 Greenspan’s 
Basic & Clinical 
Endocrinology
Edited by
David G. Gardner, MD, MS
Mount Zion Health Fund Distinguished Professor of
 Endocrinology and Medicine 
Chief, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism
Department of Medicine and Diabetes Center
University of California, San Francisco
Dolores Shoback, MD
Professor of Medicine
Department of Medicine
University of California, San Francisco
Staff Physician, Endocrine-Metabolism Section,
 Department of Medicine
San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center
 a LANGE medical book
Ninth Edition
New York Chicago San Francisco Lisbon London Madrid Mexico City
Milan New Delhi San Juan Seoul Singapore Sydney Toronto
New York Chicago San Francisco Lisbon London Madrid Mexico City
Mi
Milalan Ne
New De
Delhlhi Sa
San Ju
Juan
an
S
 Seo
eoulul
S
 Sin
inga
gapo
porere
S
 Syd
ydne
ney To
Toro
ront
nto
Copyright © 2011 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. All rights reserved. Except as permitted under 
the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed 
in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written
 permission of the publisher.
ISBN 
0-07-178497-7
978-0-07-162243-1
MHID
 978-0-07-178497-9
 
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: ISBN 
,
MHID 0-07-162243-8.
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after every
occurrence of a trademarked name, we use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit of the
trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designations appear in
this book, they have been printed with initial caps.
McGraw-Hill eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions, or
for use in corporate training programs. To contact a representative please e-mail us 
at bulksales@mcgrawhill.com.
TERMS OF USE
This is a copyrighted work and The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (“McGraw-Hill”) and its licensors reserve
all rights in and to the work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as permitted under the
Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not decompile,
disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute,
disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill’s prior consent. You
may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use; any other use of the work is strictly
prohibited. Your right to use the work may be terminated if you fail to comply with these terms.
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR
WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED
FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK
VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill and its licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the functions
contained in the work will meet your requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or error free.
Neither McGraw-Hill nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or
omission, regardless of cause, in the work or for any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill has no
responsibility for the content of any information accessed through the work. Under no circumstances shall
McGraw-Hill and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive, consequential or
similar damages that result from the use of or inability to use the work, even if any of them has been
advised of the possibility of such damages. This limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause
whatsoever whether such claim or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise.
 1. Hormones & Hormone Action 
1
David G. Gardner, MD, Mark Anderson, MD, PhD, & 
Robert A. Nissenson, PhD
Relationship to the Nervous System 2
Chemical Nature of Hormones 3
Endocrine Glands & Target Organs 4
Regulation of Hormone Levels in Plasma 4
Hormone Action 5
Receptors 5
Neurotransmitter & Peptide Hormone Receptors 6
G Protein–Coupled Receptors 7
G Protein Transducers 8
Effectors 9
Disorders of G Proteins & G Protein–Coupled 
Receptors 11
Growth Factor Receptors 13
Cytokine Receptors 14
Guanylyl Cyclase–Linked Receptors 16
Nuclear Action of Peptide Hormones 18
Nuclear Receptors 18
Steroid Receptor Family 18
Thyroid Receptor Family 21
Nongenomic Effects of the Steroid Hormones 25
Steroid & Thyroid Hormone Receptor Resistance 
Syndromes 25
 2. Endocrine Autoimmunity 
27
Juan Carlos Jaume, MD
Immune Recognition & Response 28
Tolerance 31
T-Cell Tolerance 31
B-Cell Tolerance 35
Autoimmunity is Multifactorial 35
Genetic Factors in Autoimmunity 36
Environmental Factors in Autoimmunity 36
Single-Gland Autoimmune Syndromes 37
Autoimmune Aspects of Thyroid Disease 37
Genes & Environment 37
Autoimmune Response 37
Animal Models of Autoimmune Thyroid Disease 38
Autoimmune Aspects of Type 1 Diabetes 38
Genes & Environment 39
Autoimmune Response 39
Animal Models of Autoimmune Diabetes Mellitus 40
Autoimmune Aspects of Other Endocrinopathies 40
Autoimmune Adrenal Failure 40
Autoimmune Oophoritis & Orchitis 41
Autoimmune Hypophysitis 41
Autoimmune Hypoparathyroidism 41
Autoimmune Polyglandular Syndromes 42
Autoimmune Polyglandular Syndrome I (APS-I) 42
Autoimmune Polyglandular Syndrome II
(APS-II) 43
Management of Autoimmune Polyglandular
Syndromes 44
Immunodeficiency, Polyendocrinopathy, & Enteropathy, 
X-Linked Syndrome 44
POEMS Syndrome (Osteosclerotic Myeloma) 44
 3.  Evidence-Based Endocrinology
& Clinical Epidemiology 
47
David C. Aron, MD, MS
Diagnostic Testing: Test Characteristics 47
Sensitivity & Specificity 48
Receiver-Operating Characteristic Curves 50
Predictive Values, Likelihood Ratios, & Diagnostic 
Accuracy 51
An Approach to Diagnosis in Practice 52
Clinical Epidemiologic Principles Applied to Treatment 
Decisions 54
Decision Analysis 55
Determine the Probability of Each Chance Event 57
Deciding on a Strategy: Averaging Out &
Folding Back the Tree 58
Discounting Future Events 58
Sensitivity Analysis 58
Cost-Effectiveness Analysis Using Decision
Analysis 58
Other Aspects of Clinical Epidemiology 58
Evidence-Based Endocrinology 58
Step One: Translation of the Clinical Problem into 
Answerable Questions 61
Step Two: Finding the Best Evidence 61
Step Three: Appraising the Evidence for Its Validity & 
Usefulness 61
Steps Four & Five: Applying the Results in Practice & 
Evaluating Performance 62
 4. Hypothalamus & Pituitary Gland 
65
Bradley R. Javorsky, MD, David C. Aron, MD, MS,
James W. Findling, MD, & J. Blake Tyrrell, MD
Anatomy & Embryology 66
Blood Supply 68
Pituitary Development & Histology 68
Hypothalamic Hormones 70
Hypophysiotropic Hormones 70
Neuroendocrinology: The Hypothalamus as Part of a
Larger System 73
Contents
Authors                                                                        xi
Preface                                                                        xv
The Hypothalamus & the Control of Appetite 74
The Pineal Gland & the Circumventricular
Organs 75
Anterior Pituitary Hormone 75
Adrenocorticotropic Hormone & Related Peptides 76
Growth Hormone 78
Prolactin 80
Thyrotropin 82
Gonadotropins: Luteinizing Hormone & Follicle-
Stimulating Hormone 83
Endocrinologic Evaluation of the Hypothalamic-Pituitary 
Axis 85
Evaluation of Adrenocorticotropic Hormone 85
Evaluation of Growth Hormone 88
Evaluation of Prolactin 88
Evaluation of Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone 88
Evaluation of LH & FSH 89
Problems in Evaluation of the Hypothalamic-Pituitary 
Axis 89
Effects of Pharmacologic Agents on Hypothalamic-Pituitary 
Function 89
Endocrine Tests of Hypothalamic-Pituitary Function 90
Neuroradiologic Evaluation 90
Pituitary & Hypothalamic Disorders 91
Empty Sella Syndrome 92
Hypothalamic Dysfunction 93
Hypopituitarism 94
Pituitary Adenomas 99
 5.  The Posterior Pituitary
(Neurohypophysis) 
115
Alan G. Robinson, MD
Physiology of Hormone Function 115
Anatomy of Hormone Synthesis & Release 117
Pathophysiology 117
Diagnostic Tests of Diabetes Insipidus 120
Treatment of Diabetes Insipidus 121
Treatment of Hyponatremia in SIADH 125
Summary 126
 6. Growth 
129
Dennis Styne, MD
Normal Growth 129
Intrauterine Growth 129
The Placenta 130
Classic Hormones of Growth & Fetal Growth 130
Growth Factors & Oncogenes in Fetal Growth 130
Insulin-like Growth Factors, Receptors, & Binding 
Proteins 130
Insulin 131
Epidermal Growth Factor 131
Fetal Origins of Adult Disease 132
Postnatal Growth 132
Measurement of Growth 139
Skeletal (Bone) Age 142
Disorders of Growth 142
Short Stature due to Nonendocrine Causes 142
Short Stature due to Endocrine Disorders 146
iv    CONTENTS
Tall Stature due to Nonendocrine Causes 158
Tall Stature due to Endocrine Disorders 159
 7. The Thyroid Gland 
163
David S. Cooper, MD & 
Paul W. Ladenson, MA (Oxon.), MD
Embryology, Anatomy, & Histology 163
Physiology 163
Structure & Synthesis of Thyroid Hormones 163
Iodine Metabolism 164
Thyroid Hormone Synthesis & Secretion 164
Abnormalities in Thyroid Hormone Synthesis & 
Release 168
Thyroid Hormone Transport 169
Metabolism of Thyroid Hormones 171
Control of Thyroid Function & Hormone Action 173
Physiologic Changes in Thyroid Function 181
Thyroid Autoimmunity 183
Tests of Thyroid Function 184
Tests of Thyroid Hormones in Blood 184
Assessment of Thyroid Iodine Metabolism & Biosynthetic 
Activity 187
Thyroid Imaging 188
Thyroid Ultrasonography & Other Imaging 
Techniques 189
Thyroid Biopsy 189
Test of Peripheral Thyroid Hormone Actions 190
Measurement of Thyroid Autoantibodies 190
Disorders of the Thyroid 190
Hypothyroidism 191
Hyperthyroidism & Thyrotoxicosis 198
Nontoxic Goiter 209
Thyroiditis 211
Effects of Ionizing Radiation on the Thyroid Gland 214
Thyroid Nodules & Thyroid Cancer 214
 8. Metabolic Bone Disease 
227
Dolores Shoback, MD, Deborah Sellmeyer, MD, 
& Daniel D. Bikle, MD, PhD
Cellular & Extracellular Calcium Metabolism 227
Parathyroid Hormone 228
Vitamin D 234
How Vitamin D & PTH Control Mineral Homeostasis 241
Medullary Carcinoma of the Thyroid 241
Hypercalcemia 242
Disorders Causing Hypercalcemia 244
Treatment of Hypercalcemia 252
Hypocalcemia 252
Causes of Hypocalcemia 254
Treatment of Hypocalcemia 258
Bone Anatomy & Remodeling 258
Functions of Bone 258
Structure of Bone 259
Bone Remodeling 261
Osteoporosis 262
Treatment of Osteoporosis 266
Glucocorticoid-Induced Osteoporosis 270
Osteomalacia & Rickets 271
Nephrotic Syndrome 273
Hepatic Osteodystrophy 274
Drug-Induced Osteomalacia 274
Hypophosphatemic Disorders 274
Calcium Deficiency 276
Primary Disorders of the Bone Matrix 276
Osteogenesis Imperfecta 276
Inhibitors of Mineralization 277
Paget Disease of Bone (Osteitis Deformans) 277
Etiology 277
Renal Osteodystrophy 280
Hereditary Forms of Hyperphosphatemia 281
 9.  Glucocorticoids & Adrenal
Androgens 
285
Ty B. Carroll, MD, David C. Aron, MD, MS,
James W. Findling, MD, & J. Blake Tyrrell, MD
Embryology & Anatomy 285
Biosynthesis of Cortisol & Adrenal
Androgens 287
Circulation of Cortisol & Adrenal
Androgens 292
Metabolism of Cortisol & Adrenal
Androgens 292
Biologic Effects of Adrenal Steroids 294
Adrenal Androgens 299
Laboratory Evaluation 299
Disorders of Adrenocortical Insufficiency 303
Primary Adrenocortical Insufficiency
(Addison Disease) 303
Secondary Adrenocortical Insufficiency 308
Diagnosis of Adrenocortical Insufficiency 308
Treatment of Adrenocortical Insufficiency 310
Prognosis of Adrenocortical Insufficiency 312
Cushing Syndrome 312
Hirsutism & Virilism 323
Incidental Adrenal Mass 323
Glucocorticoid Therapy for Nonendocrine
Disorders 324
10. Endocrine Hypertension 
329
William F. Young, Jr, MD, MSc
Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System 329
Renin & Angiotensin 329
Aldosterone 331
Primary Aldosteronism 332
Other Forms of Mineralocorticoid Excess or Effect 340
Hyperdeoxycorticosteronism 340
Apparent Mineralocorticoid Excess Syndrome 340
Liddle Syndrome—Abnormal Renal Tubular Ionic 
Transport 341
Hypertension Exacerbated by Pregnancy 341
Other Endocrine Disorders Associated with 
Hypertension 341
Cushing Syndrome 341
Thyroid Dysfunction 342
Acromegaly 342
11. Adrenal Medulla & Paraganglia 
345
Paul A. Fitzgerald, MD
Anatomy 346
Hormones of the Adrenal Medulla & Paraganglia 347
Catecholamines 347
Catecholamine (Adrenergic) Receptors 352
Disorders of the Adrenal Medulla & Paraganglia 357
Epinephrine & Norepinephrine Deficiency 357
Pheochromocytoma & Paraganglioma 358
Incidentally Discovered Adrenal Masses 381
12. Testes 
395
Glenn D. Braunstein, MD
Anatomy & Structure-Function Relationships 395
Testes 395
Physiology of The Male Reproductive System 397
Accessory Structures 397
Gonadal Steroids 397
Control of Testicular Function 399
Evaluation of Male Gonadal Function 400
Clinical Evaluation 400
Laboratory Tests of Testicular Function 401
Pharmacology of Drugs used to Treat Male Gonadal 
Disorders 403
Androgens 403
Gonadotropins 405
Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone 405
Clinical Male Gonadal Disorders 405
Klinefelter Syndrome (XY Seminiferous Tubule 
Dysgenesis) 405
Bilateral Anorchia (Vanishing Testes Syndrome) 407
Leydig Cell Aplasia 408
Cryptorchidism 409
Noonan Syndrome (Male Turner
Syndrome) 410
Myotonic Dystrophy 411
Adult Seminiferous Tubule Failure 411
Adult Leydig Cell Failure (Andropause) 412
Male Infertility 413
Erectile Dysfunction 415
Gynecomastia 417
Testicular Tumors 420
13.  Female Reproductive Endocrinology
& Infertility 
423
Mitchell P. Rosen, MD &
Marcelle I. Cedars, MD
Embryology & Anatomy 424
Ovarian Steroidogenesis 426
Physiology of Folliculogenesis & the Menstrual
Cycle 427
Amenorrhea 436
Hypothalamic Amenorrhea 437
Pituitary Amenorrhea 440
Ovarian Amenorrhea 442
Anovulation 445
CONTENTS     v
Obesity 452
Outflow Tract Disorders 454
Menopause 455
Oocyte Depletion 455
Endocrine System Changes with Aging 456
Menopausal Consequences 458
Infertility 461
Diagnosis of Infertility 461
Management of the Infertile Couple 463
Contraception 464
Oral Contraceptives 464
Contraception: Long-Acting Contraceptives 470
Emergency Contraception 475
14.  Disorders of Sex Determination
& Differentiation 
479
Felix A. Conte, MD, & Melvin M.
Grumbach, MD
Human Sex Differentiation 480
Testicular & Ovarian Differentiation 485
Psychosexual Differentiation 489
Classification & Nomenclature of Disorders of Sex 
Determination (& Differentiation) 489
Klinefelter Syndrome & Its Variants: Seminiferous
Tubule Dysgenesis—Sex Chromosome DSD 493
Syndrome of Gonadal Dysgenesis: Turner Syndrome
& Its Variants 495
Ovotesticular DSD (Individuals with Both Ovarian & 
Testicular Tissue) 500
46,XY DSD Androgen Induced (Female 
Pseudohermaphroditism) 502
P450 Aromatase Deficiency 509
Maternal Source Androgens & Progestogens 509
Unclassified Forms of Abnormal Sexual Development in 
Males 517
Unclassified Forms of Abnormal Sexual Development in 
Females 519
Management of Patients with DSD 519
15. Puberty 
527
Dennis Styne, MD
Physiology of Puberty 527
Physical Changes Associated with Puberty 527
Endocrine Changes from Fetal Life to Puberty 531
Ovulation & Menarche 534
Adrenarche 534
Miscellaneous Metabolic Changes 535
Delayed Puberty or Absent Puberty (Sexual 
Infantilism) 535
Constitutional Delay in Growth &
Adolescence 535
Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism 535
Hypergonadotropic Hypogonadism 540
Differential Diagnosis of Delayed Puberty 542
Treatment of Delayed Puberty 543
Precocious Puberty (Sexual Precocity) 545
Central (Complete or True) Precocious
Puberty 545
Incomplete Isosexual Precocious Puberty in Boys 547
Incomplete Contrasexual Precocity in Boys 547
Incomplete Isosexual Precocious Puberty in Girls 547
Incomplete Contrasexual Precocity in Girls 548
Variations in Pubertal Development 548
Differential Diagnosis of Precocious Puberty 549
Treatment of Precocious Puberty 549
16. The Endocrinology of Pregnancy 
553
Robert N. Taylor, MD, PhD &
Martina L. Badell, MD
Conception & Implantation 553
Fertilization 553
Implantation & hCG Production 554
Ovarian Hormones of Pregnancy 555
Symptoms & Signs of Pregnancy 555
Fetal-Placental-Decidual Unit 555
Polypeptide Hormones 555
Human Chorionic Gonadotropin 555
Human Placental Lactogen 555
Other Chorionic Peptide Hormones &
Growth Factors 558
Steroid Hormones 558
Progesterone 558
Estrogens 558
Maternal Adaptation to Pregnancy 559
Maternal Pituitary Gland 559
Maternal Thyroid Gland 559
Maternal Parathyroid Gland 559
Maternal Pancreas 559
Maternal Adrenal Cortex 561
Fetal Endocrinology 562
Fetal Pituitary Hormones 562
Fetal Thyroid Gland 562
Fetal Adrenal Cortex 562
Fetal Gonads 562
Endocrine Control of Parturition 563
Sex Steroids 563
Oxytocin 563
Prostaglandins 563
Preterm Labor/Birth 563
Maternal/Fetal Stress 564
Pathologic Uterine Distention 564
Infection/Inflammation 564
Decidual Hemorrhage & Coagulation  564
Postterm Pregnancy 565
Management of Postterm Pregnancy 565
Endocrinology of the Puerperium 566
Physiologic & Anatomic Changes 566
Uterine Changes 566
Endocrine Changes 566
Lactation 566
Endocrine Disorders & Pregnancy 567
Hyperthyroidism in Pregnancy 567
Hypothyroidism in Pregnancy 567
Pituitary Disorders in Pregnancy 567
Obesity & Pregnancy 568
Parathyroid Disease & Pregnancy 569
Preeclampsia/Eclampsia 569
vi    CONTENTS
Pathophysiology 569
Clinical Features 570
Treatment/Management of Preeclampsia 570
17.  Pancreatic Hormones &
Diabetes Mellitus 
573
Umesh Masharani, MB, BS, MRCP (UK)
& Michael S. German, MD
The Endocrine Pancreas 574
Anatomy & Histology 574
Hormones of the Endocrine Pancreas 575
Diabetes Mellitus 587
Classification 587
Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus 587
Type 2 Diabetes 590
Other Specific Types of Diabetes 593
Clinical Features of Diabetes Mellitus 599
Treatment of Diabetes Mellitus 609
Agents for the Treatment of Hyperglycemia 610
Sulfonylureas 612
Steps in the Management of the Diabetic
Patient 622
Immunopathology of Insulin Therapy 625
Acute Complications of Diabetes Mellitus 626
Transition to Subcutaneous Insulin Regimen 631
Chronic Complications of Diabetes Mellitus 634
Specific Chronic Complications of Diabetes Mellitus 636
Management of Diabetes in the Hospitalized Patient 642
Diabetes Mellitus & Pregnancy 644
18. Hypoglycemic Disorders 
657
Umesh Masharani, MB, BS, MRCP (UK) & 
Stephen E. Gitelman, MD
Pathophysiology of the Counterregulatory Response to 
Neuroglycopenia 658
Counterregulatory Response to
Hypoglycemia 659
Maintenance of Euglycemia in the Postabsorptive 
State 660
Classification of Hypoglycemic Disorders 661
Diabetes 661
Factitious Hypoglycemia 662
Drugs 662
Autoimmune Hypoglycemia 663
Pancreatic α Cell Tumors 663
Congenital Hyperinsulinism 670
19. Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism 
675
Mary J. Malloy, MD & John P. Kane, MD, PhD
Atherosclerosis 675
Overview of Lipid Transport 676
Differentiation of Disorders of Lipoprotein
Metabolism 680
Clinical Descriptions of Primary & Secondary Disorders of 
Lipoprotein Metabolism 681
The Hypertriglyceridemias 681
Primary Hypertriglyceridemia 683
Secondary Hypertriglyceridemia 685
The Primary Hypercholesterolemias 687
Familial Hypercholesterolemia 687
Familial Combined Hyperlipidemia 687
Lp(a) Hyperlipoproteinemia 688
Familial Ligand-Defective Apo B-100 688
Cholesterol 7α-Hydroxylase Deficiency 688
Hypothyroidism 688
Nephrosis 688
Immunoglobulin Disorders 688
Anorexia Nervosa 688
Cholestasis 689
The Primary Hypolipidemias 689
Primary Hypolipidemia due to Deficiency of
High-Density Lipoproteins 689
Primary Hypolipidemia due to Deficiency of
Apo B–Containing Lipoproteins 690
Secondary Hypolipidemia 691
Other Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism 691
The Lipodystrophies 691
Rare Disorders 692
Treatment of Hyperlipidemia 692
Dietary Factors in the Management of Lipoprotein 
Disorders 693
Drugs Used in Treatment of Hyperlipoproteinemia 694
Bile Acid Sequestrants 694
Niacin (Nicotinic Acid) 695
Fibric Acid Derivatives 695
HMG-CoA Reductase Inhibitors 696
Cholesterol Absorption Inhibitors 697
Combined Drug Therapy 697
20. Obesity 
699
Alka M. Kanaya, MD & Christian Vaisse, MD, PhD
Definition & Epidemiology 699
Definition 699
Prevalence & Projections 699
Possible Explanations for the Increased
Obesity Rates 700
Pathophysiology & Genetics of Obesity 700
Regulation of Food Intake & Energy Expenditure 700
Informing the Brain of the Energy Status: Leptin &
Short-Term Gastrointestinal Signals 700
Central Integration of Energy Homeostasis Signals 701
Leptin Resistance in Obesity 702
Genetics of Obesity 702
Health Consequences of Obesity 703
Mechanism Underlying Obesity Complications:
Adipose Tissue as an Endocrine Organ 703
Metabolic Complications of Obesity: Insulin Resistance
& Type 2 Diabetes 704
Dyslipidemia 705
The Metabolic Syndrome 705
Cardiovascular Complications 705
Pulmonary Complications 705
Gastrointestinal Complications 706
Reproduction & Gynecologic Complications 706
Cancer 706
Management of the Obese Patient 706
Screening & Prevention of Complications 706
Therapeutic Approaches for Weight Loss 706
CONTENTS     vii
21.  Humoral Manifestations 
of Malignancy 
711
Dolores Shoback, MD, & Janet L. Funk, MD
Ectopic Hormone & Receptor Syndromes 711
APUD Concept of Neuroendocrine Cell Tumors 712
Hypercalcemia of Malignancy 712
Pathogenesis 712
Humoral Mediators 712
Solid Tumors Associated with Hypercalcemia of 
Malignancy 713
Hematologic Malignancies Associated with 
Hypercalcemia of Malignancy 714
Diagnosis 715
Treatment 715
Ectopic Cushing Syndrome 715
Differential Diagnosis 715
Clinical Features 717
Syndrome of Inappropriate Antidiuretic Hormone 
Secretion 717
Etiology & Pathogenesis 718
Clinical & Laboratory Features 718
Non-Islet Cell Tumor-Induced Hypoglycemia 718
Other Hormones Secreted by Tumors 719
Oncogenic Osteomalacia 720
Etiology & Clinical Features 720
Pathology & Pathogenesis 720
Gut Hormones 721
22.  Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia 
723
David G. Gardner, MD
Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Type 1 723
Pathogenesis 725
Treatment 726
Screening 727
Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Type 2 729
Pathogenesis 730
Treatment 732
Screening 732
Other Disorders Characterized by Multiple Endocrine 
Organ Involvement 733
Carney Complex 733
McCune-Albright Syndrome 734
Neurofibromatosis Type 1 734
Von Hippel-Lindau Disease 734
MEN X 734
23. Geriatric Endocrinology 
737
Susan L. Greenspan, MD, Mary Korytkowski, MD,
& Neil M. Resnick, MD
Thyroid Function & Disease 738
Disorders of the Thyroid Gland 738
Hyperthyroidism 739
Hypothyroidism 741
Multinodular Goiter 742
Thyroid Nodules & Cancer 743
Carbohydrate Intolerance & Diabetes Mellitus 743
Osteoporosis 750
Hyperparathyroidism 757
Changes in Water Balance 757
Hypernatremia 758
Hyponatremia 758
Hyporeninemic Hypoaldosteronism 758
Glucocorticoids & Stress 758
Disorders of the Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal
Axis 759
Changes in Reproductive Function in Men 760
24. Endocrine Emergencies 
763
David G. Gardner, MD
Myxedema Coma 763
Thyroid Storm 765
Thyrotoxic Periodic Paralysis 766
Amiodarone-Induced Thyrotoxicosis 767
Acute Adrenal Insufficiency 768
Pituitary Apoplexy 769
Diabetic Ketoacidosis 769
Nonketotic Hyperosmolar Coma 773
Hypercalcemic Crisis 775
Acute Hypocalcemia 777
Hyponatremia 779
Diabetes Insipidus 782
25. AIDS Endocrinopathies 
787
Carl Grunfeld, MD, PhD & Grace Lee, MD
Thyroid Disorders 787
Adrenal Disorders 789
Bone & Mineral Disorders 791
Gonadal Disorders 792
Pituitary Disorders 794
AIDS Wasting Syndrome 794
Abnormalities of Fat Distribution Associated with 
HIV 795
Disorders of Glucose & Lipid Metabolism 796
Conclusion 801
26. Endocrine Surgery 
803
Geeta Lal, MD & Orlo H. Clark, MD
The Thyroid Gland 803
Embryology & Anatomy 803
Developmental Thyroid Abnormalities 804
Hyperthyroidism 804
Thyroiditis 805
Goiter (Nontoxic) 805
Thyroid Nodules 805
Thyroid Cancer 806
Conduct of Thyroidectomy 809
The Parathyroid Gland 811
Embryology & Anatomy 811
Primary Hyperparathyroidism 811
Persistent & Recurrent Primary Hyperparathyroidism 814
Secondary Hyperparathyroidism 814
Special Consideration: Familial Hyperparathyroidism 815
Complications of Parathyroid Surgery 815
The Adrenal (Suprarenal) Gland 815
viii    CONTENTS
Embryology & Anatomy 815
Primary Hyperaldosteronism 815
Hypercortisolism 816
Adrenal Cortical Carcinoma 816
Sex Steroid Excess 817
Pheochromocytoma 817
Adrenal Incidentaloma 817
Technique of Adrenalectomy 818
The Endocrine Pancreas 818
Embryology & Anatomy 818
Insulinoma 819
Gastrinoma (Zollinger-Ellison Syndrome) 820
Vipoma (Verner-Morrison) Syndrome 821
Glucagonoma 821
Somatostatinoma 821
Nonfunctioning Pancreatic Tumors 821
Appendix: Normal Hormone Reference Ranges                  825
Index                                                                        845
CONTENTS     ix
This page intentionally left blank
 Mark Anderson ,  MD, PhD 
 Associate Professor, Robert B. Friend and Michelle M. Friend 
Endowed Chair in Diabetes Research, Diabetes Center and 
Department of Medicine, University of California, San 
Francisco
manderson@diabetes.ucsf.edu
Hormones & Hormone Action 
David C. Aron ,  MD, MS 
 Professor, Department of Medicine and Department of 
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Division of Clinical and 
Molecular Endocrinology, School of Medicine, Case 
Western Reserve University; Associate Chief of Staff/
Education, Louis Stokes Cleveland Department of Veterans 
Affairs Medical Center, Cleveland, Ohio
david.aron@med.va.gov
Evidence-Based Endocrinology & Clinical Epidemiology; 
Hypothalamus & Pituitary Gland; Glucocorticoids & Adrenal 
Androgens 
 Martina L. Badell ,  MD 
 Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Emory University, 
Atlanta, Georgia
mbadell@emory.edu
The Endocrinology of Pregnancy 
 Daniel D. Bikle ,  MD, PhD 
 Professor of Medicine and Dermatology, Veterans Affairs 
Medical Center and University of California, San Francisco
daniel.bikle@ucsf.edu
Metabolic Bone Disease 
 Glenn D. Braunstein ,  MD 
 Chairman, Department of Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical 
Center; The James R. Klinenberg, MD, Chair in Medicine, 
Professor of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine at 
University of California, Los Angeles
glenn.braunstein@cshs.org
Testes 
 Ty B. Carroll ,  MD 
 Assistant Professor, Endocrinology Center, Department of 
Medicine, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee
tcarroll@mcw.edu
Glucocorticoids & Adrenal Androgens 
 Marcelle I. Cedars ,  MD 
 Professor and Director, Division of Reproductive 
Endocrinology, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and 
Reproductive Sciences, University of California, San 
Francisco
marcelle.cedars@ucsfmedctr.org 
Female Reproductive Endocrinology & Infertility 
 Orlo H. Clark ,  MD 
 Professor of Surgery, Department of Surgery, University of 
California, San Francisco 
clarko@surgery.ucsf.edu
Endocrine Surgery 
 Felix A. Conte ,  MD 
 Professor of Pediatrics Emeritus, University of California, San 
Francisco
felixconte@yahoo.com
Disorders of Sex Determination & Differentiation 
 David S. Cooper ,  MD 
 Professor of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and 
Metabolism, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine; 
Baltimore, Maryland
dscooper@jhmi.edu
The Thyroid Gland 
 James W. Findling ,  MD 
 Professor of Medicine, Director of Community Endocrine 
Services, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee
jfindling@mcw.edu 
Hypothalamus & Pituitary Gland; Glucocorticoids & Adrenal 
Androgens 
 Paul A. Fitzgerald ,  MD 
 Clinical Professor of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, 
Department of Medicine, University of California, San 
Francisco
paul.fitzgerald@ucsf.edu
Adrenal Medulla & Paraganglia 
 Janet L. Funk ,  MD 
 Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, 
Department of Medicine, University of Arizona, Tucson
jfunk@u.arizona.edu
Humoral Manifestations of Malignancy 
 David G. Gardner ,  MD, MS 
 Mount Zion Health Fund Distinguished Professor of 
Endocrinology and Medicine; Chief, Division of 
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine; 
and Diabetes Center, University of California, San Francisco
dgardner@diabetes.ucsf.edu
Hormones & Hormone Action; Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia; 
Endocrine Emergencies 
Authors
 Michael S. German ,  MD 
 Professor and Justine K. Schreyer Endowed Chair in Diabetes 
Research, Department of Medicine, Division of 
Endocrinology and Diabetes Center, University of 
California, San Francisco
mgerman@biochem.ucsf.edu
Pancreatic Hormones & Diabetes Mellitus 
 Stephen E. Gitelman ,  MD 
 Professor of Clinical Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric 
Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
California, San Francisco
sgitelma@peds.ucsf.edu
Hypoglycemic Disorders 
 Susan L. Greenspan ,  MD 
 Professor of Medicine and Director, Osteoporosis Prevention 
and Treatment Center, University of Pittsburgh Medical 
Center; Director, Bone Health Program, Magee Women’s 
Hospital; Director, Clinical and Translational Research 
Center, UPMC Braddock, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
greenspans@dom.pitt.edu
Geriatric Endocrinology 
 Melvin M. Grumbach ,  MD, DM Hon causa (Geneva), D Hon causa 
(Rene Descartes, Paris), D Hon causa (Athens) 
 Edward B. Shaw Professor of Pediatrics and Chairman 
Emeritus, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
California, San Francisco
grumbach@peds.ucsf.edu 
Disorders of Sex Determination & Differentiation 
 Carl Grunfeld ,  MD, PhD 
 Professor of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco; 
Chief, Metabolism and Endocrine Sections, Veterans Affairs 
Medical Center, San Francisco
carl.grunfeld@ucsf.edu
AIDS Endocrinopathies 
 Juan Carlos Jaume ,  MD 
 Assistant Professor, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and 
Metabolism, Department of Medicine, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison; Chief, Endocrinology, Diabetes, and 
Metabolism Section, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 
Madison, Wisconsin
jcj@medicine.wisc.edu
Endocrine Autoimmunity 
 Bradley R. Javorsky ,  MD 
 Assistant Professor of Medicine, Endocrinology Center, 
Medical College of Wisconsin, Menomonee Falls
bjavorsky@mcw.edu
Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland 
 Alka M. Kanaya ,  MD 
 Associate Professor of Medicine, Epidemiology & Biostatistics, 
University of California, San Francisco
alka.kanaya@ucsf.edu
Obesity 
 John P. Kane ,  MD, PhD 
 Professor of Medicine, Biochemistry, and Biophysics, and 
Associate Director, Cardiovascular Research Institute, 
University of California, San Francisco
john.kane@ucsf.edu
Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism 
 Mary Korytkowski ,  MD 
 Professor of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of 
Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
mtk7@pitt.edu
Geriatric Endocrinology 
 Paul W. Ladenson, MA (Oxon) ,  MD 
 John Eager Howard Professor of Endocrinology and 
Metabolism; Professor of Medicine, Pathology, Oncology, 
Radiology and Radiological Sciences, and International 
Health; Distinguished Service Professor; and Director, 
Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland
ladenson@jhmi.edu
The Thyroid Gland 
 Geeta Lal ,  MD, MSc, FRCS(C), FACS 
 Assistant Professor of Surgery, Division of Surgical Oncology 
and Endocrine Surgery, Department of Surgery, University 
of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa City
geeta-lal@uiowa.edu
Endocrine Surgery 
 Grace Lee ,  MD 
 Assistant Professor of Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
University of California, San Francisco
grace.lee.2@ucsf.edu
AIDS Endocrinopathies 
 Mary J. Malloy ,  MD 
 Professor (Emeritus), Department of Pediatrics and Medicine, 
Director, Pediatric Lipid Clinic and Co-Director, Adult 
Lipid Clinic, University of California, San Francisco
mary.malloy@ucsf.edu
Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism 
 Umesh Masharani ,  MB, BS, MRCP(UK) 
 Professor of Clinical Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and 
Metabolism, University of California, San Francisco
umesh.masharani@ucsf.edu
Pancreatic Hormones & Diabetes Mellitus; Hypoglycemic 
Disorders 
xii    AUTHORS
 Robert A. Nissenson ,  PhD 
 Senior Research Career Scientist, Endocrine Research Unit, 
Veterans’ Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, Professor, 
Department of Medicine and Physiology, University of 
California, San Francisco
robert.nissenson@ucsf.edu
Hormones & Hormone Action 
 Neil M. Resnick ,  MD 
 Thomas Detre Professor of Medicine, Chief, Division of 
Geriatric Medicine, and Director, University of Pittsburgh 
Institute on Aging, University of Pittsburgh School of 
Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
kimee@dom.pitt.edu
Geriatric Endocrinology 
 Alan G. Robinson ,  MD 
 Professor of Medicine, Associate Vice Chancellor, Medical 
Sciences and Executive Associate Dean, David Geffen 
School of Medicine at UCLA, University of California, Los 
Angeles
robinson@ucla.edu
The Posterior Pituitary (Neurohypophysis) 
 Mitchell P. Rosen ,  MD 
 Assistant Professor, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
Division of Reproductive Endocrinology, University of 
California, San Francisco
rosenm@obgyn.ucsf.edu
Female Reproductive Endocrinology & Infertility 
 Deborah Sellmeyer ,  MD 
Associate Professor, Division of Endocrinology and 
Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland
bone@jhmi.edu
Metabolic Bone Disease 
 Dolores Shoback ,  MD 
 Professor of Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of 
California, San Francisco; Staff Physician, Endocrine-
Metabolism Section, Department of Medicine, San 
Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, 
California
dolores.shoback@ucsf.edu
Metabolic Bone Disease; Humoral Manifestations of Malignancy 
 Dennis Styne ,  MD 
 Professor and Rumsey Chair, Department of Pediatrics, 
Section of Endocrinology, University of California, Davis, 
Sacramento
dmstyne@ucdavis.edu
Growth; Puberty 
 Robert N. Taylor ,  MD, PhD 
 Leach-Hendee Professor and Vice-Chairman for Research, 
Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Emory 
University, Atlanta, Georgia
robert.n.taylor@emory.edu
The Endocrinology of Pregnancy 
 J. Blake Tyrrell ,  MD 
 Clinical Professor of Medicine; Chief, Endocrine Clinic, 
Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of 
California, San Francisco
blaket@medicine.ucsf.edu
Hypothalamus & Pituitary Gland; Glucocorticoids & Adrenal 
Androgens 
 Christian Vaisse ,  MD PhD 
 Associate Professor of Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Diabetes Center, University of California, San Francisco
vaisse@medicine.ucsf.edu
Obesity 
 William F. Young ,  Jr, MD, MSc 
 Professor of Medicine, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota
young.william@mayo.edu
Endocrine Hypertension 
AUTHORS     xiii
This page intentionally left blank
Preface
This represents the ninth edition of  Greenspan’s Basic & Clinical 
Endocrinology —the first in an all-color format, which we hope will 
add to the value of the text for our readers. Each of the individual 
chapters has been revised and updated to contain the most current 
information in the field. We have introduced two entirely new 
chapters on Endocrine Hypertension (Chapter 10) and Obesity 
(Chapter 20) and added five new authors to our existing chapters.
 Once again, we hope that you will find this text useful in deal-
ing with the expanding world of basic and clinical endocrinology, 
and we trust that you will find it a valuable tool for education of 
trainees and the treatment of endocrine patients. 
 David G. Gardner, MD, MS 
 Dolores Shoback, MD 
 San Francisco, CA 
This page intentionally left blank
1
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
  Hormones and Hormone 
Action 
 David G. Gardner, MD,  Mark Anderson, MD, PhD, and 
 Robert A. Nissenson, PhD 
 ACTH 
Adrenocorticotropin 
 AD1 
Activation domain 1 
 AD2 
Activation domain 2 
 AF-1 
Activator function-1 
 AF-2 
Activator function-2 
 Akt 
Protein kinase B
AMH 
Anti-müllerian hormone 
 ANP 
Atrial natriuretic peptide 
 AP-1 
Activator protein-1 
 β-ARK 
β-Adrenergic receptor kinase 
 BNP 
B-type natriuretic peptide 
 cAMP 
Cyclic adenosine-3′,5′-monophosphate 
 CARM 
Coactivator-associated arginine 
 
methyltransferase 
 CBP 
CREB-binding protein 
 cGMP 
Cyclic guanosine-3′,5′-monophosphate 
 CNP 
C-type natriuretic peptide 
 CREB 
cAMP response element-binding protein 
 DAG 
Diacylglycerol 
 DBD 
DNA-binding domain 
 DRIP 
Vitamin D receptor–interacting protein 
 EGF 
Epidermal growth factor 
 ER 
Estrogen receptor 
 ERK 
Extracellular signal–regulated kinase 
 FAD 
Flavin adenine dinucleotide 
 FGF 
Fibroblast growth factor 
 FMN 
Flavin mononucleotide 
 FOX A1 
Forkhead transcription factor A1 
 GAP 
GTPase-activating protein 
 GAS 
Interferon gamma activated sequences 
 GDP 
Guanosine diphosphate
GH 
Growth hormone
GHR 
Growth hormone receptor 
 GLUT 4 
Glucose transporter type 4 
 GR 
Glucocorticoid receptor 
 GRB2 
Growth factor receptor–bound protein-2
GRE 
Glucocorticoid response element 
 GRIP 
Glucocorticoid receptor–interacting protein 
 GSK3 
Glycogen synthase kinase-3 
 GTF 
General transcription factor 
 GTP 
Guanosine triphosphate 
 HRE 
Hormone response element 
 HSP 
Heat shock protein 
 ID 
Receptor–repressor interaction domain 
 IGF 
Insulin-like growth factor 
 I-κB 
Inhibitor of nuclear factor kappa B 
 IKK 
Inhibitor of nuclear factor kappa B kinase 
 IP 3 
Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate 
 IP 4 
Inositol 1,3,4,5-tetrakis-phosphate 
 ISRE 
Interferon-stimulated response element 
 JAK 
Janus kinase 
 KHD 
Kinase homology domain 
 LBD 
Ligand-binding domain 
 LH 
Luteinizing hormone 
 MAPK 
Mitogen-activated protein kinase 
 MEK 
MAPK kinase 
 MR 
Mineralocorticoid receptor 
 MSH 
Melanocyte-stimulating hormone 
 N-Cor 
Nuclear receptor corepressor 
 NF-κB 
Nuclear factor kappa B
NO 
Nitric oxide
NOS 
Nitric oxide synthase 
 NPR 
Natriuretic peptide receptor 
 NR 
Nuclear receptor 
 NRPTK 
Nonreceptor protein tyrosine kinase 
 PAK 
p21-activated kinase 
 P/CAF 
p300/CBP-associated factor 
 P/CIP 
p300/CBP cointegrator-associated protein 
1
2    CHAPTER 1 Hormones and Hormone Action
 PDE 
Phosphodiesterase 
 PDGF 
Platelet-derived growth factor 
 PDK 
Phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-
 
triphosphate-dependent kinase 
 PHP-1a 
Pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1a 
 PI-3K 
Phosphoinositide-3-OH kinase 
 PIP 2 
Phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 
 PIP 3 
Phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate 
 PI(3,4)P2 
Phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-bisphosphate 
 PKA 
Protein kinase A 
 PKB 
Protein kinase B 
 PKC 
Protein kinase C 
 PKG 
cGMP-dependent protein kinase 
 PLCβ 
Phospholipase C beta 
 PLCγ 
Phospholipase C gamma 
 PLC PC 
Phosphatidylcholine-selective phospholipase 
 POL II 
RNA polymerase II 
 PPARγ 
Peroxisome proliferator–activated receptor 
 PR 
Progesterone receptor 
 PTH 
Parathyroid hormone 
 RANK 
Receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B 
 RAR 
Retinoic acid receptor 
 RE 
Response element 
 RGS 
Regulators of G protein signaling 
 RSK 
Ribosomal S6 kinase 
 RXR 
Retinoid X receptor 
 SH2 
src homology domain type 2 
 SIE 
Sis-inducible element 
 SMRT 
Silencing mediator for RXR and TR 
 SOCS 
Suppressor of cytokine signaling 
 SOS 
Son-of-sevenless 
 SR 
Steroid receptor 
 SRC 
Steroid receptor coactivator 
 SRE 
Serum response element 
 SRF 
Serum response factor 
 STAT 
Signal transducer and activator of 
 
transcription 
 SWI/SNF  
ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling 
 
complex 
 TBP 
TATA-binding protein 
 TGF-β 
Transforming growth factor beta 
 TPA 
12- O -tetradecanoyl-phorbol 13-acetate 
 TR 
Thyroid hormone receptor 
 TRAF 
Tumor necrosis factor receptor–associated 
 
factor 
 TRAP 
Thyroid hormone receptor–associated protein 
 TRE 
TPA response element 
 TSH 
Thyroid-stimulating hormone 
 VDR 
Vitamin D receptor 
 Hormones are signaling molecules that traffic information from 
one cell to another, typically through a soluble medium like the 
extracellular fluid. Hormones fall into one of a number of different 
hormonal classes (eg, steroids, monoamines, peptides, proteins, 
eicosanoids) and signal through a variety of general (eg, nuclear vs 
cell surface) and specific (eg, tyrosine kinase vs phosphoinositide 
turnover) mechanisms in target cells. 
 Hormones produced in one tissue may promote activity in a 
target tissue at some distance from the point of secretion. In this 
case the hormone travels through the bloodstream, often bound to 
a plasma protein, to access the target tissue. In addition, hormones 
may act locally following secretion; either on a neighboring cell 
(paracrine effect), on the secretory cell itself (autocrine effect), or 
without actually being released from the secretory cell (intracrine 
effect) ( Figure 1–1 ). 
 Identification of a tissue as a target for a particular hormone 
requires the presence of receptors for the hormone in cells of the target 
tissue. These receptors, in turn, are linked to effector mechanisms that 
lead to the physiological effects associated with the hormone. 
 RELATIONSHIP TO THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 
 Many features of the endocrine system, for example, the use of 
ligands and receptors to establish communication between 
cells, are shared by the nervous system. In fact, from a 
 functional standpoint, the two systems are probably related 
from an evolutionary standpoint. However, there are some 
important differences between the two systems. While the ner-
vous system uses a highly compartmentalized, closed system of 
cables to connect cells at some distance from one another, the 
endocrine system relies on circulating plasma to carry newly 
released  hormone to its targets in the periphery. As a result, the 
time constants for signal delivery are quite different between 
the two—virtually instantaneous for the nervous system but 
delayed, by virtue of circulation times, for the endocrine sys-
tem. Thus, while neural responses are typically measured in 
seconds, endocrine responses are measured in minutes to 
hours—thereby accommodating different needs in the organ-
ism. A second difference relates to the nature of the ligand–
receptor interaction. In the nervous system, the affinity of 
receptor for ligand is relatively low. This allows for rapid dis-
sociation of ligand from receptor and, if that ligand is degraded 
locally, a rapid cessation of biological effect. Despite this rapid 
dissociation, the secretory neuron is able to maintain receptor 
occupancy by keeping concentrations of the ligand high 
around the target neuron. It does this through pulsatile release 
of secretory granules into an incredibly small volume (ie, that 
determined by the volume in the synaptic cleft). The endocrine 
system, on the other hand, has a very large volume of 
 distribution for many of its ligands (eg,  circulating blood 
CHAPTER 1 Hormones and Hormone Action     3
 volume). Maintaining ligand concentrations analogous to 
those present in the synaptic cleft would require prodigious 
secretory capacity. The endocrine system circumvents this 
problem by selecting ligand–receptor interactions of much 
higher affinity (100-10,000 fold higher binding affinity) than 
those used in the nervous system. In effect, the nervous system 
is structured to deliver high ligand concentrations to relatively 
low-affinity receptors, allowing it to activate and inactivate 
biological effects quickly and in a relatively well-defined topog-
raphy. Its effects are short lived. The endocrine system, on the 
other hand, uses high-affinity receptors to extract and retain 
ligand from a relatively “dilute” pool in circulating plasma. Its 
biological effects are longlasting. It has sacrificed the rapid 
response to accommodate a wider area of signal distribution 
and prolongation of the biological effect. Thus, the systems are 
not only related but complementary in the respective roles that 
they play in contributing to normal  physiological function. 
 CHEMICAL NATURE OF HORMONES 
 Hormones vary widely in terms of their chemical composition. 
Specific examples include proteins (eg, adrenocorticotrophin), 
peptides (eg, vasopressin), monoamines (eg, norepinephrine), 
amino acid derivatives (eg, triiodothyronine), steroids (eg, cor-
tisol), and lipids (eg, prostaglandins). Proteins can be glycosy-
lated (eg, thyroid-stimulating hormone) and/or dimerized 
(eg, follicle-stimulating hormone) to generate full biological 
activity. In general, protein, peptide, monoamine, and lipo-
philic hormones tend to exert their effects primarily through 
protein receptors at the cell membrane, while thyroid hormone 
and steroids tend to operate in the cell nucleus. However, there 
are increasing numbers of exceptions to these rules (eg, tri-
iodothyronine activates classic thyroid hormone receptors in the 
nuclear compartment, and the trace amine receptor [TAR1]) on 
the cell surface and estradiol appears to activate both nuclear 
Endocrine cell
Neurotransmitter cell
Axon
Blood
vessel
Paracrine
Hormone target cell
Neurotransmitter and hormone target cell
H
H
H
H
H
R
H
R
H
R
H
R
H
R
N
N
N
N
H
R
H
R
Paracrine
H
H
H
H
H
N
R
H
R
H
Auto-
crine 
Autocrine 
H
H
N
N
R
H
 FIGURE 1–1  Actions of hormones and neurotransmitters. Endocrine and neurotransmitter cells synthesize hormones and release them by 
specialized secretory pathways or by diffusion. Hormones can act at the site of production either following release (autocrine) or without 
release (intracrine) from the producer cell. They can also act on neighboring target cells, including neurotransmitter-producing cells, without 
entering the circulation (paracrine). Finally, they can access target cells through the circulation (hormonal). Neurotransmitters that access the 
extracellular compartment, including circulating plasma, can act as paracrine or hormonal regulators of target cell activity (H, hormone; 
N, neurotransmitter; R, receptor). 
4    CHAPTER 1 Hormones and Hormone Action
and plasma membrane receptors). It is likely that the biological 
“effect” of a given hormone reflects a composite of receptor 
activity located in several different cellular compartments. 
 ENDOCRINE GLANDS AND TARGET 
ORGANS 
 Endocrine glands are traditionally defined as the ductless glandu-
lar structures that release their hormonal secretions into the extra-
cellular space where they eventually access circulating plasma. 
Classic endocrine glands include organs like the pituitary gland, 
thyroid gland, parathyroid glands, pancreatic islets, adrenal 
glands, ovaries, and testes. It is now clear that hormones can be 
secreted from nontraditional endocrine organs and play critical 
roles in the regulation of physiological homeostasis. Examples of 
the latter include the heart (natriuretic peptides), kidney (erythro-
poietin and renin), adipose tissue (leptin and adiponectin), and 
gut (cholecystokinin and incretins). Once in the circulation, hor-
mones bind to receptors on target tissues to elicit their biological 
effects. Target tissues for some hormones (eg, glucocorticoids) are 
numerous reflecting the ubiquitous distribution of glucocorticoid 
receptors, while those for other tissues have a more limited distri-
bution (eg, androgens). 
 REGULATION OF HORMONE LEVELS IN 
PLASMA 
 Hormone levels in plasma determine the effective ligand concen-
tration at the level of the hormone receptors in peripheral target 
cells. Thus, regulation of hormone levels plays an important role 
in the control of the biological effects that the hormone exerts. 
 Hormone Biosynthesis 
 New hormone synthesis is one of the principal mechanisms 
used to raise hormone levels in circulating plasma. In the case 
of protein or peptide hormones this usually reflects increased 
expression of the gene encoding the hormone (ie, increased 
production of the mRNA encoding the hormone) with subse-
quent increase in hormone synthesis. In the case of steroid or 
thyroid hormones it reflects increased sequestration of precur-
sors for hormone synthesis (eg, cholesterol for steroid hormones 
or iodide for thyroid hormone) as well as increased activity of 
those enzymatic proteins responsible for executing the individ-
ual catalytic events required for hormone production—typically 
the latter may involve a rate-limiting step in the synthetic cas-
cade (eg, 1-alpha hydroxylase activity in the synthesis of 1,25- 
dihydroxyvitamin D). 
 Precursor Processing 
 Processing of hormone precursors participates to varying degrees 
in controlling circulating hormone levels. Most peptide and pro-
tein hormones require some degree of processing to generate the 
mature hormonal product (eg, conversion of proinsulin to insulin) 
and impairment in the processing activity can alter the ratio of 
precursor to product in plasma. In other cases, a critical processing 
event is part of the secretory process itself (eg, cleavage of thyrox-
ine from thyroglobulin) and impaired processing can result in a 
dramatic reduction in immunoreactivity as well as bioactivity of 
the mature hormone. In addition, protein hormones may require 
posttranslational modification (eg, glycosylation) or assembly (eg, 
heterodimerization) prior to secretion in order to optimize 
 biological activity. 
 Hormone Release 
 Many hormones (eg, peptides, proteins, and monoamines) are 
stored in secretory granules in endocrine cells. Release of these 
granules is promoted by signaling events triggered by exogenous 
regulators termed secretagogues. This often requires activation of a 
second messenger system (see discussion under “Receptors”) like 
cyclic AMP generation or intracellular calcium mobilization in the 
endocrine cell. Steroid hormones, on the other hand, are not stored 
to a significant degree in the hormone-producing cells. In this case 
synthesis rather than hormone release appears to play the dominant 
role in controlling hormone levels in circulating plasma. 
 Hormone Binding in Plasma 
 Hormones in plasma can circulate either in a free form, uncom-
plexed with other molecules, or bound to other molecules like 
plasma proteins. It is the uncomplexed or free form of the hor-
mone that represents the biologically active fraction of hormone 
in the plasma compartment, and it is this fraction which homeo-
static regulatory mechanisms work to preserve. However, binding 
of hormone to plasma proteins does play an important role in 
endocrine physiology. First, it provides a reservoir of hormone that 
exchanges with the free hormone fraction according to the laws of 
mass action (see under “Receptors”). This makes plasma hormone 
concentrations less dependent on hormone synthesis and release, 
effectively stabilizing those concentrations over extended periods 
of time. This also serves to guarantee a uniform distribution of 
hormone concentration in capillary beds perfusing target tissues 
( Figure 1–2 ). Second, it slows the metabolism or turnover of the 
hormone by sequestering it away from degradative enzymes or 
filtration by the kidney. 
 Hormone Metabolism 
 Metabolism of hormones also plays an important role in regulat-
ing hormone concentrations. In some cases metabolism is 
responsible for converting precursors with less hormonal activity 
to products with greater activity (eg, conversion of 
25- hydroxyvitamin D to 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D and conver-
sion of androstenedione to testosterone). In other cases, metabo-
lism leads to degradation and inactivation of the hormone with 
a cessation of hormone activity. This type of degradation is often 
specific to the hormonal class under examination. Steroids, for 
example, are catalytically converted to inactive metabolites and/
or sulfated to promote excretion. Thyroid hormones are  subjected 
CHAPTER 1 Hormones and Hormone Action     5
to deiodination which strips them of their biological activity. 
Protein and peptide hormones are internalized by target, as well 
as nontarget, cells and degraded in intracellular lysosomes. In 
general, the more avid the degradative mechanisms, the shorter 
the plasma half-life of the hormone. 
 Regulation of Hormone Levels 
 Hormone levels can be modulated through regulatory factors 
affecting any of the steps listed earlier; however, the bulk of the 
acute “fine-tuning” of hormone levels occurs at the level of 
hormone secretion and synthesis. Many, if not most, hormone 
levels are controlled either directly or indirectly by the biologi-
cal activity that they serve to control. For example, parathyroid 
hormone (PTH) secretion which responds to low extracellular 
calcium levels, mobilizes calcium out of bone which, in turn, 
signals back to the parathyroid gland to turn off PTH secre-
tion. This negative feedback inhibition is a hallmark of endo-
crine regulation. The end product or negative regulator can 
either be an inorganic ion or metabolite (eg, calcium for PTH) 
or a hormonal product in the endocrine cascade (eg, thyroid 
hormone for TSH). Not all feedback is negative in nature and 
positive feedback loops (eg, mid-cycle estradiol-induced 
luteinizing hormone secretion) also play important roles in 
governing physiological homeostasis. 
 HORMONE ACTION 
 Hormones produce their biologic effects through interaction with 
high-affinity receptors that are, in turn, linked to one or more 
effector systems within the cell. These effectors involve many dif-
ferent components of the cell’s metabolic machinery, ranging 
from ion transport at the cell surface to stimulation of the nuclear 
transcriptional apparatus. Steroids and thyroid hormones exert 
their effects in the cell nucleus, although regulatory activity in the 
extranuclear compartment has also been documented. Peptide 
hormones and neurotransmitters, on the other hand, trigger a 
plethora of signaling activity in the cytoplasmic and membrane 
compartments while at the same time exerting parallel effects on 
the transcriptional apparatus. The discussion that follows will 
focus on the primary signaling systems employed by selected hor-
monal agonists and attempt to identify examples where aberrant 
signaling results in human disease. 
 RECEPTORS 
 The biologic activity of individual hormones is dependent on 
their interactions with specific high-affinity receptors on the sur-
faces or in the cytoplasm or nuclei of target cells. The receptors, in 
turn, are linked to signaling effector systems responsible for 
 generating the observed biologic response. Receptors, therefore, 
convey not only specificity of the response (ie, cells lacking 
 receptors lack responsiveness to the hormone) but also the means 
for activating the effector mechanism. In general, receptors for the 
peptide hormones and neurotransmitters are aligned on the cell 
surface and those for the steroid hormones, thyroid hormone, and 
vitamin D are found in the cytoplasmic or nuclear 
 compartments. 
 Interactions between the hormone ligand and its receptor are 
governed by the laws of mass action: 
 
[ ] [ ]
] [
k
k−
[
]
+1
1
 where [ H ] is the hormone concentration, [ R ] is the receptor con-
centration, [HR] is the concentration of the hormone–receptor 
complex, and  k +1 and  k −1 are the rate constants for [HR] formation 
and dissociation, respectively. Thus, at equilibrium, 
K
R
k
k
k
KD
+
−
K
k
−
+
=
=
1
1
[ ]
H [R
[HR]
or
[ ]
H [ ]
R
HR
1
 where  K D is the equilibrium dissociation constant that defines the 
affinity of the hormone–receptor interaction (ie, lower the disso-
ciation constant, higher the affinity). Assuming that total receptor 
concentration  R 0 = [HR] + [ R ], this equation can be rearranged to 
give 
Blood vessel
Target tissues
 FIGURE 1–2  Role of plasma binding in delivery of hormones to 
peripheral tissues. Example shows a hormone that is bound (small 
red circles) to a plasma protein (large circles) and a hormone that is 
not protein bound (small orange circles). With the bound hormone, 
only the free fraction is available for tissue uptake. As the free frac-
tion is depleted, additional hormone dissociates from the plasma-
binding protein, making hormone available to more distal portions 
of the tissue. In contrast, all hormones that are not protein bound are 
quickly extracted in the proximal part of the tissue. 
6    CHAPTER 1 Hormones and Hormone Action
[HR]
[H]
[HR]
= −⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
+
K
R
D
D
⎠
0
K
 This is the Scatchard equation and states that when bound over 
free ligand (ie, [HR]/[ H ]) is plotted against bound ligand (ie, 
[HR]), the slope of the line is defined by 1/ K D, the  y -intercept by 
R 0 /K D, and the  x -intercept by  R 0 ( Figure 1–3 ). When [HR] = R 0/2, 
[ H ] = K D ; therefore, the  K D is also the concentration of hormone 
[ H ] at which one-half of the available receptors are occupied. 
Thus, knowledge of bound and free ligand concentrations, which 
can be determined experimentally, provides information regarding 
the affinity of the receptor for its ligand and the total concentra-
tion of receptor in the preparation. 
 Agents that bind to receptors with high affinity are classified as 
either agonists or antagonists based on the functional outcome of 
this receptor–ligand interaction. Agonists are ligands that trigger 
the effector mechanisms and produce biologic effects. Antagonists 
bind to the receptor but do not activate the effector mechanisms. 
Because they occupy receptor and block association with the 
 agonist, they antagonize the functional activity of the latter. Partial 
agonists bind to the receptor but possess limited ability to activate 
the effector mechanisms. In different circumstances, partial ago-
nists demonstrate variable biologic activity. For example, when 
used alone, they may display weak activating activity, whereas 
their use together with a full agonist may lead to inhibition of 
function because the latter is displaced from the receptor molecule 
by a ligand with lower intrinsic activity. 
 In some systems, receptors are available in a surplus, which is 
severalfold higher than that required to elicit a maximal biologic 
response. Such spare receptor systems, although they superficially 
appear redundant, are designed to rectify a mismatch between low 
circulating ligand levels and a relatively low-affinity ligand– 
receptor interaction. Thus, by increasing the number of available rec-
eptors, the system is guaranteed a sufficient number of liganded 
receptor units to activate downstream effector systems fully, 
despite operating at subsaturating levels of ligand. 
 NEUROTRANSMITTER AND PEPTIDE 
HORMONE RECEPTORS 
 As mentioned above, neurotransmitter and peptide hormones 
interact predominantly with receptors expressed on the plasma 
membrane at the cell surface. The  K D of a neurotransmitter for 
its receptor is typically higher than that of a hormone for its recep-
tor, reflecting a higher  k off rate constant (see earlier). Neurotrans-
mitter receptor occupancy is driven by the extraordinarily high 
concentrations of ligand that can be achieved in the synaptic cleft, 
and occupancy of the hormone receptor is driven by its high affin-
ity for ligand. The high  k off of the neurotransmitter–receptor 
 interaction guarantees that the effect is rapid in onset but of short 
duration, whereas the lower  k off of the hormone–receptor 
 interaction guarantees that the effect is slow in onset but difficult 
to extinguish, kinetics that are more appropriate for the hormonal 
functions of these ligands. 
 The neurotransmitter and peptide receptors can be divided 
into several major groups (Table 1–1 and Figure 1–4). The first 
includes the so-called serpentine or “seven-transmembrane -
domain” receptors. These receptors each contain an amino ter minal 
extracellular domain followed by seven hydrophobic amino acid seg-
ments, each of which is believed to span the membrane bilayer 
( Figure 1–4 ). The seventh of these, in turn, is followed by a hydro-
philic carboxyl terminal domain that resides within the cytoplas-
mic compartment. As a group, they share a dependence on the 
G protein transducers (see discussed later) to execute many of 
their biologic effects. A second group includes the single-trans-
membrane-domain receptors that harbor intrinsic tyrosine kinase 
activity. This includes the insulin, insulin-like growth factor 
(IGF), and epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptors. A third 
group, which is functionally similar to the second group, is char-
acterized by a large, extracellular binding domain followed by a 
single membrane-spanning segment and a cytoplasmic tail. These 
receptors do not possess intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity but 
appear to function through interaction with soluble transducer 
molecules which do possess such activity. Prolactin and growth 
[HR]
[HR]
[HR]
[H]
[H ]
KD
KD
KD
R0
R0
R0
A
B
Slope = −1
 FIGURE 1–3  Ligand saturation  (A) and Scatchard analysis 
(B) of a hypothetical hormone receptor interaction.  K D represents the 
dissociation constant;  R 0 the total receptor concentration; [HR] and [ H ] 
the bound and free ligand, respectively. Note in  A that the  K D is the 
concentration [ H ] at which half of available receptors are occupied. 
CHAPTER 1 Hormones and Hormone Action     7
hormone are included in this group. Another group are the trans-
forming growth factor beta (TGF-β) family members which signal 
through serine/threonine kinase domains in their cytoplasmic 
tails. A fifth group, which includes the natriuretic peptide recep-
tors, operates through activation of a particulate guanylyl cyclase 
and synthesis of cGMP. The cyclase is covalently attached at the 
carboxyl terminal portion of the ligand-binding domain and thus 
represents an intrinsic part of the receptor molecule. 
 G PROTEIN–COUPLED RECEPTORS 
 G protein–coupled receptors constitute a large superfamily of 
molecules capable of responding to ligands of remarkable struc-
tural diversity—ranging from photons to large polypeptide hor-
mones. These receptors share overall structural features, most 
notably seven membrane-spanning regions connected by intracel-
lular and extracellular loops ( see Figure 1–4 ). The receptors are 
 oriented such that the amino terminal domain is extracellular, 
whereas the carboxyl terminal tail is cytoplasmic. The membrane-
spanning segments interact with one another, forming an irregular 
cylindrical bundle around a central cavity within the molecule. 
G protein–coupled receptors can assume at least two conforma-
tions with differing orientations of the membrane-spanning seg-
ments relative to one another. One orientation is favored in the 
absence of an agonist ligand, and in this orientation the receptor 
does not activate a G protein (inactive conformation). The second 
orientation is stabilized by the binding of an appropriate agonist 
ligand, and in this conformation the receptor activates a cognate 
G protein (active conformation). All G protein–coupled receptors 
are thought to undergo a similar conformational switch on agonist 
binding, producing a structural change in the cytoplasmic domain 
that promotes G protein activation. Some small agonists, such as 
catecholamines, are able to enter the cavity formed by the trans-
membrane segments, thereby directly stabilizing the active recep-
tor conformation. Other agonists, such as large polypeptide 
TABLE 1–1   Major subdivisions (with examples) of 
the neurotransmitter-peptide hormone 
receptor families.a
Seven-Transmembrane Domain
β-Adrenergic
PTH
LH
TSH
GRH
TRH
ACTH
MSH
Glucagon
Dopamine
α2-Adrenergic (−)
Somatostatin (−)
Single-Transmembrane Domain
Growth factor receptors
 Insulin
 IGF
 EGF
 PDGF
Cytokine receptors
 Growth hormone
 Prolactin
 Erythropoietin
 CSF
Guanylyl cyclase-linked receptors
 Natriuretic peptides
aReceptors have been subdivided based on shared structural and functional similari-
ties. Minus (−) sign denotes a negative effect on cyclase activity.
Seven-
transmembrane-
domain receptor
(eg, β-adrenergic
catecholamines)
Growth factor
receptor
(eg, EGF)
COOH
Binding domain
Binding domain
Binding domain
Binding domain
Tyrosine kinase
domain
Y
Y
Y
NH2
Guanylyl cyclase
receptor
(eg, ANP)
Kinase-like domain
Binding domain
TGF-β receptor
(eg, TGF-β)
Serine/Threonine
Kinase domain
Cytokine
receptor
(eg, GH)
Accessory protein with
tyrosine kinase
domain
Guanylyl cyclase
 FIGURE 1–4  Structural schematics of different classes of 
membrane-associated hormone receptors. Representative ligands 
are presented in parentheses (ANP, atrial natriuretic peptide; EGF, epi-
dermal growth factor; GH, growth hormone; TGF-β, transforming 
growth factor beta). 
8    CHAPTER 1 Hormones and Hormone Action
hormones, bind primarily to the extracellular domain of their 
G protein–coupled receptors. This indirectly results in movement 
of the transmembrane region of the receptor and stabilization of 
the active receptor conformation. 
 Until recently, it was thought that G protein–coupled receptors 
function exclusively as monomers. Many G protein–coupled 
receptors are now known to dimerize either with themselves 
(homodimerization) or with other G protein–coupled receptors 
(heterodimerization). In some cases, dimerization is important for 
efficient receptor biosynthesis and membrane localization. In 
other cases, dimerization is important for optimal ligand affinity, 
specificity, or receptor signaling. 
 Heritable mutations in a variety of G protein–coupled recep-
tors are known to be associated with disease. Loss-of-function 
phenotypes result from mutations that eliminate one or both 
receptor alleles, or that result in the synthesis of signaling- 
defective receptors. Gain-of-function phenotypes generally result 
from point mutations that produce constitutively active recep-
tors (ie, stably assume the active receptor conformation even in 
the absence of an agonist ligand). Examples of such G protein– 
coupled receptor disorders relevant to endocrinology are 
described below and discussed in greater detail elsewhere in this 
book. 
 G PROTEIN TRANSDUCERS 
 G protein–coupled receptors initiate intracellular signaling by 
activating one (or in some cases multiple) G proteins. G proteins 
are a family of heterotrimeric proteins that regulate the activity 
of effector molecules (eg, enzymes, ion channels) ( Table 1–2 ), 
resulting ultimately in biological responses. The identity of a 
G protein is defined by the nature of its α subunit, which is 
largely responsible for effector activation. The major G proteins 
involved in hormone action (and their actions on effectors) are 
G s (stimulation of adenylyl cyclase), G i (inhibition of adenylyl 
cyclase; regulation of calcium and potassium channels), and G q/11 
(stimulation of phospholipase C [PLC] β). The β and γ subunits 
of G proteins are tightly associated with one another and func-
tion as a dimer. In some cases, the βγ subunit dimer also regu-
lates effector function. 
 G proteins are noncovalently tethered to the plasma mem-
brane and are thus proximate to their cognate receptors and to 
their effector targets. The basis for specificity in receptor–G pro-
tein interactions has not been fully defined. It is likely that spe-
cific structural determinants presented by the cytoplasmic loops 
of the G protein–coupled receptor determine the identity of the 
G proteins that are activated. It is the nature of the α subunit of 
the G protein that is critical for receptor recognition. There are 
about a dozen different G protein α subunits and hundreds of 
distinct G protein–coupled receptors. Thus, it is clear that a par-
ticular G protein is activated by a large number of different recep-
tors. For example, G s is activated by receptors for ligands as 
diverse as β-adrenergic catecholamines and large polypeptide 
hormones such as luteinizing hormone (LH). LH is thereby able 
to stimulate adenylyl cyclase and raise intracellular levels of 
cAMP in cells that express LH receptors (eg, Leydig cells of the 
testis). 
 Figure 1–5 is a schematic representation of the molecular 
events associated with activation of G proteins by G protein–
coupled receptors. In the basal, inactive state, the G protein is 
an intact heterotrimer with guanosine diphosphate (GDP) 
bound to the α subunit. Agonist binding to a G protein– coupled 
receptor promotes the physical interaction between the receptor 
and its cognate G protein. This produces a conformational 
change in the G protein, resulting in the dissociation of GDP. 
TABLE 1–2  G protein subunits selectively interact 
with specific receptor and effector 
mechanisms.
G Protein 
Subunit
Associated 
Receptors
Effector
αs
β-Adrenergic 
TSH 
Glucagon
Adenylyl cyclase 
Ca2+ channels 
K+ channels
αi
α2-Adrenergic 
Muscarinic (type II)
Adenylyl cyclase 
Ca2+ channels 
K+ channels
αq
α1-Adrenergic 
PLCβ
β/α
Adenylyl cyclase (+ or −) 
PLC Supports βARK-mediated 
receptor phosphorylation and 
desensitization
H
H
GTP
α
H
R
R
R
GDP
GDP
β/γ
α
GDP
α
GTP
α
GTP
α
β/γ
β/γ
E
E
Pi
Biologic effect
 FIGURE 1–5  G protein–mediated signal transduction. α and β/γ 
subunits of a representative G protein are depicted (see text for 
details) (E, effector; H, hormonal ligand; R, hormone receptor). 
CHAPTER 1 Hormones and Hormone Action     9
This in turn allows the binding of GTP (which is present at a 
much higher concentration in cells than is GDP) to the α sub-
unit. Dissociation of the GTP-bound α subunit from the βγ 
dimer then occurs, allowing these subunits to activate their 
effector targets. Dissociation of the hormone–receptor complex 
also occurs. The duration of activation is determined by the 
intrinsic GTPase activity of the G protein α subunit. Hydrolysis 
of GTP to GDP terminates the activity and promotes reassocia-
tion of the αβγ trimer, returning the system to the basal state. 
The GTPase activity of G protein α subunits can be increased 
by the action of proteins termed “regulators of G protein 
signaling” (RGS proteins). 
 EFFECTORS 
 Numerous effectors have been linked to the G protein–coupled 
receptors. A number of these are presented in  Table 1–2 . A great 
many other G proteins—not dealt with here—are coupled to 
physical or biochemical stimuli but have very limited  involvement 
in hormone action. As discussed, adenylyl cyclase, perhaps the 
best-studied of the group, is activated by G s ( Figure 1–6 ). This 
activation results in a transient increase in intracellular cAMP 
levels. The cAMP binds to the inhibitory regulatory subunit 
of inactive protein kinase A (PKA) and promotes its dissocia-
tion from the complex, thereby permitting enhanced activity 
of the catalytic subunit. The latter phosphorylates a variety of 
cellular substrates, among them the hepatic phosphorylase 
kinase that initiates the enzymatic cascade which results in 
enhanced glycogenolysis. It also phosphorylates and activates 
the cAMP response element–binding protein (CREB), which 
mediates many of the known transcriptional responses 
to cAMP (and to some extent calcium) in the nuclear com-
partment. Other transcription factors are also known to be 
 phosphorylated by PKA. 
 PLC beta (PLCβ) is a second effector system that has been 
studied extensively. The enzyme is activated through G q -mediated 
transduction of signals generated by a wide array of hormone– 
receptor complexes, including those for angiotensin II, α-adrenergic 
agonists, and endothelin. Activation of the enzyme leads to 
CREB
TGACGTCA
CREB
Core
transcription
factors
Increased
transcription
β-AR
Adenylyl
cyclase
Epinephrine
Transport to
extracellular space
cAMP
cAMP
ATP
R
R R
PKA
regulatory
subunit
PKA
PKA
catalytic
subunit
Phosphorylate
cytosolic enzymes
(eg, phosphorylase
kinase)
Phosphodiesterase
5'-AMP
CREB
TGACGTCA
CREB
PO4
PO4
Gs
Nucleus
 FIGURE 1–6  β-Adrenergic receptor signaling in the cytoplasmic and nuclear compartments. The cAMP response element–binding protein 
(CREB) is depicted bound to a consensus CRE in the basal state. Phosphorylation of this protein leads to activation of the juxtaposed core tran-
scriptional machinery. 
10    CHAPTER 1 Hormones and Hormone Action
 cleavage of phosphoinositol 4,5-bisphosphate in the plasma mem-
brane to generate inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP 3 ) and diacylg-
lycerol (DAG) ( Figure 1–7 ). The former interacts with a specific 
receptor present on the endoplasmic reticulum membrane to pro-
mote release of Ca 2+ into the cytoplasmic compartment. The 
increased calcium, in turn, may activate protein kinases, promote 
secretion, or foster contractile activity. Depletion of intracellular 
calcium pools by IP 3 results in enhanced uptake of calcium across 
the plasma membrane (perhaps through generation of IP 4 [1,3,4,5-
tetrakisphosphate]), thereby activating a second, albeit indirect, 
signaling mechanism that serves to increase intracellular calcium 
levels even further. DAG functions as an activator of several pro-
tein kinase C (PKC) isoforms within cells. Several different iso-
forms of PKC (eg, α, β, γ) exist in a given cell type. A number of 
these are calcium dependent, a property which, given the IP 3 
activity mentioned above, provides the opportunity for a synergis-
tic interaction of the two signaling pathways driven by PLCβ 
activity. However, not all PKC activity derives from the break-
down of PIP 2 substrate. Metabolism of phosphatidylcholine by 
PLC PC (phosphatidyl choline-selective phospholipase) leads to the 
generation of phosphocholine and DAG. This latter pathway is 
believed to be responsible for the more protracted elevations in 
PKC activity seen following exposure to agonist. 
 Other phospholipases may also be important in hormone- 
dependent signaling. Phospholipase D employs phosphatidylcho-
line as a substrate to generate choline and phosphatidic acid. The 
latter may serve as a precursor for subsequent DAG formation. As 
with PLC PC above, no IP 3 is generated as a consequence of this 
reaction. Phospholipase A 2 triggers release of arachidonic acid, a 
precursor of prostaglandins, leukotrienes, endoperoxides, and 
thromboxanes, all signaling molecules in their own right. The 
relative contribution of these other phospholipases to hormone-
mediated signal transduction and the role of the specific lipid 
breakdown products (eg, phosphocholine, phosphatidic acid) in 
conveying regulatory information remains an area of active 
research. 
 Activation of effectors by G protein–coupled receptors is sub-
ject to regulatory mechanisms that prevent overstimulation of cells 
by an agonist ligand. At the level of the receptor, two regulatory 
events are known to occur. One is desensitization, wherein initial 
Receptor
PLCPC
PLCβ2
PIP2
Ligand
Phosphatidyl-
choline
G?
Gq
Choline
DAG
DAG
IP3
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+-calmodulin
PKC
Cytoplasmic and
membrane
protein
phosphorylation
Calmodulin
CaM kinase
+
+
+
CREB
TGACTCA
TGACGTCA
CREB
c-jun
c-fos
Core transcription factors
Increased
transcription
Nucleus
 FIGURE 1–7  PLCβ-coupled receptor signaling in the cytoplasmic and nuclear compartments (DAG, diacylglycerol;  PC, phosphatidylcho-
line; PKC, protein kinase C; PLC, phospholipase). 
CHAPTER 1 Hormones and Hormone Action     11
stimulation of a receptor by its agonists leads to a loss of the abil-
ity of the receptor to subsequently elicit G protein activation. This 
is shown schematically in  Figure 1–8 for the β-adrenergic receptor. 
A similar regulatory mechanism exists for many G protein– 
coupled receptors. Agonist binding to the receptor produces 
G protein activation and results also in activation of a kinase 
(termed G protein–coupled receptor kinase, GRK) that 
phosphorylates the cytoplasmic domain of the receptor. By virtue 
of this phosphorylation, the receptor acquires high affinity for a 
member of the arrestin family of proteins. The name “arrestin” 
derives from the observation that the receptor is no longer capable 
of interacting with a G protein when arrestin is bound. Thus, the 
phosphorylated receptor becomes uncoupled from its G protein, 
preventing signaling to the effector. The receptor remains inactive 
until a phosphatase acts to restore the receptor to its 
 unphosphorylated state. 
 Many G protein–coupled receptors are also susceptible to 
agonist-induced downregulation, resulting in a reduced level of 
cell surface receptors following exposure of cells to an agonist. 
This can result from agonist-induced internalization of receptors, 
followed by trafficking of receptors to lysosomes where degrada-
tion occurs. In addition, chronic exposure of cells to an agonist 
may result in signaling events that suppress the biosynthesis of 
new receptors, thereby lowering steady-state receptor levels. 
Together, these regulatory events ensure that the cell is protected 
from excessive stimulation in the presence of sustained high levels 
of an agonist. 
 Recently, it has become clear that these events that serve to 
dampen G protein signaling can also have important positive roles 
in promoting cell signaling. For example, arrestin association with 
G protein–coupled receptors can produce activation of specific 
pathways such as the MAP kinase pathway, and this occurs inde-
pendently of G protein signaling. In addition, internalized 
G protein–coupled receptors can in some cases retain the ability 
to signal, and the effects may differ from those produced when 
activation occurs at the plasma membrane. 
 DISORDERS OF G PROTEINS AND
G PROTEIN–COUPLED RECEPTORS 
 Two bacterial toxins are capable of covalently modifying specific 
G protein α subunits, thereby altering their functional activity. 
Cholera toxin is a protein that binds to receptors present on all 
cells, resulting in the internalization of the enzymatic subunit of 
the toxin. The toxin enzyme is an ADP-ribosyl transferase that 
transfers ADPribose from NAD to an acceptor site (Arg 201 ) 
on the α subunit of G s . This covalent modification greatly inhib-
its the GTPase activity of α s , enhancing the activation of adenylyl 
cyclase by extending the duration of the active GTP-bound form 
of the G protein. Even in the absence of an active G protein–
coupled receptor, GDP dissociates (albeit very slowly) from the 
G protein. Thus, cholera toxin will eventually activate adenylyl 
cyclase activity even without agonist binding to a G protein–
coupled receptor. The result is a large and sustained activation of 
adenylyl cyclase. When this occurs in intestinal epithelial cells, 
the massive increase in cAMP results in the increased water and 
salt secretion characteristic of cholera. 
H
H
H
H
H
R
G
ACa
R
G
ACi
R
ACi
P
Arrestin
Receptor
Adenylyl cyclase
G protein
Phosphatase
ATP
cAMP
β-ARK
PKA
 FIGURE 1–8  Kinase-dependent desensitization of the ligand–receptor complex. Schema shown is that for the β-adrenergic receptor, but 
similar systems probably exist for other types of G protein–linked receptors (ACa, active adenylyl cyclase; ACi, inactive adenylyl cyclase; β-ARK, 
β-adrenergic receptor kinase; PKA, protein kinase A). 
12    CHAPTER 1 Hormones and Hormone Action
 Pertussis toxin is also an ADP-ribosyl transferase. However, in 
this case, the substrates are α subunits of different G proteins, 
most notably G i and G o . The ADPribose moiety is transferred to 
a cysteine residue near the carboxyl terminus of the α subunit, a 
region required for interaction with activated G protein–coupled 
receptors. Once ADP-ribosylated by pertussis toxin, these G pro-
teins are no longer able to interact with activated receptors and are 
thus stuck in an inactive (GDP-bound) conformation. Inhibition 
of receptor-mediated activation of G i and G o accounts for many of 
the clinical manifestations of pertussis infection. 
 Genetic mutations in G protein α subunits are seen in a num-
ber of human diseases. Acquired activating mutations in α s can 
produce a variety of phenotypes depending on the site of expres-
sion of the mutant protein. In McCune-Albright syndrome, the 
mutation occurs in a subset of neural crest cells during embryo-
genesis. All of the descendants of these cells, including certain 
osteoblasts, melanocytes, and ovarian or testicular cells, express the 
mutant protein. The result is a form of genetic mosaicism in 
which the consequence of unregulated production of cAMP in 
particular tissues is evident (ie, the progressive bone disorder poly-
ostotic fibrous dysplasia, the abnormal skin pigmentation referred 
to as café au lait spots, gonadotropin-independent precocious 
puberty). In cells where cAMP is linked to cell proliferation (eg, 
thyrotropes, somatotropes), a subset of patients with benign 
tumors has been shown to have acquired activating mutations in 
α s . Activating mutations in one of the G i proteins that is coupled 
to cell proliferation, α i2 , have been reported in a subset of adrenal 
and ovarian tumors. 
 Loss-of-function mutations in α s are associated with the 
hereditary disorder pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1 (PHP-1a). 
This disorder, first described by Fuller Albright, is the first docu-
mented example of a human disease attributable to target cell 
resistance to a hormone. Affected patients display biochemical 
features of hypoparathyroidism (eg, hypocalcemia, hyperphos-
phatemia) but have markedly increased circulating levels of 
parathyroid hormone (PTH) and display target cell resistance to 
PTH. Many hormone receptors couple to adenylyl cyclase via 
G s , yet patients with PHP-1a generally display only subtle 
defects in responsiveness to other hormones (eg, TSH, LH). The 
explanation for this lies in the fascinating genetics of this disor-
der. In brief, affected patients have one normal and one mutated 
α s allele. The mutated allele fails to produce an active form of 
the protein. Tissues in these patients are expected to express 
about 50% of the normal level of α s , a level sufficient to support 
signaling to adenylyl cyclase. However, in certain tissues, the α s 
gene is subject to genetic imprinting such that the paternal allele 
is expressed poorly or not at all. In individuals harboring inacti-
vating mutations, if the paternal allele has the mutation, all cells 
express about 50% of the normal level of α s (derived from the 
normal maternal allele). However, if the maternal allele has the 
mutation, then the cells in which paternal imprinting occurs 
express low levels or no α s . One of the major sites of this paternal 
imprinting is in the proximal renal tubule, an important target 
tissue for the physiologic actions of PTH. This accounts for the 
clinical resistance to PTH seen in PHP-1a and accounts also for 
the fact that only a subset of patients with haploinsufficiency of 
α s are resistant to PTH. Interestingly, essentially all patients with 
haploinsufficiency of α s display Albright hereditary osteodystro-
phy, a developmental disorder with phenotypic manifestations 
affecting a variety of tissues. This indicates that even a partial 
loss of adenylyl cyclase signaling is incompatible with normal 
development. 
 Mutations in the genes encoding G protein–coupled receptors 
are being increasingly recognized as important in the pathogenesis 
of endocrine disorders. Loss-of-function mutations generally need 
to be homozygous (or compound heterozygous) in order to result 
in a significant disease phenotype. This is probably due to the fact 
that most cells have a complement of receptors which exceeds 
what is needed for maximal cellular response (spare receptors). 
Thus, a 50% reduction in the amount of a cell surface receptor 
may have little influence on the ability of a target cell to respond. 
However, in some situations, haploinsufficiency of a G protein–
coupled receptor can produce a clinical phenotype. For instance, 
heterozygous loss-of-function mutations in the G protein–coupled 
calcium-sensing receptor results in the autosomal dominant disor-
der familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia due to mild dysregula-
tion of PTH secretion and renal calcium handling. Homozygous 
loss-of-function of the calcium-sensing receptor results in severe 
neonatal hyperparathyroidism due to the loss of the ability of 
plasma calcium to suppress PTH secretion and promote renal 
calcium clearance. Syndromes of hormone resistance have also 
been reported in patients lacking expression of functional G pro-
tein–coupled receptors for vasopressin, ACTH, and TSH. Loss of 
functional expression of the PTH receptor results in Blomstrand 
chondrodysplasia, a disorder that is lethal due to the inability of 
PTH-related protein (a PTH receptor agonist) to promote normal 
cartilage development. 
 Mutations that render G protein–coupled receptors constitu-
tively active (in the absence of an agonist ligand) are seen in a 
number of endocrine disorders. Generally speaking, such muta-
tions produce a disease phenotype resembling that seen with 
excessive levels of the corresponding hormone agonist. Thus, 
activating mutations in the TSH receptor produce neonatal thy-
rotoxicosis, and activating mutations in the LH receptor result 
in pseudoprecocious puberty or testotoxicosis. Activating muta-
tions in the PTH receptor result in Jansen type metaphyseal 
chondrodysplasia; a disorder characterized by hypercalcemia and 
increased bone resorption (mimicking the effects of excess PTH 
on bone) and delayed cartilage differentiation (mimicking the 
effects of excess PTH-related protein on cartilage). A theoretical 
approach to treating disorders resulting from constitutively 
active G protein–coupled receptors would be administration of 
“inverse agonists,” agents that stabilize receptors in their inactive 
conformation. Although inverse agonists have been identified 
for a number of G protein–coupled receptors, they have yet to 
be successfully employed as therapeutics. Molecular analysis of 
G protein–coupled receptors has revealed that point mutations, 
in addition to producing constitutive activity, can alter the 
specificity of ligand binding or the ability of the receptor to 
become desensitized. It is almost certain that such mutations will 
be found to provide the basis for some perhaps more subtle 
endocrinopathies. 
CHAPTER 1 Hormones and Hormone Action     13
 GROWTH FACTOR RECEPTORS 
 The growth factor receptors differ from those described earlier 
both structurally and functionally. Unlike the G protein– associated 
receptors, these proteins span the membrane only once and 
acquire their signaling ability, at least in part, through activation 
of tyrosine kinase activity, which is intrinsic to the individual 
receptor molecules. The insulin and IGF receptors fall within this 
group as do those for the autocrine or paracrine regulators plate-
let-derived growth factor (PDGF), fibroblast growth factor (FGF), 
and EGF. Signaling is initiated by the association of ligand (eg, 
insulin) with the receptor’s extracellular domain ( Figure 1–9 ) and 
subsequent receptor dimerization. This results in phosphorylation 
of tyrosines both on the receptor itself as well as on nonreceptor 
substrates. It is assumed that phosphorylation of these substrates 
results in a cascade of activation events, similar to those described 
for the G protein–coupled systems, which contribute to perturba-
tions in intracellular pathways. The autophosphorylation of the 
receptor molecules themselves has been studied extensively and 
provided some intriguing insights into the mechanisms that 
underlie signal transduction by this group of proteins. 
 Tyrosine phosphorylation takes place at specific locations in 
the receptor molecule. Once phosphorylated, these sites associate, 
in highly specific fashion, with a variety of accessory proteins that 
possess independent signaling capability. These include PLCγ, 
phosphoinositol (PI) 3′ kinase, GTPase-activating protein (GAP), 
growth factor receptor–bound protein-2 (GRB2), and the Src 
family nonreceptor tyrosine kinases. These interactions are fos-
tered by the presence of highly conserved type 2  src homology 
(based on sequence homology to the  src proto-oncogene) domains 
(SH2) in each of the accessory molecules. Each individual SH2 
domain displays specificity for the contextual amino acids sur-
rounding the phosphotyrosine residues in the receptor molecule. 
In the PDGF receptor, for example, the SH2 domain of PLCγ 
associates selectively with Tyr 977 and Tyr 989 , whereas that of PI 3′ 
kinase associates with Tyr 708 and Tyr 719 . Thus, diversity of response 
is controlled by contextual sequences around individual phospho-
tyrosine residues that determine the types of accessory proteins 
brought into the signaling complex. These protein–protein inter-
actions may provide a means of directly activating the signaling 
molecule in question, perhaps through a change in steric confor-
mation. Alternatively, they may facilitate the sequestration of these 
accessory proteins in or near the plasma membrane compartment, 
in close proximity to key substrates (eg, membrane lipids in the 
case of PLCγ) or other important regulatory proteins. 
 Some of these associations trigger immediate signaling events, 
but others (eg, GRB2) may act largely to provide the scaffolding 
needed to construct a more complex signaling apparatus 
( Figure 1–10 ). In the case of GRB2, another accessory protein 
(son-of-sevenless; SOS) associates with the receptor–GRB2 com-
plex through a type  3 src homology (SH3) domain present in the 
latter. This domain recognizes a sequence of proline-rich amino 
acids present in the SOS protein. SOS, in turn, facilitates assem-
bly of the Ras–Raf complex, which permits activation of down-
stream effectors such as mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) 
kinase (MEK). This latter kinase, which possesses both serine-
threonine and tyrosine kinase activity, activates the p42 and p44 
MAPKs (also called extracellular signal–regulated kinases; ERKs). 
ERK acts on a variety of substrates within the cell, including the 
RSK kinases, which, in turn, phosphorylate the ribosomal S 6 
 protein and thereby stimulates protein synthesis. These phospho-
rylation reactions (and their amplification in those instances 
where the MAPK substrate is a kinase itself) often lead to protean 
changes in the phenotype of the target cells. 
 The liganded growth factor receptors, including the insulin 
receptor, may also signal through the phosphoinositide 3-OH 
kinase (PI-3K). SH2 domains of the p85 regulatory subunit of 
PI-3K associate with the growth factor receptor through specific 
Y
P
Receptor
Ligand
Y
P
Y
Y
Y
SH2
P
P
Y
SH2
SH3
Y
P
P
Y
SH2
SH3
Biologic
effect
Further
complex
assembly
Biologic
effect
SH3
 FIGURE 1–9  Signaling by tyrosine kinase–containing growth 
factor receptor. Receptors depicted here as monomers for simplicity; 
typically dimerization of receptors follows association with ligand. 
Autophosphorylation of one or more critically positioned tyrosine 
residues in the receptor leads to association with accessory proteins 
or effectors through SH2 domains present on the latter. In some 
cases, an SH3 domain present on the same protein leads to recruit-
ment of yet other proteins leading to further complex assembly. 
14    CHAPTER 1 Hormones and Hormone Action
phosphotyrosine residues (Tyr 740 and Tyr 751 in the PDGF receptor) 
in a manner similar to that described above for GRB2 ( see Figure 
1–10 ). This leads to activation of the p110 catalytic subunit of 
PI-3K and increased production of phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-
trisphosphate (PIP 3 ) and phosphatidylinositol-3,4-bisphosphate 
(PI[3,4]P 2 ). These latter molecules sequester protein kinase B (also 
known as Akt) at the cell membrane through association with the 
plekstrin homology domains in the amino terminal of the kinase 
molecule. This in turn leads to phosphorylation of PKB at two 
separate sites (Thr 308 in the active kinase domain and Ser 473 in the 
carboxyl terminal tail) by PIP 3 -dependent kinases (PDK1 and 
PDK2). These phosphorylations result in activation of PKB. In 
the case of insulin-sensitive target cells, downstream targets of 
activated PKB (eg, following insulin stimulation) include 6-phos-
phofructo-2-kinase (increased activity), glycogen synthase kinase-3 
(GSK3) (decreased activity), the insulin-responsive glucose trans-
porter GLUT 4 (translocation and increased activity), and p70 S6 
kinase (increased activity). This leads to increased glycolysis, 
increased glycogen synthesis, increased glucose transport, and 
increased protein synthesis, respectively. There is also a growing 
body of evidence suggesting that PKB may protect cells from 
programmed cell death through phosphorylation of key proteins 
in the apoptotic pathway. 
 It has been reported that G protein–coupled receptors may also 
activate the Raf-MEK-ERK cascade, although in this case the 
signal traffics through a nonreceptor protein tyrosine kinase 
(NRPTK such as Src and Fyn) rather than the traditional growth 
factor receptor–linked tyrosine kinases. The details of the mecha-
nism are incompletely understood, but it appears to require the 
participation of β-arrestin (discussed earlier) as an adaptor 
molecule linking the G protein receptor to the NRPTK. 
Interestingly, this implies that β-arrestin, which terminates coupling 
between the receptor and G protein, actually promotes coupling 
between the desensitized receptor and downstream effectors 
 traditionally associated with growth factor–dependent activation. 
 CYTOKINE RECEPTORS 
 These include the receptors for a variety of cytokines, erythropoi-
etin, colony-stimulating factor, GH, and prolactin. These cell 
membrane receptors have a single internal hydrophobic stretch of 
amino acids, suggesting that they span the membrane but once 
( see Figure 1–4 ). They can be composed of monomers or het-
erodimers of different molecules. 
 Growth Hormone and Prolactin Receptors 
 Receptors for GH and prolactin are prototypical cytokine recep-
tors ( Figure 1–11 ). Interestingly, alternative splicing of the GH 
receptor gene primary transcript results in a foreshortened “recep-
tor” that lacks the membrane anchor and carboxyl terminal 
domain of the protein. This “receptor” is secreted and serves to 
bind GH in the extracellular space (eg, circulating plasma). Unlike 
the growth factor receptors described above, GH receptors lack a 
Ras
Raf-1
MEK-1
ERK
ERK
SRF
AP-1 
GRB2
PIP3
PI(3, 4)P2
P
P
P
P
PKB
p110
p85
PI3K
PDK1
PDK2
Ligand
6-PFK
GSK3
GLUT4
S6 kinase
SOS
 FIGURE 1–10  Growth factor–dependent pathway. Assembly of the components involved in the  Ras/Raf /MEK/MAPK and PI-3K/PKB–
signaling mechanisms. 
CHAPTER 1 Hormones and Hormone Action     15
tyrosine kinase domain. Different domains of a single GH mole-
cule associate with homologous regions of two independent GH 
receptors, promoting dimerization of the receptors and subse-
quent association with and activation of Janus kinase (JAK) 2. 
JAK2 undergoes autophosphorylation and concurrently tyrosine 
phosphorylates the GH receptors. The latter provide a docking 
site for the signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 
factors; STAT 5a and 5b appear to be particularly relevant to GH 
and prolactin action. The STATs are phosphorylated, dissociate 
from the GH receptor, migrate to the nucleus, and bind to specific 
STAT-binding DNA regulatory elements (SIE/ISRE/GAS) respon-
sible for transcriptional control of GH target genes such as IGF-1. 
There are a number of different STAT family members, and there 
is specificity of certain cytokine receptors for certain STAT family 
members. This helps direct the specificity of signaling by each type 
of receptor. STAT signaling is also regulated by a family of inhibi-
tors referred to as suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS) pro-
teins. SOCS proteins bind to JAK and STAT proteins and target 
them for degradation. SOCS proteins are induced after cytokine/
hormone binding and help to autoregulate signaling in this 
 pathway. 
 TGF-β Receptors 
 These receptors bind a variety of ligands that include the cytokine 
transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β) and the hormones 
inhibin, activin, and anti-müllerian hormone (AMH). The ligands 
for these receptors are typically homo- or heterodimers of subunits 
that have a highly conserved, cysteine-dependent structure. 
TGF-β family receptors bind to ligands through a heterodimeric 
receptor consisting of two transmembrane subunits known as type 
I and type II receptors ( Figure 1–12 ). There are a number of dif-
ferent type I and type II receptor subunits in this family and type 
I/type II pairs can form between several different family members. 
Both type I and type II receptors have an intracellular serine/
threonine kinase domain. The type II receptor is constitutively 
phosphorylated and active, while the type I receptor is not. The 
ligands in this family initially bind the type II receptor. The type 
I receptor is recruited to the complex where the type II receptor 
kinase phosphorylates and activates the type I receptor, which 
then further propagates the signal. Downstream in the signaling 
pathway are a group of phosphorylation targets called the Smad 
proteins. These proteins, upon phosphorylation, can migrate to 
the nucleus to activate and/or repress transcription of target 
genes. 
 TNF-Receptors 
 The tumor necrosis factor (TNF) family of receptors is a large 
group of cytokine receptors that bind to both soluble and cell-
membrane-associated ligands. One important member of this 
family is the receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B 
(RANK) which plays a critical function in the regulation of 
bone physiology (see Chapter 8). These receptors consist of a 
trimeric complex of three single transmembrane receptors that 
bind to ligand. The cytoplasmic tail of many TNF-receptors 
GH
GHR
GHR
Y
Y
JAK2
Y
Y
JAK2
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
STAT
STAT
STAT
DNA
Transcription
STAT
SIE
GAS
ISRE
STAT
STAT
GH
GHR
GHR
Y
Y
JAK2
Y
Y
JAK2
P
P
P
GH
GHR
GHR
Y
Y
Y
JAK2
Y
JAK2
P
 FIGURE 1–11  Signaling by the growth hormone receptor (GHR). Different portions of a single growth hormone molecule associate with 
homologous regions of two independent GHR molecules. This is believed to lead to the recruitment of Janus kinase 2 (JAK2), which phosphory-
lates the GHR, providing a docking site for STAT. The latter is phosphorylated, dissociates from the liganded receptor complex, and migrates to 
the nucleus, where it associates with binding elements of target genes and regulates transcription. 
16    CHAPTER 1 Hormones and Hormone Action
(including RANK)  interacts with a family of adapter molecules 
called TNF receptor–associated factors (TRAFs) that further 
activate a number of downstream pathways, the most of impor-
tant of which is the activation of nuclear factor kappa B 
(NF-κB) ( Figure 1–13 ). Activation of NF-κB is a central event 
in many if not all inflammatory responses and leads to the 
induction of many molecules including those involved in apop-
totic, cytokine, and chemokine pathways. TNF-receptor signal-
ing leads to the activation of NF-κB through phosphorylation 
of the heterotrimeric I-κB kinase (IKK) complex, which then 
phosphorylates the inhibitor of NF-κB (I-κB). I-κB complexes 
with NF-κB in the cytosol and keeps it inactive; however, when 
I-κB is phosphorylated it dissociates from the complex and 
undergoes degradation through the ubiquitin-dependent pro-
teasome pathway. NF-κB then translocates to the nucleus where 
it regulates gene transcription. 
 GUANYLYL CYCLASE–LINKED 
RECEPTORS 
 Activation of guanylyl cyclase–dependent signaling cascades can 
occur through two independent mechanisms. The first involves 
activation of the soluble guanylyl cyclase, a heme-containing 
enzyme that is activated by the gas nitric oxide (NO) generated in 
the same or neighboring cells. NO is produced by the enzyme 
nitric oxide synthase. NO synthase exists as three different 
isozymes in selected body tissues. Constitutive forms of NO syn-
thase (NOS) are produced in endothelial (NOS-3) and neuronal 
(NOS-1) cells. The endothelial enzyme possesses binding sites for 
FAD and FMN as well as calcium and appears to require calcium 
for optimal activity. Agents such as bradykinin and acetylcholine, 
which interact with receptors on the surface of endothelial cells 
and increase intracellular calcium levels, trigger an increase in 
constitutive NO synthase activity with consequent generation of 
NO and activation of soluble guanylyl cyclase activity in neigh-
boring vascular smooth muscle cells ( Figure 1–14 ). Thus, in this 
instance, the cGMP-dependent vasodilatory activity of acetylcho-
line requires sequential waves of signaling activity in two different 
cell types to realize the ultimate physiologic effect. 
Type II receptor
Type I receptor
Type II receptor
Type I receptor
Type II receptor
Type I receptor
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Smad
TGF-β
TGF-β
Smad
 FIGURE 1–12  Signaling by the TGF-β receptors. TGF-β ligand first docks with the type II receptor which has an intracellular serine/threo-
nine kinase domain that is constitutively active. After ligand binding, the type I receptor is then recruited to the complex and the type II recep-
tor can phosphorylate the intracellular serine/threonine kinase domain of the type I receptor. This then propagates the signal downstream 
leading to the phosphorylation and activation of Smad proteins which can migrate to the nucleus and activate or repress gene transcription. 
P
IKK
IKK
P
TNF-receptor
Ligand
Nucleus
Cytoplasm
Degradation
NFκ−B
NFκ−B
Iκ−B
Iκ−B
Activation and/or
repression of
gene
transcription
 FIGURE 1–13  TNF receptor signaling. TNF binds to a trimolecu-
lar cell surface receptor which transmits a downstream signal that 
leads to the phosphorylation and activation of the I-κB kinase (IKK). 
IKK phosphorylates the inhibitor of NF-κB (I-κB) which is then tagged 
for degradation through a ubiquitin-dependent proteosomal path-
way. This allows NF-κB to migrate to the nucleus where it can carry 
out activation or repression of gene transcription. 
CHAPTER 1 Hormones and Hormone Action     17
 The inducible (i) form of NO synthase (NOS-2) is found pre-
dominantly in inflammatory cells of the immune system, although 
it has also been reported to be present in smooth muscle cells of 
the vascular wall. Unlike the endothelial form of NO synthase, 
expression of iNO synthase is low in the basal state. Treatment of 
cells with a variety of cytokines triggers an increase in new iNO 
synthase synthesis (hence, the inducible component of iNO syn-
thase activity), probably through activation of specific cis elements 
in the iNO synthase promoter. Thus, hormones, cytokines, or 
growth factors with the capacity for induction of iNO synthase 
activity may direct at least a portion of their signaling activity 
through a cGMP-dependent pathway. 
 A third mechanism for increasing cGMP levels within target 
cells involves the activation of particulate guanylyl cyclases ( Figure 
1–15 ). From an endocrine standpoint, this involves predomi-
nantly the natriuretic peptide receptors (NPR). NPR-A is a single-
transmembrane-domain receptor (about 130 kDa) with a large 
extracellular domain that provides ligand recognition and bind-
ing. This is followed by a hydrophobic transmembrane domain 
and a large intracellular domain that harbors the signaling func-
tion. The amino terminal portion of this intracellular region 
contains an ATP-binding kinase homology domain (KHD) that is 
involved in regulating cyclase activity, whereas the carboxyl termi-
nal domain contains the catalytic core of the particulate guanylyl 
Endothelium
Smooth 
       muscle
Acetylcholine
Bradykinin
Arginine
Citrulline
NO
NO
+
eNOS
Ca2+
O2
PKG 
PKG 
iNOS
−
GTP
GTP
cGMP
cGMP
Soluble GC
Soluble GC
Vasorelaxation
Steroids
Cytokines
 FIGURE 1–14  Signaling through the endothelial (e) and inducible (i) nitric oxide synthases (NOS) in the vascular wall. Activation of eNOS in 
the endothelial cell or iNOS in the vascular smooth muscle cell leads to an increase in NO and stimulation of soluble guanylyl cyclase (GC) activ-
ity. Subsequent elevations in cGMP activate cGMP-dependent protein kinase (PKG) and promote vasorelaxation. 
cyclase. It is believed that association of ligand with the extracel-
lular domain leads to a conformational change in the receptor that 
arrests the tonic inhibitory control of the kinase-like domain and 
permits activation of guanylyl cyclase activity. Recent studies sug-
gest that the small GTPase Rac can directly activate the catalytic 
domain through its effector kinase PAK (p21-activated kinase). 
NPR-B, the product of a separate gene, has a similar topology and 
a relatively high level of sequence homology to the NPR-A gene 
product; however, while NPR-A responds predominantly to the 
cardiac atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) and brain natriuretic pep-
tide (BNP), NPR-B is activated by the C-type NP (CNP), a 
peptide found in the central nervous system, endothelium, and 
reproductive tissues but not in the heart. Thus, segregated expres-
sion of the ligand and its cognate receptor convey a high level of 
response specificity to these two systems despite the fact that they 
share a common final effector mechanism. Noteworthy, both 
NPR-A and NPR-B require a high degree of phosphorylation in 
the kinase homology domain to retain sensitivity to agonist. 
Dephosphorylation, perhaps through agonist-triggered exposure 
of the phosphoserine residues to regulatory phosphatase activity in 
the target cell, results in receptor desensitization. In humans, 
homozygous mutation of the  NPR-B genes results in acrome-
somelic dysplasia, Maroteaux type (AMDM), a rare form of auto-
somal recessive, short-limbed dwarfism. 
18    CHAPTER 1 Hormones and Hormone Action
 NUCLEAR ACTION OF PEPTIDE 
HORMONES 
 Although the initial targets of peptide hormone receptor signaling 
appear to be confined to the cytoplasm, it is clear that these recep-
tors can also have profound effects on nuclear transcriptional 
activity. They accomplish this through the same mechanisms they 
use to regulate enzymatic activity in the cytoplasmic compartment 
(eg, through activation of kinases and phosphatases). In this case, 
however, the ultimate targets are transcription factors that govern 
the expression of target genes. Examples include hormonal 
 activation of c-Jun and c-Fos nuclear transcription factors that 
make up the heterodimeric AP-1 complex. This complex has been 
shown to alter the expression of a wide variety of eukaryotic genes 
through association with a specific recognition element, termed 
the phorbol ester (TPA) response element (TRE), present within 
the DNA sequence of their respective promoters. Other growth 
factor receptors that use the MAPK-dependent signaling mecha-
nism appear to target the serum response factor (SRF) and its 
associated  ternary complex proteins. Posttranslational modifica-
tion of these transcription factors is believed to amplify the signal 
that traffics from this complex, when associated with the cognate 
serum response element (SRE), to the core transcriptional appara-
tus. The cAMP-dependent activation of protein kinase A results in 
the phosphorylation of a nuclear protein CREB (cAMP response 
element–binding protein) at Ser 119 , an event that results in 
enhanced transcriptional activity of closely positioned promoters. 
The latter requires the participation of an intermediate 
 CREB-binding protein (CBP). CBP is a coactivator molecule that 
functionally tethers CREB to proteins of the core transcriptional 
machinery. Interestingly, CBP may also play a similar role in 
nuclear receptor (NR) signaling (see “Nuclear Receptors”). GH is 
known to induce the phosphorylation of an 84-kDa and a 97-kDa 
protein in target cells. These proteins have been shown to associate 
with the sis-inducible element (SIE) in the  c-fos promoter and to 
play a role in signaling cytokine activity that traffics through this 
element. It remains to be demonstrated that these proteins play a 
similar functional role in mediating GH-dependent effects. 
Several recent studies have provided evidence suggesting that a 
number of peptide hormones and growth factors may bind to 
high-affinity receptors in the cell nucleus. The role these receptors 
play—if any—in contributing to the signaling profile of these 
peptides remains undefined. 
 NUCLEAR RECEPTORS 
 The NRs, which include those for the glucocorticoids, mineralocor-
ticoids, androgens, progesterone, estrogens, thyroid hormone, and 
vitamin D, differ from the receptors of the surface membrane 
described above in that they are soluble receptors with a proclivity 
for using transcriptional regulation as a means of promoting their 
biologic effects. Thus, although some receptors are compartmental-
ized in the cytoplasm (eg, glucocorticoid receptor), whereas others 
are confined to the nucleus (eg, thyroid hormone receptor), they all 
operate within the nuclear chromatin to initiate the signaling cas-
cade. These receptors can be grouped into two major subtypes based 
on shared structural and functional properties. The first, the steroid 
receptor family, includes the prototypical glucocorticoid receptor 
(GR) and the receptors for mineralocorticoids (MR), androgens 
(AR), and progesterone (PR). The second, the thyroid receptor fam-
ily, includes the thyroid hormone receptor (TR) and the receptors 
for estrogen (ER), retinoic acid (RAR and RXR), and vitamin D 
(VDR) as well as the peroxisome proliferator–activated receptor 
(PPAR).There are also so-called orphan receptors that bear struc-
tural homology to members of the extended NR family. For most 
of these, the “ligand” is unknown, and their functional roles in the 
regulation of gene expression have yet to be determined. In total, 
there are 48 nuclear receptors and orphan receptors in humans. 
 STEROID RECEPTOR FAMILY 
 Steroid receptors (ie, GR, MR, AR, and PR), under basal condi-
tions, exist as cytoplasmic, multimeric complexes that include the 
heat shock proteins (HSP) 90, 70, and 56. ER, although 
Natriuretic peptide ligand
Extracellular ligand-binding
domain
Kinase homology
domain
Particulate guanylyl
cyclase
Direct effects
ion channels
PKG
PDE
cGMP
GTP
Rac/PAK-1
Plasma
membrane
 FIGURE 1–15.  Signaling by particulate guanylyl cyclase. Ligand 
(ANP or BNP for the type A natriuretic peptide receptor or CNP for 
the type B receptor) associates with the extracellular domain of the 
receptor. This effects a change in the receptor that reduces affinity 
for ligand and alters conformation of the kinase homology domain 
(KHD) which, in turn, reverses tonic inhibition of particulate guanylyl 
cyclase activity at the carboxy terminal portion of the receptor. Rac 
and PAK-1 are thought to activate the receptor through a more direct 
interaction with the guanylyl cyclase domain. Increased cyclase activ-
ity increases cellular cGMP levels which increase protein kinase G 
(PKG) activity through a mechanism similar to that described for 
cAMP (see Figure 1–6), regulates phosphodiesterase (PDE) activity, 
and alters the ion transport properties of the target cell. 
CHAPTER 1 Hormones and Hormone Action     19
 demonstrating similar association with HSP, is largely confined to 
the nuclear compartment. Association of the steroid ligand with 
the receptor results in dissociation of the HSP. This in turn 
exposes a nuclear translocation signal previously buried in the 
receptor structure and initiates transport of the receptor to the 
nucleus, where it associates with the hormone response element 
( Figure 1–16 ). 
 Each of the family members has been cloned and sequenced, 
and crystallographic structures have been obtained for many of 
them. Consequently, we know a great deal about their structure 
and function ( Figure 1–17 ). Each has an extended amino terminal 
domain of varying length and limited sequence homology to other 
family members. In at least some receptors, this region, which has 
been termed AF-1, is believed to participate in the transactivation 
function through which the individual receptors promote increased 
gene transcription. Significant variability in the length of the 
amino terminal regions of the different receptors suggests  potential 
differences in their respective mechanisms for transcriptional 
R
R
HRE
TATA
Core
transcription
factors
pre-mRNA
H
H
R
H
R
H
R
H
Plasma membrane
HSP
R
HSP
HSP
Alteration nucleosome phasing/
chromatin structure
Nuclear membrane
mRNA
meG
AAAA
Protein
 FIGURE 1–16  Signaling through the steroid receptor complex. Similar mechanisms are employed by members of the  TR gene family, 
though most of the latter are concentrated in the nuclear compartment and are not associated with the heat shock protein complex (HSP) prior 
to binding ligand ( me G, methyl guanosine). 
NH2
DBD 
LBD 
Ligand-
independent
transactivation
DNA binding
Dimerization
Hetero- and homo-
dimerization
Ligand binding
Ligand-dependent
transactivation
Nuclear translocation
Association with
heat shock proteins
 FIGURE 1–17  Structural schematic of a representative steroid 
receptor molecule. Separate designations are given to the amino terminal 
(NH 2 ), DNA-binding (DBD), and ligand-binding (LBD) domains. Functional 
activity associated with each of these individual domains, as determined 
by mutagenesis studies, is indicated below each individual domain. 
20    CHAPTER 1 Hormones and Hormone Action
 regulation. The amino terminal is followed by a basic region that 
has a high degree of sequence homology in both the steroid and 
thyroid receptor gene families. This basic region encodes two zinc 
finger motifs ( Figure 1–18 ) that have been shown to establish 
contacts in the major groove of the cognate DNA recognition ele-
ment (see the discussion later). Based on crystallographic data 
collected for the DNA-binding region of the GR, we know that 
the amino acid sequence lying between the first and second fingers 
(ie, recognition helix) is responsible for establishing specific con-
tacts with the DNA. The second finger provides the stabilizing 
contacts that increase the affinity of the receptor for DNA. The 
DNA-binding region also harbors amino acid residues that con-
tribute to the dimerization of monomers contiguously arrayed on 
the DNA recognition element. Following the basic region is the 
carboxyl terminal domain of the protein. This domain is respon-
sible for binding of the relevant ligand, receptor dimerization or 
heterodimerization, and association with the heat shock proteins. 
It also contributes to the ligand-dependent transactivation func-
tion (incorporated in a subdomain termed AF-2) that drives tran-
scriptional activity. Interestingly, in selected cases, nonligands have 
been shown to be capable of activating steroid receptors. Dopamine 
activates the progesterone receptor and increases PR-dependent 
transcriptional activity, probably through a phosphorylation 
event, which elicits a conformational change similar to that pro-
duced by the association of the receptor with progesterone. 
 The DNA-binding regions of these receptors contact DNA 
through a canonical HRE, which is described in  Table 1–3 . 
Interestingly, each receptor in the individual subfamily binds to 
the same recognition element with high affinity. Thus, specificity 
of hormone action must be established either by contextual DNA 
sequence lying outside the recognition element or by other, non-
receptor DNA-protein interactions positioned in close proximity 
to the element. Interestingly, the GR, as well as some other NRs 
(eg, ER), are capable of binding to DNA sequence lacking the 
classic HRE. Originally described in the mouse proliferin gene 
promoter, these composite elements associate with heterologous 
C
C
C
G
S
C
K V
F
F K R A V E G Q H N Y L
C
C
A
G
R
N D
D
K I 
R 
R 
K 
N 
C 
P 
A 
R 
Y R K 
C 
L 
Q 
A 
C
I
I
Zn2+
Zn2+
S
D
E
A
S
G
H
Y
G
V
L
T
V
L 
440 
460 
470 
480 
C
500
Recognition helix
 FIGURE 1–18  Schema of the two zinc fingers, together with coordinated zinc ion, which make up the DNA-binding domain of the gluco-
corticoid receptor (amino acids are numbered relative to the full-length receptor). Shaded regions denote two alpha helical structures which are 
oriented perpendicularly to one another in the receptor molecule. The first of these, the recognition helix, makes contact with bases in the 
major groove of the DNA. Red arrows identify amino acids which contact specific bases in the glucocorticoid response element (GRE). Black 
arrows identify amino acids that confer specificity for the GRE; selective substitutions at these positions can shift receptor specificity to other 
response elements. Dots identify amino acids making specific contacts with the phosphate backbone of DNA. ( Modified from Luisi BF et al. 
Reprinted, with permission, from  Nature . 1991;352:498. Copyright 1991 by Macmillan Magazines Ltd.) 
TABLE 1–3  DNA recognition elements for major 
classes of nuclear hormone receptors.a
Element
Recognition Sequence
Receptor
HRE
AGAACANNNTGTTCT
Glucocorticoid
Mineralocorticoid
Progesterone
Androgen
ERE
AGGTCANNNTGACCT
Estrogen
TRE
AGGTCA(N)nAGGTCA
Vitamin D
Thyroid hormone
Retinoic acids
PPAR ligands
aElements represent consensus sequences selected to emphasize the modular nature 
of the half-sites and their capacity for palindrome generation. Sequences read in the 
5′ to 3′ direction. N denotes a spacer nucleoside (either A, G, C, or T). Half-sites are 
identified by the overlying arrows. The TRE is arrayed as a direct repeat but may also 
exist as a palindrome or an inverted palindrome. A variable number of spacer nucle-
otides are positioned between the two direct repeats, depending on the type of 
hormone receptor. Three, four, and five nucleosides (ie, n = 3, 4, or 5) are preferred for 
binding of the VDR, TR, or RAR, respectively.
CHAPTER 1 Hormones and Hormone Action     21
complexes containing GR, as well as with components of the AP-1 
transcription factor complex (ie, c-Jun and c-Fos). They display 
unique regulatory activity at the level of contiguously positioned 
promoters. One such composite element, for example, directs very 
specific transcriptional effects depending on whether the GR or 
the MR is included in the complex. 
 Several steroids, particularly the glucocorticoids and estrogens, 
have been reported to have independent effects on the stability of 
target gene transcripts. At this point, it is unclear what role the 
hormone receptors play in this process and whether transcript 
stabilization is tied mechanistically to the enhancement of tran-
scriptional activity. 
 THYROID RECEPTOR FAMILY 
 Included in this group are the TR, RAR, RXR, ER, PPAR, and 
VDR. They share a high degree of homology to the proto- 
oncogene c- erb A and high affinity for a common DNA recogni-
tion site ( Table 1–3 ). With the exception of the ER, they do not 
associate with the HSPs, and they are constitutively bound to 
chromatin in the cell nucleus. Specificity of binding for each of 
the individual receptors is, once again, probably conferred by a 
contextual sequence surrounding this element, the orientation of 
the elements (eg, direct repeats or inverted repeats or  palindromes), 
the polarity (ie, 5′ in contrast to 3′ position on two  successive 
repeats), and the number and nature of the spacing nucleotides 
separating the repeats. 
 The ER binds to its RE as a homodimer, whereas the VDR, 
RAR, RXR, and TR prefer binding as heterodimers. The nature of 
the heterodimeric partners has provided some intriguing insights 
into the biology of these receptors. The most prevalent 
TR-associated partners appear to be the retinoid X receptors. 
These latter receptors, which as homodimers form high-affinity 
associations with 9- cis -retinoic acid, also form heterodimeric com-
plexes in the unliganded state with VDR and RAR. In the indi-
vidual cases in which it has been examined, heterodimerization 
with RXR amplifies both the DNA binding and the functional 
activity of these other receptors. Thus, the ability to form such 
heterodimeric complexes may add significantly to the flexibility 
and potency of these hormone receptor systems in regulating gene 
expression. Interestingly, the positioning (5′ vs 3′) of the partici-
pant proteins on the RE is important in determining the func-
tional outcome of the association. In most of those situations 
linked to transcriptional activation, RXR seems to prefer the 
upstream (5′) position in the dimeric complex. Thus, diversity of 
response is engendered by the selection of recognition elements 
(eg, monomeric vs dimeric vs oligomeric sites) and by the choice 
and positioning of the dimeric partner (eg, homodimer vs het-
erodimer) where applicable. 
 The crystallographic structures of the ligand-binding domains 
(LBDs) of several members of the TR family have been described. 
These include the dimeric unliganded RXRα, monomeric 
liganded RARγ, monomeric liganded TRα, dimeric agonist 
(ie, estradiol)—and antagonist (ie, raloxifene)—liganded ERα, 
liganded VDR, and liganded PPARγ. A composite LBD displays 
a common folding pattern with 12 alpha helices (numbered by 
convention H1-H12) and a conserved beta turn. Some variabil-
ity exists in that there is no H2 in RARγ and a short H2′ helix 
is present in PPARγ, but the overall structural configuration is 
preserved. The dimeric interface is formed through interaction 
of amino acids located in helices 7 to 10, with the strongest 
influence exerted by H10. These interactions appear to be 
important for both homodimeric as well as heterodimeric inter-
actions. Binding of ligand has been shown to occur through 
what has been termed a “mousetrap” mechanism. In the unli-
ganded state, H12, which contains the carboxyl terminal activa-
tion domain AF-2, is displaced away from the ligand-binding 
pocket ( Figure 1–19 ). Association of agonist ligand (eg, estradiol 
in the case of the ER) with the hydrophobic core of the receptor 
leads to a repositioning of H12 over the ligand-binding cavity, 
where it stabilizes receptor–ligand interactions and closes the 
“mousetrap.” Binding of an antagonist ligand such as raloxifene, 
which because of its structure engenders steric hindrance in the 
ligand-binding pocket, prevents closure of H12 into the normal 
agonist position. Instead, H12 folds into an alternative location 
between H4 and H3, a conformation that suppresses the activa-
tion function of the receptor (discussed later). Crystal structure 
of a full-length nuclear receptor pair (in this case PPAR gamma 
and RXR alpha) shows that the PPAR gamma protein dominates 
its heterodimeric partner, dictating the overall structure of the 
complex. 
 The mechanistic underpinnings of transcriptional regulation 
by the NRs have been partially elucidated ( Figure 1–20 ). In the 
unliganded state, the receptor dimers are associated with a macro-
molecular complex containing the repressor proteins N-CoR or 
SMRT, a transcriptional corepressor Sin3, and a histone deacety-
lase RPD3. N-CoR and SMRT each use two independent recep-
tor interaction domains (IDs) to associate with the NRs (one 
repressor; two receptors). Each ID contains an amino acid 
sequence (L/IXXI/VI, where I = isoleucine, L = leucine, V = 
valine, X = any amino acid), which interacts with helices 4, 5, and 
6 of the NR LBD. Histone acetylation is typically associated with 
activation of gene transcription (presumably reflecting decompac-
tion of chromatin surrounding the transcriptional unit), so the 
presence of histone deacetylase activity in the complex is thought 
to promote a transcriptionally quiescent state. Addition of ligand 
leads to a change in receptor conformation that no longer favors 
interaction with the corepressor (a shift in position of helix 12 in 
the LBD prevents corepressor interaction and promotes coactiva-
tor assembly into the complex) and promotes both ATP-dependent 
chromatin remodeling and assembly of an activator complex con-
taining p160 coactivator proteins (eg, SRC-1, GRIP-1, or P/CIP) 
and, secondarily, the CREB-binding protein (CBP) and the his-
tone acetylase P/CAF. The net accrual of histone acetylase activity 
(CBP and P/CIP as well as P/CAF possess acetylase activity) leads 
to acetylation of chromatin proteins (eg, histones) as well as com-
ponents of the core transcriptional machinery, resulting in chro-
matin decompaction and a net increase in transcriptional activity. 
Interaction of the NRs with the coactivators in this complex takes 
place through LXXLL motifs (where L = leucine and X = any 
amino acid) present in the coactivator proteins. Each coactivator 
22    CHAPTER 1 Hormones and Hormone Action
A
H4
H5
H3
 FIGURE 1–19  Three-dimensional structures for the agonist- and antagonist-occupied ERα LBD.  (A) Orthogonal views of the agonist 
diethylstilbestrol-ERα LBD-NR Box II peptide complex. Coactivator peptide and LBD are presented as ribbon diagrams. Peptide is colored 
medium orange, helix (H) 12 (ERα residues 538-546) is colored dark orange. Helices 3, 4, and 5 are colored light pink. Diethylstilbestrol is 
depicted in red in a space-filling format.  (B) Orthogonal views of the antagonist 4-hydroxytamoxifen-ERα LBD complex. Color scheme is the 
same as in panel A. 4-Hydroxytamoxifen is shown in green in a space-filling format. Note that NR Box II is absent in this structure.  (C) Schematic 
representation of the mechanism underlying agonist-dependent activation of nuclear hormone receptor. In the presence of agonist, helix 12 
(the terminal helix in the LBD) folds across the ligand-binding pocket, stabilizing ligand–receptor interaction and promoting a conformation 
conducive for coactivator association. In the presence of antagonist, steric hindrance precludes folding of helix 12 across the ligand-binding 
pocket. Instead, it positions itself in the region typically occupied by the coactivator, thereby blocking the activation function of the receptor. 
( Reprinted, with permission, from Shiau AK, Barstad D, Loria PM, et al. The structural basis of estrogen receptor/coactivator recognition and the 
antagonism of this interaction by tamoxifen.  Cell . 1998;95:927. Copyright 1998 by Cell Press.) 
B
CHAPTER 1 Hormones and Hormone Action     23
Agonist
Antagonist
Helix 12
Helix 12
Helix 11
Helix 11
Coactivator
C
FIGURE 1–19 (Continued)
TRAP/DRIP
complex
HRE
HRE
DBD
DBD
LBD
LBD
Sin3
RPD3
N-Cor or
SMRT
Decreased
transcription
HRE
HRE
DBD
DBD
LBD
LBD
SRC-1, GRIP-1,
or CIP
Increased
transcription
P/CAF
POL II
TBP
GTFs
CBP/p300
Ligand
Histone
acetylation
HRE
HRE
DBD
DBD
LBD
LBD
TRAP220
Increased
transcription
Histone
deacetylation
SWI/SNF
ATP-dependent
chromatin
remodeling
?
?
p160
acetylation
 FIGURE 1–20  Interaction of corepressor (top) versus coactivator (bottom) molecules with the ligand-binding domain of a representative 
nuclear receptor (See text for details.). The temporal order of p160 versus DRIP/TRAP–binding remains undetermined. 
24    CHAPTER 1 Hormones and Hormone Action
may have several of these motifs, which preferentially associate 
with different NRs, other transcription factors, or other coactiva-
tors. This allows for a degree of selectivity in terms of which regu-
latory proteins are incorporated in the complex. Notably, a recent 
structural analysis showed that a 13-amino-acid peptide, contain-
ing an LXXLL motif from the GRIP-1 protein, interacts with 
TRβ through a hydrophobic cleft generated by helices 3, 4, and 
12 (including AF-2) in the receptor protein. This is the same 
cleft that is occupied by helix 12, which harbors an LXXLL motif, 
in the raloxifene-bound ERα. This suggests that the antagonist in 
the latter instance acquires its activation-blocking properties by 
repositioning helix 12 in a manner that leads to displacement of 
the coactivator protein from this groove (see discussion earlier). It 
also appears that the antagonist-bound receptor may preferentially 
associate with the corepressor molecules NCoR and SMRT. SRC 
also interacts with the AF-1 domain, suggesting a potential 
mechanism for maximizing synergistic activity between AF-1 and 
AF-2 domains in the receptors. The importance of SRC1 in thy-
roid hormone action is underscored by the finding that SRC1 
knockout mice display significant thyroid hormone resistance in 
peripheral tissues. 
 CBP is thought to function as a pivotal component of the NR 
regulatory complex. While the p160 class of coactivators interact 
directly with the NRs (primary coactivator), CBP associates pri-
marily with the p160 coactivators, thereby establishing an indirect 
link to the receptors (secondary coactivator). CBP also has the 
ability to establish weaker, primary associations with the receptor 
proteins. As noted above, CBP functions as a central integrator of 
transcriptional regulatory signals from multiple pathways, includ-
ing the cAMP-dependent activation of the transcription factor 
CREB. Recent evidence suggests that an additional level of regula-
tory control may be involved in selectively amplifying 
NR-dependent transcriptional activity. An enzyme called coactiva-
tor-associated arginine methyltransferase 1 (CARM1) associates 
with CBP and methylates the protein. This results in a reduction 
in CREB-dependent gene activation and, secondarily, an increase 
in NR-dependent gene transcription. This switching mechanism 
effectively refocuses the transcriptional machinery on expression 
of NR-dependent gene expression. CARM1 also interacts with all 
three members of the SRC family. It binds to the AD2 domain at 
the carboxy terminus of the p160 coactivators (by contrast, CBP 
associates with the AD1 domain located in the midregion of the 
molecule). CARM1 in this context promotes methylation of the 
p160 coactivator and dissociation of the CARM1-SRC complex 
from NR-associated DNA, effectively clearing the promoter of the 
transcriptional regulatory complex. 
 More recently, another family of coactivator complexes has 
been identified as playing an important role in NR signaling. The 
human TR-associated protein (TRAP) and vitamin D receptor–
interacting protein (DRIP) complexes are the best characterized to 
date. These complexes, which contain in the neighborhood of 25 
individual proteins, are thought to serve as a functional bridge 
between the liganded NR bound to DNA and the general tran-
scription factors (GTFs) (eg, TBP, TFIIB, RNA polymerase II, 
and TAFs) involved in formation of the preinitiation complex, a 
function previously assigned to the Mediator complex in yeast. 
The TRAP220 subunit appears to establish the relevant contacts, 
through LXXLL motifs, with the NRs in promoting this assembly. 
Their role vis-à-vis the p160 coactivators alluded to earlier remains 
undefined; however, it has been suggested that they succeed the 
p160 coactivator complex in binding with liganded NRs 
positioned on target gene promoters, establish the requisite struc-
tural and functional connections with the core transcriptional 
machinery, and initiate mRNA synthesis. It has also been sug-
gested that acetylation of one of the key NR-binding motifs 
(LXXLL) on the SRC coactivator by CBP leads to dissociation of 
SRC from the nuclear receptors, thereby allowing access for 
assembly of the TRAP/DRIP complex ( Figure 1–20 ). 
 Nuclear receptors can be posttranslationally modified 
through acetylation, ubiquitination, and phosphorylation. 
Phosphorylation, which is the most extensively studied of these 
modifications, can affect virtually all nuclear receptors. 
Phosphorylation by kinases associated with the general tran-
scriptional machinery (eg, cyclin-dependent kinase 7) or major 
intracellular signaling pathways (eg, Akt) may serve to recruit 
coactivators into the complex, thereby facilitating transcrip-
tional regulation. Coactivator molecules or other factors 
recruited into the multisubunit transcription complexes may 
possess kinase, ubiquitin ligase, ATPase, methyltransferase, or 
acetylase activity which can target either nuclear receptors or 
other coregulators. Thus, in addition to their ability to provide 
the scaffolding for transcription complex assembly, they also 
possess the enzymatic capacity to fine tune the transcriptional 
activity of the complex. In addition to their effects on tran-
scription, coactivators have been suggested to be involved in 
 transcript elongation, RNA splicing, and mRNA transport. 
 Recent studies have shown that a significant portion of ER 
DNA-binding sites in MCF7 lines (breast cancer cell line) are 
topographically linked to, or in some cases directly overlap with, 
those for the forkhead box transcription factor A1 (FOX A1). 
FOX A1 has been referred to as a pioneer factor that aids in posi-
tioning ER (or AR) at specific sites on DNA. FOX A1 is recruited 
to specific epigenetic markers in chromatin; in the case of MCF7 
cells this is a lysine 4 methylation on histone 3. This, in turn, 
directs ER binding to nearby regions on the DNA. Similar find-
ings have been reported with the AR, albeit with different epige-
netic chromatin markers. 
 Although the glucocorticoid receptor is encoded by a single 
gene, TR is encoded by two genes (α and β). TR α1 and TR β1 
appear to be the dominant forms of TR in the body. Although 
considerable overlap exists in their tissue distribution, TR α1 is 
enriched in skeletal muscle, brown fat, and the central nervous 
system, and TR β1 is found in the liver, kidney, and central 
nervous system. They are believed to signal most of the develop-
mental and thermogenic effects of thyroid hormone in the whole 
animal. TR β2, a splice variant of the TR β gene, is found in the 
rodent pituitary gland, where it may subserve a specific regula-
tory function (eg, control of TSH secretion). TR α2, an alterna-
tively spliced product of the TR α gene, lacks the 
hormone-binding domain at the carboxyl terminal of the mole-
cule and thus is not a true thyroid hormone receptor. Under 
certain experimental conditions, TR α2 can block the activity of 
CHAPTER 1 Hormones and Hormone Action     25
other members of the TR family, but its physiologic role, if one 
exists, remains undefined. 
 Similar heterogeneity exists in the retinoid receptor family. 
There are three isoforms for both the RXR and RAR. Collectively, 
these receptors are thought to play an important role in mor-
phogenesis, but the function of the individual isoforms remains 
only partially understood. There are two ER isoforms. ERα 
appears to signal the bulk of traditional estrogenic activity. ERβ 
is found in a variety of different tissues and possesses 
 antiproliferative activity that may serve to dampen the effects of 
liganded ER. 
 NONGENOMIC EFFECTS OF THE STEROID 
HORMONES 
 Although steroids exert most of their biologic activity through 
direct genomic effects, there are several lines of evidence sug-
gesting that this does not provide a complete picture of steroid 
hormone action. There are several examples that, for kinetic or 
experimental reasons, do not fit the classic paradigm associated 
with a transcriptional regulatory mechanism. Included within 
this group are the rapid suppression of ACTH secretion follow-
ing steroid administration, the modulation of oocyte matura-
tion and neuronal excitability by progesterone, the stimulation 
of endothelial nitric oxide synthase (through interaction of 
ERα with the p85 subunit of PI-3K) by estrogen, the inhibi-
tion of type II deiodinase and stimulation of mitochondrial 
oxygen consumption by thyroid hormone, and regulation of 
calcium channel function by 1,25-(OH) 2 vitamin D. Recent 
studies have demonstrated the presence of conventional 
 estrogen receptors on the plasma membrane of target cells. The 
relationship of these receptors to their nuclear counterparts 
and their role in signaling estrogen-dependent activity (genomic 
vs nongenomic) is being actively investigated. The PR displays 
a novel ability to interact with the SH3 domains of the Src 
family tyrosine kinases, thereby accessing the Ras/Raf/MEK-1/
ERK signaling pathway (discussed earlier). Although we still 
do not completely understand the mechanisms underlying 
these nongenomic effects, their potential importance in medi-
ating steroid or thyroid hormone action may, in selected 
instances, approach that of their more conventional genomic 
counterparts. 
 Neurosteroids represent another class of nontraditional hor-
monal agonists with unique biologic activity. Some of these are 
native steroids (eg, progesterone), whereas others are conjugated 
derivatives or metabolites of the native steroids (eg, dihydropro-
gesterone). These agonists have been identified in the central 
nervous system and in some instances shown to have potent bio-
logic activity. It is believed that they operate through interaction 
with the receptor for γ-aminobutyric acid, a molecule that 
increases neuronal membrane conductance to chloride ion. This 
has the net effect of hyperpolarizing the cellular membrane and 
suppressing neuronal excitability. Interactions that promote 
receptor activity would be predicted to produce sedative-hypnotic 
effects in the whole animal, whereas inhibitory interactions 
would be expected to lead to a state of central nervous system 
excitation. 
 STEROID AND THYROID HORMONE 
RECEPTOR RESISTANCE SYNDROMES 
 Heritable defects in these receptors have been linked to the 
pathophysiology of a number of hormone-resistance syndromes. 
These syndromes are characterized by a clinical phenotype sug-
gesting hormone deficiency, by elevated levels of the circulating 
hormone ligand, and increased (or inappropriately detectable) 
levels of the relevant trophic regulatory hormone (eg, ACTH, 
TSH, FSH, or LH). Point mutations in the zinc fingers of the 
DNA-binding domain as well the ligand-binding domain of the 
vitamin D receptor lead to a form of vitamin D–dependent rickets 
(type II) characterized by typical rachitic bone lesions, secondary 
hyperparathyroidism, and alopecia. It is inherited as an autosomal 
recessive disorder. Molecular defects scattered along the full length 
of the androgen receptor, although concentrated in the ligand-
binding domain, have been linked to syndromes characterized by 
varying degrees of androgen resistance ranging from infertility to 
the full-blown testicular feminization syndrome. Clinical severity, 
in this case, is thought to be related to the severity of the func-
tional impairment that the mutation imposes on the receptor. 
Because the androgen receptor is located on the X chromosome, 
these disorders are inherited in an X-linked fashion. Defects in the 
glucocorticoid receptor are less common, perhaps reflecting the 
life-threatening nature of derangements in this system. However, 
mutations have been identified that impact negatively on receptor 
function. Clinical presentations in these cases have been domi-
nated by signs and symptoms referable to glucocorticoid defi-
ciency (eg, fatigue, asthenia) and adrenal androgen (eg, hirsutism 
and sexual precocity) and mineralocorticoid (low renin hyperten-
sion) overproduction. This presumably results from defective ste-
roid-mediated suppression of ACTH secretion and adrenal 
hyperplasia as the former rises in a futile attempt to restore gluco-
corticoid activity at the periphery. Resistance to thyroid hormone 
has been linked to a large number of mutations scattered along the 
full length of the β form of the receptor, although, once again, 
there is a concentration of mutations in the ligand-binding 
domain, particularly along the rim of the coactivator-binding 
pocket. No mutations in the α form of the receptor have been 
linked to a hormone-resistant phenotype. The clinical presenta-
tion of thyroid hormone resistance extends from the more typical 
mild attention-deficit syndromes to full-blown hypothyroidism 
with impaired growth. Different target tissues harboring the 
mutant receptors display variable sensitivity to thyroid hormone, 
with some tissues (eg, pituitary) displaying profound resistance 
and others (eg, heart) responding in a fashion suggesting hyper-
stimulation with thyroid hormone (ie, thyrotoxicosis). The latter 
effects (eg, tachycardia) may reflect the predominance of the nor-
mal α isoform, as opposed to defective β TR isoform, in the target 
tissue (eg, heart). These syndromes are rather unique in that they 
are inherited as autosomal dominant disorders, presumably 
reflecting the ability of the mutated receptors to interfere with 
26    CHAPTER 1 Hormones and Hormone Action
receptors produced from the normal allele, either by binding to 
the RE with higher affinity than the wild-type receptors and pre-
cluding access of the latter to target genes or by forming inactive 
heterodimers with the wild-type receptor proteins. A number of 
patients with thyroid hormone resistance have been described that 
lack mutations in the TR. In two cases, the defect has been 
assigned to defects in the transport and intracellular metabolism 
of thyroid hormone. Defects in the ER are rare, perhaps reflecting 
the critical role estrogens play in regulating lipoprotein metabo-
lism. However, one male patient who harbors a mutation within 
the ligand-binding domain of the ER has been described. His 
clinical presentation was characterized by infertility as well as 
osteopenia, suggesting important roles for estrogens in the main-
tenance of spermatogenesis as well as bone growth even in male 
subjects. A novel mutation in the PPARγ receptor leads to a phe-
notype that clearly resembles that of patients with the metabolic 
syndrome (ie, severe insulin resistance, diabetes mellitus, and 
hypertension). A syndrome of mineralocorticoid resistance, or 
pseudohypoaldosteronism, has been described in a number of inde-
pendent kindreds. Pseudohypoaldosteronism type I is characterized 
by neonatal renal salt wasting, dehydration, hypotension, hyper-
kalemia, and hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis despite the presence 
of elevated aldosterone levels. Heterozygous mutations in the MR are 
responsible for a milder form of the disease which is inherited in an 
autosomal dominant pattern with abnormalities largely confined to 
the kidney. A more severe form of the disease with generalized sys-
temic involvement is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern and 
appears to be due to loss-of-function mutations in genes encoding 
subunits of the amiloride-sensitive epithelial sodium channel. Of 
equivalent interest is the recent identification of an activating miner-
alocorticoid receptor mutation (Ser 810 -to-Leu 810 ). This mutation 
results in severe early-onset hypertension that is markedly exacer-
bated by pregnancy. The mutation leads to constitutive activation of 
the MR and alters the specificity of ligand binding such that tradi-
tional MR antagonists, like progesterone, function as partial  agonists. 
This latter property presumably accounts for the dramatic increase in 
blood pressure during pregnancy. 
 REFERENCES 
 Hormones and Hormone Action 
 Funder JW. Receptors, hummingbirds and refrigerators.  News Physiol Sci . 
1987;2:231. 
 G Protein Receptors 
 Barki-Harrington L, Rockman HA. β-Arrestins: multifunctional cellular media-
tors.  Physiology . 2008;23:17. [PMID: 18268361] 
 Lania AG, Mantovani G, Spada A. Mechanisms of disease: mutations of G proteins 
and G-protein-coupled receptors in endocrine diseases.  Nat Clin Pract 
Endocrinol Metab . 2006;2:681. [PMID: 17143315] 
 Métayé T, Gibelin H, Perdrisot R, Kraimps JL. Pathophysiological roles of 
G-protein-coupled receptor kinases.  Cell Signal . 2005;17:917. [PMID: 
15894165] 
 Schöneberg T, Schulz A, Biebermann H, Hermsdorf T, Rompler H, Sangkuhl K. 
Mutant G-protein-coupled receptors as a cause of human diseases.  Pharmacol 
Ther . 2004;104:173. [PMID: 1556674]
Weinstein LS, Chen M, Xie T, Liu J. Genetic diseases associated with heterotrimeric 
G proteins. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2006;27:260. [PMID: 16600389]
 
 G Protein Effectors 
 Cazzolli R, Shemon AN, Fang MQ, Hughes WE. Phospholipid signaling through 
phospholipase D and phosphatidic acid.  IUBMB Life . 2006;58:457. [PMID: 
16916782] 
 Kiselyov K, Shin DM, Muallem S. Signaling specificity in GPCR-dependent Ca 2+ 
signaling.  Cell Signal . 2003;15:243. [PMID: 12531423] 
 Luttrell LM. Transmembrane signaling by G protein-coupled receptors.  Methods 
Mol Biol . 2006;332:3. [PMID: 16878684] 
 Werry TD, Sexton PM, Christopoulos A. “Ins and outs” of seven-transmembrane 
receptor signaling to ERK.  Trend Endocrinol Metab . 2005;16:26. [PMID: 
15620546] 
 Woehler A, Ponimaskin EG. G protein-mediated signaling: same receptor, multi-
ple effectors.  Curr Mol Pharmacol . 2009;2:237. [PMID: 20021461] 
 Tyrosine Kinase–Coupled and Cytokine Receptors 
 Belfiore A, Frasca F, Pandini G, Sciacca L, Vigneri R. Insulin receptor isoforms and 
insulin receptor/insulin-like growth factor receptor hybrids in physiology 
and disease.  Endocr Rev . 2009;30:586. [PMID: 19752219] 
 Hupfeld CJ, Olefsky JM. Regulation of receptor tyrosine kinase signaling by GRKs 
and beta-arrestins.  Annu Rev Physiol . 2007;69:561. [PMID: 17002595] 
 Kikani CK, Dong LQ, Liu F. “New”-clear functions of PDK1: beyond a master 
kinase in the cytosol?  J Cell Biochem . 2005;96:1157. [PMID: 16187290] 
 LeRoith D, Yakar S. Mechanisms of disease: metabolic effects of growth hormone 
and insulin-like growth factor 1.  Nat Clin Pract Endocrinol Metab . 
2007;3:302. [PMID: 17315038] 
 Leung K-C. Regulation of cytokine receptor signaling by nuclear hormone recep-
tors: a new paradigm for receptor interaction.  DNA Cell Biol . 2004;23:463. 
[PMID: 15307949] 
 Guanylyl Cyclase-Linked Receptors 
 Dudzinski DM, Igarashi J, Greif D, Michel T. The regulation and pharmacology 
of endothelial nitric oxide synthases.  Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol . 
2006;46:235. [PMID: 16402905] 
 Garbers DL, Chrisman TD, Wiegn P, et al. Membrane guanylyl cyclase receptors: 
an update.  Trends Endo Metab . 2006;17:251. [PMID: 16815030] 
 Gardner DG, Chen S, Glenn DJ, Grigsby CL. Molecular biology of the natriuretic 
peptide system: implications for physiology and hypertension.  Hypertension . 
2007;49:419. [PMID: 17283251] 
 Kuhn M. Function and dysfunction of mammalian membrane guanylyl cyclase 
receptors: lessons from genetic mouse models and implications for human 
disease.  Handb Exp Pharmacol . 2009;191:47. [PMID: 19089325] 
 Nuclear Receptors 
 Chrousos GP, Kino T. Glucocorticoid signaling in the cell. Expanding clinical 
implications to complex human behavioral and somatic disorders.  Ann NY 
Acad Sci . 2009;1179:153. [PMID: 19906238] 
 Cornell W, Nam K. Steroid hormone binding receptors: application of homology 
modeling, induced fit docking, and molecular dynamics to study structure-
function relationships.  Curr Top Med Chem . 2009;9:844. [PMID: 
19754398] 
 Ito M, Roeder RG. The TRAP/SMCC/mediator complex and thyroid hormone 
receptor function.  Trends Endocrinol Metab . 2001;12:127. [PMID: 11306338] 
 Knouff C, Auwerx J. Peroxisome proliferators-activated receptor-gamma calls for 
activation in moderation: lessons from genetics and pharmacology.  Endocr 
Rev . 2004;25:899. [PMID: 15583022] 
 Lonard DM, O’Malley B. Nuclear receptor coregulators: judges, juries, and execu-
tioners of cell regulation.  Mol Cell . 2007;27:691. [PMID: 17803935] 
 O’Malley B. The year in basic science: nuclear receptors and coregulators.  Mol 
Endo . 2008;22:2751. [PMID: 18845672] 
 Ordonez-Moran P, Munoz A. Nuclear receptors: genomic and non-genomic effects 
converge.  Cell Cycle . 2009;8:1675. [PMID: 19448403] 
 Rochel N, Moras D. Ligand binding domain of vitamin D receptors.  Curr Top Med 
Chem . 2006;6:1229. [PMID: 16848737] 
 Yang J, Young MJ. The mineralocorticoid receptor and its coregulators.  J Mol 
Endocrinol . 2009;43:53. [PMID 19617444] 
27
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
  Endocrine Autoimmunity 
 Juan Carlos Jaume, MD 
 AADC 
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase 
 ACA 
Antibodies recognizing the adrenal cortex 
 ADCC 
Antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytoxicity 
 AICD 
Activation-induced cell death 
 AIRE 
Autoimmune regulator gene 
 APECED 
Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-
 
candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy 
 APS 
Autommune polyglandular syndrome 
 BB 
Bio breeding 
 BCR 
B-cell receptor 
 cAMP 
Cyclic adenosine monophosphate 
 CaSR 
Calcium-sensing receptor 
 CD 
Cluster of differentiation 
 CTLA 
Cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen 
 DPT 
Diabetes Prevention Trial 
 FOXP3 
Forkhead box P3 
 GABA 
Gamma-aminobutyric acid 
 GAD 
Glutamic acid decarboxylase 
 HLA 
Human leukocyte antigen 
 IA-2 
Islet cell antigen-2 (tyrosine phosphatase) 
 IFN 
Interferon 
 IL 
Interleukin 
 IPEX 
 Immunodeficiency, polyendocrinopathy, 
 
and enteropathy, x-linked 
 LFA 
Lymphocyte function-associated antigen 
 MHC 
Major histocompatibility complex 
 NALP1 
NACHT leucine-rich-repeat protein 1 
 NALP5 
NACHT leucine-rich-repeat protein 5 
 NK 
Natural killer (cells) 
 NOD 
Nonobese diabetic (mice) 
 SCA 
Steroid-producing cell antibodies 
 SCID 
Spontaneous combined immunodeficiency 
 TAP 
Transporter associated with antigen processing 
 TBI 
Thyrotropin-binding inhibition 
 TCR 
T-cell receptor 
 TD 
Thymus-dependent 
 Tg 
Thyroglobulin 
 TI 
Thymus-independent 
 TNF 
Tumor necrosis factor 
 TPO 
Thyroperoxidase 
 TSH 
Thyroid-stimulating hormone 
 TSH-R 
Thyrotropin receptor 
 TSI 
Thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin 
 VNTR 
Variable number of tandem repeats 
2
 Epidemiologic analysis of a large population reported that about 1 
of 30 (3.2%) people in the United States (more than 8.5 million 
individuals) are currently affected by autoimmune diseases. Graves 
disease, type 1 diabetes, pernicious anemia, rheumatoid arthritis, 
Hashimoto thyroiditis, and vitiligo are the most prevalent such 
conditions, accounting for 93% of affected individuals. A more 
global approach at calculating prevalence led to a corrected esti-
mate between 7.6% and 9.4% of the world’s population as 
affected by autoimmune diseases (2.5 in 30 people worldwide). 
 These autoimmune diseases have traditionally been looked 
upon as forming a spectrum. At one end are found organ-specific 
diseases with organ-specific targets. Hashimoto thyroiditis is an 
example in which a specific lesion affects the thyroid (lymphocytic 
infiltration, destruction of follicular cells) and autoantibodies are 
produced with absolute specificity for thyroid proteins. At the 
other end of the spectrum are the systemic autoimmune diseases, 
broadly belonging to the class of rheumatologic disorders. 
Systemic lupus erythematosus is an example of a disease character-
ized by widespread pathologic changes and a collection of autoan-
tibodies to DNA and other nuclear constituents of all cells. Many 
organ-specific autoimmune diseases are autoimmune endocrinop-
athies. Furthermore, most endocrine glands are subject to autoim-
mune attack including the adrenals (autoimmune Addison 
disease), gonads (autoimmune oophoritis), pancreas (type 1 diabe-
tes), pituitary (autoimmune hypophysitis), and thyroid (autoim-
mune thyroid disease) ( Table 2–1 ). 
28    CHAPTER 2 Endocrine Autoimmunity
 By far the most common autoimmune endocrine diseases are 
those involving the thyroid and type 1 diabetes. When the target 
is the thyroid gland and the clinical manifestation is hypothyroid-
ism (Hashimoto thyroiditis), the prevalence is about 1%. When 
the manifestation is hyperthyroidism (Graves disease), the preva-
lence is about 0.4%. Both thyroid autoimmune disorders affect 
women preferentially. When the targets of the autoimmune 
response are the β cells of the pancreas, the clinical presentation is 
type 1 diabetes. The prevalence of type 1 diabetes is close to that 
of Graves disease (0.2%-0.5%); however, it has no gender 
 predilection. 
 Basic immunologic concepts as they apply to clinical autoim-
mune endocrine diseases as sole entities and as polyglandular 
failure syndromes are reviewed in this chapter. 
 BASIC IMMUNE COMPONENTS 
AND MECHANISMS 
 The immune system is constantly confronted with a variety of 
molecules and recognizes them as either self or foreign. The adap-
tive immune system has evolved to recognize virtually any foreign 
molecule, either in existence or yet to come. The repertoire of 
immune recognition molecules randomly formed by gene rear-
rangements is not limited by the genetic information encoded in 
the genome ( Figure 2–1 ). As a result, an enormously wide array of 
immune recognition molecules is acquired by the human immune 
system. By way of illustration, the theoretical diversity of T-cell 
receptors (T-cell recognition molecules) by random rearrange-
ments reaches 10 15 . This mechanism of rearrangement also applies 
to B-cell recognition molecules (ie, immunoglobulins). The ran-
dom mechanism of gene rearrangement, however, produces 
immune recognition molecules that react with self components. 
Potentially dangerous immune cells carrying self-reactive recogni-
tion molecules are eliminated (negatively selected) during devel-
opment of T lymphocytes in the thymus and of B lymphocytes in 
the bone marrow. It appears that only immune cells which react 
with foreign antigen strongly and with self antigen very weakly are 
positively selected and comprise the peripheral immune cell reper-
toire. This selection mechanism of immune cells is termed “central 
tolerance.” Self-reactive immune cells that skip central tolerance 
and reach the periphery are managed by other control mechanisms 
against autoimmunity and are either eliminated, rendered unre-
sponsive, or suppressed (“peripheral tolerance”). Failures in these 
mechanisms of immunologic regulation, as proposed by Mackay 
and Burnet in 1964, are central features of the concept of 
 autoimmunity. 
 IMMUNE RECOGNITION AND RESPONSE 
 T and B lymphocytes are the fundamental and predominant 
immune cells. T lymphocyte precursors (pre-T cells) originate in 
the bone marrow and migrate to the thymus, where they undergo 
maturation and differentiation. At early stages, they express several 
T-cell surface molecules but still have genomic (not rearranged) 
configuration of their T-cell receptors (TCRs). These pre-T cells, 
destined to become T cells with TCR α/β chains (T α/β cells), 
pass through a critical phase during which self-reactive T cells are 
deleted by negative selection (see T-Cell Tolerance, later in this 
chapter). Few pre-T cells will express other types of chains on their 
TABLE 2–1 Some autoimmune endocrinopathies, antigens, and autoantibodies.
Disease 
Gland 
Autoantigen 
Autoantibody 
Autoimmune (lymphocytic) hypophysitis 
Granulomatous hypophysitis 
Pituitary 
Pituitary cytosolic protein 
Antipituitary 
Graves disease 
Thyroid 
TSH-R, TPO 
TSI, TBII, anti-TPO 
Hashimoto thyroiditis 
Thyroid 
TPO, Tg 
Anti-TPO, anti-Tg 
Autoimmune (idiopathic) hypoparathyroidism 
Parathyroid 
CaSR, NALP5
Antiparathyroid 
Type 1 diabetes mellitus 
Pancreas (β cells) 
GAD65, IA-2, insulin 
Anti-GAD, anti-IA-2 (ICA), 
 antiinsulin 
Type B insulin resistance with acanthosis 
 nigricans (rare) 
Adipocytes, muscle cells 
Insulin receptor 
Insulin receptor blocking 
Autoimmune Addison disease (autoimmune 
 adrenal failure) 
Adrenal 
21-Hydroxylase 
17α-Hydroxylase P450scc 
Anti-21-hydroxylase (ACA) 
Anti-17α-hydroxylase and 
 anti-P450scc (SCA) 
Autoimmune oophoritis (premature ovarian failure) 
Ovaries 
Not yet identified 
 unequivocally, 
 17α-hydroxylase 
P450scc 
Also SCA in association with 
 adrenal insufficiency 
Autoimmune orchitis 
Male infertility (some forms) 
Testes 
Sperm 
Antisperm 
CHAPTER 2 Endocrine Autoimmunity     29
TCR (T γ/δ cells). T α/β cells differentiate into either mature 
CD4 or CD8 cells. These now mature lymphocytes migrate to 
T-cell areas of peripheral lymphoid organs and exert their function 
as helper (T H ) or cytotoxic (T C ) cells when activated. 
 B lymphocytes mature and differentiate in the bone marrow 
and then migrate to the B-cell areas of lymphoid organs. 
Influenced by factors derived from T H cells previously activated by 
professional antigen-presenting cells (APCs) such as macrophages, 
some B cells differentiate to become immunoglobulin M (IgM)-
producing cells (plasma cells). Most of the other activated B cells 
that do not differentiate into plasma cells revert to the resting state 
to become memory B cells. When memory B cells are further 
activated, two events occur: isotype switching (immunoglobulin 
class switching) and hypermutation of the immunoglobulin- 
variable region to further increase diversity and specificity (affinity 
maturation). 
 Activation of B cells requires recognition of the antigen as a 
whole, while T cells require recognition of antigenic peptides 
bound to major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules on 
the surfaces of professional APCs. Therefore, T-cell recognition is 
said to be MHC restricted. 
 The human MHC (human leukocyte antigen; HLA) consists 
of a linked set of genes encoding major glycoproteins involved in 
antigen presentation ( Figure 2–2 ). The complex locates to the 
short arm of chromosome 6 and divides into three separate 
regions: class I, class II, and class III genes. The class I “classic” 
region encodes HLA-A, HLA-B, and HLA-C loci; the nonclassic 
or class I-related region encodes HLA-E, HLA-F, and HLA-G loci 
and other immunity-related genes such as CD1. The class II 
region (HLA-D) encodes HLA-DP, HLA-DQ, and HLA-DR loci 
and other genes related to antigen processing, transport, and pre-
sentation, such as, transporter associated with antigen processing 
(TAP). The class III region encodes genes for tumor necrosis factors 
α and β (TNF-α and TNF-β); complement factors C2, C4, and B; 
and the steroidogenic enzyme 21-hydroxylase. MHC class I 
(classic) molecules are found on all somatic cells, whereas MHC 
class I nonclassic antigens are expressed only on some (eg, HLA-F 
on fetal liver, HLA-G on placental tissues). CD1 molecules are 
expressed on Langerhans cells, dendritic cells, macrophages, and 
B cells (all professional APCs). MHC class II molecules are exclu-
sively expressed on these professional APCs. However, virtually all 
cells except mature erythrocytes can express MHC class II 
Vαn
Vα2
Vα1
Vα1 
Vβn
Vβ2
Vβ1
Vβ1
Dβ1
Dβ1
Cβ1
Cβ1
Cβ2
Dβ2
Jβ
Jβ
Cα
Cα
Jα
Jα
Jβ
Germline DNA
Recombination
Recombination
Protein
T-cell receptor
Rearranged DNA
Rearranged DNA
Transcription
Splicing
Translation
Transcription
Splicing
Translation
Germline DNA
α
α
β
β
 FIGURE 2–1  Rearrangement of the T-cell receptor (TCR) α and β genes to form a functionally diverse receptor. During T-cell development, 
the TCR α and β gene segments rearrange by somatic recombination so that one of the V α segments pairs with a single J α segment, and a V β 
segment pairs with a single D β and J β segment. The C (constant) segments are brought together with the rearranged segments by transcription 
and splicing to generate the functional mRNA that will be translated into the α and β protein chains that compose the TCR. 
30    CHAPTER 2 Endocrine Autoimmunity
 molecules under particular conditions (eg, stimulation with 
interferon-γ [IFN-γ]). As a general rule, MHC class I molecules 
present peptides derived from endogenous antigens that have 
access to cytosolic cell compartments (eg, virus) to CD8 T C cells. 
On the other hand, MHC class II molecules present peptides 
derived from antigens internalized by endocytosis into vesicular 
compartments (eg, bacteria) to CD4 T H cells. MHC class II mol-
ecules also bind peptides derived from many membrane-bound 
self antigens. 
 APCs process and present antigen in order to activate T cells 
utilizing MHC-peptide presentation ( Figure 2–3 ). T cells require 
at least two signals to become activated. The interaction of a TCR 
expressed on antigen-specific T cells and the antigenic peptide–
MHC complex expressed on APCs provides the first signal. The 
second signal is delivered primarily by the interaction between 
costimulatory molecules CD80 (B7.1) and CD86 (B7.2) on 
APCs and CD28 on T cells. These two signals induce prolifera-
tion of T cells, production of interleukin-2 (IL-2), and expression 
of the antiapoptotic protein Bcl-xL. T H cells and T C cells are effec-
tor cells that require both signals in order to become activated. 
However, T C cells also need the “help” provided by T H cells. Until 
recently, it was thought that T H and T C cells needed to interact 
with the same APC simultaneously and that cytokines (such as 
IL-2) produced by the T H cell would then act on the T C cell to 
facilitate its response. New studies suggest that the interaction 
between another costimulatory molecule, CD40 ligand (CD154), 
present on T cells, and CD40, present on APCs, may provide an 
alternative explanation. It appears that T H cells–recognizing anti-
genic peptides presented by APCs deliver a signal through the 
CD154–CD40 complex that “licenses” APCs to directly stimulate 
T C cells ( Figure 2–4 ). Thus, there is no need for simultaneous 
interactions of T H and T C cells while encountering the APC. 
CD154–CD40 interaction also enhances expression of CD80 and 
CD86 as well as secretion of cytokines (IL-1, -6, -8, -10, and -12 
and TNF-α). 
 Yet another molecule on T cells, the CD28 homolog cytotoxic 
T lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA-4 or CD152), functions to sup-
press T-cell responses (see  Figure 2–3 ). CD152 is expressed at low 
to undetectable levels on resting T cells. It is upregulated by the 
 ligation of CD28 on T cells with CD80/86 on APCs, or by IL-2. 
CD152 and CD28 on T cells share the same counterreceptors, 
namely, CD80/86 on APCs. However, CD152 has a 20-fold 
higher affinity than CD28 for their ligands. 
 FIGURE 2–2  Gene organization of the human major histocompatibility complex or human leukocyte antigen (HLA) complex. Regions 
encoding the three classes of MHC proteins are on top. APTP denotes a cluster of genes within the class II region, encoding genes related to 
antigen processing, transport, and presentation. Class III region encodes genes unrelated to class I or class II not involved in antigen presenta-
tion (TNF-α and -β, complement factors C2, C4, B, and 21-hydroxylase and others). 
DP
βα
β α
β α
αβ
DM
DQ
DR
BC
E
AHGF
21B
APTP
FB
21A
C4A
TNF-α
TNF-β
C4B
C2
0
500
Class II
Class III
Class I
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Kilobases (≈)
Centromere
 FIGURE 2–3  Antigen recognition by T cells. From top to bottom: 
 A. Antigen uptake: Incorporation of antigen (via phagocytosis, pino-
cytosis, or FcR-mediated endocytosis of immune complex).  B. Antigen 
presentation: APCs deliver an antigen-specific signal through the 
MHC-peptide–TCR interaction on T cells (MHC I coupled to CD8 inter-
acts with T C cells, MHC II coupled to CD4 interacts with T H cells). 
 C. T-cell activation: The required second signal is provided via CD80/86 
(B7.1; B7.2)–CD28 that induces the expression of CD154 (CD40 L) first 
and CD152 (CTLA-4) later on. Binding of CD154 on T cells with CD40 on 
APCs enhances expression of CD80/86. The APC–CD80/86 increased 
expression and consequent binding of CD28 on T cells perpetuates the 
activation and proliferation of these effector cells (downstream 
events).  D. T-cell inactivation: CD152 (expressed 48-72 hours after 
T-cell activation) will preferentially bind to CD80/86 on APCs because 
of its higher affinity, displacing CD28 and in turn suppressing T-cell 
activity. 
T cell
 TCR
APC
MHC
+
+
(-)
+
Endogenously
processed peptide
Downstream
events
Whole antigen or
immune complex
CD28
CD40
CD80/86
CD154
CD152
A. Antigen uptake
B. Antigen presentation
C. T-cell
activation
D. T-cell inactivation
CHAPTER 2 Endocrine Autoimmunity     31
 The integration of all these interactions may be as follows (see 
 Figure 2–3 ): After processing antigen, APCs deliver an 
 antigen-specific first signal through the MHC-peptide–TCR 
interaction on T cells. A second signal is provided by a costimula-
tory interaction of the CD80/86–CD28 complex that induces the 
expression of CD154 first and then CD152. Binding of CD154 
on T H cells with CD40 on APCs enhances expression of CD80/86 
and licenses APCs for direct activation of T C cells. Other inflam-
matory cytokines as well as lipopolysaccharides and viruses may 
do the same. The increased expression of APC–CD80/86 and 
consequent binding of CD28 on T cells then perpetuates the 
activation and proliferation of these effector cells. However, the 
expression of CD152 48 to 72 hours after T-cell activation leads 
to the preferential binding of this molecule to CD80/86 on APCs 
because of its higher affinity for CD80/86. This may displace 
CD28 from CD80/86 and, in turn, suppress T-cell activity. This 
sequence of complex events is probably simplistic relative to what 
nature has to offer. A new B7 family of receptors has been 
reported: some with positive costimulatory capacity, many with a 
role in downregulating immune responses, yet others with dual 
functions. For some of these pathways such as B7H3/H4 
(expressed in APCs with unknown counterreceptor on T cells), 
very little is known, but even for those pathways that have been 
extensively studied, such as the CD80/86:CD28/CTLA-4 (men-
tioned above); B7h:ICOS (inducible costimulator) and PD-L1/
PD-L2:PD1, new insights are still being generated. The intricacies 
of controlling T-cell activation are enhanced by the complexity of 
the costimulatory pathways, such that there are multiple possible 
receptor–ligand interactions. 
 Activation and differentiation of B cells often require two sig-
nals also. Naive B cells are triggered by antigen but may also 
require accessory signals that come from activated T H cells. Some 
antigens can directly activate naive B cells without the need for T H 
cells (eg, lipopolysaccharides from gram-negative bacteria or poly-
meric protein structures). The former type of B-cell activation 
(MHC class II-restricted T cell help) is called thymus-dependent 
(TD). The latter type is called thymus-independent (TI). T H cells 
also control isotype switching and initiate somatic hypermutation 
of antibody variable-region genes (see Tolerance, later). Interaction 
between CD154 on T H cells and CD40 on B cells and the cytok-
ines produced by T H cells are essential for isotype switching and 
formation of germinal centers in peripheral lymphoid organs. The 
immunoglobulin isotype switching is critical for the generation of 
functional diversity of a humoral immune response. Somatic 
hypermutation (point mutations of the variable-region genes of 
immunoglobulins during the course of an immune response) is 
necessary for the affinity maturation of antibodies. 
 Overall, the immune response is a combination of effector 
mechanisms that function to eliminate pathogenic organisms. 
These effector mechanisms include, as  innate immunity , phago-
cytosis (by macrophages, neutrophils, monocytes, and dendritic 
cells) and cytotoxicity (by natural killer [NK] cells); and as  adap-
tive immunity , antibody-dependent complement-mediated cyto-
toxicity, antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC), 
cytotoxicity by T γ/δ cells that recognize heat shock proteins on 
target cells, and cytotoxicity by CD8 or CD4 T C cells. CD8 and 
CD4 T C cells are activated by the described recognition of specific 
antigenic peptides bound to class I (for CD8), class II (for CD4) 
MHC molecules on the APCs and classically by IL-2 from nearby 
activated CD4 T H cells. These cells kill the target by either secret-
ing cytotoxins (perforin, granzyme) or by inducing apoptosis 
through the Fas–FasL (Fas ligand) interaction (killer cells carrying 
FasL molecules activate programmed cell death in target cells 
expressing Fas molecules). FasL or CD95L is a type II transmem-
brane protein that belongs to the TNF family. The binding of 
FasL with its receptor induces apoptosis. FasL–Fas receptor inter-
actions play an important role in the regulation of the immune 
system. 
 The specificity of the immune response is crucial if self- 
reactivity is to be avoided. In order to ensure that lymphocyte 
responses and the downstream effector mechanisms they control are 
directed exclusively against foreign antigens and not against “self” 
components, a number of safety-check barriers must be negotiated 
before autoreactive lymphocytes can differentiate and proliferate. 
 TOLERANCE 
 T-Cell Tolerance 
 T cells developing in the thymus (pre-T cells) are destined to 
become T α/β cells through rearrangement of the TCR β gene 
initially, followed by the TCR α gene ( Figure 2–5 ). If unproduc-
tive rearrangements of TCR genes occur (nonfunctional TCR α or 
β proteins), apoptosis of these pre-T cells follows ( Figure 2–5 A). 
APC
APC
T helper
TCR
MHC
TCR
MHC
CD80/86
CD40
“Licensing”
CD28
CD80/86
CD28
CD154
A
B
APC able to 
activate Tc
Activated
T cytotoxic
 FIGURE 2–4  Licensed APCs directly activate T C cells. According 
to the traditional model, T H cells and T C cells recognize antigen on 
the same APC. The APC-activated T H cell produces IL-2, which con-
tributes to the activation of T C cells while in simultaneous interaction 
with the same APC. According to the proposed new model  (A) , APCs 
are licensed to activate T C cells by T H or other stimuli (lipopolysaccha-
rides, IFN-γ, viruses). APCs first interact with T H cells. The association 
of CD154 (CD40 L) on the T H cell and CD40 on the APC allows (or 
licenses) the latter to activate T C cells directly  (B) . Thus, once licensed, 
APCs are capable of activating cytotoxic T cells without the need of 
simultaneous interaction with T H cells. 
32    CHAPTER 2 Endocrine Autoimmunity
CD4
CD8
Encounter
self antigen
1. Clonal deletion
Induction
Inhibition
Never encounter
self antigen
T-cell
T-cell
T-cell
APC
APC
MHC
MHC
TCR
FasL
TCR
CD28
CD152
CD80/86
CD80/86
T-cell
APC
MHC
TCR
CD28
CD4
TS
CD8
TS
MHC
TCR
CD28
Any
cell
TH2
NK-T
No 2nd signal
No 2nd signal
Fas
IFN-γ
IL-4
TH1
IFN-γ
IL-4
Peripheral T-cell tolerance
2. Anergy
3. Active suppression
5. Immune deviation
4. Ignorance
Central T-cell tolerance
Pre
T-cell
Pre
T-cell
T-cell
TCR rearrangements
To the periphery
Apoptosis
Apoptosis
Apoptosis
Unproductive
Productive
Low avidity
High avidity
No avidity
CD4
CD8
Self
antigen
Clonal
deletion
B 
A 
 FIGURE 2–5  A. Central T-cell tolerance: Mechanisms of central tolerance (at the thymus level) are depicted. From top to bottom, pre-T 
cells first rearrange their TCR. Unproductive (nonfunctional) rearrangements lead to apoptosis, while productive ones engage pre-T cells in self-
antigen recognition. Clonal deletion indicates elimination of cells based on their high or no avidity for self antigen (apoptosis). Surviving low-
avidity cells reach the periphery as mature CD4 and CD8 cells.  B.  Peripheral T-cell tolerance: May be accomplished through any of the five 
depicted mechanisms.  1. Clonal deletion: After encountering self antigen in the context of self-MHC molecules and simultaneous delivery of a 
second signal (CD80/86–CD28) by APCs (top left), autoreactive T cells become activated. These activated T cells express Fas molecules on their 
CHAPTER 2 Endocrine Autoimmunity     33
If functional rearrangements of TCR α and β proteins occur, cells 
express TCR α/β dimer and CD3 molecules at low levels on the 
cell surface. TCR-rearranged cells proliferate 100-fold. Positive 
and negative selection occurs based on the ability of the rearranged 
TCR α/β to recognize antigenic peptides in association with self-
MHC molecules on thymic epithelial and dendritic cells. Negative 
selection (clonal deletion) appears to take place in the thymus 
medulla, where pre-T cells–bearing TCRs specific for self peptides 
bound to self-MHC molecules are deleted. At least 97% of devel-
oping T cells undergo apoptosis within the thymus (central toler-
ance). Positively selected pre-T cells increase expression of TCR 
α/β, express either CD4 or CD8, and become mature T cells. 
These mature T cells exit the thymus and go to the periphery. 
CD4 T cells are activated in the periphery in an MHC class 
II-restricted fashion, while CD8 T cells are activated in an MHC 
class I-restricted fashion. 
 A differential avidity model in which the fate of T cells is deter-
mined by the intrinsic affinity of TCRs for their ligands has been 
advanced to explain the paradox between positive and negative 
selection. According to this model, T cells with high avidity for 
MHC-self peptide complexes would be eliminated (negative selec-
tion), whereas T cells with low avidity to MHC-self peptide com-
plexes would be positively selected. If the avidity is close to zero, 
T cells would not be selected (for lack of effective signal to sur-
vive). The biochemical factor or factors that signal survival (low 
avidity of TCR binding) versus apoptosis (triggered by high avid-
ity interactions) have yet to be found. 
 Costimulatory interactions between CD28 and CD80/86 and 
between CD154, CD40, and adhesion molecules, such as lym-
phocyte function-associated antigen-1 (LFA-1), are also involved 
in preferential deletion of self-reactive T cells in the medullary 
region of the thymus. It is known that negative selection is not 
100% effective and that some potentially autoreactive T cells do 
escape to the periphery. Not all self peptides would be presented 
to pre-T cells during their development in the thymus. Self pep-
tides derived from secluded proteins (ie, intracytoplasmic enzymes) 
only timely expressed after rigid regulatory control (ie, puberty) in 
endocrine glands are believed to be a likely source. Therefore, the 
peripheral immune system must maintain tolerance through 
complementary control mechanisms. 
 “Peripheral tolerance” ( Figure 2–5 B) may be maintained by the 
induction of unresponsiveness to self antigen  (anergy) or by the 
induction of regulatory T cells (T regs), such as suppressor T cells 
 (active suppression). Peripheral  clonal deletion (apoptosis) of 
autoreactive T cells that have escaped from the thymus may play 
an important role in limiting rapidly expanding responses, but 
there are many examples where autoreactive T cells persist. Some 
autoreactive T cells may never encounter the self antigen because 
it may be sequestered from the immune system  (ignorance). 
Lastly,  immune deviation , whereby noninflammatory T H2 
responses suppress an autoreactive inflammatory T H1 response, 
inducing peripheral tolerance, deserves further discussion. T H1 
cells, which regulate cell-mediated responses, secrete IFN-γ and 
small amounts of IL-4. In contrast, T H2 cells, which provide help 
for antibody production, secrete abundant IL-4 and little IFN-γ. 
A prevailing concept in human autoimmunity is that T H1 responses 
are believed to dominate. It has been shown in animal models that 
induction of T H2 responses ameliorates T H1 responses. Hence, 
unbalanced T H1 immune deviation may lead to a breakage of 
peripheral tolerance. However, evidence to the contrary exists in 
some endocrinopathies. (See autoimmune response in the section 
on Autoimmune Aspects of Thyroid Disease, later in the 
 chapter.) 
 Clonal deletion and  anergy occur through apoptosis at the 
site of activation or after passage through the liver. High antigen 
dose and chronic stimulation induce peripheral elimination of 
both CD4 and CD8 T cells. Activated T cells express Fas mole-
cules on their surfaces but are resistant to FasL-mediated apoptosis 
because of the simultaneous expression of Bcl-xL (apoptosis-resis-
tance molecules), induced by CD28 ligation during activation (see 
Immune Recognition and Response, earlier in the chapter). 
Several days after activation, when Bcl-xL has declined, CD4 cells 
become susceptible to Fas-mediated apoptosis (activation-induced 
cell death; AICD). A similar mechanism via p75 tumor necrosis 
factor (TNF) receptor has been shown for CD8 cells. Therefore, 
autoreactive T cells might be deleted by apoptosis induced by 
chronic stimulation with self antigens, present abundantly in the 
periphery. However, autoreactive T cells specific for very rare self 
antigens may be difficult to eliminate. 
 Anergy also results from the lack of a second costimulatory 
signal. When nonhematopoietic cells stimulated by IFN-γ present 
antigen in an MHC class II-restricted fashion (as thyrocytes do in 
AITD), autoreactive T cells may be rendered unresponsive because 
of the absence of a CD28–CD80/86-mediated signal (nonhe-
matopoietic cells do not express CD80/86 as professional APCs 
do). However, even if the two signals are provided, anergy may 
result from the lack of T H cell-originated cytokines (IL-2, -4, 
-7, etc). It has also been shown that in vivo T-cell anergy may be 
surface but are resistant to Fas ligand (FasL)-mediated apoptosis because of the simultaneous expression of Bcl-xL (not shown) induced by 
CD28 ligation during activation. Several days after activation, when Bcl-xL presence has declined, CD4 cells become susceptible to FasL-
mediated apoptosis. Natural killer cells (NK-T) may then accomplish the task of eliminating these autoreactive T cells.  2. Anergy: Anergy may be 
induced via CD80/86–CD152 interaction 48 to 72 hours following activation or may result from the lack of a second costimulatory signal from 
APCs presenting self antigen (nonprofessional APCs).  3. Active suppression: Active suppression is thought to occur when nonhematopoietic 
cells (stimulated by IFN-γ) present antigen in an MHC class II–restricted fashion to CD4 T-suppressor cells (T S , also known as CD4 + CD25 + 
FOXP3 + regulatory T cells, T regs). Before becoming unresponsive, these cells may induce specific CD8 T S cells. In turn, these CD8 T S cells may 
suppress antigen-specific autoreactive T cells.  4. Ignorance (top right): Some autoreactive T cells may never encounter self antigen because it 
may be sequestered from the immune system. Although they may persist in the circulation, they never become activated.  5. Immune devia-
tion: Under specific circumstances, noninflammatory T H 2 responses could suppress inflammatory (autoreactive) T H 1 responses (see text). 
34    CHAPTER 2 Endocrine Autoimmunity
B cell
T cell
MHC
TCR
CD28
CD80/86
IgD
B cell
B cell
B cell
T cell
FasL
Fas
CD40
CD154
B cell
B cell
No T cell help
Somatic
mutations
High affinity
No antigen
Cytokines
+ CD154
Cytokines
+ CD154
Cytokines
(no CD154)
Cytokines
(no CD154)
Memory B
Plasma
cell
Secreted
IgM
Plasma
cell
Secreted
IgG (A,E)
Anergy
or
apoptosis
Peripheral B-cell tolerance
B
BCR rearrangements 
Low avidity
To the periphery
No avidity
Non
soluble
High avidity
Pre-
B cell
Pre-
B cell
IgM
IgD
IgD
IgD
IgD
Apoptosis
Apoptosis
Unproductive
Productive
B cell
B cell
B cell
B cell
Clonal deletion
or
BCR editing
Soluble
Anergy
Central B-cell tolerance
Self
antigen
A
 FIGURE 2–6  A. Central B-cell tolerance: As T cells do in the thymus, B-cells rearrange their B-cell receptor (BCR) in the bone marrow. 
Unproductive rearrangements drive pre-B cells to apoptosis. Functional rearrangements allow expansion and expression of IgM. Next, similar to 
T-cell clonal deletion, immature B cells that strongly bind self antigens in the bone marrow are eliminated by apoptosis. Some autoreactive 
immature B cells, instead of becoming apoptotic, however, resume rearrangements of their L-chain genes, attempting to reassemble new allelic 
CHAPTER 2 Endocrine Autoimmunity     35
induced by CD80/86–CD152 interaction (see also Immune 
Recognition and Response, discussed earlier). 
 T-cell  active suppression is considered to be a major regulatory 
mechanism of peripheral tolerance; however, its mode of action is 
still under study. As mentioned above, nonhematopoietic cells 
stimulated by IFN-γ present antigen in an MHC class II-restricted 
fashion to T cells and render them anergic. These nonhematopoi-
etic cells (nonprofessional APCs) may also present to CD4 
T-suppressor cells (T S , also known as CD4 + CD25 + FOXP3 + 
regulatory T cells, T regs). Before becoming unresponsive, these 
cells may induce specific CD8 T suppressor (T S ) cells. In turn, 
these CD8 T S cells may regulate (via T-cell-suppressor factors or 
cytotoxicity) autoreactive T cells (see also  Figure 2–5 B). 
 B-Cell Tolerance 
 Instead of the thymus, the bone marrow provides the setting for 
central B-cell tolerance. Pre-B cells rearrange their B-cell receptor 
(BCR or membrane-bound immunoglobulin) early in develop-
ment. The immunoglobulin heavy (H) chain genes rearrange first, 
followed by light (L) chain gene rearrangement. Unproductive 
rearrangements and pairings leading to formation of nonfunctional 
immunoglobulin drive pre-B cells to apoptosis ( Figure 2–6 A). 
Functional rearrangements (functional BCRs) allow immature 
B-cell expansion and expression of IgM and CD21 (a marker of 
functionality). Only one-third of the precursor cells reach this 
stage. The random rearrangement of the V, D, and J segments of 
immunoglobulin genes during this period inevitably generates 
self-recognizing immunoglobulins. Negative selection of autoreac-
tive B cells occurs at the immature B cell stage on the basis of the 
avidity of the BCR for self antigens. Similar to the T-cell clonal 
deletion, immature B cells that strongly bind antigens in the bone 
marrow are eliminated by apoptosis. Some autoreactive immature 
B cells, instead of undergoing apoptosis, resume rearrangements of 
their L-chain genes in an attempt to reassemble new κ or λ genes. 
This procedure, called  BCR editing , permanently inactivates the 
autoreactive immunoglobulin genes. Soluble antigens, presumably 
because they generate weaker signals through the BCR of imma-
ture B cells, do not cause apoptosis but render cells unresponsive 
to stimuli (anergy) . These anergic B cells migrate to the periphery, 
where they express IgD. They may be activated under special cir-
cumstances, making anergy less than sufficient as a mechanism of 
enforcing tolerance. Only immature B cells in the bone marrow 
with no avidity for antigens (membrane-bound or soluble) 
become mature B cells with the capacity to express both IgM and 
IgD. As with T cells, 97% of developing B cells undergo apoptosis 
within the bone marrow. Also, and as with T cells,  central clonal 
deletion, anergy, and  BCR editing eliminates autoreactive 
B cells, recognizing bone marrow-derived self antigens. 
 Peripheral B-cell tolerance ( Figure 2–6 B) is also crucial for 
protection against autoimmunity. It appears that in the absence of 
antigen, mature B cells are actively eliminated in the periphery by 
activated T cells via Fas–FasL and CD40–CD154 interactions. In 
the presence of specific antigen but without T-cell help, antigen 
recognition by BCRs induces apoptosis or anergy of mature 
B cells. If antigen and specific T-cell help are provided—that is, if 
antigen bound to the BCR is internalized, processed, and pre-
sented in an MHC class II-restricted fashion to a previously acti-
vated T H cell specific for the same antigen—two events occur. 
One, the B cell becomes an IgM-secreting plasma cell, and—in 
the presence of the appropriate cytokines and after expression of 
CD40 (for T H cell CD154 interaction)—class switching occurs. 
Two, further somatic hypermutation of the immunoglobulin vari-
able region genes of such mature B cells, which changes affinity of 
BCRs for antigens, also occurs in germinal centers (see also 
Immune Recognition and Response, discussed earlier). Mutants 
with low-affinity receptors undergo apoptosis, while enhanced-
affinity BCRs are positively selected. In the presence of CD40 
ligation of CD154, antigen-stimulated B cells become memory B 
cells ( see Figure 2–6 B). 
 The ability of mature B cells to capture very low quantities of 
antigen via high-affinity BCRs allows them to amplify their anti-
gen-presenting capacity to more than 1000 times that of other 
professional APCs. This particular property may become critical 
in the development of chronic organ-specific autoimmune dis-
eases in which the source of antigen is limited. Thus, autoreactive 
B cells that happen to escape the control mechanisms described 
could amplify and perpetuate autoimmune responses in patients 
with failing endocrine organs when tissue destruction has left only 
minute amounts of residual antigen. 
 AUTOIMMUNITY IS MULTIFACTORIAL 
 Although the breakage of self-tolerance seems to be a central 
pathogenic step in the development of autoimmune diseases, 
autoimmunity is a multifactorial event. Specifically, defects in 
apoptosis-related molecules (Fas–FasL) of thymic dendritic cells 
κ or λ genes (BCR editing). Soluble self antigens presumably generate weaker signals through the BCR of immature B cells; they do not cause 
apoptosis but make cells unresponsive to stimuli (anergy). These anergic B cells migrate to the periphery, expressing IgD, and may be activated 
under special circumstances. Only immature B cells with no avidity for antigens become mature B cells, expressing both IgM and IgD. These are 
the predominant cells that make it to the periphery.  B.  Peripheral B-cell tolerance: In the “absence” of antigen (top right), mature B cells are 
actively eliminated by activated T cells via Fas–FasL and CD40–CD154 interactions. In the “presence” of specific self antigen but “without T-cell 
help,” antigen recognition by BCRs induces apoptosis or anergy on mature B cells. If self antigen and specific autoreactive T-cell help are pro-
vided, two events develop (center): (1) The B cell becomes an IgM-secreting plasma cell (top left), and, in the presence of the appropriate cytok-
ines after expression of CD40 (for T H cell CD154 interaction), class switching occurs (bottom left). (2) Further somatic hypermutation of the 
Ig-variable region genes, which changes affinity of BCRs, occurs. Mutants with low-affinity receptors undergo apoptosis, while improved-affinity 
BCRs are positively selected. In the presence of CD40 ligation of CD154, antigen-stimulated B cells become memory B cells. These two events 
are the same as in foreign antigen recognition. 
36    CHAPTER 2 Endocrine Autoimmunity
have been shown to impair central clonal deletion. Also, in the 
periphery, similar defects (Fas–FasL, CD152) on T cell-APC mol-
ecules may prevent apoptosis of autoreactive T cells. However, it 
is difficult to consider these general defects as causative of organ-
specific disorders. Furthermore, clonal ignorance of T cells cannot 
be maintained if antigens sequestered from the immune system are 
released in blood or if cryptic epitopes of antigens that have never 
been recognized by the immune system are presented to T cells for 
recognition (after tissue destruction, for example). Defects of 
active suppression (T regs dysfunction, CTLA-4 downregulation), 
immune deviation (T H1 /T H2 imbalance), and defects in B-cell 
tolerance may all be involved in the pathogenesis of autoimmune 
diseases. How and why loss of immune self-tolerance occurs is not 
completely understood. Both genetic and environmental factors 
appear to be necessary. 
 GENETIC FACTORS IN AUTOIMMUNITY 
 Epidemiologic studies demonstrate that susceptibility to most 
autoimmune diseases has a significant genetic component. In type 
1 diabetes, for example, there is a clear association between race 
and susceptibility to disease—the incidence is approximately 
40 times higher in Finland than in Japan. Family studies also 
demonstrate a strong underlying genetic component. The lifetime 
risk of developing type 1 diabetes in the United States general 
population is 0.4%, whereas in relatives of diabetics the risk is 
substantially higher (4% for parents, 5%-7% for siblings, 20% for 
HLA-identical siblings, 25%-40% for monozygotic twins). 
 The inheritance pattern of autoimmune disorders is complex. 
These disorders are polygenic, arising from several independently 
segregating genes. The most consistent genetic marker for autoim-
mune diseases to date is the MHC genotype. Considering again 
genetic susceptibility to type 1 diabetes, up to 95% of Caucasians 
developing diabetes express the HLA alleles DR3 or DR4—
compared to about 40% of normal individuals. Individuals 
heterozygous for both DR3 and DR4 have the highest risk. It has 
been shown that the DQ rather than DR genotype is a more spe-
cific marker of susceptibility and that the association of both 
markers is due to the fact that they are products of closely linked 
genes. But what is more important than the fact that HLA genes 
are linked to diabetes is that HLA haplotypes are no longer simply 
undefined genetic markers. It has been shown that the polymor-
phisms of the DQ molecules are critical for high-affinity recogni-
tion of autoantigens (eg, islet cell antigens) by TCRs. HLA-DQ 
structure analysis suggests that the lack of aspartic acid at position 
57 (Asp 57 ) on the DQ β chain allows the autoantigen (processed 
peptide) to fit better in the antigen-binding groove formed by this 
molecule. To the contrary, the presence of Asp 57 allows the forma-
tion of a salt bridge with a conserved arginine at position 76 on 
the DQ α chain, preventing the accommodation of the immuno-
genic peptide recognized by the TCR. Several autoimmune dis-
eases have been linked to HLA-DQβ1 genes, including type 1 
diabetes, celiac disease, bullous pemphigoid, autoimmune hepati-
tis, and premature ovarian failure, and the structure of the DQβ1 
molecule may be the reason for the increased susceptibility. Other 
candidate genes associated with autoimmune endocrinopathies are 
discussed further under the single and polyglandular syndromes. 
 ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS IN 
AUTOIMMUNITY 
 Environmental factors also play a critical role in the pathogenesis 
of autoimmune disease. The strongest evidence for this statement 
comes from studies of monozygotic twins, which show that con-
cordance rates for autoimmune disorders are imperfect (never 
100%). As mentioned above, in type 1 diabetes, identical twins 
show less than 50% concordance. 
 The environmental factors thought to have greatest influence 
on disease development include infectious agents, diet, and toxins. 
In type 1 diabetes, viruses have been strong suspects. Up to 20% 
of children prenatally infected with rubella develop type 1 diabe-
tes. Children with congenital rubella also have an increased inci-
dence of other autoimmune disorders, including thyroiditis and 
dysgammaglobulinemia. The mechanisms by which these patho-
gens may induce autoimmune responses include molecular mim-
icry and direct tissue injury. The hypothesis of molecular mimicry 
suggests that immune responses directed at infectious agents can 
cross-react with self antigens, causing tissue or organ destruction. 
Support for this concept is found in well-known clinical syn-
dromes such as rheumatic fever (immune responses directed 
against streptococcal M protein seem to cross-react with cardiac 
myosin, inducing clinical myocarditis). In autoimmune diabetes, 
the best-studied example of molecular mimicry is the B4 coxsacki-
evirus protein P2-C. Coxsackie B4 virus has also been epidemio-
logically implicated in the development of type 1 diabetes. There 
is a striking amino acid sequence similarity between P2-C viral 
protein and the enzyme glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD), 
found in pancreatic β cells (see Autoimmune Aspects of Type 1 
Diabetes, discussed later). 
 The importance of diet in the development of autoimmune 
diseases remains controversial. An association between early expo-
sure to cow’s milk proteins and the risk of type 1 diabetes has been 
observed in several epidemiologic studies. For example, one study 
demonstrated that primary immunity to insulin is induced in 
infancy by oral exposure to cow’s milk insulin, but the relevance 
of this observation is still unknown. On the other hand, selected 
antigens (from bovine serum albumin to porcine insulin) have 
been administered orally to mice with a broad spectrum of auto-
immune disorders, including nonobese diabetic (NOD) mice, 
with favorable outcomes. Those data in mice were so compelling 
that oral tolerance trials in humans have been conducted or are 
ongoing. Unfortunately, the results of already completed trials in 
other autoimmune diseases have been disappointing. Three large, 
randomized, controlled trials designed to delay or prevent type 1 
diabetes—the two Diabetes Prevention Trial (DPT-1 and 2) and 
the European Diabetes Nicotinamide Intervention Trial—have 
failed to demonstrate a treatment effect. Thus, it should not be 
concluded that it is impossible to delay or prevent type 1 diabetes; 
rather, it may require testing of more potent interventions or com-
binations of therapies, guided by better understanding of the 
CHAPTER 2 Endocrine Autoimmunity     37
immunopathogenesis of the disease, to demonstrate attenuation 
or amelioration of the destructive immune process leading to 
type 1 diabetes. 
 SINGLE-GLAND AUTOIMMUNE 
SYNDROMES 
 Organ-specific autoimmune endocrine disorders may present as 
single entities or may cluster in polyglandular syndromes. Most 
endocrine glands are susceptible to autoimmune attack. Some are 
affected more frequently than others (see  Table 2–1 ). 
 AUTOIMMUNE ASPECTS OF THYROID 
DISEASE 
 Autoimmune thyroid disease can present in a polarized fashion 
with Graves disease (thyroid hyperfunction) at one end and 
Hashimoto thyroiditis (thyroid failure) at the other. This func-
tional subdivision is clinically useful. However, both diseases have 
a common autoimmune origin. 
 Genes and Environment 
 Major susceptibility genes in autoimmune thyroid disease have yet 
to be identified. Although certain HLA alleles (mainly HLA-DR3 
and DQA1*0501) have been shown to be present more frequently 
in Graves disease than in the general population, this association 
has frequently been challenged. In fact, no consistent association 
has been found between Graves disease and any known HLA 
polymorphism. Furthermore, the risk of developing Graves dis-
ease in HLA-identical siblings (7%) is not significantly different 
from that in control populations. HLA-DR5, -DR3, -DQw7 in 
Caucasian, HLA-DRw53 in Japanese, and HLA-DR9 in Chinese 
patients were found to be associated with Hashimoto thyroiditis. 
However, genetic linkage between Hashimoto thyroiditis and a 
specific HLA locus has not been demonstrated consistently. 
Overall, the HLA loci are likely to provide less than 5% of the 
genetic contribution to autoimmune thyroid disease, confirming 
the relative importance of non-HLA-related genes in susceptibil-
ity. For example, it has been shown that the inheritance pattern of 
autoantibodies to thyroperoxidase (TPO) is genetically transmit-
ted. Other candidates are currently under study. However, auto-
immune thyroid disease linkage to CTLA-4, HLA, IgH chain, 
TCR, thyroglobulin (Tg), TPO, and thyrotropin receptor 
(TSH-R) genes has been excluded. Recently, using positional 
genetics of a candidate gene, Graves disease susceptibility was 
mapped to a noncoding 6.13 kb 3′ region of CTLA-4, the com-
mon allelic variation of which was correlated with lower messen-
ger RNA levels of the soluble alternatively spliced form of CTLA-4 
(sCTLA-4). sCTLA-4 is known to be present in human serum. It 
can bind CD80/86 molecules on APCs and inhibit T-cell prolif-
eration in vitro. The reduction in the level of sCTLA-4 could 
potentially lead to reduced blocking of CD80/86, causing 
increased activation through CD28 of autoreactive T cells. 
 An important environmental factor influencing the natural 
history of autoimmune thyroid disease is that of iodine intake 
(dietary, or present in drugs such as amiodarone or in x-ray con-
trast media). There is considerable evidence that iodine adversely 
affects both thyroid function and antibody production in those 
with occult or overt autoimmune thyroid disease. 
 Autoimmune Response 
 In Graves disease, thyrocytes are the differentiated carriers of 
TSH-Rs and the target cells of autoantibodies and probably the 
autoimmune response. The development of autoantibodies that 
functionally stimulate the TSH-R mimicking the action of TSH 
was the first example of antibody-mediated activities of a hormone 
receptor in humans. Autoantibodies that may stimulate the calci-
um-sensing receptor (CaSR) (another G-protein–coupled recep-
tor) and signal the inhibition of PTH production have been 
described in autoimmune hypoparathyroidism. Similarly, stimu-
lating antibodies that bind to the adrenocorticotropin (ACTH) 
receptor may be involved in the pathogenesis of primary pig-
mented nodular adrenocortical disease (also referred to as nodular 
adrenal dysplasia). 
 In Graves disease, antibodies to the TSH-R present with differ-
ent types of activity. Thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulins 
(TSIs), the cause of the hyperthyroidism, are detected by a bioas-
say that measures cAMP production in a cell line that expresses 
TSH-Rs. TSH-R autoantibodies (stimulating, blocking, or neu-
tral) can be identified by their ability to prevent TSH binding to 
the TSH-R (TSH-binding inhibition immunoglobulins, TBII). 
No direct immunoassay for the measurement of TSH-R autoanti-
bodies is available yet, and its development may be difficult 
because TSH-R autoantibodies are present at very low concentra-
tions in patients with the disease. 
 A particular feature of Graves disease is its early clinical presen-
tation. Unlike other autoimmune endocrinopathies (type 1 diabe-
tes, Hashimoto thyroiditis, autoimmune Addison disease), in 
which much of the target organ has to be destroyed before the 
disease is manifested, Graves hyperthyroidism often presents with 
an enlarged and active gland. Minimal lymphocytic infiltration is 
present when hyperthyroidism (due to the presence of TSH-R-
stimulating antibodies) develops. This unique feature may ulti-
mately allow early immune intervention in preference to current 
ablative therapeutic options. 
 Another peculiar feature of Graves disease is the helper T-cell 
response observed in this disease. The activation of antibody-
producing B cells by T H lymphocytes in Graves disease is well 
recognized. At present, a prevailing concept of human autoim-
munity suggests that as in acute allograft rejection, “deviation” 
toward a T H 1 response dominates its pathogenesis. Counterdeviation 
toward T H 2 is thought to be a consequence of tolerance induction 
and has been postulated as a potential therapeutic approach. 
Graves disease seems to challenge that concept. Analysis of TSH-
R-specific T-cell clones from patients with Graves disease has 
provided direct evidence for polarization of T H responses; how-
ever, instead of T H 1 deviation, T H 0 and T H 2 responses have been 
observed. As mentioned before, T H 1 cells, which regulate 
38    CHAPTER 2 Endocrine Autoimmunity
 cell-mediated responses, secrete mainly IFN-γ and small amounts 
of IL-4. In contrast, T H 2 cells that regulate antibody production 
(such as TSH-R autoantibodies in Graves disease) preferentially 
produce IL-4 and little IFN-γ. T cells expressing both IL-4 and 
IFN-γ are known as T H 0 cells. These experimental results suggest 
that in Graves disease T H 0 to T H 2 cell responses appear to be 
dominant. Hence, in human autoimmunity, Graves disease 
appears to be an exception to the usual T H cell pattern. 
 In Hashimoto thyroiditis, the hallmark of the humoral 
immune response is the presence of autoantibodies to TPO. 
Although the effector mechanism for TPO (or thyroglobulin 
[Tg]) autoantibodies is still controversial, under special circum-
stances (at least in vitro) the autoantibodies are themselves cyto-
toxic agents or activators of cytotoxic T lymphocytes. Furthermore, 
in secondary T-cell responses, antibodies may play a critical role in 
antigen processing or presentation to T cells. In short, mac-
rophages internalize (and subsequently process) antigen by phago-
cytosis and antigen-antibody complex uptake via Fc receptors. 
B cells have membrane-bound antibodies (B-cell receptors; BCRs) 
which provide a much more powerful system for antigen capture. 
Indeed, recombinant TPO-specific membrane-bound autoanti-
body captures antigen and allows presentation efficiently. Antibody 
binding also modulates antigen processing of immune complexes, 
enhancing or suppressing the presentation of different T-cell pep-
tides. Hence, APCs (internalizing immune complexes through 
Fc receptors) and B cells (capturing antigen through BCRs) can 
influence the secondary T-cell response that perpetuates autoim-
mune disease. The potential role of autoantibodies in modulating 
presentation of T-cell determinants in thyroid (and diabetes) auto-
immunity is being explored. 
 Animal Models of Autoimmune Thyroid 
Disease 
 The classic immunologic approach to development of an animal 
model of an autoimmune disease is to immunize the animal with 
soluble antigen in adjuvant. For autoimmune thyroid disease, the 
induction of thyroiditis in rabbits using human Tg was one of the 
earliest attempts to do this—by Rose and coworkers in 1956. In 
subsequent studies, mice immunized with human or murine Tg 
developed experimental autoimmune thyroiditis. Immunization 
with TPO (human or porcine) induces thyroid autoantibodies 
and, as in the case of Tg, causes thyroiditis to develop in particular 
MHC strains of mice. However, unlike spontaneous thyroiditis in 
chickens, none of the immunized mouse models of thyroiditis 
develop hypothyroidism. 
 In 1996, Shimojo and coworkers developed a mouse model 
that clearly mimics some of the major features of Graves disease. 
This was achieved by the ingenious approach of immunizing mice 
with fibroblasts stably transfected with the cDNA for the human 
TSH-R and syngeneic MHC class II ( Figure 2–7 ). Most of the 
animals had moderately high TBII activity in their sera, and about 
25% were clearly thyrotoxic, with elevated T 4 and T 3 values, 
detectable TSI activity, and thyroid hypertrophy. For the first 
time, therefore, an animal model was established in which a sig-
nificant number of affected subjects have the immunologic and 
endocrinologic features of Graves hyperthyroidism. More recently, 
other models have become available. The general rule for induc-
tion of an antibody response to the TSH-R in the form of TSI and 
consequent Graves disease appears to be the need to express the 
antigen in a native form in an MHC class II carrying cell. Thus, 
TSH-R-transfected B cells (M12 cell line), TSH-R-adenovirus-
infected dendritic cells, and even naked TSH-R DNA or TSH-R 
adenovirus parenterally delivered and probably captured and 
expressed by MHC class II expressing cells, have been used to 
induce TSI and Graves-like disease. However, the focal thyroiditis 
that accompanies human Graves, as well as the extrathyroidal 
manifestations that define the disease, have never been reliably 
reproduced in any of these models. Nevertheless, these models 
open up new ways of investigating the pathogenesis of Graves 
disease. 
 AUTOIMMUNE ASPECTS OF TYPE 1 
DIABETES 
 Most type 1 diabetes results from autoimmune destruction of 
pancreatic β cells in a process that can span several years. This 
results in glucose intolerance and clinical disease when the major-
ity of β cells have been destroyed. The destruction is marked by 
circulating antibodies to pancreatic β cells and by massive infiltra-
tion of mononuclear lymphocytes into the islets of Langerhans 
while pancreatic β cells remain. The lymphocytes disappear when 
the β cells are gone. Although insulin is available for replacement 
therapy, type 1 diabetes remains a chronic disorder of major 
TSH-R
MHC
TSH-R peptide
Injected cells
AKR/N mice
TSH-R antibodies and hyperthyroidism
hTSH-R + m class II fibroblasts
 FIGURE 2–7  Animal model for Graves disease. This first animal 
model of Graves-like disease was achieved by injecting AKR/N mice 
with syngeneic (MHC-identical) fibroblasts dually transfected with 
mouse MHC class II (H2-k) and human TSH-R cDNA. About 25% of the 
animals developed endocrinologic (hyperthyroidism) and immuno-
logic (TSI, TBII) features of Graves disease. 
CHAPTER 2 Endocrine Autoimmunity     39
 socioeconomic impact, especially because it mainly afflicts the 
young. Elucidation of the molecular mechanisms underlying this 
destruction—and the development of methods to prevent autoim-
munity—may ultimately lead to effective treatment. Such devel-
opments, however, require animal models of type 1 diabetes that 
closely resemble the disease in humans. 
 Genes and Environment 
 The susceptibility to develop type 1 diabetes is associated with 
certain alleles of the MHC class II locus that have been statistically 
linked to a variety of autoimmune disorders. The most recent 
analyses indicate that in Caucasians, HLA-DR3, DQ2 
(DQB1*0201) and HLA-DR4 (DRB1*0401), DQ8 (DQB1*0302) 
haplotypes are most strongly associated with type 1 diabetes. In 
Asian populations, DRB1*0405 is the major susceptibility haplo-
type. In contrast, the DR2, DQ6 (DQB1*0602) haplotype is 
negatively associated with type 1 diabetes. More importantly, sus-
ceptibility requires both HLA-DQ β chain alleles to be negative 
for aspartic acid at position 57 (Asp 57 ) in the amino acid sequence. 
Studies of different populations have shown a linear relationship 
between the incidence of type 1 diabetes and the estimated 
 frequency of homozygous absence of Asp 57 . 
 Non-HLA candidate genes consistently associated with type 1 
diabetes include the “variable number of tandem repeats” (VNTR) 
polymorphisms in the insulin gene and the CTLA-4 gene 
(CD152). The VNTR polymorphisms are located adjacent to 
defined regulatory sequences that influence insulin gene expres-
sion. Of immunologic importance, CTLA-4 gene (see Immune 
Recognition and Response, discussed earlier) is the other  non-HLA 
candidate gene consistently found to be associated with type 1 
diabetes. 
 Although environmental factors definitely play a role in the 
development of type 1 diabetes (eg, Coxsackie B4 virus, mumps 
virus, rubella virus, Kilham rat virus in the bio breeding [BB]-rat; 
or cow’s milk formula exposure), more studies are needed to estab-
lish a definite etiologic link. 
 Autoimmune Response 
 The autoantibodies associated with β cell destruction can be pres-
ent up to several years before the clinical onset of disease and are 
thus excellent markers of disease risk. Furthermore, they have 
served as important tools to identify human pancreatic β cell 
autoantigens. In 1990, Baekkeskov and coworkers identified a 
64-kDa islet cell protein as the smaller isoform of the enzyme that 
synthesizes γ-aminobutyrate (GABA): glutamic acid decarboxylase 
(GAD65). This autoantigen was shown to be recognized by 70% 
to 80% of prediabetic and newly diagnosed type 1 diabetic 
patients’ sera. A second component of the 64-kDa antigen was 
shown to be a putative tyrosine phosphatase, termed IA-2. IA-2 is 
recognized by 60% to 70% of prediabetic and newly diagnosed 
type 1 diabetic patients. Together, GAD65 and IA-2 autoantibod-
ies detect over 90% of individuals who develop type 1 diabetes 
and can be used to detect individuals at risk several years before 
the clinical onset of disease. 
 Although autoantibody responses to GAD65 are not easily 
detected, there is strong evidence to suggest that GAD65 is an 
important T-cell autoantigen in the NOD mouse. Thus, GAD65 
is the earliest known target of the autoimmune T-cell response in 
the NOD mouse. Administration of the protein in a tolerogenic 
form prevents disease in NOD mice. In contrast, induction of 
tolerance to other potential autoantigens in this model (such as 
carboxypeptidase H and hsp60) does not prevent disease. The 
NOD mouse does not develop autoimmunity to the IA-2 mole-
cule and thus distinguishes itself from the human disease with 
regard to this target antigen (see Models, discussed later). 
 Insulin is a third well-characterized autoantigen in type 1 dia-
betes. Insulin autoantibodies can be detected in about 50% of 
newly diagnosed children with type 1 diabetes. Insulin-specific 
T-cell clones can transfer disease in the NOD mouse. Furthermore, 
administration of whole insulin, insulin B chain, or an insulin 
peptide epitope in a tolerogenic form can protect against disease 
in NOD mice. Because animals receiving insulin or insulin B 
chain continue to have intra-islet insulitis—in contrast to young 
NOD mice treated with GAD65 in a tolerogenic way—it has 
been suggested that insulin reactivity is more distal in disease pro-
gression. Additional but less well-characterized proteins have been 
implicated as targets of autoantibodies in type 1 diabetes in 
humans. 
 Autoantibodies, although they are good markers of disease, do 
not seem to be directly involved in destruction of pancreatic 
β cells. Adoptive transfer of diabetes to NOD mice with spontane-
ous, combined immunodeficiency (NOD-SCID) lacking B cells, 
can be mediated by T cells alone. However, because β-cell-
deficient NOD mice do not develop disease, it is possible that 
B lymphocytes function as important APCs in the islet to per-
petuate an ongoing autoimmune response and thus are essential 
for presentation of rare antigens such as GAD65 and IA-2. (See 
also autoimmune response in the section on Autoimmune Aspects 
of Thyroid Disease, discussed earlier.) 
 An important question is whether GAD65, IA-2, and insulin 
are major target antigens of T-cell mediated β-cell destruction that 
results in type 1 diabetes in humans. Proliferative and cytotoxic 
T-cell responses to GAD65 are detected in the peripheral blood of 
newly diagnosed type 1 diabetes patients, but their pathogenicity 
has not been addressed. Induction of neonatal tolerance to 
GAD65 specifically prevents diabetes in the NOD mouse model. 
The role of IA-2 in destructive autoimmunity to the pancreatic 
β cell in humans is suggested by the high predictive value of IA-2 
antibodies for clinical onset of diabetes. 
 Both GAD65 and IA-2 are neuroendocrine proteins, which are 
expressed at significant levels in the brain and β cell. Stiff-man 
syndrome—a very rare neurologic disorder in humans with a high 
coincidence of diabetes—is characterized by a strong autoanti-
body response to GAD65, the titer of which is several orders of 
magnitude higher than in diabetes. It has been suggested that 
impairment of GABA-secreting neurons in stiff-man syndrome is 
mediated by GAD65 autoantibodies, whereas development of 
type 1 diabetes is associated with a cellular immune response to 
GAD65. The low incidence of stiff-man syndrome compared with 
type 1 diabetes (only one in 10 4 type 1 diabetic patients develops 
40    CHAPTER 2 Endocrine Autoimmunity
stiff-man syndrome, whereas 40% of stiff-man syndrome patients 
develop type 1 diabetes) probably reflects in part the protection of 
GABAergic neurons by the blood–brain barrier and the absence of 
MHC class II antigen expression in normal neurons. The cellular 
localization of IA-2 expression in brain is not known, and there 
are no known disorders of the central nervous system that involve 
autoimmunity to IA-2. 
 In the NOD mouse, the destruction of pancreatic β cells 
requires both the CD4 T-helper (T H ) cells and CD8 cytotoxic 
(T C ) cells. Whereas T H cells seem to be required for the develop-
ment of an autoimmune response to the islets and generation of 
intrainsulitis, T C cells are probably the effector cells of β-cell 
destruction. Furthermore, there is evidence that in the CD4 
lineage, the T H 1 subset is important for development of disease 
in the NOD mouse. T H 1 cells are induced by IL-12 and are 
biased toward secreting IFN-γ and IL-2. In contrast, there is 
evidence that the T H 2 cytokine IL-4 exerts a dominant-negative 
effect on diabetes progression in the NOD mouse. In humans, 
low autoantibody titers associated with type 1 diabetes and high 
titers associated with a protective haplotype (DR2) suggest that 
a strong T H 2 response can be inhibitory for β-cell destruction. A 
role for T H 1 cells in human disease is also suggested by results of 
cytokine profiles of peripheral human NK cells in identical twins 
which are discordant for the development of diabetes. This is 
different from the observed T H responses in Graves disease (see 
Autoimmune Aspects of Thyroid Disease, discussed earlier). 
 Recently, it has been suggested that it is not the presence of 
autoantibodies to GAD65 but the absence of the corresponding 
anti-idiotypic antibodies that defines type 1 diabetes. Anti-
idiotypic antibodies bind to the idiotype (binding region) of other 
antibodies. Investigators found that while diabetes patients are 
positive for GAD65 antibodies because they lack certain anti- 
idiotypic antibodies, healthy individuals are negative for GAD65 
antibodies because of the very presence of anti-idiotypic antibod-
ies directed against GAD65 antibodies in their serum. 
 Animal Models of Autoimmune Diabetes 
Mellitus 
 The nonobese diabetic (NOD) mouse has been invaluable for 
studies of molecular mechanisms of autoimmunity directed 
toward the pancreatic β cells and the development of diabetes. It 
has several features, however, which distinguish it from the human 
disease. The incidence of diabetes is two to three times higher in 
female than in male NODs, whereas in humans there is a slight 
preponderance of type 1 diabetes in males. Furthermore, while the 
induction of organ-specific autoimmunity and inflammation in 
humans may be caused by human pathogens or toxins, autoim-
munity seems to be the default mechanism in the NOD mouse. 
Thus, mice in clean, pathogen-free environments have a high 
incidence of disease, whereas a variety of regimens that stimulate 
the immune system of the mouse, such as viral infection or injec-
tion of complete Freund adjuvant, prevent disease. To date, more 
than 125 treatments for successful prevention or delay of diabetes 
in the NOD mouse have been identified, but none have been 
identified for humans. 
 The bio breeding (BB) rat develops spontaneous T-cell-
mediated diabetes. The BB-rat disease is significantly different 
from the human disease in that it is accompanied by autoantibod-
ies to lymphocytes and a severe lymphocytopenia, which is essen-
tial for development of β-cell autoimmunity and diabetes in this 
model. 
 In an attempt to develop better models of diabetes, “human-
ized” transgenic mice that express diabetes-prone  human  MHC 
class II molecules were developed. Since these animals did not 
develop spontaneous diabetes, they were backcrossed into the 
NOD background. However, backcrossing to NOD once again 
prevented the development of diabetes. Other animal models of 
type 1 diabetes, some of them  carrying  human MHC class II 
diabetes-susceptibility genes, were developed by expression of 
ectopic molecules in the islets using the rat insulin promoter 
(RIP). In some of these models, diabetes needed to be induced by 
immunization with, for example, insulin peptides or lymphocytic 
choriomeningitis virus. However, none of these models fully 
reflect the human disease in that the immune attack was initiated 
against target human β-cell autoantigen(s) in an MHC class 
II–restricted fashion, without the need for  aberrant protein(s) (for-
eign to the pancreatic β-cell) expression. 
 Although some of the models of type 1 diabetes described have 
been very useful for studies of basic immunologic mechanisms 
associated with pancreatic β-cell autoimmunity, other models of 
type 1 diabetes closer to what occurs in humans are needed if 
immunoprevention and immunomodulatory techniques are to be 
tested. At a minimum, human susceptibility genes and human 
target antigens need to coexist in an animal model to mimic 
human autoimmune responses. 
 AUTOIMMUNE ASPECTS OF OTHER 
ENDOCRINOPATHIES 
 Autoimmune Adrenal Failure 
 Autoimmune Addison disease seldom develops as a single-gland 
syndrome. In about 50% of cases, the disease is associated with 
other gland and organ failure. Anderson and coworkers described 
the existence of adrenal-specific autoantibodies for the first time 
in 1963. Using immunofluorescence techniques on sections of 
human, bovine, or monkey adrenals, antibodies specifically recog-
nizing the adrenal cortex (ACA) were described. Steroid-producing 
cell autoantibodies (SCA) reactive with cells of the adrenals, 
gonads, and placenta were described by Anderson and coworkers 
in 1968. SCAs are detected predominantly in ACA-positive 
patients with Addison disease who have premature ovarian failure 
in the context of autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type I 
(APS-I; see Autoimmune Polyglandular Syndromes, discussed 
later). 
 Steroid 21-hydroxylase has been identified as a major adrenal 
autoantigen in ACA-positive patients with Addison disease. Using 
a sensitive assay based on the immune precipitation of radiola-
beled recombinant 21-hydroxylase, workers in one study reported 
positive testing in sera from 72% of patients with isolated Addison 
CHAPTER 2 Endocrine Autoimmunity     41
disease, 92% of patients with APS-I, 100% of patients with 
APS-II, and 80% of patients who were positive for ACA by immu-
nofluorescence but did not have clinically overt Addison disease 
(apparently healthy blood donors showed 2.5% positivity) 
( Table 2–2 ). Another study measured ACA in 808 children with 
organ-specific autoimmune diseases without adrenal insufficiency. 
ACAs were detectable in 14. Ten of these ACA-positive children 
(also positive for 21-hydroxylase antibodies) and 12 ACA-negative 
children were prospectively followed with adrenocortical function 
testing and antibodies. Overt Addison disease developed in 9 
(90%) ACA/21-hydroxylase antibody-positive children within 3 
to 121 months, and the one remaining child had subclinical 
hypoadrenalism throughout an extra 24-month observation 
period. The progression to adrenal failure was not related to ACA 
titer, sex, baseline adrenal function (subclinical insufficiency vs. 
normal function), type of associated autoimmune disease, or HLA 
status. Although ACA 21-hydroxylase antibodies appear to be 
highly predictive in children, in adults the cumulative risk of 
developing Addison disease in patients with other organ-specific 
autoimmune diseases and positive ACA 21-hydroxylase antibodies 
is about 32%. Steroid 17α-hydroxylase is another adrenal autoan-
tigen. 17α-Hydroxylase antibodies were found in 5% of patients 
with isolated Addison disease, 55% of patients with APS-I, 33% 
of patients with APS-II, and 20% of sera from patients who were 
positive for ACA but did not have clinically overt Addison disease 
(see  Table 2–2 ). Antibodies against another adrenal autoantigen, 
cytochrome P450 side-chain cleavage enzyme (P450scc), were 
found to be present in 9% of patients with isolated Addison dis-
ease, 45% of patients with APS-I, 36% of patients with APS-II, 
and 20% of sera from patients who were positive for ACA but did 
not have clinically overt Addison disease (see  Table 2–2 ). The 
prevalence of P450scc antibodies in these groups of patients was 
always lower than that of 21-hydroxylase antibodies but similar to 
that of 17α-hydroxylase antibodies. Furthermore, almost all sera 
that were positive for 17α-hydroxylase or P450scc antibodies were 
also positive for 21-hydroxylase antibodies. In addition, a com-
parison of SCAs measured by immunofluorescence with 17α-
hydroxylase and P450scc antibody measurements suggested that 
17α-hydroxylase and P450scc are the major components of the 
SCA antigen just as 21-hydroxylase is the major component of 
ACA antigen. 
 Overall, immune responses in autoimmune adrenal disease 
may involve other antigens, but reactivity to the three described, 
particularly 21-hydroxylase, appears to predominate. Although 
inhibition of enzymatic activity by these antibodies has been 
shown in vitro, no clear relationship to the pathogenesis of the 
clinical syndrome has yet been established. 
 Autoimmune Oophoritis and Orchitis 
 An autoimmune origin for premature ovarian failure with con-
comitant Addison disease or oophoritis can be based on the follow-
ing human and animal data: (1) the presence of autoantibodies to 
SCA in most cases, (2) the characterization of shared autoantigens 
between the adrenals and the ovaries (ie, 17α-hydroxylase and 
P450scc), (3) the histologic features of the ovaries (lymphocyte and 
plasma cell infiltrate involving steroid-producing cells), and 
(4) animal models of the syndrome. There is some evidence of auto-
immunity in idiopathic premature ovarian failure not associated with 
Addison disease (cellular immune abnormalities, presence of various 
ovarian antibodies in some patients, and associations with type 1 
diabetes and myasthenia gravis); however, the absence of histologic 
confirmation makes the autoimmune pathogenesis less credible. 
 Less is known about the autoimmune pathogenesis of human 
orchitis. Animal models, however, have shown that infectious or 
traumatic injury to the testes can induce autoimmune responses 
in this immune-privileged tissue (defined as sites where antigens 
are not presented to the host immune system; see Tolerance, 
discussed earlier). 
 Autoimmune Hypophysitis 
 Autoimmune hypophysitis (also called lymphocytic hypophysitis) 
should be considered in the differential diagnosis of pituitary 
abnormalities in women (8:1 female:male ratio) during the latter 
half of pregnancy and in the first 6 months postpartum, as well as 
in patients with coexisting autoimmune disorders, for example, 
thyroiditis, adrenalitis, autoimmune hypoparathyroidism, or atro-
phic gastritis. More than 380 cases have been described since the 
original report in 1962. Antipituitary antibodies have been 
detected in a minority of patients. Owing to the lack of markers 
for the disease, the diagnosis can only be confirmed with histo-
logic examination. Nevertheless, because of the usually transient 
endocrine and compressive features of this condition, conservative 
management based on clinical suspicion may prevent the conse-
quences of unnecessary pituitary surgery. Granulomatous hypo-
physitis—another form of autoimmune hypophysitis—appears to 
have a similar autoimmune pathogenesis but more commonly 
affects postmenopausal women and men. The presence of regula-
tory T cells in this form of hypophysitis, however, makes the 
autoimmune pathogenesis less clear. 
 Autoimmune Hypoparathyroidism 
 Autoimmune hypoparathyroidism, also called idiopathic hypopara-
thyroidism, is one of the major components of APS type I (APS-I; 
TABLE 2–2  Adrenal autoantibodies in different 
syndromes.
Autoantibodies
Addison 
Disease(%)
APS-Ia 
(%)
APS-IIb 
(%)
ACA(+)c 
(%)
21-Hydroxylase
72
92
100
80
17α-Hydroxylase
5
55
33
20
P450scc
9
45
36
20
aAPS-I: Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type I: Autoimmune polyendocrinopa-
thy, candidiasis, and ectodermal dystrophy.
bAPS-II: Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type II: Adrenal insufficiency, thyroid 
disease, and diabetes mellitus.
cACA(+): Adrenal cortex antibody-positive without clinically overt Addison disease.
42    CHAPTER 2 Endocrine Autoimmunity
see next section). It also presents as a sporadic disease, sometimes 
associated with Hashimoto thyroiditis in women. The fact that 
autoimmune hypoparathyroidism presents in association with 
other autoimmune diseases and also the presence of autoantibod-
ies reactive with parathyroid tissue in many affected patients sug-
gests an autoimmune pathogenesis. Parathyroid autoantibodies 
have been reported to show a complement-dependent cytotoxic 
effect on cultured bovine parathyroid cells. At least one major 
parathyroid autoantigen has been identified as the CaSR. The 
CaSR is of great importance in the regulation of parathyroid hor-
mone secretion and renal tubular calcium reabsorption. This 
receptor is a member of the 7-membrane-spanning domain G 
protein–coupled receptor family. It is also expressed in thyroid C 
cells, the pituitary, the hypothalamus, and in other regions of the 
brain. The relationship of the autoimmune response directed 
against the receptor to the pathogenesis of the disease is not clear. 
However, antibody-mediated stimulation of the CaSR with con-
sequent inhibition of PTH synthesis and secretion has been sug-
gested. The prevalence of the CaSR antibodies in clinically 
diagnosed idiopathic hypoparathyroidism was found to be 56% in 
one study. Measurement of these antibodies may have value in 
predicting the development of autoimmune hypoparathyroidism 
in patients with autoimmune endocrinopathies who are at risk. 
Furthermore, hypercalcemia in a patient with multiple autoim-
mune disorders, responsive to glucocorticoids, has been recently 
described as secondary to the presence of a blocking IgG4 autoanti-
body directed against the CaSR and apparently capable of blocking 
the inhibitory actions of the ligand calcium (see also Chapter 8). 
 AUTOIMMUNE POLYGLANDULAR 
SYNDROMES 
 Associations of multiple autoimmune endocrine disorders have 
been classified in different syndromes. APS type I and type II 
(APS-I and -II) can be clearly separated clinically ( Table 2–3 ). 
Some authors have attempted to subdivide APS-II (ie, APS-II 
and -III) on the basis of the association of some autoimmune 
disorders but not others. Little information is gained, however, by 
making this subdivision in terms of understanding pathogenesis or 
prevention of future endocrine failure in patients or their relatives. 
Other autoimmune associations, not always described in syn-
dromes, are also classically recognized. Vitiligo, for example, seems 
to accompany multiple autoimmune endocrinopathies. There is 
now convincing evidence of linkage between  NALP1 ( NACHT 
leucine-rich-repeat protein 1 ), a gene involved in immune regulation, 
and the presence of vitiligo associated with at least one endocrine 
autoimmune disease including but not limited to type 1 diabetes, 
Addison disease, and thyroiditis. 
 AUTOIMMUNE POLYGLANDULAR 
SYNDROME I (APS-I) 
 APS-I is an autosomal recessive disorder with 25% incidence 
among siblings of affected individuals. Also known as APECED, 
or autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal 
dystrophy, APS-I is characterized by the triad of chronic muco-
cutaneous candidiasis, autoimmune hypoparathyroidism, and 
adrenal insufficiency (only two are required in the index case for 
the diagnosis, and only one in the siblings). Chronic mucocuta-
neous candidiasis (involving oral mucosa and nails or, less fre-
quently, the esophagus) is usually first manifested as the initial 
problem early in life. In most individuals, the development of 
autoimmune hypoparathyroidism, a major clinical phenotype, 
usually follows. Specifically for hypoparathyroidism, the  presence 
of antibodies to  NALP5 ( NACHT leucine-rich-repeat protein 5 ), 
a gene highly expressed in parathyroid and ovary, have been 
recently described. In one study these antibodies were detected 
in 49% of patients with known APS-I and hypothyroidism 
(see also Chapter 8). Addison disease is another component of 
the triad that can manifest prior to, concomitantly with, or fol-
lowing hypoparathyroidism. Lifelong surveillance is important 
since decades may elapse between the development of one fea-
ture of the disorder and the onset of another. There is no female 
preponderance in this syndrome, and it is not HLA-associated. 
APS-I may occur sporadically or in families. The genetic locus 
responsible for the disease has been mapped to the long arm of 
chromosome 21 (21q22.3). The haplotype analysis of this 
region in different populations has shown that APS-I is linked 
to different mutations in a gene identified as the autoimmune 
regulator  (AIRE). AIRE encodes a putative nuclear protein with 
transcription factor motifs (including two zinc finger motifs). It 
is expressed in different tissues but particularly in the thymus. 
The mechanism by which mutations of this putative transcrip-
tion factor lead to the diverse manifestations of APS-I is still 
unknown. In mice, however, the absence of the analogous pro-
tein “aire” influences ectopic expression of peripheral tissue 
antigens in thymic medullary epithelial cells (MECs), resulting 
in the development of an autoimmune disorder similar to APS-I 
and establishing aire/AIRE as an important factor in the induc-
tion of central tolerance. Other immune response-related genes 
as well as environmental factors probably play a role in develop-
ment of the syndrome. Several studies of large cohorts of 
patients from different ethnic backgrounds have reported the 
appearance of chronic candidiasis at different sites in all 
patients. Hypoparathyroidism and Addison disease present with 
similar high frequency (see  Table 2–3 ). The occurrence of the 
diagnostic triad reportedly presents in 57% of patients. Female 
hypogonadism, presenting as total or partial failure of pubertal 
development or as premature ovarian failure in adults, has been 
reported in up to 60% of patients. Male hypogonadism is less 
frequent (14%). Type 1 diabetes is not as frequent as in APS-II, 
but if present, usually develops early (under 21 years of age). 
Autoimmune hypothyroidism (atrophic thyroiditis) is also less 
frequent than in APS-II; however, thyroid autoantibodies may 
be present in many euthyroid patients. Other manifestations are 
described in  Table 2–3 . Acute autoimmune hepatitis is report-
edly less common than chronic hepatitis, which appears to be 
present in most individuals. Autoantibodies to aromatic L - amino 
acid decarboxylase (AADC) are associated with chronic active 
 autoimmune hepatitis and vitiligo, which are found in APS-I. 
These antibodies, if present, can be helpful in making the 
CHAPTER 2 Endocrine Autoimmunity     43
 diagnosis. Autoantibodies against tryptophan hydroxylase have 
been associated with gastrointestinal dysfunction in APS-I. 
Autoantibodies to the H + -K + -ATPase and to intrinsic factor are 
associated with pernicious anemia, and autoantibodies to tyro-
sinase are associated with vitiligo. Other autoantibodies associ-
ated with the single gland disorders that make up this 
polyglandular syndrome have been discussed above. 
 AUTOIMMUNE POLYGLANDULAR 
SYNDROME II (APS-II) 
 APS-II is the most common of the polyglandular failure syn-
dromes. It affects women in a 3:1 ratio to men. APS-II is diagnosed 
when at least two of the following are present: adrenal insufficiency, 
autoimmune thyroid disease (thyroiditis with  hypothyroidism or 
Graves disease with hyperthyroidism), and type 1 diabetes. 
Historically, Schmidt (1926) first described the association of 
Addison disease and thyroiditis. Carpenter and coworkers in 1964 
included type 1 diabetes in the syndrome. Other components of 
APS-II include the following (see  Table 2–3 ): primary hypogonad-
ism, myasthenia gravis, celiac disease, pernicious anemia, alopecia, 
vitiligo, and serositis. The most frequent association appears to be 
with type 1 diabetes (over 50%) and autoimmune thyroid disease 
(70% in some series). Adrenal insufficiency may be concurrent, 
may be delayed in onset for up to two decades, or may never 
manifest. Some diabetic patients (2%-3%) develop celiac disease. 
Gluten-free diet is usually effective. If the celiac disease is untreated, 
hypocalcemia (not due to hypoparathyroidism), osteopenia, and 
occasionally gastrointestinal lymphoma may occur. 
 Although this syndrome and its components aggregate in 
families, there is no identifiable pattern of inheritance. Susceptibility 
TABLE 2–3 Comparison of the different components of autoimmune polyglandular syndromes.
Characteristics 
Type I 
Type II 
Inheritance 
Genetic association or linkage 
Gender 
Age at onset 
Autosomal recessive 
Linked to AIRE 
Equal distribution 
Infancy 
Polygenic 
Some HLA association 
Female preponderance 
Age 20-40 
Endocrine disorders 
 Addison disease 
 Hypoparathyroidism 
 Autoimmune thyroid disease 
 Type 1 diabetes 
 Primary hypogonadism 
 Hypophysitis 
60%-72% 
Common (79%-96%) 
Less frequent (about 5%) 
14% (lifetime) 
60% female, 14% male 
Not reported 
70% 
Rare (late onset) 
More frequent (about 70%) 
>50% 
About 5% 
Reported 
Dermatologic 
 Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis 
 Alopecia 
 Vitiligo 
 Dermatitis herpetiformis 
Often at onset (about 100%) 
Common (about 29%) 
About 13% 
Not reported 
Not reported 
Reported 
About 5% 
Reported 
Gastrointestinal 
 Celiac disease 
 Autoimmune hepatitis 
None (only steatorrhea) 
About 12% 
Present in 2%-3% 
Not reported 
Hematologic 
 Pernicious anemia 
 Pure red cell hypoplasia 
 Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura 
About 13% 
Reported 
Not reported 
As common as in APS-I 
Not reported 
Reported 
Ectodermal 
 Enamel hypoplasia 
 Nail dystrophy 
 Tympanic membrane calcification 
All reported 
Not reported 
Neurologic 
 Myasthenia gravis 
 Stiff-man syndrome 
 Parkinson disease 
None reported 
All reported 
Other 
 Asplenism 
 Keratopathy 
 Progressive myopathy 
 IgA deficiency 
 Serositis 
 Idiopathic heart block 
 Goodpasture syndrome 
Reported 
Reported 
Reported 
Not reported 
Not reported 
Not reported 
Not reported 
Not reported 
Not reported 
Not reported 
Reported 
Reported 
Reported 
Reported 
44    CHAPTER 2 Endocrine Autoimmunity
is probably determined by multiple gene loci (HLA being the 
strongest) that interact with environmental factors. Many of the 
disorders of APS-II are associated (some genetically linked) with 
the HLA haplotype identified in single organ disorders. HLA-A1, 
-B8, -DR3 and -DR4, DQA1*0501, and DQB1*0201 have all 
been described as associated with APS-II. 
 MANAGEMENT OF AUTOIMMUNE 
POLYGLANDULAR SYNDROMES 
 Hormonal replacement therapy remains the only form of treat-
ment of the APS. The clinical management of these disorders 
mandates early diagnosis of associated components. Since the age 
at onset of associated disorders is clinically unpredictable, long-
term follow-up is needed. Endocrine disorders are treated as they 
develop and are diagnosed. Hormonal treatments for the specific 
gland failures are described elsewhere in this book. However, spe-
cific combinations of endocrine organ failure require specific man-
agement. For example, thyroxine replacement can precipitate 
life-threatening adrenal failure in a patient with untreated Addison 
disease. Furthermore, hypoglycemia or decreasing insulin require-
ments in a patient with type 1 diabetes may be the earliest symp-
tom/sign of adrenal insufficiency. Hypocalcemia, seen in APS-II, is 
more commonly due to celiac disease than hypoparathyroidism. 
Treatment of mucocutaneous candidiasis with ketoconazole in 
patients with APS-I may induce adrenal insufficiency in a failing 
gland (ketoconazole is a global P450 cytochrome inhibitor). These 
antifungal drugs may also elevate liver enzymes, making the diag-
nosis of autoimmune hepatitis—requiring treatment with immu-
nosuppressants—more difficult in these patients. 
 Screening of affected individuals as well as their relatives is the 
only way of preventing morbidity and mortality. Annual measure-
ment of TSH is recommended as cost-effective in first-degree rela-
tives of patients with type 1 diabetes. Autoantibody measurements 
may help in the preclinical assessment of several disorders. 
Complete blood counts, electrolytes, calcium and phosphorus 
levels, thyroid and liver function tests, blood smears (including 
RBC indices), and vitamin B 12 /plasma methylmalonic acid mea-
surements are all recommended in the follow-up of APS-I. For 
APS-II patients with type 1 diabetes, thyroid disease and celiac 
disease coexist with sufficient frequency to justify not only TSH 
measurement but also screening for endomysial antibodies con-
taining transglutaminase antibodies, which are prevalent in celiac 
disease. 
 IMMUNODEFICIENCY, 
POLYENDOCRINOPATHY, AND 
ENTEROPATHY, X-LINKED SYNDROME 
 Another autoimmune polyglandular failure syndrome, immuno-
deficiency, polyendocrinopathy, and enteropathy, x-linked (IPEX) 
syndrome, is characterized by development of overwhelming sys-
temic autoimmunity in the first year of life resulting in the 
observed triad of watery diarrhea, eczematous dermatitis, and 
endocrinopathy seen most commonly as type 1 diabetes mellitus. 
Most children have other autoimmune phenomena including 
Coombs positive anemia, autoimmune thrombocytopenia, auto-
immune neutropenia, and tubular nephropathy. The majority of 
affected males die within the first year of life of either metabolic 
derangements or sepsis; a few survive into the second or third 
decade. 
 Diagnosis is based on clinical findings. FOXP3 is the only gene 
currently known to be associated with IPEX syndrome. 
Approximately 50% of males with IPEX syndrome have muta-
tions identified in FOXP3. Genetic testing is clinically available. 
FOXP3 is expressed primarily in lymphoid tissues (thymus, 
spleen, and lymph nodes), particularly in CD4+ CD25+ regula-
tory T lymphocytes. In mice, it is required for the development 
and suppressive function of this important regulatory T-cell popu-
lation. In humans, it is not expressed at baseline in CD4+ CD25− 
or CD8+ T cells but is expressed upon T-cell activation. The 
FOXP3 protein is absent (due to nonsense, frameshift, or splicing 
mutations) in individuals with severe, early-onset IPEX syndrome. 
Some individuals with FOXP3 point mutations express a protein 
that appears to have decreased function, thereby leading to a 
milder form of the disease. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells 
from individuals with IPEX syndrome show an excess production 
of the Th2 cytokines IL-4, IL-5, IL-10, and IL-13 and decreased 
production of the Th1 cytokine IFN-γ. 
 Treatment options include: immunosuppressive agents (eg, 
cyclosporin A, tacrolimus) alone or in combination with steroids; 
sirolimus (rapamycin) for persons in whom tacrolimus therapy is 
toxic or ineffective; granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF, 
filgrastim) for autoimmune neutropenia; nutritional support; and 
standard treatment of diabetes mellitus and autoimmune thyroid 
disease. If performed early, bone marrow transplantation (BMT) 
using nonmyeloablative conditioning regimens can resolve clinical 
symptoms. If the family-specific mutation is known, FOXP3 
sequence analysis in at-risk males can be undertaken immediately 
after birth to permit early diagnosis and BMT before significant 
organ damage occurs; otherwise, monitoring at-risk males for 
symptoms is needed to enable early diagnosis and treatment. 
 IPEX syndrome is inherited in an x-linked manner. The risk to 
siblings of the proband depends on the carrier status of the 
mother. If the mother of the proband is a carrier, the chance of 
transmitting the disease-causing mutation in each pregnancy is 
50%. Males who inherit the mutation will be affected; females 
who inherit the mutation are carriers and will not be affected. 
Affected males pass the disease-causing mutation to all of their 
daughters and none of their sons. Prenatal testing for pregnancies 
at risk is possible for families in which the disease-causing muta-
tion has been identified. 
 POEMS SYNDROME (OSTEOSCLEROTIC 
MYELOMA) 
 The POEMS (polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, 
M spike, skin abnormalities) syndrome, which is frequently seen 
as a concomitant of Castelman disease (giant cell lymph node 
CHAPTER 2 Endocrine Autoimmunity     45
hyperplasia), includes a variety of endocrinopathies of the adrenal, 
thyroid, pituitary, gonads, parathyroids, and pancreas. 
 The POEMS syndrome displays a number of endocrinopathies 
in the setting of lymphoproliferative disorders and presumed 
B-cell dysfunction. Aside from one report in which 2 of 11 
patients with monoclonal gammopathy and some form of autoim-
munity had POEMS, the endocrinological manifestations of 
POEMS are not yet established as autoimmune in origin. When 
associated with Castleman, Kaposi-associated herpes virus (HHV8) 
may be implicated in the pathogenesis of the lymphoproliferation 
and the gammopathy. 
 Two-thirds of patients with POEMS reportedly had at least 
one endocrine abnormality at presentation. During the course of 
disease, endocrine abnormalities developed in another 10% of 
patients with POEMS. Hypogonadism seems to be the most 
common endocrine abnormality. Elevated levels of follicle-
stimulating hormone (FSH) in the absence of primary hypogo-
nadism have been reported. One-third of patients reportedly 
have erectile dysfunction with low serum testosterone levels. 
Fourteen percent of patients have hypothyroidism requiring 
therapy. An additional 12% had mild increases in TSH levels but 
normal thyroxine levels in one series. Sixteen percent of patients 
with POEMS have abnormalities of the adrenal-pituitary axis at 
presentation; with 5% of patients developing adrenal insuffi-
ciency later in the course of their disease. Three percent of 
patients have diabetes mellitus. Serum levels of parathyroid hor-
mone were increased in three of four patients in whom it was 
measured in one series of 99 POEMS patients. Finally and 
although still hypothetical for POEMS, autoantibody-mediated 
mechanisms of disease (Graves disease) have been described in 
patients with other gammopathies. 
 REFERENCES 
 Cooper GS, Bynum ML, Somers EC. Recent insights in the epidemiology of 
autoimmune diseases: improved prevalence estimates and understanding of 
clustering of diseases.  J Autoimmun . 2009 Oct 8;33:197-207. [Epub ahead 
of print] [PMID: 19819109]. 
 Elagin RB, Balijepalli S, Diacovo MJ, Baekkeskov S, Jaume JC. Homing of 
GAD65 specific autoimmunity and development of insulitis requires expres-
sion of both DQ8 and human GAD65 in transgenic mice.  J Autoimmun . 
2009;33:50. [PMID: 19289270]. 
 Janeway CA, Jr, Travers P, Walport M, Shlomchik MJ, eds.  Immunobiology: The Immune 
System in Health and Disease . 6th ed. New York: Garland Science; 2005. 
 Jaume JC, Parry SL, Madec AM, Sonderstrup G, Baekkeskov S. Suppressive effect 
of glutamic acid decarboxylase 65-specific autoimmune B lymphocytes on 
processing of T cell determinants located within the antibody epitope. 
 J Immunol . 2002;169:665. [PMID: 12097368]. 
 Khoury S, Sayegh M. The roles of the new negative T cell costimulatory pathways 
in regulating autoimmunity.  Immunity . 2004;20:529. [PMID: 15142522]. 
 Lanzavecchia A. Immunology. Licence to kill.  Nature . 1998;393:413. [PMID: 
9623994]. 
 McLachlan SM, Nagayama Y, Rapoport B. Insight into Graves hyperthyroidism 
from animal models.  Endocr Rev . 2005;26:800. [PMID: 15827111]. 
 Mirocha S, Elagin RB, Salamat S, Jaume JC. T regulatory cells distinguish two 
types of primary hypophysitis.  Clin Exp Immunol . 2009;155:403. [PMID: 
19077086]. 
 Roitt IM, Delves PJ.  Roitt’s Essential Immunology. 10th ed. Oxford: Blackwell 
Science; 2001. 
 Skyler JS, Krischer JP, Wolfsdorf J, et al. Effects of oral insulin in relatives of 
patients with type 1 diabetes: The Diabetes Prevention Trial—Type 1.  Diab 
Care . 2005;28:1068. [PMID: 15855569]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This page intentionally left blank
47
3
 Evidence-Based 
Endocrinology and Clinical 
Epidemiology 
 David C. Aron, MD, MS 
 ARR 
Absolute risk reduction 
 CI 
Confidence interval 
 CV 
Coefficient of variation 
 EBM 
Evidence-based medicine 
 ER 
Event rate 
 NiH 
Negativity in health 
 NNT 
Number needed to treat 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 The individual practitioner faces a multiplicity of potential 
diagnoses, limitations in diagnostic capacity, subclinical disease 
identified by tests rather than by clinical manifestations, and 
rapid changes in scientific knowledge. The paradigm of clinical 
decision-making based on the assumption that all that is needed 
to guide clinical practice is personal experience (however unsys-
tematic), understanding of pathophysiology, and thorough 
training plus common sense is insufficient to address these chal-
lenges. Moreover, the integration of relevant research findings 
into clinical practice has been haphazard; the lag time between 
development of scientific knowledge and introduction into 
practice can be many years, and there is marked variation in 
practice. A systematic approach based on principles of clinical 
epidemiology can help address some of these issues. This quan-
titative approach has formed the primary, albeit not the only, 
basis of the evidence-based medicine movement. This move-
ment posits that understanding certain rules of evidence is 
necessary to interpret the literature correctly and that physicians 
who practice based on the above understanding will provide 
superior care. This chapter will summarize some of the princi-
ples of clinical epidemiology and evidence-based endocrinology 
and some of their limitations. 
 PiD 
Positivity in disease 
 QALY 
Quality-adjusted life year 
 RCT 
Randomized controlled trial 
 ROC 
Receiver-operating characteristic 
 RRR 
Relative risk reduction 
 USPSTF 
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force 
 CLINICAL EPIDEMIOLOGY 
 Clinical epidemiology consists of the application of epidemiologic 
principles and methods to problems encountered in clinical 
medicine. Clinical epidemiology emphasizes a quantitative 
approach and is therefore concerned with counts of clinical events. 
Its applications are paramount (1) in diagnostic testing and how 
the results modify the probability of a particular disorder being 
present and (2) in treatment decisions in which the potential ben-
efits and harms must be addressed. The techniques of clinical 
epidemiology have become increasingly important as practitioners 
confront the complexity of contemporary medical practice. 
 DIAGNOSTIC TESTING: TEST 
CHARACTERISTICS 
 The appropriate choice and interpretation of diagnostic tests, 
whether biochemical assays, radiologic procedures, or clinical find-
ings, have always been essential to the clinical practice of endocri-
nology. These tests, when introduced in the medical literature, are 
accompanied by varying degrees of validation. The  clinician’s 
48    CHAPTER 3 Evidence-Based Endocrinology and Clinical Epidemiology
assessment of the utility of tests, now even more important with 
the emphasis on cost-effectiveness, can be improved by knowledge 
of test EBM principles. We review some of these concepts as they 
apply to diagnosis and management of endocrine disorders, includ-
ing the topics of test characteristics such as sensitivity and specific-
ity, receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) curves, likelihood 
ratios, predictive values, and diagnostic accuracy. 
 The evaluation of endocrine function begins with a clinical 
question. The more vague the question, the more difficult it is to 
obtain a clear answer. Part of this step involves a clinical judgment 
about the likelihood of the disease prior to obtaining a test and its 
results. This pretest probability is combined with the performance 
characteristics of the test and its use (sensitivity and specificity, 
ROC curves, likelihood ratios, predictive values, and diagnostic 
accuracy) in order for proper interpretation. Variation is inherent 
in biological systems. Therefore, diagnostic tests must take into 
account not only variability of the tests themselves and how they 
are performed but also variability in the populations in whom the 
tests were developed, both with the disease and without the disease. 
Key aspects in the analysis of a test include reproducibility (preci-
sion) and accuracy.  Reproducibility describes how close the test 
comes to producing the same results every time and depends on 
such factors as intraobserver and interobserver variability (as in the 
assessment of a physical finding or x-ray) and, in the case of bio-
chemical tests, characteristics such as intra-assay and interassay 
coefficients of variation (CVs). Although studies utilizing radioim-
munoassays and other assays routinely report intra-assay and inter-
assay CVs, few papers publish multiple results performed on the 
same patient (intraindividual variation). There have also been rela-
tively few studies on the reliability of measurements (ie, the degree 
of intraindividual variation). One study found that the minimum 
number of replicate measurements necessary to achieve satisfactory 
reliability of the mean of basal levels was 3 for plasma cortisol and 
18 for salivary cortisol. Responses to dynamic tests required fewer 
replicates to achieve the same reliability (one to two samples). 
 Reproducibility depends on the conditions under which the 
test is performed. Clinicians must be aware of the distinction 
between efficacy and effectiveness when translating published 
results into practice. As applied to diagnostic testing, efficacy 
refers to the degree to which the test has been shown scientifically 
to accomplish the desired outcome. In contrast, effectiveness refers 
to the degree to which the test achieves this outcome in actual 
clinical practice. Most large studies have been performed in 
research venues and thus are efficacy studies, whereas the effective-
ness of most tests in practice has not been extensively evaluated. 
In comparing one’s own results with a published report or labora-
tory normal range, it is important to take into account those 
conditions (eg, test performed in a hospital vs a physician’s 
office). 
 Accuracy describes how close the test comes to producing 
results that are a true measure of the phenomenon of interest; 
systematic bias of a highly reproducible test may produce the same 
incorrect result every time. Like reproducibility, accuracy depends 
on the conditions under which the test is performed; accuracy in 
the clinical practice setting may differ from that in the experimen-
tal setting where many extraneous influences are controlled. 
 When interpreting a test, the result is usually compared to a 
normal range. Frequently, the normal range is developed by using 
a reference population assumed (or preferably shown) to be disease 
free. For example, when designing a test to be used in the diagno-
sis of Cushing syndrome, the reference group should be made up 
of individuals who have clinical features suggestive of Cushing 
syndrome but who in fact do not have the disorder. However, 
reference groups may be made up of individuals who are readily 
accessible and not more appropriate comparisons. It is also impor-
tant to note that in establishing a normal range based on a 
Gaussian or normal distribution, encompassing the mean ± two 
standard deviations, 5% of disease-free individuals have a result 
outside the limits of normal. (It is important to note that the 
definition of normal based on a Gaussian distribution of values is 
only one of a number of definitions of normal. Some others 
include the one most representative or most common in a class, 
the one most suited to survival, and the one that carries no penalty 
[ie, no risk].)  Figure 3–1 illustrates a normal range and a range in 
a population with disease. A result outside normal limits is not 
equivalent to disease. Moreover, values within the normal range 
do not necessarily exclude disease. Values in the population of 
individuals with disease are determined separately, and the overlap 
with the normal range is assessed. 
 Sensitivity and Specificity 
 Ideally, a diagnostic test has no overlap between the results of indi-
viduals with the disease and those without the disease. The reality, 
however, is different. Test characteristics that describe this overlap 
are sensitivity and specificity, and they are typically illustrated in a 
2 × 2 table. As shown in  Figure 3–2 , sensitivity and specificity are 
collectively known as  operating characteristics . Sensitivity refers 
to the ability to identify correctly individuals with a disease. The 
sensitivity of a sign or symptom (or diagnostic test) is the propor-
tion of patients with disease who has a positive test result, sign, or 
symptom. In contrast, specificity refers to the ability to identify 
correctly individuals without a disease. The specificity of a test is 
the proportion of healthy patients who have a negative test result 
or who lack that sign or symptom. 
 Thus, the  sensitivity of a test equals the number of individuals 
with disease who have a positive test (true positive [TP] divided 
by the number of individuals with disease (true positives plus false 
negatives [FN]), whereas  specificity equals the number of indi-
viduals without the disease who have a negative test (true nega-
tives) divided by the number of individuals without disease (true 
negatives plus false positives [FP]). Sensitivity is sometimes termed 
 PiD or positivity in disease, and specificity is sometimes termed 
 NiH or negativity in health. In theory, sensitivity and specificity 
are characteristics of the test itself and not of the patients on 
whom the test is applied. However, this may not be correct in 
practice. The sensitivity of a test may be affected by the stage or 
severity of the disease. The specificity of a test may depend on the 
characteristics of the reference population. The nature of the 
groups used to establish the cut-points that differentiate normal 
from abnormal must be appropriate and should be specified in 
any report of a diagnostic test. The value chosen for a cutoff point 
CHAPTER 3 Evidence-Based Endocrinology and Clinical Epidemiology     49
also affects the sensitivity and specificity. To assist the clinician in 
assessing a report on a diagnostic test, a series of questions has 
been proposed ( Table 3–1 ). 
 The overnight dexamethasone suppression test is commonly 
used as a screening test in the diagnosis of Cushing syndrome, and 
its use illustrates some of the issues in diagnostic testing. As shown 
in  Figure 3–3 , combining the results of a number of studies indi-
cates a sensitivity of 98.1% and specificity of 98.9%. However, the 
individual studies varied, with sensitivities ranging from 83% to 
100% and specificities from 77% to 100%. Moreover, the studies 
used different cortisol assays, doses of dexamethasone, and criteria 
for a positive test. Caution must be exercised in drawing conclu-
sions from the combining of such data. In order to apply the 
sensitivity and specificity of a test derived from one study sample 
to a different population, the test cannot deviate from methods 
used (eg, dose of dexamethasone, type of cortisol assay, timing of 
dexamethasone administration, and cortisol assay) when the opti-
mal cutoff was determined, and the sample studied must be simi-
lar to the new population to be tested. To meet this latter 
prerequisite, the sample studied must account for variability 
of diseased individuals. This requires that subjects with disease 
be defined using the best available gold standard (independent of 
the test in question) and include a broad enough cross-section of 
those with disease (eg, mild versus severe disease, different etiolo-
gies of disease, as well as age, sex, and race) to establish a reliable 
range of measurements. The characteristics of the reference sample 
of subjects without the disease are equally important. Although 
the 1-mg overnight dexamethasone suppression test is still believed 
to have excellent, albeit less than 100% sensitivity, it has serious 
problems with specificity, and false-positive results have been 
described with a variety of drugs as well as medical, surgical, and 
psychiatric conditions. 
 One additional method of reporting the performance of a test 
is diagnostic accuracy. This can also be derived from the 2 × 2 
table. Diagnostic accuracy is defined as the ability of a test to 
identify correctly those with the disease and those without the 
disease: 
 
Diagnostic accuracy
(TP
TN)
(TP
TN FP FN)
+
+
+
+
 From Crapo composite data on the 1-mg overnight dexametha-
sone suppression test, the diagnostic accuracy is calculated as 
98.7%. In addition to the characteristics of the study subjects, the 
number of subjects included in the sample is also critical to assess 
the accuracy of the test. Each operating characteristic determined 
in a study should be accompanied by a  confidence interval 
(CI) —a range of values calculated from sample size and standard 
error which expresses a degree of confidence (usually 90%, 95%, 
or 99%) that the unknown true sensitivity or specificity lies in that 
interval. CIs are a measure of the precision of an estimate. The 
range of a CI depends on two factors: (1) the number of observa-
tions; and (2) the spread in the data (commonly measured as a 
standard deviation). The fewer the number of observations, the 
larger the range of the CI, and the greater the standard deviation 
of the data, the larger the range of the CI. 
 In addition to the limitations on the operating characteristics 
based on the samples from which the data are derived, sensitivity 
and specificity are not independent of each other. They vary with 
the cutoff level chosen to represent positive and negative test 
results. In general, as sensitivity increases, specificity decreases and 
Test value
Test value
Normal subjects
Normal 
subjects
No false positives or negatives
Subjects with
disease
−2 SD
Number of individuals
Number of individuals
Ideal test
Test value
Normal 
subjects
False 
negatives
False 
positives
Subjects with
disease
Number of individuals
Less than ideal test
+2 SD
+2 SD
 FIGURE 3–1  Defining a normal range and diagnostic testing. 
The top panel shows the Gaussian (normal) distribution of test values 
in a population of individuals. The middle panel illustrates two such 
curves that describe the findings in an ideal test. In this case, there is 
no overlap in the results between normal subjects and subjects with 
disease (ie, there are no false-positive results and no false-negative 
results). The bottom panel illustrates the results for a less-than-ideal 
test. Normal subjects with test values above the given threshold have 
abnormal results (ie, false-positive results), whereas some subjects 
with disease have test values below that threshold (ie, normal or 
false-negative results). 
50    CHAPTER 3 Evidence-Based Endocrinology and Clinical Epidemiology
as specificity increases, sensitivity decreases. This phenomenon is 
depicted graphically in an ROC curve. 
 Receiver-Operating Characteristic Curves 
 An ROC curve graphically illustrates the trade-off between the 
false-negative and false-positive rates for different cutoff points of 
a diagnostic test. In an ROC curve, the true-positive rate (sensitiv-
ity) is plotted on the vertical axis and the false-positive rate 
(1−specificity) is plotted on the horizontal axis for different  cutoff 
points for the test. The dotted diagonal line in  Figure 3–4 corre-
sponds to a test that is positive or negative just by chance (ie, the 
true-positive rate equals the false-positive rate). Such a test pro-
vides no useful information. Ideally, a test would provide results 
that could be plotted on one point in the top left corner—100% 
true-positive rate and 100% true-negative rate. The closer an 
ROC curve is to the upper left-hand corner of the graph, the more 
accurate it is, because the true-positive rate is 1 and the false-pos-
itive rate is 0. As the criterion for a positive test becomes more 
stringent, the point on the curve corresponding to sensitivity and 
specificity (point A) moves down and to the left (lower sensitivity, 
higher specificity); if less evidence is required for a positive test, 
the point on the curve corresponding to sensitivity and specificity 
(point B) moves up and to the right (higher sensitivity, lower 
specificity). Analysis of the area between the actual results and the 
straight line indicates how good the test is. The greater the area 
under the curve, the better the test. 
 Depending on the purpose of the test, the curves may be used 
to decide an optimal cutoff level for a single test. For example, 
with a screening test, high sensitivity is typically desired, and the 
trade-off is lower specificity. The cutoff point may also be chosen 
depending on health costs (morbidity and mortality associated 
with an error in diagnosis), financial costs, or need for maximal 
information (the operating position giving the greatest increase in 
posttest probability). 
 ROC curves may also be used to compare two or more tests by 
comparing the areas under the curves, which represent the inher-
ent accuracy of each test. An example of the comparison of the 
performance of different tests for the diagnosis of pheochromocy-
toma is given in  Figure 3–5 . It is important to remember, however, 
 FIGURE 3–2  This 2 × 2 table graphically depicts how tests can be performed in individuals with and without a disease. 
Disease
Test result
Sensitivity = a/(a + c) = TP/(TP + FN)
Specificity = d/(b + d) = TN/(TN + FP)
Positive predictive value = a/(a + b) = (TP/TP + FP)
Negative predictive value = d/(c + d) = TN/(TN + FN)
Diagnostic accuracy = (a + d)/(a + b + c + d) = (TP+ TN)/(TP + FP + TN + FN)
Pretest (prior) probability = (a + c)/(a + b + c + d) = (TP + FN)/(TP + FP + TN + FN)
Likelihood ratio for a positive test result (LR+):
    = [a/(a + c)]/[b/b(b + d)] = TP rate/FP rate = [TP/(TP + FN)/(FP/TN + FP)] =
    = sensitivity/(1 − specificity)
Likelihood ratio for a negative test result (LR−):
    = [c/(a + c)]/[d/(b + d)] = FN rate/TN rate = [FN/(TP + FN)]/[TN + FP)] =
= (1 − sensitivity)/specificity
+ Present
a True positive (TP)
c False negative (FN)
− Present
b False positive (FP)
d True negative (TN)
+
−
TABLE 3–1  Guide for evaluating studies of test 
performance.
Question #1
Is the study population described well enough?
Question #2
Does the spectrum of illness in the study 
population differ from that of my patients 
(eg, spectrum bias)?
Question #3
Was a positive result on the index test a criterion 
for referral to have the gold standard test?
Question #4
Was there blinding of those who interpreted the 
index test and those who interpreted the gold 
standard test (eg, test review bias)?
Question #5
Was the gold standard test an adequate measure 
of the true state of the patient?
Reprinted with permission from Jaeschke R, Guyatt G, Sackett DL. Users’ guide to the 
medical literature. III. How to use an article about a diagnostic test. A. Are the results 
of the study valid? JAMA. 1994;271:389-391; and Jaeschke R, Guyatt G, Sackett DL. 
Users’ guide to the medical literature. III. How to use an article about a diagnostic test. 
B. What are the results and will they help me in caring for my patients? JAMA. 
1994:271:703.
CHAPTER 3 Evidence-Based Endocrinology and Clinical Epidemiology     51
predictive value is the proportion of patients with a positive test 
who actually have the disease. Similarly, the  negative predictive 
value is the proportion of those with a negative test who do not 
have the disease. Because each of these values are calculated 
using results from both individuals with and without the disease 
in question, the prevalence of the disease has a great impact on 
the values. For any given sensitivity and specificity, the lower the 
prevalence of disease (or the lower the pretest probability), the 
more false-positive results there are ( Figure 3–6 ). 
 The  likelihood ratio , which is derived from sensitivity and 
specificity, is an expression of the odds that a sign, symptom, or 
test result is expected in a patient with a given disease as opposed 
to one without the disease. Two forms of the likelihood ratio exist, 
the likelihood ratio for a positive finding and the likelihood ratio 
for a negative finding. Calculations are shown in  Figure 3–2 . 
Likelihood ratios offer some advantages over sensitivity and speci-
ficity. They are the most useful in calculating posttest probabilities 
given prevalence (a probability) and likelihood ratios. A conve-
nient nomogram for this has been published ( Figure 3–7 ). 
No suppression
Suppression
Sensitivity = 151/(151 + 3) = 98.1%
Specificity = 461/(5 + 461) = 98.9%
Present
151
3
Absent
5
461
A
Cushing syndrome
1-mg overnight
dexamethasone
suppression
No suppression
Suppression
Specificity = 858/(101 + 858) = 89.5%
Specificity = 397/(96 + 397) = 80.5%
Present
151
3
Absent
101
858
B
Cushing syndrome
1-mg overnight
dexamethasone
suppression
No suppression
Suppression
Present
151
3
Absent
96
397
C
Cushing syndrome
1-mg overnight
dexamethasone
suppression
 FIGURE 3–3  Diagnosis of Cushing syndrome with the 1-mg overnight dexamethasone suppression test: test characteristics with normal 
controls ( Panel A ); all controls ( Panel B ); and “obese” and “other” controls ( Panel C ). These data show how the specificity of the test is affected 
by the types of control subjects.  (Reproduced with permission from Crapo L. Cushing’s syndrome: a review of diagnostic tests.  Metabolism . 
1979;28:955.) 
that ROC curves are only as good as the operating characteristics 
from which they are generated. 
 Finally, determining cost-effective diagnostic strategies requires 
careful evaluation not only of a test in isolation, but also in the 
context of the other information available and the likelihood of 
disease. This is the essence of Bayesian models of decision-making. 
In this model, the physician updates his or her belief in a hypoth-
esis with each new item of information, with different weights 
given to the new information depending on its operating charac-
teristics. Consideration must be given to the question of the value 
added by a test or procedure. This can be assessed with ROC 
curves and statistical models. 
 Predictive Values, Likelihood Ratios, and 
Diagnostic Accuracy 
 Sensitivity and specificity are important test characteristics, yet the 
clinician wants to know how to interpret a test result. Predictive 
values help in this regard. As shown in  Figure 3–6 , the  positive 
52    CHAPTER 3 Evidence-Based Endocrinology and Clinical Epidemiology
 AN APPROACH TO DIAGNOSIS IN 
PRACTICE 
 In approaching a case, the clinician makes a series of inferences 
about the nature of a patient’s condition and proceeds toward a 
working diagnosis along with some alternatives—generation of a 
differential diagnosis. Although one could create a listing of all 
possible causes of the patient’s complaint (ie, a possibilistic dif-
ferential diagnosis), experienced clinicians generate a differential 
diagnosis that is a combination of probabilistic (ie, considering 
first those disorders that are more likely), prognostic (ie, consider-
ing first those disorders that are more serious if missed), and 
pragmatic (ie, considering first those disorders that are most 
responsive to treatment). The clinician then refines the diagnostic 
hypotheses, sometimes using clues from the history and physical 
examination and often with the use of laboratory or radiologic 
tests. In so doing, the clinician tries to reduce the inherent uncer-
tainty so that the most appropriate course of treatment can be 
prescribed. 
0
0.2
0.4
False-positive rate
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
True-positive rate
1.0
A
B
 FIGURE 3–4  Receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) curve. In an 
ROC curve, the true-positive rate (sensitivity) is plotted on the verti-
cal axis, and the false-positive rate (1 − specificity) is plotted on the 
horizontal axis for different cutoff points for the test. The dotted 
diagonal line corresponds to a test that is positive or negative just by 
chance (ie, the true-positive rate equals the false-positive rate). The 
closer an ROC curve is to the upper left-hand corner of the graph, the 
more accurate it is, because the true-positive rate is 1 and the false-
positive rate is 0. As the criterion for a positive test becomes more 
stringent, the point on the curve corresponding to sensitivity and 
specificity ( point A ) moves down and to the left (lower sensitivity, 
higher specificity); if less evidence is required for a positive test, the 
point on the curve corresponding to sensitivity and specificity ( point B ) 
moves up and to the right (higher sensitivity, lower specificity). 
Analysis of the area between the actual results and the straight line 
indicates how good the test is. The greater the area under the curve, 
the better the test. 
 FIGURE 3–5  Receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) curves for diag-
nostic tests for pheochromocytoma. Receiver-operating characteristic 
(ROC) curve. In an ROC curve, the true-positive rate (sensitivity) is plotted 
on the vertical axis, and the false-positive rate (1 - specificity) is plotted on 
the horizontal axis for different cutoff points for the test. A diagonal line 
drawn for the points where true positive rate = false positive rate corre-
sponds to a test that is positive or negative just by chance. The closer an 
ROC curve is to the upper left-hand corner of the graph, the more accu-
rate it is, because the true-positive rate is 1 and the false positive rate is 0. 
As the criterion for a positive test becomes more stringent, the point on 
the curve corresponding to sensitivity and specificity moves down and to 
the left (lower sensitivity, higher specificity); if less evidence is required for 
a positive test, the point on the curve corresponding to sensitivity and 
specificity moves up and to the right (higher sensitivity, lower specificity). 
Analysis of the area between the actual results and the line representing 
chance alone indicates how good the test is. The greater the area under 
the curve, the better the test. The area under the curve from plasma-free 
metanephrines exceeds that of other tests indicating that it is more accu-
rate overall. 
CHAPTER 3 Evidence-Based Endocrinology and Clinical Epidemiology     53
 The first step in this process is to understand the concept of 
probability. A probability is an expression of likelihood and thus 
represents an opinion of the relative frequency with which an 
event is likely to occur. In the case of diagnosis, probability is a 
numerical expression of the clinician’s uncertainty about a diagno-
sis; expressing a clinical opinion in subjective terms such as  likely 
and  possible is fraught with imprecision and misunderstanding. 
Certainty that a disease is present is assigned a probability of one, 
certainty that a disease is not present is assigned a probability of 
zero, and a clinician’s opinion of the disease being present or 
absent usually falls somewhere in between. Of course, probabilities 
are derived from different data sources that vary in their reliability and 
application to a given patient, such as the clinician’s experience 
(remembered cases), research studies, and population-based epide-
miologic studies. Therefore, some degree of uncertainty is inher-
ent in a given probability, and the confidence with which one can 
rely on a given probability depends to a large extent on the data 
underlying it. 
 The diagnostic approach to minimizing uncertainty requires 
four steps. First, the clinician starts with an estimate of probability 
based on initial clinical impressions. This starting point is dubbed 
the  pretest or a priori probability and is a number between zero and 
one that expresses the likelihood of disease. For example, a clini-
cian who sees a large population of patients with diabetes mellitus 
may think that a 55-year-old patient with polyuria, polydipsia, 
weight loss, and fatigue has a probability of 0.70 of having diabe-
tes mellitus (ie, if there were 100 such individuals, 70 would have 
diabetes). 
 Second, the clinician determines the threshold probability for 
treatment. The treatment threshold probability is defined as the 
probability of disease at which one is indifferent between giving 
treatment and withholding treatment. Establishing a treatment 
threshold probability takes into account the costs (not just in the 
monetary sense) and benefits of treating or not treating. Because 
probability is predicated on the lack of certainty about the pres-
ence or absence of disease, it is inevitable that some patients who 
are not diseased receive treatment and others who are diseased do 
not receive treatment. Third, if the pretest probability is greater 
than the threshold probability, the clinician chooses to treat; if it 
is less than the threshold probability, the clinician opts not to 
treat. If the clinician is not comfortable enough about the presence 
or absence of disease, he or she may choose to order further tests 
with the objective of getting closer to certainty. The fourth step 
involves taking information gained from the test and using it to 
update the pretest probability. The updated, or  posttest , probability 
can also serve as a new  pretest probability for the next step in 
hypothesis testing ( Figure 3–8 ). 
 Treatment threshold probability depends on the effectiveness 
of treatment, including its adverse effects. In general, treatment 
threshold probability is generally low when treatment has a high 
benefit for diseased patients and/or a low risk of harm for nondis-
eased patients. Likewise, the treatment threshold probability is 
generally high when there is a high risk to nondiseased patients 
and/or a low benefit to diseased patients. For example, an endo-
crinologist evaluating an incidentally found pituitary microade-
noma would need to be as certain as possible that the patient 
suffered from hormone hypersecretion before recommending sur-
gical resection because of the high risk of harm to nondiseased 
patients relative to the benefit to diseased patients. The same prin-
ciples apply to diagnostic testing. There is a test-threshold defined 
as the probability of disease at which one is indifferent between 
performing a test and not performing a test. Depending on the 
circumstances, one would treat without performing the test or not 
perform the test and ignore the issue entirely. 
 Tests can be combined in the hope that diagnostic accuracy is 
enhanced. Two tests can be performed in parallel (simultaneously) 
or in series (sequentially). When two tests are performed in paral-
lel, a positive result in either test establishes the diagnosis; when 
Disease prevalence or
pretest probability
Positive predictive
value
Negative predictive
value
0.1%
1%
10%
50%
90%
0.89%
8.33%
50.0%
90.0%
98.78%
99.99%
99.89%
98.78%
90%
50.0%
 FIGURE 3–6  Positive and negative predictive values as a func-
tion of disease prevalence, assuming test sensitivity and specificity of 
90% for each. 
0.1
0.2
0.5
1
2
5
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
95
99
500
200
100
50
20
10
5
2
1
0.5
0.2
0.1
0.05
0.02
0.01
0.005
0.002
0.001
1000
95
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
5
2
1
0.5
0.2
0.1
Posttest
probability
Pretest
probability
Likelihood
ratio
99
 FIGURE 3–7  Nomogram for likelihood ratios. ( Adapted from 
Fagan TJ. Letter: nomogram for Bayes theorem.  N Engl J Med . 
1975;293;257. Reprinted, with permission, of  The New England Journal 
of Medicine . Copyright 1975, Massachusetts Medical Society.) 
54    CHAPTER 3 Evidence-Based Endocrinology and Clinical Epidemiology
two tests are performed in series, positive results in both tests are 
required to make the diagnosis. Thus, parallel testing increases 
sensitivity at the cost of specificity, whereas series testing increases 
specificity at the cost of sensitivity. For this approach to be better 
than one test alone, the second test has to provide information not 
provided by the first test. A common practice is to repeat the same 
test. This approach may be quite logical when the disorder is 
intermittently active (eg, intermittent Cushing syndrome) or 
when there is concern about the way the first test was performed. 
When tests are performed in series, the first test is usually the 
one with the higher sensitivity so that as many patients with the 
disease are discovered. False-positive results are then identified by 
a second test with higher specificity. Another approach to sequen-
tial testing uses as the first test the one with highest specificity so 
that fewer patients without the disease go on to further testing. 
This approach makes sense when the second test is associated with 
more morbidity. Adjusting cut-points for the first test can make it 
100% specific (at the cost of some sensitivity). This approach has 
been used frequently in tests related to Cushing syndrome. One 
caveat applies to the method of choosing the cutoff point. In addi-
tion to considering whether the patients without the disease are an 
appropriate control group, attention should be paid to sample 
size. Caution must be exercised when applying test characteristics 
derived from small samples. 
 CLINICAL EPIDEMIOLOGIC PRINCIPLES 
APPLIED TO TREATMENT DECISIONS 
 Critical to decision-making is the appropriate interpretation of the 
results of clinical trials and the impact of treatments on clinical 
events. The use of a 2 × 2 table can facilitate this process 
( Figure 3–9 ). 
 The  event rate (ER) is the rate of occurrence of the outcome 
of interest. The  relative risk reduction (RRR) is the proportional 
reduction in rates of bad outcomes between experimental and 
control participants in a trial, and it can be calculated as: 
 
RRR
Relative risk of experimental treatm
1−
ent
Relative risk of control treatment
 RRR is usually reported accompanied by a 95% CI.  Absolute risk 
reduction (ARR) is the absolute arithmetic difference in rates of 
poor outcomes between experimental and control participants in 
a trial and is usually accompanied by a 95% CI. Another way to 
think about this is to ask how many patients would have to be 
treated in order to prevent one negative outcome or achieve one 
additional favorable outcome. This is termed  number needed to 
treat (NNT) , and it is calculated as 1/ARR and accompanied by a 
95% CI. An example is provided ( see Figure 3–9 ) from the results 
of a clinical trial. In the United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes 
Study (UKPDS-38), hypertensive patients with type 2 diabetes 
were randomized to tight versus less tight blood pressure control. 
The patients with tight blood pressure control had fewer diabetes-
 related complications and fewer deaths due to diabetes compared 
to the patients with less tight blood pressure control. Over a 
period of 8 years of treatment, 15.9% of patients in the less tight 
control group had died of diabetes complications compared with 
10.9% in the tight control group. 
 To apply these statistics in clinical decision-making to patients, 
it is necessary to calculate ARR, RRR, and NNT. The RRR of 
32% indicates that approximately one-third of the expected 
deaths were prevented by tight control of blood pressure. However, 
although the RRR may be similar across different risk groups, the 
ARRs are not. ARRs become smaller when event rates are low, 
whereas RRR remains constant. Thus, RRR can be misleading. 
Positive test result
Probability of disease
Probability of disease
Probability of disease
0
0.5
1.0
New information
Negative test result
0
0.5
1.0
New information
Do not treat
Treat
Determining to treat or not to treat based on probability
0
0.5
1.0
Pretest
probability
Posttest
probability
Posttest
probability
Pretest
probability
Treatment
threshold
p
 FIGURE 3–8  Adjusting probabilities with new information and 
treatment thresholds. The top panel shows a pretest probability of 
disease of approximately 0.4. With the new information provided by 
a test, the probability rose to approximately 0.7. The middle panel 
shows the same pretest probability, but a negative test result 
reduced the probability of disease to approximately 0.15. The 
treatment threshold probability is the probability above which one 
would treat. The actual threshold value depends on the morbidity 
and mortality of disease and the adverse effects (morbidity and 
mortality) of treatment. 
CHAPTER 3 Evidence-Based Endocrinology and Clinical Epidemiology     55
The lower the ER in the control group, the larger the difference 
between RRR and ARR. In other words, the benefits of treatment 
as reflected in ARR are usually greater in patients at higher risk of 
negative outcomes than in patients at lower risk of negative 
 outcomes. 
 The RRR fails to discriminate absolute treatment effects that 
are clinically significant from those that are trivial. The NNT is 
20, so that one would need to treat 20 patients for 8 years with 
tight blood pressure control to prevent one death from diabetes. 
NNT can be readily used to compare different treatments. In this 
case, RRR was 32% and ARR was 5.1%. If a different treatment 
with the same RRR of 32% has an ARR of 0.51%, the NNT 
would be 196, indicating that a much greater effort would be 
needed to achieve one additional favorable outcome. This might 
or might not be worth the effort, depending on a variety of fac-
tors. One method by which treatment thresholds can be deter-
mined is with the method of decision analysis. 
 DECISION ANALYSIS 
 Decision analysis is a mathematical tool designed to facilitate 
complex clinical decisions in which many variables must be con-
sidered simultaneously. This analytical procedure selects among 
available diagnostic or therapeutic options based on the probabil-
ity and predetermined value (utility) of all possible outcomes of 
those options. Decision analysis provides a systematic framework 
for organizing all data relevant to the decision so that relevant 
uncertainties are less likely to be overlooked. Performing a deci-
sion analysis requires clear definition of the relationship between 
possible courses of action and their associated outcomes and 
assignment of numerical values to various courses of action. In so 
doing, decision analysis simplifies comparisons among different 
strategies. 
 There is substantial variation in duration and severity of disease 
between individuals. Choosing a treatment option in the setting 
Outcome
Treatment group
Experimental
Control
a
c
b
d
Relative risks
RRa—risk rate of the negative outcome occurring in the experimental group = a/(a + b)
RRb—risk rate of the negative outcome occurring in the control group = c/(c + d)
RR—the relative risk of the negative outcome occurring in experimental treatment compared to
control treatment = RRa/RRb = {a/(a + b)}/{c/(c + d)}
Relative risk reduction (RRR) = (1 – RR) X 100%
Absolute risk reduction (ARR) = RRb – RRa
Number needed to treat (NNT) = 1/ARR
EXAMPLE:
Figure 2 X 2 Table for UKPDS Trial of Tight Control of Blood Pressure in Patients with Diabetes
RRa—10.8%
RRb—15.9%
RR—0.68
RRR—32%
ARR—5.1%
NNT—20
Negative outcome
Positive outcome
Outcome—Deaths from diabetes
Treatment group
Experimental
(n = 758)
Control
(n = 390)
82
62
676
328
Negative outcome
—Death
Positive outcome
—Alive
 FIGURE 3–9  A 2 × 2 table for treatment groups and outcomes. 
56    CHAPTER 3 Evidence-Based Endocrinology and Clinical Epidemiology
of unpredictable effects is a difficult problem, and expected value 
decision-making is a useful tool. When individual outcomes are 
uncertain, expected value is the result that is expected  on average . 
In preparing to perform a decision analysis, one first must define 
the problem with a clear statement of the strategies to be exam-
ined. Two or more strategies may be included. Clinical decisions 
have effects over different time frames. An important step in 
defining a decision problem is to decide the time horizon for out-
comes to be evaluated. For example, if strategies for diabetes treat-
ment are to be compared, a period of weeks to months may be 
appropriate for evaluating the risk of hypoglycemic episode. 
However, this relatively short time horizon would not be appro-
priate when the study outcome is diabetic retinopathy, where a 
time horizon of years would be a better choice. After choosing the 
problem and a single time horizon, carrying out a formal analysis 
typically involves six general steps: 
 1. Construction of a decision tree that maps out all the possibilities 
 2. Determination and assignment of probabilities 
 3. Assignment of utilities to each potential outcome 
 4. Determination of the expected utility 
 5. Choosing the course of action with the highest expected utility 
  6.  Evaluation of the sensitivity of the chosen course of action to 
changes in probabilities and utilities 
 In a decision tree, the term decision alternative refers to one of 
the potential strategies to be analyzed ( Figure 3–10 ). Each 
 alternative should be listed.  Figure 3–11 shows a sample decision 
tree that outlines strategies of medical versus surgical treatment for 
disease. The decision itself is represented by a box called a decision 
node. All of the possible outcomes for each decision alternative are 
listed. An event that has outcomes under the control of chance is 
denoted by a chance node. The symbol for a chance node is a 
circle. The series of events leading to the clinical outcomes is rep-
resented by a series of chance nodes and decision nodes. The deci-
sion tree is usually written from left to right, with the initial 
decision node on the far left and the final outcomes on the far 
right. A final outcome is represented by a terminal node. There 
may be any number of outcomes at a chance node. The listed 
outcomes should include all possible outcomes, and they must not 
overlap. In addition to this assumption of mutual exclusivity, 
structuring a tree in this fashion assumes that the probability of 
occurrence of one event does not influence the probability of 
occurrence of another event(s). The decision tree structure should 
be as similar as possible for all strategies, because differences may 
lead to a structural bias in the analysis. 
 The decision tree described above is relatively simple, and this 
approach cannot readily represent complex, dynamic clinical situa-
tions with recurring events. More elaborate models, such as 
Markov models, can be used to represent the passage through mul-
tiple health states. Patients may transition from one health state to 
another with some probability within a specified time period or 
model cycle. Like each terminal node in a static decision tree, each 
health state in the Markov model is associated with a specific 
clinical measure, utility, or cost. A key assumption of the Markov 
model is that the future is determined only by the individual’s pres-
ent health state; events prior to that health state or how long it took 
to arrive there do not affect the individual’s future, a simplifying 
assumption that may not hold true for some health problems. 
 One strength of the decision analysis process is that it may be 
used for a variety of outcome measures. The outcome measure of 
interest determines the information needed for analysis. For 
example, one may use clinical measures such as survival following 
total thyroidectomy for differentiated thyroid cancer, preservation 
of vision after laser photocoagulation, or meeting a target level for 
glycosylated hemoglobin. Economic measures provide measures of 
Choice A
Choice B
Probabilities
Outcomes of
choice A
Outcomes of
choice B
Decision tree
Choice A
Choice B
Risks and
benefits A
Risks and
benefits B
Scale
 FIGURE 3–10  Balancing outcomes and a decision tree. 
CHAPTER 3 Evidence-Based Endocrinology and Clinical Epidemiology     57
cost and resource use. When cost measures are included, it is important 
to consider whose perspective is represented; analyses may reflect the 
viewpoint of society as a whole, payers, or patients. 
 A detailed analysis of costs may be used for cost-effectiveness 
analysis or cost–utility analysis. Utility measures reflect outcome 
preferences. For an individual, utilities represent quality of life 
preferences. They are quantitative values used to summarize mul-
tiple dimensions, which may be conflicting. For example, decision-
makers frequently must choose among strategies that have differing 
effects on length of life and quality of life and involving trade-offs 
between the two. Utilities are traditionally scored on a scale from 0 
to 1. The ideal situation, often perfect health, is scored as a 1. The 
worst situation, death, is scored as a 0, and this assumes that there 
are no utilities worse than death. Intermediate states are assigned 
values between 0 and 1. For example, living with diabetes mellitus 
may receive a score of 0.80—less than perfect, but preferable to 
death. Among the assumptions underlying this approach are: sta-
bility of estimates of utilities, that is, the estimates obtained prior 
to experiencing an event will not change after the event has been 
experienced; and the it-does-not-matter-how-you-get-there 
assumption (ie, death or other outcomes have the same utility 
regardless of the route a patient takes in getting there). 
 There are different ways to obtain utility values for different 
health states. One relatively simple method is the visual analog 
scale, in which a subject is asked to rate a given health state on a 
scale from 0 to 100. There also are more specific ways of determin-
ing utility. The standard gamble approach was developed by von 
Neumann and Morgenstern as a method for assessing utility. One 
advantage of this method is that it incorporates the participant’s 
attitudes about risk taking, because the process involves consider-
ation of a hypothetical gamble. For example, consider a 74-year-
old diabetic man with known coronary artery disease and a 
chronically infected lower extremity ulcer. His physicians suggest a 
below-the-knee amputation (BKA), but they also discuss the 
option of a course of antibiotics instead of surgery. Assume that 
antibiotics have a 10% cure rate and that an amputation has a 95% 
cure rate. To assess utility from the patient’s perspective, it is neces-
sary to list all of the possible outcomes; rank the outcome states in 
the order of preference; assign a utility of 1 to the most preferred 
outcome and 0 to the least preferred outcome; and formulate situ-
ations where a patient is indifferent about choosing between a 
gamble (between outcomes of known utility) and a sure thing 
(involving an outcome with unknown utility). This is how the util-
ity of each intermediate outcome is determined. For example, sup-
pose the patient decides that a cure with antibiotics is an appealing 
outcome. This outcome is compared to those with known utili-
ties—perfect health and death. When asked to choose between a 
cure with antibiotics and a gamble in which he has a 90% chance 
of achieving perfect health and a 10% chance of dying, he is unable 
to choose (indifferent). Thus, the utility for the outcome of cure 
with antibiotics is 0.9. However, a surgical cure with an amputa-
tion is a less appealing scenario. The utility for an amputation is 
only 0.75. By a similar process, the utility of a failure of antibiotics 
necessitating an amputation is 0.5. The utility scores can then be 
incorporated into a decision tree (see  Figure 3–11 ). The expected 
utility for each decision alternative may be obtained by adding each 
(utility × probability) value. The utility for each outcome is on the 
right. The probabilities are below the outcome branches. The 
 utility for antibiotic treatment = (0.1 × 0.9) + (0.9 × 0.5) = 0.54, 
whereas the utility for BKA = (0.95 × 0.75) + (0.05 × 0) = 0.71. 
In terms of the patient’s quality of life, the expected value of ampu-
tation is greater than the expected value of antibiotic treatment. 
Different utilities for these health states would alter the analyses. 
 The time trade-off method is another way of determining util-
ity. The utility may be described as a number between 0 and 1. For 
example, a subject may consider 10 years with pain from diabetic 
neuropathy equivalent to 5 years in perfect health. The utility of 
diabetic neuropathy would be 0.5. Alternatively, the utility may be 
expressed in quality-adjusted life years (QALYs). To determine the 
number of QALYs associated with an outcome, the time horizon 
for the outcome state is specified. Often, this is a patient’s life 
expectancy in a particular outcome state. The number of years in 
full health that the subject sees as equivalent to the specified time 
with that outcome is the corresponding number of QALYs. 
 Determine the Probability of Each 
Chance Event 
 Once the decision tree structure is formed, the probability of each 
chance event may be determined. In general, this is best per-
formed by taking a systematic review of published, peer- reviewed 
literature. However, this approach assumes that probabilities 
derived from a period in the past accurately reflect the probabilities 
Cure
0.9
Antibiotics
BKA
0.1
No cure
Infected
ulcer
0.9
Cure
0.95
Operative death
0.05
0.5
0.75
0
 FIGURE 3–11  A decision tree with probabilities and utilities. 
This sample decision tree outlines strategies of medical versus surgi-
cal treatment—below-knee amputation (BKA) for a particular dis-
ease. The decision node (open square) represents the decision itself. 
All of the possible outcomes for each decision alternative are listed 
emanating from an open circle or chance node. The events are gov-
erned by chance. The series of events leading to the clinical out-
comes is represented by a series of chance nodes and decision 
nodes. Terminal nodes (triangles) denote the outcomes. Probabilities 
and utilities are listed. For example, if one chooses antibiotics, there 
is a 10% chance of cure, whereas if one chooses surgery, there is a 
95% chance of cure. However, although surgery has a higher cure 
rate, one is left with an amputation. Having a BKA has lower utility 
(eg, 0.75) compared with antibiotic treatment (eg, 0.9). The predicted 
outcome is (0.1 × 0.9) + (0.9 × 0.5) or 0.54 for antibiotics vs (0.95 × 
0.74) + (0.05 × 0) or 0.71 for surgery. This indicates that on the  aver-
age , surgery is a better choice. 
58    CHAPTER 3 Evidence-Based Endocrinology and Clinical Epidemiology
in the future. Moreover, it assumes that the probabilities derived 
from other settings apply to the one in question. However, all 
these probabilities must reflect actual practice. For example, if 
decision analysis is being used to determine the best strategy for 
specific individual patients, the probabilities must be those of the 
site when the care is to be delivered. At times, not all of the infor-
mation needed for the decision tree is available. This frequently 
occurs during analysis of a relatively new practice. If possible, 
primary data may be collected or secondary data may be analyzed. 
Expert opinion may be used in the absence of relevant data. At a 
given chance node, the sum of probabilities equals one. 
 Deciding on a Strategy: Averaging Out and 
Folding Back the Tree 
 The goal of decision analysis is to identify the strategy that leads to 
the most favorable expected outcome. To calculate the expected 
outcome, one starts at the outcome measures (typically the far 
right). Each group of branches, which start at a single chance node, 
is reduced to a single numerical value by multiplying each outcome 
measure by the probability associated with that outcome and add-
ing all of the values. This is the process of folding back the decision 
tree. This process is repeated until there is a single numerical value 
for each strategy at the initial decision node. At this point, the 
expected outcome for each strategy has been calculated. The strat-
egy with the more favorable outcome is the preferred strategy. 
 Discounting Future Events 
 A greater value is placed on current events than future events. It is bet-
ter to pay $100 in 10 years rather than pay $100 now. Similarly, if one 
is to have a disease, it is preferable to have a disease in the future than 
to have it today. The value of a future event then depends on how far 
in the future it occurs. Discounting refers to calculating the present 
value of an outcome that occurs in the future. The discount rate is the 
annual rate at which costs are discounted, which is usually the rate of 
interest that money would bring if it were invested. 
 Sensitivity Analysis 
 Sensitivity analysis is an important part of the decision analysis 
process that tests the stability or robustness of a conclusion over a 
range of structural assumptions, value judgments, and estimates of 
probability. The initial analysis, or base case analysis, uses the best 
estimates for each part of the model. In sensitivity analysis, a plau-
sible range of values is determined for each portion of the model. 
Variables that have the most influence on the model are deter-
mined. Different time horizons or perspectives may be considered. 
The objective is to see whether conclusions change when possi-
bilities within a reasonable range are included. 
 Cost-Effectiveness Analysis Using Decision 
Analysis 
 Cost-effectiveness analysis is the use of decision analysis to compare 
strategies in terms of their cost per unit of output. Output is an 
outcome such as years of life, utility, or cases of disease prevented. 
Cost-effectiveness ratios are interpreted by comparing them to ratios 
for other strategies. An incremental cost-effectiveness ratio indicates 
how much additional money needs to be spent for a better, but more 
expensive strategy to generate one additional unit of outcome. 
 Of practical importance, there usually is a limit to the amount 
of money a policy-maker is willing to spend to gain one QALY; 
this is termed the willingness-to-pay threshold. Cost–utility analy-
sis is a specific type of cost-effectiveness analysis that uses QALYs 
(or other measures of utility) as the effectiveness end-point. By 
convention, cost–utility analyses are often called cost-effectiveness 
analyses. However, not all cost-effectiveness studies use the cost–
utility methodology. Because they use QALYs as an end-point, 
cost–utility analyses generate information that may be compared 
across disease states. It is important to note that although they are 
useful in providing a common metric among outcomes, a number 
of stringent assumptions must be made to compare cost-effective-
ness analyses. Principles for assessing decision analysis have been 
developed by the evidence-based medicine (EBM) group and are 
shown in  Table 3–2 . Representative decision analyses related to 
endocrine disorders are shown in  Table 3–3 . 
 OTHER ASPECTS OF CLINICAL 
EPIDEMIOLOGY 
 The methods of clinical epidemiology have been applied to risk, prog-
nosis, the assessment of studies of different designs, and many other 
issues in clinical medicine. Readers are referred to standard texts. 
 EVIDENCE-BASED ENDOCRINOLOGY 
 The definition of evidence-based medicine (EBM) has evolved 
over time. A 2005 definition states that EBM requires the integration 
TABLE 3–2 Users’ guide to decision analyses.
  I. Are the results of the study valid?
   Were all important strategies and outcomes included?
   Was an explicit and sensible process used to identify, select, and 
    combine the evidence into probabilities?
   Were the utilities obtained in an explicit and sensible way from 
    credible sources?
   Was the potential impact of any uncertainty in the evidence 
    determined?
 II. What are the results?
   In the baseline analysis, does one strategy result in a clinically 
    important gain for patients? If not, is the result a “toss-up”?
   How strong is the evidence used in the analysis?
   Could the uncertainty in the evidence change the result?
III. Will the results help me in caring for my patients?
   Do the probability estimates fit my patients’ clinical features?
   Do the utilities reflect how my patients would value the outcomes 
    of the decision?
Richardson WS, Detsky AS for the Evidence-Based Medicine Working Group; based on 
the Users’ Guides to Evidence-Based Medicine and reproduced with permission from 
JAMA. 1995 Apr 26;273:1292-1295 and 1995 May 24;273:1610-1613. Copyright 1995, 
American Medical Association.
CHAPTER 3 Evidence-Based Endocrinology and Clinical Epidemiology     59
TABLE 3–3 Representative decision analyses in endocrinology.
Study
Clinical Problem and Strategies
Time 
Horizon
Outcome 
Measures
Results
Diabetes 
DCCT
Conventional vs intensive insulin therapy 
in approximately 120,000 persons with 
IDDM in the United States who meet 
DCCT inclusion criteria
Lifetime
Years free from 
diabetic 
complica-tions
Cost per life-year
Intensive insulin therapy results in a gain of 
920,000 y of sight, 691,000 y free from ESRD, 
678,000 y free from lower extremity amputation, 
and 611,000 y of life at a cost of $4 billion. Cost 
per life-year gained is $28,661.
CDC
Screening for type 2 DM with routine 
medical contact at age 25 vs age 45
Lifetime
Cost per life-year
Cost per QALY
IC-ER for early screening was $236,449 per life-
year gained and $56,649 per QALY gained. Early 
screening is more cost-effective in younger per-
sons and African Americans.
Vijan
Prevention of blindness and ESRD in 
patients with type 2 DM with lowering 
hemoglobin A1c by 2 % points to a lower 
limit of 7
Lifetime
Risk of developing 
blindness and 
ESRD
Patients with early onset of type 2 diabetes ben-
efit from near-normal glycemic control. Moderate 
control prevents most of the studied complica-
tions in patients with later onset of disease
Hoerger
Screening for type 2 DM in all people vs 
only screening those with hypertension
Lifetime
Cost per QALY
Screening in people with hypertension is more 
cost-effective. Targeted screening for people age 
55-75 is most cost-effective.
Gillies
Different strategies for screening and 
prevention of type 2 DM in adults
Lifetime
Cost per QALY
Screening for type 2 DM and impaired glucose 
tolerance, with appropriate intervention for 
those with impaired glucose tolerance, in an 
above average risk population aged 45 seems to 
be cost-effective. 
Golan
To preserve kidney function in patients 
with DM type 2, strategies of treating all 
patients with ACE inhibitors vs screening 
for microalbuminuria vs screening for 
gross proteinuria
Lifetime
Cost per QALY
Screening for gross proteinuria has the highest 
cost and lowest benefit. Compared with microal-
buminuria, treating all patients with an ACE-
inhibitor was beneficial with an IC-ER of $7500 
per QALY gained.
Gaede
Intensified vs conventional multifactorial 
intervention in type 2 DM
Lifetime
Cost per QALY
From a health-care perspective in Denmark, inten-
sive therapy was more cost-effective than conven-
tional treatment. Assuming that persons in both 
arms were treated in a primary care setting, inten-
sive therapy was both cost- and life-saving.
Thyroid 
Danese
In asymptomatic adults, screening for 
mild thyroid failure every 5 y starting at 
age 35 vs no screening
Lifetime
Cost per QALY 
Screening was cost-effective with a cost per QALY 
gained of $9223 for women and $22,595 for men.
Vidal-
Trécan
Four strategies to treat solitary toxic thy-
roid adenoma in a 40-y-old woman: 
 (A) Primary radioactive iodine
 (B) Primary surgery after euthyroidism 
    achieved by ATDs
 (C) ATDs followed by surgery or 
 (D) ATDs followed by radioactive 
    iodine. 
    C and D were used if severe 
    reaction to ATDs occurred
Lifetime
Cost per QALY
Surgery was the most effective and least costly 
strategy. Primary radioactive iodine was more 
effective if surgical mortality exceeded 0.6%.
Nasuti
Evaluation of FNA by a cytopathologist 
with on-site processing vs standard 
processing at the University of 
Pennsylvania Medical Center
Short term
Cost
By avoiding nondiagnostic specimens, an esti-
mated cost savings of $404,525 per year may be 
achieved with on-site FNA review.
McCartney
Analysis of different thyroid nodule 
biopsy guideline criteria
Short term
Utility (expected 
value)
As a general approach to 10-14 mm thyroid nod-
ules, routine FNA appears to be the least desir-
able compared with observation alone or FNA of 
nodules with ultrasonographic risk factors.
Cheung
Calcitonin measurement in the 
evaluation of thyroid nodules in the 
United States
Lifetime
Cost per life years 
saved
Routine serum calcitonin screening in patients 
undergoing evaluation for thyroid nodules 
appears to be comparable in cost-effectiveness 
to other screening procedures, eg, mammogra-
phy, colonoscopy, TSH.
(Continued)
60    CHAPTER 3 Evidence-Based Endocrinology and Clinical Epidemiology
TABLE 3–3 Representative decision analyses in endocrinology.
Study
Clinical Problem and Strategies
Time 
Horizon
Outcome 
Measures
Results
Other 
King
Four strategies to manage incidental 
pituitary microadenoma in an 
asymptomatic patient:
 (1) Expectant management
 (2) PRL screening
 (3) Screening for PRL, insulin-like 
   growth factor I, and 
 (4) MRI follow-up
Lifetime
Cost per QALY 
PRL test may be the most cost-effective strategy. 
Compared to expectant management, the IC-ER 
for PRL was $1428. The IC-ER for the extended 
screening panel was $69,495. MRI follow-up was 
less effective and more expensive.
Sawka
Three strategies to evaluate pheochro-
mocytoma in patients with refractory 
hypertension, suspicious symptoms, 
adrenal mass, or history of pheochromo-
cytoma:
 (A) Fractionated plasma metanephrines 
   with imaging if abnormal
 (B) 24-h urinary metanephrines or 
   catecholamines with imaging if 
   abnormal
 (C) Plasma metanephrines if modestly 
   elevated, urine studies to decide on 
   imaging
Short term
Cost per pheochro-
mocytoma 
detected
Strategy C is least costly and has reasonable sen-
sitivity in patients with moderate pretest proba-
bility for pheochromocytoma.
Col
For menopausal symptom relief in 
healthy, white, 50-y-old women with 
intact uteri, use of hormone therapy vs 
no hormone therapy
2 y
Survival
QALE
Hormone therapy is associated with lower sur-
vival but gains in QALE. Benefits depend on 
severity of menopausal symptoms and CVD risk.
Smith
For 60-y-old men with erectile dysfunc-
tion, sildenafil vs no drug therapy
Lifetime
Cost per QALY 
gained
From the societal perspective, cost per QALY 
gained with sildenafil is less than $50,000 if treat-
ment-related morbidity is less than 0.55% per 
year, treatment success rate is greater than 
40.2%, or cost of sildenafil is less than $244 per 
month.
DCCT, Diabetes Control and Complications Trial; IDDM, insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus; ESRD, end-stage renal disease; DM, diabetes mellitus; QALY, quality-adjusted life year; 
IC-ER, incremental cost-effectiveness ratio; ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; CVD, cardiovascular disease; ATDs, antithyroid drugs; FNA, fine-needle aspiration; PRL, prolactin; 
MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; QALE, quality-adjusted life expectancy.
• DCCT. Lifetime benefits and costs of intensive therapy as practiced in the diabetes control and complications trial The Diabetes Control and Complications Trial Research Group.
  JAMA. 1996;276(17):1409-1415.
• The CDC Diabetes Cost-Effectiveness Study Group. The cost-effectiveness of screening for type 2 diabetes. JAMA. 1998;280(20):1757-1763.
• Vijan S, Hofer TP, Hayward RA. Estimated benefits of glycemic control in microvascular complications in type 2 diabetes. Ann Intern Med. 1997;127(9):788-795.
• Hoerger TJ, Harris R, Hicks KA, Donahue K, Sorensen S, Engelgau M. Screening for type 2 diabetes mellitus: a cost-effectiveness analysis. Ann Intern Med. 2004;140(9):689-699.
• Gillies CL, Lambert PC, Abrams KR, et al. Different strategies for screening and prevention of type 2 diabetes in adults: cost effectiveness analysis. BMJ. 2008;336:1180-1185.
•  Golan L, Birkmeyer JD, Welch HG. The cost-effectiveness of treating all patients with type 2 diabetes with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors. Ann Intern Med.
1999;131(9):660-667.
• Gaede P, Valentine WJ, Palmer AJ, et al. Cost-effectiveness of intensified versus conventional multifactorial intervention in type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2008;31(8):1510-1515.
•  Danese MD, Powe NR, Sawin CT, Ladenson PW. Screening for mild thyroid failure at the periodic health examination: a decision and cost-effectiveness analysis. JAMA.
1996;276(4):285-292.
• Vidal-Trecan GM, Stahl JE, Durand-Zaleski I. Managing toxic thyroid adenoma: a cost-effectiveness analysis. Eur J Endocrinol. 2002;146(3):283-294.
•  Nasuti JF, Gupta PK, Baloch ZW. Diagnostic value and cost-effectiveness of on-site evaluation of fine-needle aspiration specimens: review of 5,688 cases. Diagn Cytopathol.
2002;27(1):1-4.
• McCartney CR, Stukerborg GJ. Decision analysis of discordant thyroid nodule biopsy guideline criteria. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008;93(8):3037-3044.
•  Cheung K, Roman SA, Wang TS, Walker HD, Sosa JA. Calcitonin measurement in the evaluation of thyroid nodules in the United States: a cost-effectiveness and decision 
analysis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008;93(6):2173-2180.
• King JT, Jr, Justice AC, Aron DC. Management of incidental pituitary microadenomas: a cost-effectiveness analysis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1997;82(11):3625-3632.
•  Sawka AM, Gafni A, Thabane L, Young WF, Jr. The economic implications of three biochemical screening algorithms for pheochromocytoma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2004;89(6):2859-2866.
•  Col NF, Weber G, Stiggelbout A, Chuo J, D’Agostino R, Corso P. Short-term menopausal hormone therapy for symptom relief: an updated decision model. Arch Intern Med.
2004;164(15):1634-1640.
• Smith KJ, Roberts MS. The cost-effectiveness of sildenafil. Ann Intern Med. 2000;132(12):933-937.
(Continued)
of the best research evidence with clinical expertise and patient’s 
unique values and circumstances. The best research evidence refers 
to valid and clinically relevant research, often from the basic sci-
ences of medicine, but especially from patient-centered clinical 
research. Clinical expertise refers to the ability to use physicians’ 
clinical skills and past experience to rapidly identify each patient’s 
unique health state and diagnosis, their individual risks and ben-
efits of potential interventions, and their personal circumstances 
CHAPTER 3 Evidence-Based Endocrinology and Clinical Epidemiology     61
and expectations. Patient values consist of the unique preferences, 
concerns, and expectations each patient brings to a clinical 
encounter that must be integrated into clinical decisions if they are 
to serve the patient. Patient circumstances refer to the patient’s 
individual clinical state and the clinical setting. 
 The five steps of EBM as defined in 1997 are discussed below. 
Entire textbooks are devoted to the principles of EBM. In this 
chapter, we will briefly review these five steps and focus on how 
EBM views evidence and review some of the limitations. 
 Step One: Translation of the Clinical 
Problem into Answerable Questions 
 One of the fundamental skills required for practicing EBM is the 
asking of well-built clinical questions. To benefit patients and cli-
nicians, such questions need to be both directly relevant to 
patients’ problems and phrased in ways that direct a literature 
search to relevant and precise answers. In practice, well-built 
clinical questions usually contain four elements: patient, interven-
tion, comparison, and outcome. The patient refers to the indi-
vidual to whom the evidence will be applied (eg, a hypertensive 
patient with diabetes). (The evidence-based approach can also be 
applied to a group to inform policy.) The intervention is the diag-
nostic test or therapy being considered for application to the par-
ticular patient (or group) (eg, tight control of blood pressure). The 
comparison is that intervention to which a new intervention being 
considered is to be compared (eg, less tight control of blood pres-
sure). The outcome is the end point of interest to the physician or 
patient (eg, stroke, myocardial infarction, or death from diabetes). 
Background questions relate to general information or basic facts 
about a disease, and this information can usually be found in reli-
able textbooks, whether published in book form or on-line. 
However, more involved clinical questions, especially those that 
require the most up-to-date information about diagnosis, progno-
sis, or treatment, have been termed foreground questions and 
require a different approach. 
 Step Two: Finding the Best Evidence 
 The finding of best research evidence from the medical literature 
is a critical feature of the EBM approach and is an iterative process 
that involves medical informatics. Given the enormous breadth 
and depth of the medical literature, with more than two million 
articles published each year in about 20,000 biomedical journals 
(with more being established each year), efficient strategies must 
be used to take advantage of the best original journal articles, 
reviews and synopses of primary studies, and practice guidelines, 
along with textbooks, both traditional and innovative. Among the 
useful sources of information are PubMed, which allows sophisti-
cated search strategies of the MEDLINE database. A variety of 
tools have been developed to facilitate this process. However, these 
are beyond the scope of this chapter, and readers are referred to 
references on the subject. Certain journals are specifically devoted 
to critically appraised articles (eg, ACP Journal Club, BMJ 
Evidence-Based Medicine). It is important to remember, however, 
that the presence of the label  evidence based does not ensure that 
the information meets the highest standards. Systematic reviews 
are another useful source for evidence. In addition to the profes-
sional journals, such reviews are available from both governmental 
agencies (eg, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality) and 
nongovernmental agencies (eg, the Cochrane Collaboration). 
Standards have been developed for reporting systematic reviews: 
preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses 
(PRISMA). Among the issues addressed specifically is that of pub-
lication bias and its potential effects on the results. Publication 
bias reflects, among other things, the tendency to not publish 
studies with negative findings. 
 Step Three: Appraising the Evidence for its 
Validity and Usefulness 
 Critical appraisal is the process of systematically examining 
research evidence to assess its validity, results, and relevance before 
using it to inform a decision. There are three basic questions to be 
addressed in evaluating any kind of research: (1) Is it valid? (2) Is 
it important? and (3) Is it applicable to my patient? This involves 
assessment of the study’s methods in order to assess the internal 
validity of the conclusions. Once criteria for internal validity are 
satisfied, then the importance of the finding can be assessed. It is 
critical that statistical significance not be equated with clinical 
significance. Assuming the finding is important, it is necessary to 
consider the study’s relevance to the patient (ie, the external valid-
ity of the study). A series of guides has been developed to help the 
clinician to critically appraise different types of studies. An exam-
ple is shown in  Table 3–4 . Underlying this appraisal process is the 
EBM model of the hierarchy of evidence. 
TABLE 3–4  Users’ guides for an article about therapy.
  I. Are the results of the study valid?
   Primary Guides
    Was the assignment of patients to treatments randomized?
    Were all patients who entered the trial properly accounted for 
     and attributed at its conclusion?
    Was follow-up complete?
    Were patients analyzed in the groups to which they were 
     randomized?
   Secondary Guides
    Were patients, health workers, and study personnel “blind” to 
     treatment?
    Were the groups similar at the start of the trial?
    Aside from the experimental intervention, were the groups 
     treated equally?
 II. What were the results?
   How large was the treatment effect?
   How precise was the estimate of the treatment effect?
III. Will the results help me in caring for my patients?
   Can the results be applied to my patient care?
   Were all clinically important outcomes considered?
   Are the likely treatment benefits worth the potential harms and 
    costs?
Guyatt GH, Sackett D, Cook DJ, for the Evidence Based Medicine Working Group. 
Based on the Users’ Guides to Evidence-Based Medicine and reproduced with permis-
sion from JAMA. 1993;270:2598-2601 and 1994;271:59-63. Copyright 1995, American 
Medical Association.
62    CHAPTER 3 Evidence-Based Endocrinology and Clinical Epidemiology
 A. Hierarchies of evidence 
 Any empirical observation 
about the apparent relation between events constitutes evidence. 
This includes the thoughtful observations of an experienced clini-
cian, the observations derived from physiologic experiments, and 
the results of large, randomized clinical trials. Methodological 
safeguards to protect against systematic error (bias) are inherent in 
experimental design. In this way, experiments differ from clinical 
observations. Different study designs lend themselves to different 
safeguards, and these safeguards vary in their efficacy both in 
theory and in practice. 
 The EBM approach uses a hierarchy of study designs based on 
their inherent safeguards. A hierarchy is shown in  Table 3–5 . In 
this hierarchy, randomized controlled trials (RCTs) are given the 
highest weight, followed by quasi-experimental studies (ie, no-
RCTs), followed by other study designs, and finally opinions of 
authorities and unsystematic clinical observations. Evidence from 
the top of the hierarchy should have greater impact in clinical 
decision-making than observations from the lower levels. There is 
disagreement about what the hierarchy should be. Some have an 
N of 1 randomized trial (the equivalent of an RCT with one sub-
ject) at the top of the hierarchy, whereas others place meta-analyses 
of randomized trials at the top. However, the term  evidence is not 
synonymous with evidence from RCTs (or whatever study design 
occupies at the preferred level of the hierarchy). Rather, it is pre-
ferred to use that sort of evidence when it is available. Evidence 
from other sources is still evidence and may be more than suffi-
cient. For example, the introduction of thyroid replacement ther-
apy for hypothyroidism or insulin therapy for type 1 diabetes has 
never been subjected to RCTs. 
 While recognizing the central role of evaluating the quality of the 
evidence in decision-making, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force 
(USPSTF) has developed a different approach to address some of the 
shortcomings of the EBM approach. The USPSTF adopted three 
major changes to the process. First, a rating of internal validity was 
added to the study criterion for judging individual studies. A well-de-
signed cohort or case-control study could be more compelling than an 
inadequately powered or poorly conducted RCT. Second, evidence 
was explicitly assessed at three different levels—the level of the indi-
vidual study, both in terms of internal and external validity; the body 
of evidence supporting a given linkage in the analytic framework; and, 
because of the focus of the USPSTF, the level of evidence for the entire 
preventive service. Third, the magnitude of effect was separated from 
the assessment of quality. Both benefit and harm are considered in 
assessing the magnitude of the effect(s). Overall, the USPSTF grades 
the quality of the overall evidence for a service on a three-point scale 
(good, fair, poor) and grades its recommendations according to one of 
five classifications (A, B, C, D, I) reflecting the strength of evidence 
and magnitude of net benefit (benefits minus harms) ( Table 3–6 ). This 
approach of assessing both the quality of evidence and strength of 
recommendations has been expanded to include practice guidelines: 
grading of recommendations, assessment, development, and evalua-
tion (GRADE) system. Although a discussion of practice guidelines is 
beyond the scope of this chapter, it is important to recognize that they 
vary widely in quality, strength of evidence, and bias. Before a practi-
tioner bases a decision on a practice guideline, the basis of that guide-
line must be clear. 
 B. Other evidence-related issues 
 Notwithstanding these 
improvements, there are three other major issues concerning 
the evidence. First, it is important to recognize that all of this 
evidence is essentially quantitative in nature. Thus, the EBM 
definition of evidence is relatively narrow and excludes informa-
tion important to clinicians; many qualitative factors are involved 
in clinical decision-making concerning individual patients. 
Second, there are problems in the evidence in terms of the quality 
and scope of the data (eg, the soft data that clinicians usually use); 
the scope of the topics (average patients, gray zones of practice, 
lack of RCTs); sources of authority, which however explicit, 
require judgment; and potential abuses (eg, key findings could be 
ignored). Third, there is the issue of applying results in popula-
tions (ie, average results) to individuals. 
 Steps Four and Five: Applying the Results 
in Practice and Evaluating Performance 
 Knowledge of the best available evidence of treatment is not enough 
to recommend a particular course of action. Underlying this issue is 
heterogeneity of treatment effects.  Treatment effect heterogeneity 
is the term given to the phenomenon in which the same treatment 
produces different results in different patients. For the average effect 
observed in a clinical trial to occur with certainty in one patient, all 
patients in the trial must have had that average response. Yet average 
response may also reflect a large response in some and small or no 
response or even harm in others. Part of clinical decision-making 
involves addressing this phenomenon to individualize therapy in the 
most effective way. To do so, four major factors about the patient 
must be taken into account: (1) baseline probability of incurring a 
disease-related adverse event (risk without treatment or susceptibil-
ity/prognosis), (2) responsiveness to the treatment, (3) vulnerability 
to the adverse side-effects of the treatment, and (4) utilities for dif-
ferent outcomes. When lacking good data on a patient’s individual 
level of risk, responsiveness, and vulnerability, the average treatment 
effect as reported in good clinical trials provides the most reasonable 
guide for decision-making. However, it is important that physicians 
evaluate the results in their own patients so that the course can be 
modified when necessary. 
TABLE 3–5 A hierarchy of evidence.
 1. Evidence obtained from at least one properly designed 
   randomized controlled trial.
 2a. Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without 
   randomization.
2b. Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control 
   analytical studies, preferably from more than one center or 
   research group.
 2c. Evidence from comparisons between times or places with or 
   without the intervention. Dramatic results in uncontrolled 
   experiments could be included in this section.
 3. Opinions of respected authorities, based on clinical experience, 
   descriptive studies, or reports on expert committees.
CHAPTER 3 Evidence-Based Endocrinology and Clinical Epidemiology     63
 Practicing and perfecting the art of medicine demands recogni-
tion that uncertainty permeates all clinical decisions. How clini-
cians make decisions, whether diagnostic or therapeutic, by 
combining the art and the science is a complicated matter replete 
with unknowns. There is a variety of modes of clinical problem-
solving ranging from automatic decisions in which a clinician 
makes a decision without consciously considering alternatives or 
even specific features of the problem to rational decision-making 
using simplified strategies to take into account probabilities and 
values of outcomes to formal decision analysis. The potential 
deficiencies of automatic decisions (nondecisions one might say) 
are obvious. Formal decision analyses, even if accepted as gold 
standards (which they are not), are beyond practical use for the 
vast majority of clinicians, so that we are left with simplified pro-
cesses to combine likelihoods and values. However, even in striv-
ing to reduce uncertainty and coming up with the best course of 
action for the patient, it is critical to recognize that uncertainty 
will always be with us. In using a quantitative approach, we can 
only become more certain about the probability of the outcome. 
We cannot guarantee the desired outcome. 
Levels of Certainty Regarding Net Benefit
Level of Certainty*
Description
High
The available evidence usually includes consistent results from well-designed, well-conducted studies in representative 
primary care populations. These studies assess the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes. This conclusion 
is therefore unlikely to be strongly affected by the results of future studies.
Moderate
The available evidence is sufficient to determine the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes, but confi-
dence in the estimate is constrained by such factors as: 
• The number, size, or quality of individual studies. 
• Inconsistency of findings across individual studies. 
• Limited generalizability of findings to routine primary care practice. 
• Lack of coherence in the chain of evidence. 
As more information becomes available, the magnitude or direction of the observed effect could change, and this 
change may be large enough to alter the conclusion.
Low
The available evidence is insufficient to assess effects on health outcomes. Evidence is insufficient because of: 
• The limited number or size of studies. 
• Important flaws in study design or methods. 
• Inconsistency of findings across individual studies. 
• Gaps in the chain of evidence. 
• Findings not generalizable to routine primary care practice. 
• Lack of information on important health outcomes. 
More information may allow estimation of effects on health outcomes.
*The USPSTF defines certainty as “likelihood that the USPSTF assessment of the net benefit of a preventive service is correct.” The net benefit is defined as benefit minus harm of 
the preventive service as implemented in a general, primary care population. The USPSTF assigns a certainty level based on the nature of the overall evidence available to assess 
the net benefit of a preventive service.
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Ratings. Strength of recommendations and quality of evidence. Guide to Clinical Preventive Services. 3rd ed. Periodic Updates, 2000–2003. 
Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/grades.htm
TABLE 3–6  The USPSTF grading system for recommendations reflecting the strength of evidence and 
magnitude of net benefit (benefits minus harms).
Grade
Definition
Suggestions for Practice
A
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net 
benefit is substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
B
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net 
benefit is moderate or there is moderate certainty that the net benefit is 
moderate to substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
C
The USPSTF recommends against routinely providing the service. There may 
be considerations that support providing the service in an individual 
patient. There is at least moderate certainty that the net benefit is small.
Offer or provide this service only if other consid-
erations support the offering or providing the 
service in an individual patient.
D
The USPSTF recommends against the service. There is moderate or high cer-
tainty that the service has no net benefit or that the harms outweigh the 
benefits.
Discourage the use of this service.
I Statement
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to assess the bal-
ance of benefits and harms of the service. Evidence is lacking, of poor quality, or 
conflicting, and the balance of benefits and harms cannot be determined.
Read the clinical considerations section of USPSTF 
Recommendation Statement. If the service is 
offered, patients should understand the uncertainty 
about the balance of benefits and harms.
64    CHAPTER 3 Evidence-Based Endocrinology and Clinical Epidemiology
 REFERENCES 
 General 
 Greenberg RS, Daniels SR, Flanders WD, et al.  Medical Epidemiology . New York, 
NY: McGraw-Hill Medical; 2005. 
 Grobbee DE, Hoes AW.  Clinical Epidemiology: Principles, Methods, and Applications 
for Clinical Research. London: Jones & Bartlett Publishing; 2009. 
 Guyatt G, Rennie D, Meade M, Cook D.  Users’ Guides to the Medical Literature: 
Essentials of Evidence-Based Clinical Practice . 2nd ed ( JAMA & Archives 
Journals). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2008. 
 Janicek M.  The Foundations of Evidence-Based Medicine . New York, NY: Parthenon 
Publishing Group; 2003. 
 Jenicek M, Hitchcock DL.  Evidence-Based Practice: Logic and Critical Thinking in 
Medicine . Chicago, IL: AMA Press; 2005. 
 Mayer D.  Essential Evidence-Based Medicine . New York, NY: Cambridge Medicine; 
2009. 
 Muennig P.  Cost-Effectiveness in Health: A Practical Approach . New York, NY: John 
Wiley and Sons; 2009. 
 Montori VM, ed.  Evidence-Based Endocrinology . Tolowa: Humana Press Inco; 2006. 
 Strauss SE, Richardson WS, Glasziou P, Haynes, RB.  Evidence-Based Medicine. 3rd 
ed. Churchill Livingstone; 2005. 
 Diagnostic Testing and Treatment Decisions (Clinical Decision 
Making and Decision Analysis) 
 Hunink M, Glasziou P.  Decision Making in Health and Medicine: Integrating 
Evidence and Values . New York, NY: Cambridge University Press; 2001. 
 Montori VM, Wyer P, Newman TB, et al. Evidence-Based Medicine Teaching Tips 
Working Group: Tips for learners of evidence-based medicine. 5. The effect 
of spectrum of disease on the performance of diagnostic tests.  CMAJ . 
2005;173:385. [PMID: 16103513] 
 Schwartz A, Bergus G.  Medical Decision Making: A Physician’s Guide . New York, 
NY: Cambridge University Press; 2008. 
 Evidence-Based Medicine: General 
 Berwick D. Broadening the view of evidence-based medicine.  Qual Saf Health 
Care . 2005;14:315. [PMID: 16195561] 
 Daly J.  Evidence-Based Medicine and the Search for a Science of Clinical Care . 
California: University of California Press/Milbank Memorial Fund; 2005. 
 Greenhalgh T. Integrating qualitative research into evidence based practice. 
 Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am . 2002;31:583. [PMID: 12227121] 
 Translation of the Clinical Problem into Answerable Questions 
 Bergus GR, Randall CS, Sinift SD. Does the structure of clinical questions affect 
the outcome of curbside consultations with specialty colleagues?  Arch Fam 
Med . 2000;9:541. [PMID: 10862217] 
 Villanueva EV, Burrows EA, Fennessy PA, Rajendran M, Anderson JN. Improving 
question formulation for use in evidence appraisal in a tertiary care setting: 
a randomised controlled trial.  BMC Med Inf Decis Making . 2001;I:4. 
[PMID: 11716797] 
 Finding the Best Evidence 
 Haynes RB, Walker-Dilks CJ. Evidence-based endocrinology: finding the current 
best research evidence for practice in endocrinology.  Endocrinol Metab Clin 
North Am . 2002;31:527. [PMID: 12227117] 
 Richter B, Clar C. Systematic reviews in endocrinology: the Cochrane Metabolism 
and Endocrine Disorders Review Group.  Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am . 
2002;31:613. [PMID: 12227123] 
 Critical Appraisal and Applying the Results 
 Glasziou P, Vandenbroucke J, Chalmers I. Assessing the quality of research.  BMJ . 
2004;328:39. [PMID: 14703546] 
 Haynes RB, Devereaux PJ, Guyatt GH. Clinical expertise in the era of evidence-
based medicine and patient choice. ACP J Club. 2002;136:[a11]. [PMID: 
11874303] 
 Helfand M, Morton SC, Guallar E, Mulrow C. A guide to this supplement. 
Challenges of summarizing better information for better health: the evidence-
based practice center experience.  Ann Intern Med . 2005;142(suppl):1033. 
 Ioannidis JP, Haidich AB, Pappa M, et al. Comparison of evidence of treatment 
effects in randomized and nonrandomized studies.  JAMA . 2001;286:821. 
[PMID: 11497536] 
 Liberati A, Altman DG, Tetzlaff J, et al. The PRISMA statement for reporting 
systematic reviews and meta-analyses of studies that evaluate health care 
interventions: explanation and elaboration.  Ann Intern Med . 2009;151:W-65. 
www.annals.org. [PMID: 1000100] 
 Montori VM, Jaeschke R, Schünemann HJ, et al. Users’ guide to detecting misleading 
claims in clinical research reports.  BMJ . 2004;329:1093. [PMID: 15528623] 
 U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Ratings. Strength of Recommendations and 
Quality of Evidence.  Guide to Clinical Preventive Services . 3rd ed. Periodic 
Updates, 2000-2003. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and 
Quality. http://www.ahrq.gov/clinic/3rduspstf/ratings.htm. 
 van Dam HA, van der Horst F, van den Borne B, et al. Provider–patient interaction 
in diabetes care: effects on patient self-care and outcomes. A systematic 
review.  Patient Educ Couns . 2003;51:17. [PMID: 12915276] 
 Whitney SN, McGuire AL, McCullough LB. A typology of shared decision mak-
ing, informed consent, and simple consent.  Ann Intern Med . 2003;140:54. 
[PMID: 14706973] 
 Practice Guidelines 
 Aron D, Pogach L. Transparency standards for diabetes performance measures. 
 JAMA . 2009;301:210. [PMID: 19141769] 
 Boyd CM, Darer J, Boult C, et al. Clinical practice guidelines and quality of care 
for older patients with multiple comorbid diseases: implications of pay for 
performance.  JAMA . 2005;294:716-724. [PMID: 16091574] 
 Brozek JL, Akl EA, Jaeschke R, et al. Grading quality of evidence and strength of 
recommendations in clinical practice guidelines. Part 1 of 3. An overview of 
the GRADE approach and grading quality of evidence about interventions. 
 Allergy . 2009;64:669. [PMID: 19210357] 
 Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist G, et al. Rating quality of evidence and strength of rec-
ommendations GRADE: an emerging consensus on rating quality of evidence 
and strength of recommendations.  BMJ . 2008;336:924. [PMID: 18436948] 
 Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, et al. Rating quality of evidence and strength of 
recommendations: what is “quality of evidence” and why is it important to 
clinicians?  BMJ . 2008;336:995. [PMID: 18456631] 
 Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, et al. Rating quality of evidence and strength of 
recommendations: incorporating considerations of resources use into grad-
ing recommendations.  BMJ . 2008;336:1170. [PMID: 18497416] 
 Guyatt GH, Henry D, Hill S, et al. Rating quality of evidence and strength of 
recommendations: going from evidence to recommendations.  BMJ . 
2008;336:1049. [PMID: 18467413] 
 Jaeschke R, Guyatt GH, Dellinger P, et al. Use of GRADE grid to reach decisions 
on clinical practice guidelines when consensus is elusive.  BMJ . 2008;337:a744. 
[PMID: 18669566] 
 McGoey L. Sequestered evidence and the distortion of clinical practice guidelines. 
 Persp Biol Med . 2009;52:203. [PMID: 19395820] 
 Qaseem A, Vijan S, Snow V, Cross JT, Weiss KB, Owens DK. Clinical Efficacy 
Assessment Subcommittee of the American College of Physicians. Glycemic 
control and type 2 diabetes mellitus: the optimal hemoglobin A1c targets: a 
guidance statement from the American College of Physicians.  Ann Intern 
Med . 2007;147:417. [PMID: 17876024] 
 Schünemann HJ, Oxman AD, Brozek J. Grading quality of evidence and strength 
of recommendations for diagnostic tests and strategies.  BMJ . 2008;336:1106. 
[PMID: 18483053] 
 Shaneyfelt TM, Centor RM. Reassessment of clinical practice guidelines: go gently 
into that good night.  JAMA . 2009;301:868. [PMID: 19244197] 
 Internet Sites Related to Evidence-Based Medicine 
 Center for Health Evidence. http://www.cebm.net/  
 Center for Evidence Based Medicine. http://www.ahrq.gov/clinic/epc/  
 Evidence-Based Medicine Web Resources. University of Washington Health 
Sciences Library. http://healthlinks.washington.edu/howto/ebmtable.html 
 Health Information Resource Unit, McMaster University. http://hiru.mcmaster.ca/ 
 
65
4
 Hypothalamus and 
Pituitary Gland 
 Bradley R. Javorsky, MD,  David C. Aron, MD, MS, 
 James W. Findling, MD, and  J. Blake Tyrrell, MD  
 ACTH 
Adrenocorticotropic hormone 
 ADH 
Antidiuretic hormone (vasopressin) 
 CLIP 
Corticotropin-like intermediate lobe peptide 
 CRH 
Corticotropin-releasing hormone 
 CRHBP 
Corticotropin-releasing hormone-binding 
 
protein 
 FGF8 
Fibroblast growth factor 8
 FGFR1 
Fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 
 FSH 
Follicle-stimulating hormone 
 GABA 
Gamma-aminobutyric acid 
 GH 
Growth hormone (somatotropin) 
 GHBP 
Growth hormone–binding protein 
 GHRH 
Growth hormone–releasing hormone 
 GHS-R 
Growth hormone secretagogue receptor 
 GnRH 
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
 hCG 
Human chorionic gonadotropin 
 hMG 
Human menopausal gonadotropin 
 hPL 
Human placental lactogen 
 ICMA 
Immunochemiluminescent assay 
 IGF 
Insulin-like growth factor 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 The hypothalamus and pituitary gland form a unit that exerts 
control over the function of several endocrine glands—thyroid, 
adrenals, and gonads—as well as a wide range of physiologic 
activities. This unit is highly conserved across vertebrate species 
and constitutes a paradigm of neuroendocrinology—brain– 
endocrine interactions. The actions and interactions of the endo-
crine and nervous systems, whereby the nervous system regulates 
the endocrine system and endocrine activity modulates the activ-
ity of the central nervous system, constitute the major regulatory 
mechanisms for virtually all physiologic activities. These neuroen-
docrine interactions are also important in pathogenesis. This 
 IRMA 
Immunoradiometric assay
KAL1 
Kallmann syndrome 1 
 LH 
Luteinizing hormone 
 β-LPH 
 β-Lipotropin 
Met-Enk 
Methionine-enkephalin
 MEN 
Multiple endocrine neoplasia 
 MSH 
Melanocyte-stimulating hormone
Pit-1 
Pituitary-specific positive transcription factor 1 
 POMC 
Pro-opiomelanocortin
PROK2 
Prokineticin 2
PROKR2 
Prokineticin receptor 2
Prop-1 
Prophet of Pit-1 
 PRL 
Prolactin
 PTTG 
Pituitary tumor transforming gene 
 SHBG 
Sex hormone–binding globulin 
 SIADH 
Syndrome of inappropriate secretion of 
 
antidiuretic hormone 
 TRH 
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone 
 TSH 
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (thyrotropin) 
 VIP 
Vasoactive intestinal peptide 
chapter will review the normal functions of the pituitary gland, 
the  neuroendocrine control mechanisms of the hypothalamus, 
and the disorders of those mechanisms. 
 Nerve cells and endocrine cells, which are both involved in 
cell-to-cell communication, share certain characteristic features—
secretion of chemical messengers (neurotransmitters or hormones) 
and electrical activity. A single chemical messenger—peptide or 
amine—can be secreted by neurons as a neurotransmitter or neu-
ral hormone and by endocrine cells as a classic hormone. Examples 
of such multifunctional chemical messengers are shown in 
 Table 4–1 . The cell-to-cell communication may occur by four 
66    CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland
mechanisms: (1) autocrine communication via messengers that dif-
fuse in the interstitial fluid and act on the cells that secreted them, 
(2) neural communication via synaptic junctions, (3) paracrine 
communication via messengers that diffuse in the interstitial fluid 
to adjacent target cells (without entering the bloodstream), and 
(4) endocrine communication via circulating hormones 
( Figure 4–1 ). The two major mechanisms of neural regulation of 
endocrine function are direct innervation and neurosecretion (neu-
ral secretion of hormones). The adrenal medulla, kidney, parathy-
roid gland, and pancreatic islets are endocrine tissues that receive 
direct autonomic innervation (see Chapters 9, 10, 11). An example 
of neurosecretory regulation is the hormonal secretion of certain 
hypothalamic nuclei into the portal hypophysial vessels, which 
regulate the  hormone-secreting cells of the anterior lobe of the pitu-
itary. Another example of neurosecretory regulation is the posterior 
lobe of the pituitary gland, which is made up of the endings of neu-
rons whose cell bodies reside in hypothalamic nuclei. These neurons 
secrete vasopressin and oxytocin into the general circulation. 
 Anatomy and Embryology 
 The anatomic relationships between the pituitary and the main 
nuclei of the hypothalamus are shown in  Figure 4–2 . The posterior 
lobe of the pituitary (neurohypophysis) is of neural origin, arising 
embryologically as an evagination of the ventral  hypothalamus and 
the third ventricle. The neurohypophysis  consists of the axons and 
TABLE 4–1  Neuroendocrine messengers: substances that function as neurotransmitters, 
neural hormones, and classic hormones.
Neurotransmitter 
(Present in Nerve 
Endings)
Hormone 
Secreted by 
Neurons
Hormone 
Secreted by 
Endocrine Cells
Dopamine
+
+
+
Norepinephrine
+
+
+
Epinephrine
+
 
+
Somatostatin
+
+
+
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)
+
+
+
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH)
+
+
 
Oxytocin
+
+
+
Vasopressin
+
+
+
Vasoactive intestinal peptide
+
+
 
Cholecystokinin (CCK)
+
 
+
Glucagon
+
 
+
Enkephalins
+
 
+
Pro-opiomelanocortin derivatives
+
 
+
Other anterior pituitary hormones
+
 
+
Endocrine
Message transmission
Local or general
Specificity depends on
Anatomic location
Local
Local
Anatomic location
and receptors
Gap junctions
Synaptic
Paracrine
By circulating 
body fluids
General
Receptors
Receptors
Locally diffuse
By diffusion in
interstitial fluid
Across synaptic 
cleft
Directly from cell
to cell
 FIGURE 4–1  Intercellular communication by chemical mediators. 
CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland     67
nerve endings of neurons whose cell bodies reside in the supraoptic 
and paraventricular nuclei of the hypothalamus and supporting 
tissues. This hypothalamic-neurohypophysial nerve tract contains 
approximately 100,000 nerve fibers. Repeated swellings along the 
nerve fibers ranging in thickness from 1 to 50 μm constitute the 
nerve terminals. 
 The human fetal anterior pituitary anlage is initially recogniz-
able at 4 to 5 weeks of gestation, and rapid cytologic differentia-
tion leads to a mature hypothalamic-pituitary unit at 20 weeks. 
The anterior pituitary (adenohypophysis) originates from Rathke 
pouch, an ectodermal evagination of the oropharynx, and migrates 
to join the neurohypophysis. The portion of Rathke pouch in 
contact with the neurohypophysis develops less extensively and 
forms the intermediate lobe. This lobe remains intact in some spe-
cies, but in humans its cells become interspersed with those of the 
anterior lobe and develop the capacity to synthesize and secrete 
pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) and adrenocorticotropic hor-
mone (ACTH). Remnants of Rathke pouch may persist at the 
boundary of the neurohypophysis, resulting in small colloid cysts. 
In addition, cells may persist in the lower portion of Rathke pouch 
beneath the sphenoid bone, the pharyngeal pituitary. These cells 
have the potential to secrete hormones and have been reported to 
undergo adenomatous change. 
 The pituitary gland itself lies at the base of the skull in a por-
tion of the sphenoid bone called the sella turcica (Turkish saddle). 
The anterior portion, the tuberculum sellae, is flanked by poste-
rior projections of the sphenoid wings, the anterior clinoid pro-
cesses. The dorsum sellae forms the posterior wall, and its upper 
corners project into the posterior clinoid processes. The gland is 
surrounded by dura, and the roof is formed by a reflection of the 
dura attached to the clinoid processes, the diaphragma sellae. The 
arachnoid membrane and, therefore, cerebrospinal fluid are pre-
vented from entering the sella turcica by the diaphragma sellae. 
The pituitary stalk and its blood vessels pass through an opening 
in this diaphragm. The lateral walls of the gland are in direct 
apposition to the cavernous sinuses and separated from them by 
dural membranes. The optic chiasm lies 5 to 10 mm above the 
diaphragma sellae and anterior to the stalk ( Figure 4–3 ). 
Dorsal hypothalamic area
Paraventricular nucleus
Anterior hypothalamic area
Preoptic area
Supraoptic nucleus
Suprachiasmatic nucleus
Arcuate nucleus
Optic chiasm
Median eminence
Superior hypophysial artery
Portal hypophysial vessel
Anterior lobe
Pituitary
gland
Posterior lobe
Posterior hypothalamic nucleus
Dorsomedial nucleus
Ventromedial nucleus
Premammillary nucleus
Medial mammillary nucleus
Lateral mammillary nucleus
Mammillary body
 FIGURE 4–2  The human hypothalamus, with a superimposed diagrammatic representation of the portal hypophysial vessels.  (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Ganong WF.  Review of Medical Physiology . 15th ed. McGraw-Hill; 1993). 
68    CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland
 The size of the pituitary gland, of which the anterior lobe 
constitutes two-thirds, varies considerably. It measures approxi-
mately 15 × 10 × 6 mm and weighs 500 to 900 mg; it may double 
in size during pregnancy. The sella turcica tends to conform to 
the shape and size of the gland, and for that reason there is con-
siderable variability in its contour. 
 Blood Supply 
 The anterior pituitary is the most richly vascularized of all mam-
malian tissues, receiving 0.8 mL/g/min from a portal circulation 
connecting the median eminence of the hypothalamus and the 
anterior pituitary. Arterial blood is supplied from the internal 
carotid arteries via the superior, middle, and inferior hypophysial 
arteries. The superior hypophysial arteries form a capillary net-
work in the median eminence of the hypothalamus that recom-
bines in long portal veins draining down the pituitary stalk to the 
anterior lobe, where they break up into another capillary network 
and re-form into venous channels. The pituitary stalk and the 
posterior pituitary are supplied directly from branches of the 
middle and inferior hypophysial arteries (see  Figures 4–2 and  4–3 ). 
 Venous drainage of the pituitary, the route through which ante-
rior pituitary hormones reach the systemic circulation, is variable, 
but venous channels eventually drain via the cavernous sinus pos-
teriorly into the superior and inferior petrosal sinuses to the jugular 
bulb and vein ( Figure 4–4 ). The axons of the  neurohypophysis 
terminate on capillaries that drain via the posterior lobe veins and 
the cavernous sinuses to the general circulation. The hypophysial 
portal system of capillaries allows control of anterior pituitary func-
tion by the hypothalamic hypophysiotropic hormones secreted 
into the portal hypophysial vessels. This provides a short, direct 
connection to the anterior pituitary from the ventral hypothalamus 
and the median eminence ( Figure 4–5 ). There may also be retro-
grade blood flow between the pituitary and hypothalamus, provid-
ing a possible means of direct feedback between pituitary hormones 
and their neuroendocrine control centers. 
 Pituitary Development and Histology 
 Anterior pituitary cells were originally classified as acidophils, 
basophils, and chromophobe cells based on staining with hema-
toxylin and eosin. Immunocytochemical and electron microscopic 
techniques now permit classification of cells by their specific secre-
tory products: somatotrophs (growth hormone [GH]-secreting 
cells), lactotrophs (prolactin [PRL]-secreting cells), thyrotrophs 
(cells secreting thyroid-stimulating hormone [thyrotropin; TSH]), 
corticotrophs (cells-secreting ACTH [corticotropin] and related 
peptides), and gonadotrophs (luteinizing hormone [LH]– and 
follicle-stimulating hormone [FSH]–secreting cells). The develop-
ment of the pituitary gland and the emergence of the distinct cell 
types from common primordial cells are controlled by a limited 
set of transcription factors, most notably Prop1 and Pit1 
Third ventricle
Optic chiasm
Anterior clinoid 
Long portal veins 
Dura 
Anterior lobe
(adenohypophysis) 
Sphenoid sinus 
Median eminence
Internal carotid artery
Posterior clinoid
Posterior lobe
(neurohypophysis)
Pituitary stalk
Diaphragma sellae
 FIGURE 4–3  Anatomic relationships and blood supply of the pituitary gland.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Frohman LA. Diseases of 
the anterior pituitary. In: Felig P, Baxter JD, Frohman LA, eds.  Endocrinology and Metabolism . 3rd ed. McGraw-Hill; 1995). 
CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland     69
( Figure 4–6 ). The individual hormone-secreting cells emerge in a 
specific order and from distinct lineages. Abnormalities of pituitary 
and lineage–specific transcription factors have been associated with 
the development of hypopituitarism. Although traditionally the 
pituitary has been conceptualized as a gland with distinct and 
highly specialized cells that respond to specific hypothalamic and 
peripheral hormones, it has become clear that local (ie, paracrine) 
factors also play a role in normal pituitary physiology. 
 A. Somatotrophs 
 The GH-secreting cells are acidophilic and 
usually located in the lateral portions of the anterior lobe. Granule 
size by electron microscopy is 150 to 600 nm in diameter. These 
cells account for about 50% of the adenohypophysial cells. 
 B. Lactotrophs 
 The PRL-secreting cell is a second but dis-
tinct acidophil-staining cell randomly distributed in the anterior 
pituitary. These cells account for 10% to 25% of anterior pituitary 
cells. Granule size averages approximately 550 nm on electron 
microscopy. There are two types of lactotrophs: sparsely granu-
lated and densely granulated. These cells proliferate during preg-
nancy as a result of elevated estrogen levels and account for the 
twofold increase in gland size. 
 C. Thyrotrophs  These TSH-secreting cells, because of their gly-
coprotein product, are basophilic and also show a positive reaction 
with periodic acid-Schiff stain. Thyrotrophs are the least common 
pituitary cell type, making up less than 10% of adenohypophysial 
cells. The thyrotroph granules are small (50-100 nm), and these cells 
Basilar plexus
Superior petrosal sinus
Occipital sinus
Superior sagittal sinus
Transverse sinus
Sigmoid sinus
Internal jugular vein
Superior bulb of jugular vein
Inferior petrosal sinus
Cavernous sinus
Pituitary
 FIGURE 4–4  Venous drainage of the pituitary gland—the route by which adenohypophysial hormones reach the systemic circulation. 
 (Reproduced, with permission, from Findling JW, et al. Selective venous sampling for ACTH in Cushing’s syndrome: differentiation between 
Cushing’s disease and the ectopic ACTH syndrome.  Ann Intern Med . 1981;94:647). 
MB
OC
PL
SO and PV
ARC
AL
Anterior 
pituitary hormones
Posterior pituitary 
hormones
 FIGURE 4–5  Secretion of hypothalamic hormones. The hor-
mones of the posterior lobe (PL) are released into the general circula-
tion from the endings of supraoptic and paraventricular neurons, 
whereas hypophysiotropic hormones are secreted into the portal 
hypophysial circulation from the endings of arcuate and other hypo-
thalamic neurons (AL, anterior lobe; ARC, arcuate and other nuclei; 
MB, mamillary bodies; OC, optic chiasm; PV, paraventricular nucleus; 
SO, supraoptic nucleus). 
70    CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland
are usually located in the anteromedial and anterolateral portions 
of the gland. During states of primary thyroid failure, the cells 
demonstrate marked hypertrophy, increasing overall gland size. 
 D. Corticotrophs 
 ACTH and its related peptides (see below) 
are secreted by basophilic cells that are embryologically of interme-
diate lobe origin and usually located in the anteromedial portion of 
the gland. Corticotrophs represent 15% to 20% of adenohypophy-
sial cells. Electron microscopy shows that these secretory granules 
are about 360 nm in diameter. In states of glucocorticoid excess, 
corticotrophs undergo degranulation and a microtubular hyaliniza-
tion known as Crooke hyaline degeneration. 
 E. Gonadotrophs 
 LH and FSH originate from basophil-
staining cells, whose secretory granules are about 200 nm in diam-
eter. These cells constitute 10% to 15% of anterior pituitary cells, 
and they are located throughout the entire anterior lobe. They 
become hypertrophied and cause the gland to enlarge during 
states of primary gonadal failure such as menopause, Klinefelter 
syndrome, and Turner syndrome. 
 F. Other cell types 
 Some cells, usually chromophobes, con-
tain secretory granules but do not exhibit immunocytochemical 
staining for the major known anterior pituitary hormones. These 
cells have been called null cells; they may give rise to (apparently) 
nonfunctioning adenomas. Some may represent undifferentiated 
primitive secretory cells, and others (eg, glia-like or folliculostel-
late cells) may produce one or more of the many paracrine factors 
that have been described in the pituitary. Mammosomatotrophs 
contain both GH and PRL; these bihormonal cells are most often 
seen in pituitary tumors. Human chorionic gonadotropin is also 
secreted by the anterior pituitary gland, but its cell of origin and 
physiologic significance are uncertain. The six known major ante-
rior pituitary hormones are listed in  Table 4–2 . 
 HYPOTHALAMIC HORMONES 
 The hypothalamic hormones can be divided into those secreted 
into hypophysial portal blood vessels and those secreted by the 
neurohypophysis directly into the general circulation. The hypo-
thalamic nuclei, their neurohormones, and their main functions 
are shown in  Table 4–3 . The structures of the eight major hypo-
thalamic hormones are shown in  Table 4–4 . 
 Hypophysiotropic Hormones 
 The hypophysiotropic hormones that regulate the secretion of 
anterior pituitary hormones include growth hormone–releasing 
TSH
PRL
GH 
NE OE
Prop1
Pit1
α-GSU
Neuro01
LIF
Tpita
ACTH
GATA2
DAX1 SF1
LH/FSH
VH
RP
Ptx1
Pax6
Six3
Hesx1
Isl1
Ptx1
Lbx3/4
Hesx1
Six3
Ptx1
E 8.0-8.5
Organ
commitment
E 11
Definitive
pouch
E 13.5-15.5
Lineage
determination
E 15.5-17.5
Cellular
commitment
 FIGURE 4–6  Transcription factors involved in the early development of mouse pituitary, including Tpit. 
 Tpit is expressed on embryonic day E 11.5, followed by expression of POMC-producing cells by E 12.5 (DAX1, dosage sensitive sex-reversal- 
adrenal hypoplasia congenital critical region on the X chromosome 1; GATA2, GATA-binding protein 2, zinc-finger transcription factor; α-GSU, 
alpha subunit of pituitary glycoprotein hormones; Hesx1, homeobox gene expressed in embryonic stem cells 1; Isl1, islet 1 transcription factor; 
LH/FSH, luteinizing hormone/follicle-stimulating hormone; Lhx3/4, LIM-domain transcription factor 3/4; LIF, leukemia inhibiting factor; NE, neu-
ral epithelium; Neuro01, neurogenic basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor 01; OE, oral ectoderm; Pax6, paired box containing transcription 
factor 6; Pit1, pituitary transcription factor 1; PRL, prolactin; Prop1, prophet of Pit1; Ptx1, pituitary homeobox 1; RP, Rathke pouch; SF1, steroido-
genic factor 1; Six3, sine oculis-like homeobox transcription factor 3; Tpit, T-box pituitary transcription factor; VH, ventral hypothalamus).  (From 
Asteria C. T-Box and isolated ACTH deficiency.  Eur J Endocrinol . 2002;146:463). 
CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland     71
hormone (GHRH), somatostatin, dopamine, thyrotropin- 
releasing hormone (TRH), corticotropin-releasing hormone 
(CRH), and gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH). The loca-
tion of the cell bodies of the hypophysiotropic hormone–secreting 
neurons is depicted in  Figure 4–7 . Most of the anterior pituitary 
hormones are controlled by stimulatory hormones, but GH and 
especially PRL are also regulated by inhibitory hormones. Some 
hypophysiotropic hormones are multifunctional. The hormones 
of the hypothalamus are secreted episodically and not continu-
ously, and in some cases there is an underlying circadian rhythm. 
 A. GHRH 
 GHRH stimulates GH secretion by, and is trophic 
for, somatotrophs. GHRH-secreting neurons are located in the 
arcuate nuclei (see  Figure 4–2 ), and axons terminate in the exter-
nal layer of the median eminence. The major isoform of GHRH 
is 44 amino acids in length. It was isolated from a pancreatic 
tumor in a patient with clinical manifestations of GH excess (acro-
megaly) associated with somatotroph hyperplasia (see discussion 
later in the chapter). GHRH is synthesized from a larger precursor 
of 108 amino acids. Other secretory products derived from this 
precursor have also been found. Full biologic activity of these 
releasing factors appears to reside in the 1 to 29 amino acid 
sequence of the amino terminal portion of the molecule. Human 
GHRH is a member of a homologous family of peptides that includes 
secretin, glucagon, vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), and others. 
The half-life of GHRH is approximately 3 to 7 minutes. 
 B. Somatostatin 
 Somatostatin inhibits the secretion of GH 
and TSH. Somatostatin-secreting cells are located in the periven-
tricular region immediately above the optic chiasm (see  Figure 4–2 ) 
with nerve endings found diffusely in the external layer of the 
median eminence. 
 Somatostatin, a tetradecapeptide, has been found not only in 
the hypothalamus but also in the D cells of the pancreatic islets, 
the gastrointestinal mucosa, and the C cells (parafollicular cells) 
of the thyroid. The somatostatin precursor has 116 amino acids. 
TABLE 4–2 Major adenohypophysial hormones and their cellular sources.
Cellular Source and 
Histologic Staining
Main Hormone Products
Structure of Hormone
Main Functions
Somatotroph (acidophil)
GH; also known as STH or 
somatotropin
191 amino acids, 22-kDa 
protein, mainly 
nonglycosylated
Stimulates the production of IGF-1 (the mediator 
of the indirect actions of GH); also exerts direct 
actions on growth and metabolism.
Lactotroph or mammotroph 
 (acidophil)
PRL
198 amino acids, 23-kDa 
protein, mainly 
nonglycosylated (Note: most 
of the decidually produced 
PRL is glycosylated)
Stimulation of milk production (protein and 
lactose synthesis, water excretion, and sodium 
retention); inhibits gonadotropin; 
immunomodulator
Corticotroph (small cells with 
 basophil granules with 
 strong PAS positivity, 
 indicating the presence of 
 glycoproteins)
Derivatives of POMC, 
mainly ACTH and β-LPH
POMC: glycosylated 
 polypeptide of 134 amino 
 acid residues
ACTH: simple peptide of 39 
 amino acid residues, 4.5 kDa
β-LPH: simple peptide of 
 91 amino acid residues, 
 11.2 kDa
ACTH: stimulation of glucocorticoids and sex 
 steroids in the zona fasciculata and zona 
 reticularis of the adrenal cortex, inducing 
 hyperplasia and hypertrophy of the adrenal 
 cortex
β-LPH: weak lipolytic and opioid actions
Thyrotroph (large cells with 
 basophil granules with PAS 
 positivity)
TSH
Glycoprotein hormone 
 consisting of a shared α 
 (89 amino acid) and a TSH-
 specific β (112 amino acid) 
 subunit
Total size: 28 kDa
Stimulation of all aspects of thyroid gland func-
tion: hormone synthesis, secretion, hyperplasia, 
hypertrophy, and vascularization
Gonadotroph (small cells with 
 basophil granules with 
 periodic acid-Schiff positivity)
LH: named after its effect 
in females; is identical to 
the ICSH (interstitial cell 
stimulating hormone) 
originally described in 
males
Glycoprotein hormone 
 consisting of a shared α 
 and an LH-specific β 
 (115 amino acid) subunit
Total size: 29 kDa
Females: stimulates steroid hormone synthesis in 
 theca interna cells, lutein cells, and hilar cells; 
 promotes luteinization and maintains corpus 
 luteum
Males: stimulates steroid hormone production in 
Leydig cells
FSH
Glycoprotein hormone 
 consisting of a shared α 
 and an FSH-specific β 
 (115 amino acid) subunit.
Total size: 29 kDa
Females: targets the granulosa cells to promote 
 follicular development; stimulates aromatase 
 expression and inhibin secretion
Males: targets the Sertoli cells to promote 
 spermatogenesis and to stimulate inhibin 
 secretion
Modified from Kacsoh B. Endocrine Physiology. McGraw-Hill; 2000.
72    CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland
Processing of the carboxyl terminal region of preprosomatosta-
tin results in the generation of the tetradecapeptide somatosta-
tin 14 and an amino terminal extended form containing 
28 amino acid residues (somatostatin 28). Somatostatin 14 is 
the major species in the hypothalamus, whereas somatostatin 
28 is found in the gut. In addition to its profound inhibitory 
effect on GH secretion, somatostatin also has important inhibi-
tory influences on many other hormones, including insulin, 
 glucagon, gastrin, secretin, and VIP. This inhibitory hypotha-
lamic peptide plays a role in the physiologic secretion of TSH 
by augmenting the direct inhibitory effect of thyroid hormone 
on the thyrotrophs; administration of anti-somatostatin anti-
bodies results in a rise in circulating TSH level. Somatostatin 
has a half-life of 2 to 3 minutes. 
 C. Dopamine 
 Dopamine, the primary PRL-inhibitory hor-
mone, is found in the portal circulation and binds to dopamine 
receptors on lactotrophs. It has a short half-life, on the order of 1 
to 2 minutes. The hypothalamic control of PRL secretion, unlike 
that of the other pituitary hormones, is predominantly inhibitory. 
Thus, disruption of the hypothalamic-pituitary connection by 
stalk section, hypothalamic lesions, or pituitary autotransplanta-
tion increases PRL secretion. Dopamine-secreting neurons 
(tuberoinfundibular dopaminergic system) are located in the arcu-
ate nuclei, and their axons terminate in the external layer of the 
median eminence, primarily in the same area as the GnRH end-
ings (laterally) and to a lesser extent medially (see  Figure 4–2 ). The 
neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and cholin-
ergic pathways also appear to inhibit PRL release. 
 D. Prolactin-releasing factors 
 The best-studied factor with 
PRL-releasing activity is TRH (see discussion later), but there is 
little evidence for a physiologic role. PRL increase associated with 
sleep, during stress, and after nipple stimulation or suckling is not 
accompanied by an increase in TRH or TSH. Another hypotha-
lamic peptide, VIP, stimulates PRL release in humans. Serotonergic 
pathways may also stimulate PRL secretion, as demonstrated by 
the increased PRL secretion after the administration of serotonin 
precursors and by the reduction of secretion following treatment 
with serotonin antagonists. 
TABLE 4–3 The hypothalamic nuclei and their main functions.
Nucleus
Location
Major Neurohormones or Function
Supraoptic
Anterolateral, above the optic tract
ADH: osmoregulation, regulation of ECF volume
Oxytocin: regulation of uterine contractions and milk ejection
Paraventricular
Dorsal anterior periventricular
Magnocellular paraventricular nucleus (PVN): ADH, oxytocin: same functions 
 as above
Parvocellular PVN
TRH: regulation of thyroid function
CRH: regulation of adrenocortical function, regulation of the sympathetic 
 nervous system and adrenal medulla, regulation of appetite
ADH: coexpressed with CRH, regulation of adrenocortical function
VIP: prolactin-releasing factor (?)
Suprachiasmatic
Above the optic chiasm, anteroventral 
 periventricular zone
Regulator of circadian rhythms and pineal function (zeitgeber [pacemaker]): 
 VIP, ADH neurons project mainly to the PVN
Arcuate
Medial basal hypothalamus close to 
 the third ventricle
GHRH: stimulation of growth hormone
GnRH: regulation of pituitary gonadotropins (FSH and LH)
Dopamine: functions as PIH
Somatostatin: inhibition of GHRH release
Regulation of appetite (neuropeptide Y, agouti-related transcript, α-MSH, 
 cocaine- and amphetamine-related transcript)
Periventricular
Anteroventral
Somatostatin: inhibition of growth hormone secretion by direct pituitary 
 action: most abundant SRIF location
Ventromedial
Ventromedial
GHRH (as above)
Somatostatin: inhibition of GHRH release
Functions as a satiety center
Dorsomedial
Dorsomedial
Focal point of information processing: receives input from ventromedial 
 nucleus (VMN) and lateral hypothalamus and projects to the PVN
Lateral hypothalamus
Lateral hypothalamus
Functions as a hunger center (melanin-concentrating hormone, anorexins)
Preoptic area
Preoptic area
Main regulator of ovulation in rodents; only a few GnRH neurons in primates
Anterior hypothalamus
Anterior hypothalamus
Thermoregulation: cooling center
Anteroventral third ventricular region: regulation of thirst
Posterior hypothalamus
Posterior hypothalamus
Thermoregulation: heating center
Modified from Kacsoh B. Endocrine Physiology. McGraw-Hill; 2000.
CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland     73
 E. Thyrotropin-releasing hormone  TRH, a tripeptide, is the 
major hypothalamic factor regulating TSH secretion. Human TRH 
is synthesized from a large precursor of 242 amino acids that contains 
six copies of TRH. TRH-secreting neurons are located in the medial 
portions of the paraventricular nuclei (see  Figure 4–2 ), and their axons 
terminate in the medial portion of the external layer of the median 
eminence. The half-life of TRH is approximately 6 minutes. 
 F. Corticotropin-releasing hormone 
 CRH, a 41-amino-
acid peptide, stimulates the secretion of ACTH and other prod-
ucts of its precursor molecule, POMC. CRH is synthesized from 
a precursor of 196 amino acids. The half-life of CRH follows a 
biphasic pattern in plasma lasting approximately 6 to 10 minutes 
and 40 to 50 minutes. Both antidiuretic hormone (ADH) and 
angiotensin II potentiate CRH-mediated secretion of ACTH. In 
contrast, oxytocin inhibits CRH-mediated ACTH secretion. 
CRH-secreting neurons are found in the anterior portion of the 
paraventricular nuclei just lateral to the TRH-secreting neurons; 
their nerve endings are found in all parts of the external layer of 
the median eminence. CRH is also secreted from human placenta. 
The level of this hormone increases significantly during late preg-
nancy and delivery. In addition, a specific CRH-binding protein 
(CRHBP) has been described in both serum and in intracellular 
locations within a variety of cells. It is likely that CRHBPs modu-
late the actions and plasma half-life of CRH. Since the 1990s, three 
proteins homologous to CRH, termed urocortins, and two differ-
ent receptors, have been identified. In addition to the role of CRH 
in the physiologic response to stress, this family of peptides 
appears to play a significant role in energy balance. 
 G. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
 The secretion of 
LH and FSH is controlled by a single stimulatory hypothalamic 
hormone, GnRH. This is achieved through differences in the size 
and frequency of GnRH release as well as feedback from estro-
gens and androgens; low-frequency pulses favor FSH release 
while high-frequency pulses result in LH release. GnRH is a lin-
ear decapeptide that stimulates only LH and FSH; it has no effect 
on other pituitary hormones except in some patients with acro-
megaly and Cushing disease (see discussion later). The precursor 
of GnRH—proGnRH—contains 92 amino acids. ProGnRH 
also contains the sequence of a 56-amino-acid polypeptide called 
GnRH-associated peptide. This secretory product exhibits PRL-
inhibiting activity, but its physiologic role is unknown. GnRH-
secreting neurons are located primarily in the preoptic area of 
the anterior hypothalamus, and their nerve terminals are found in 
the lateral portions of the external layer of the median eminence 
adjacent to the pituitary stalk (see  Figure 4–2 ). GnRH has a half-
life of 2 to 4 minutes. 
 Neuroendocrinology: The Hypothalamus 
as Part of a Larger System 
 The hypothalamus is involved in many nonendocrine functions 
such as regulation of body temperature, thirst, and food intake 
TABLE 4–4  Hypothalamic hormones.
Hormone 
Structure 
Posterior pituitary hormones 
 Arginine vasopressin 
 Oxytocin 
Hypophysiotropic hormones 
 Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) 
(pyro)Glu-His-Pro-NH2 
 Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) 
(pyro)Glu-His-Trp-Ser-Tyr-Gly-Leu-Arg-Pro-Gly-NH2 
 Somatostatina 
 Growth hormone–releasing hormone (GHRH) 
Tyr-Ala-Asp-Ala-Ile-Phe-Thr-Asn-Ser-Tyr-Arg-Lys-Val-Leu-Gly-Gln-Leu-Ser-
Ala-Arg-Lys-Leu-Leu-Gln-Asp-Ile-Met-Ser-Arg-Gln-Gln-Gly-Glu-Ser-Asn-Gln-
Glu-Arg-Gly-Ala-Arg-Ala-Arg-Leu-NH2 
 Prolactin-inhibiting hormone (PIH, dopamine) 
 Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) 
Ser-Gln-Glu-Pro-Pro-Ile-Ser-Leu-Asp-Leu-Thr-Phe-His-Leu-Leu-Arg-Glu-Val-
Leu-Glu-Met-Thr-Lys-Ala-Asp-Gln-Leu-Ala-Gln-Gln-Ala-His-Ser-Asn-Arg-Lys-
Leu-Leu-Asp-Ile-Ala-NH2 
aIn addition to the tetradecapeptide shown here (somatostatin 14), an amino terminal–extended molecule (somatostatin 28), and a 12-amino-acid form (somatostatin 28 [1-12]) 
are found in most tissues. 
74    CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland
and is connected with many other parts of the nervous system. 
The brain itself is influenced by both direct and indirect hormonal 
effects. Steroid and thyroid hormones cross the blood–brain bar-
rier and produce specific receptor-mediated actions (see Chapters 
1, 7, and 9). Peptides in the general circulation, which do not 
cross the blood–brain barrier, elicit their effects indirectly (eg, 
insulin-mediated changes in blood–glucose concentration). In 
addition, communication between the general circulation and the 
brain may take place via the circumventricular organs, which are 
located outside the blood–brain barrier (see later). Moreover, 
hypothalamic hormones in extrahypothalamic brain function as 
neurotransmitters or neurohormones. They are also found in 
other tissues where they function as hormones (endocrine, para-
crine, or autocrine). For example, somatostatin-containing neu-
rons are widely distributed in the nervous system. They are also 
found in the pancreatic islets (D cells), the gastrointestinal 
mucosa, and the C cells of the thyroid gland (parafollicular cells). 
Somatostatin is not only secreted into the general circulation as 
well as locally—it is also secreted into the lumen of the gut, where 
it may affect gut secretion. A hormone with this activity has been 
called a  lumone . Hormones common to the brain, pituitary, and 
gastrointestinal tract include not only TRH and somatostatin but 
also VIP and peptides derived from POMC. 
 Hypothalamic function is regulated both by hormone-medi-
ated signals (eg, negative feedback) and by neural inputs from a 
wide variety of sources. These nerve signals are mediated by neu-
rotransmitters including acetylcholine, dopamine, norepineph-
rine, epinephrine, serotonin, GABA, and opioids. The 
hypothalamus can be considered a final common pathway by 
which signals from multiple systems reach the anterior pituitary. 
For example, cytokines that play a role in the response to infec-
tion, such as the interleukins, are also involved in regulation of the 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. This system of immunoneu-
roendocrine interactions is important in the organism’s response 
to a variety of stresses. 
 The hypothalamus also sends signals to other parts of the 
nervous system. For example, while the major nerve tracts of the 
magnocellular neurons containing vasopressin and oxytocin ter-
minate in the posterior pituitary, nerve fibers from the paraven-
tricular and supraoptic nuclei project toward many other parts of 
the nervous system. In the brain stem, vasopressinergic neurons 
are involved in the autonomic regulation of blood pressure. 
Similar neurons project to the gray matter and are implicated in 
higher cortical functions. Fibers terminating in the median emi-
nence permit release of ADH into the hypophysial-portal system; 
delivery of ADH in high concentrations to the anterior pituitary 
may facilitate its involvement in the regulation of ACTH secre-
tion. Magnocellular neurons also project to the choroid plexus, 
where they may release ADH into the cerebrospinal fluid. In 
addition to magnocellular neurons, the paraventricular nuclei 
contain cells with smaller cell bodies— parvicellular neurons . 
Such neurons are also found in other regions of the nervous sys-
tem and may contain other peptides such as CRH and TRH. 
 The Hypothalamus and the Control of 
Appetite 
 With the growing appreciation of adipose tissue as an endocrine 
organ, as well as the increasing problem of obesity and its asso-
ciated health risks, understanding how energy balance and 
appetite are regulated has become a major topic of study. In 
1901, Frohlich observed that some tumors affecting the pitu-
itary and hypothalamus were associated with excess subcutane-
ous fat and hypogonadism. Subsequent lesioning experiments 
by Hetherington and Ranson in the 1940s established the hypo-
thalamus as a fundamental site in the regulation of appetite. 
These experiments introduced the classic  dual center model of 
food intake where the ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus func-
tions as a  satiety center and the lateral hypothalamic area serves 
as a  feeding center. Subsequent studies have led to refinements of 
this model. 
0.5 mm
Oxytocin
Vasopressin
SS
DA
CRH
GnRH
TRH
GHRH
Peri
SO
PV
ME
ARC
IC
PL
IL
AL
BA
PC
MC
TRH
GHRH
DA
 FIGURE 4–7  Location of cell bodies of hypophysiotropic 
 hormone-secreting neurons projected on a ventral view of the hypo-
thalamus and pituitary of the rat. (AL, anterior lobe; ARC, arcuate 
nucleus; BA, basilar artery; IC, internal carotid; IL, intermediate lobe; 
MC, middle cerebral; ME, median eminence; PC, posterior cerebral; 
Peri, periventricular nucleus; PL, posterior lobe; PVL and PVM, lateral 
and medial portions of the paraventricular nucleus; SO, supraoptic 
nucleus.) The names of the hormones are enclosed in the boxes (SS, 
somatostatin; DA, dopamine).  (Courtesy of LW Swanson and ET 
Cunningham Jr.) 
CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland     75
 Growing evidence points to the pivotal role of the arcuate 
nucleus in the integration of feeding signals and energy reserves. It 
has special access to circulating hormones via the underlying 
median eminence, an area rich with fenestrated capillaries, that is, 
it is not protected by the blood–brain barrier (see  Figure 4–2 ). 
Two populations of neurons involved in the regulation of feeding 
are located within the arcuate nucleus: one that inhibits food 
intake via the expression of neuropeptides POMC and cocaine- 
and amphetamine-regulated transcript, and one that stimulates 
food intake via expression of neuropeptide Y and agouti-related 
peptide. The arcuate nucleus projects to second-order neuronal 
populations including the paraventricular nucleus, dorsomedial 
nucleus, ventromedial nucleus, and lateral hypothalamic area, 
which then activate downstream pathways controlling appetite 
and energy expenditure. 
 Circulating markers of adiposity (leptin, adiponectin, insulin), 
and hormones from the gastrointestinal tract (ghrelin, peptide YY, 
glucagon-like peptide 1, cholecystokinin, oxyntomodulin, pancre-
atic polypeptide) converge on the hypothalamus and brain stem to 
signal adequacy of short- and long-term energy stores. Alterations 
in the levels or tissue sensitivity of these hormones may underlie 
disorders of weight regulation such as obesity, and could prove 
useful as therapeutic targets (see also Chapter 20). 
 The Pineal Gland and the 
Circumventricular Organs 
 The circumventricular organs are secretory midline brain struc-
tures that arise from the ependymal cell lining of the ventricular 
system ( Figure 4–8 ). These organs are located adjacent to the third 
ventricle—subfornical organ, subcommissural organ, organum 
vasculosum of the lamina terminalis, pineal, and part of the 
median eminence—and at the roof of the fourth ventricle—area 
postrema (see  Figure 4–8 ). The tissues of these organs have rela-
tively large interstitial spaces and have fenestrated capillaries 
which, being highly permeable, permit diffusion of large mole-
cules from the general circulation; elsewhere in the brain tight 
capillary endothelial junctions prevent such diffusion—the blood–
brain barrier. For example, angiotensin II (see Chapter 10) is 
involved in the regulation of water intake, blood pressure, and 
secretion of vasopressin. In addition to its peripheral effects, circu-
lating angiotensin II acts on the subfornical organ resulting in an 
increase in water intake. 
 The pineal gland, considered by the 17th century French phi-
losopher René Descartes to be the seat of the soul, is located at the 
roof of the posterior portion of the third ventricle. The pineal 
gland in humans and other mammals has no direct neural connec-
tions with the brain except for sympathetic innervation via the 
superior cervical ganglion. The pineal gland secretes melatonin, an 
indole synthesized from serotonin by 5-methoxylation and 
 N -acetylation ( Figure 4–9 ). The pineal releases melatonin into the 
general circulation and into the cerebrospinal fluid. Melatonin 
secretion is regulated by the sympathetic nervous system and is 
increased in response to hypoglycemia and darkness. The pineal 
also contains other bioactive peptides and amines including TRH, 
somatostatin, GnRH, and norepinephrine. The physiologic roles 
of the pineal remain to be elucidated, but they appear to involve 
regulation of gonadal function and development and chronobio-
logic rhythms. 
 The pineal gland may be the site of origin of pineal cell tumors 
(pinealomas) or germ cell tumors (germinomas). Neurologic signs 
and symptoms are the predominant clinical manifestations; exam-
ples include increased intracranial pressure, visual abnormalities, 
ataxia, and Parinaud syndrome—upward gaze palsy, absent pupil-
lary light reflex, paralysis of convergence, and wide-based gait. 
Endocrine manifestations result primarily from deficiency of hypo-
thalamic hormones (diabetes insipidus, hypopituitarism, or disor-
ders of gonadal development). Treatment involves surgical removal 
or decompression, radiation therapy, and hormone replacement 
(discussed later). 
 ANTERIOR PITUITARY HORMONES 
 The six major anterior pituitary hormones—ACTH, GH, PRL, 
TSH, LH, and FSH—may be classified into three groups: ACTH-
related peptides (ACTH itself, lipotropin [LPH], melanocyte-
stimulating 
hormone 
[MSH], 
and 
endorphins); 
the 
somatomammotropin proteins (GH and PRL); and the glycopro-
teins (LH, FSH, and TSH). The chemical features of these hor-
mones are set forth in  Table 4–2 . 
AP
NH
PI
OVLT
SFO
SCO
 FIGURE 4–8  Circumventricular organs. The neurohypophysis 
(NH) and adjacent median eminence, the organum vasculosum of 
the lamina terminalis (OVLT), the subfornical organ (SFO), and the 
area postrema (AP) are shown projected on a sagittal section of the 
human brain. The pineal (PI) and the subcommissural organ (SCO) are 
also shown but probably do not function as circumventricular 
organs.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Ganong WF.  Review of 
Medical Physiology . 15th ed. McGraw-Hill; 1993). 
76    CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland
 ADRENOCORTICOTROPIC HORMONE 
AND RELATED PEPTIDES 
 Biosynthesis 
 ACTH is a 39-amino-acid peptide hormone (MW 4500) pro-
cessed from a large precursor molecule, POMC (MW 28,500). 
Within the corticotroph, a single mRNA directs the synthesis and 
processing of POMC into smaller, biologically active fragments 
( Figure 4–10 ), which include β-LPH, α-MSH, β-MSH, 
β-endorphin, and the amino terminal fragment of POMC. Most 
of these peptides are glycosylated, which accounts for differences 
in the reporting of molecular weights. These carbohydrate moi-
eties are responsible for the basophilic staining of corticotrophs. 
 Two of these fragments are contained within the structure of 
ACTH: α-MSH is identical to ACTH 1 to 13, and corticotropin-
like intermediate lobe peptide (CLIP) represents ACTH 18 to 39 
(see  Figure 4–10 ). Although these fragments are found in species 
with developed intermediate lobes (eg, the rat), they are not 
secreted as separate hormones in humans. β-LPH, a fragment with 
91 amino acids (1-91), is secreted by the corticotroph in equimo-
lar quantities with ACTH. Within the β-LPH molecule exists the 
amino acid sequence for β-MSH (41-58), γ-LPH (1-58), and 
β-endorphin (61-91). 
 Function 
 ACTH stimulates the secretion of glucocorticoids, mineralocorti-
coids, and androgens—all steroids from the adrenal cortex (see 
Chapters 9 and 10). The amino terminal end (residues 1-18) is 
responsible for this biologic activity. ACTH binds to receptors on 
the adrenal cortex and induces steroidogenesis through a cAMP-
dependent mechanism. 
 The hyperpigmentation observed in states of ACTH hyperse-
cretion (eg, Addison disease, Nelson syndrome) appears to be 
primarily due to ACTH binding to the MSH receptor, because 
Genome
mRNA
Pro-opiomelanocortin
ACTH (1-39)
N-terminal fragment (1-131)
β-LPH (1-91)
α-MSH
(1-13)
(18-39)
(1-58)
(61-91)
CLIP
γ-LPH
β-Endorphin
(41-58)
(61-65)
γ-MSH
Met-Enk
 FIGURE 4–10  The processing of pro-opiomelanocortin (MW 28,500) into its biologically active peptide hormones. Abbreviations are 
expanded in the text. 
HO
CH2CH2NH2
N
H
HO
CH2CH2NH
CH3
C
O
N
H
Tryptophan
5-Hydroxytryptophan
5-Hydroxytryptamine
(serotonin)
N-Acetyltransferase
+ Acetyl-CoA
CH2CH2NH
CH3O
CH3
C
O
N
H
N-Acetyl-5-hydroxytryptamine
(N-acetylserotonin)
HIOMT + 
S-Adenosylmethionine
N-Acetyl-5-methoxytryptamine
(melatonin)
6-Hydroxymelatonin (in liver)
and other metabolities (in brain)
 FIGURE 4–9  Formation and metabolism of melatonin 
(HIOMT, hydroxyindole- O -methyltransferase.)  (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Ganong WF.  Review of Medical Physiology . 15th ed. 
McGraw-Hill; 1993). 
CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland     77
α-MSH and β-MSH do not exist as separate hormones in 
humans. 
 The physiologic function of β-LPH and its family of peptide 
hormones, including β-endorphin, is not completely understood. 
However, both β-LPH and β-endorphin have the same secretory 
dynamics as ACTH. 
 Measurement 
 The development of immunoradiometric and immunochemilumi-
nescent assays (IRMAs and ICMAs, respectively) has provided a 
sensitive and practical clinical ACTH assay for the evaluation of 
pituitary-adrenal disorders. The basal morning concentration ranges 
from 9 to 52 pg/mL (2-11 pmol/L). Its short plasma half-life (7-12 
minutes) and episodic secretion cause wide and rapid fluctuations 
both in its plasma concentration and in that of cortisol. 
 Although β-LPH has a longer half-life than ACTH and is more 
stable in plasma, its measurement has not been extensively uti-
lized. Current data suggest that the normal concentration of 
β-LPH is 10 to 40 pg/mL (1-4 pmol/L). 
 Secretion 
 The physiologic secretion of ACTH is mediated through neural 
influences by means of a complex of hormones, the most impor-
tant of which is CRH ( Figure 4–11 ). 
 CRH stimulates ACTH in a pulsatile manner: diurnal rhyth-
micity causes a peak before awakening and a decline as the day 
progresses. The diurnal rhythm is a reflection of neural control 
and provokes concordant diurnal secretion of cortisol from the 
adrenal cortex ( Figure 4–12 ). This episodic release of ACTH is 
Emotional
Stress
Physical
Chemical
(hypoglycemia)
Others
CRH
Long feedback
“F”
ACTH
“Corticotroph”
Short
feedback ACTH
Set
point
 FIGURE 4–11  The hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, illustrat-
ing negative feedback by cortisol (F) at the hypothalamic and pitu-
itary levels. A short negative feedback loop of ACTH on the secretion 
of corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) also exists.  (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Gwinup G, Johnson B. Clinical testing of the 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical system in states of hypo- and 
hypercortisolism.  Metabolism . 1975;24:777). 
 FIGURE 4–12  The episodic, pulsatile pattern of ACTH secretion and its concordance with cortisol secretion in a healthy human subject dur-
ing a 24-hour period.  (Previously unpublished, used with permission, from Johannes D. Veldhuis, MD.) 
Clock time (hr)
ACTH concentrations (ng/L)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Cortisol concentrations (nmol/L)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0900
1300
1700
2100
0100
0500
0900
78    CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland
independent of circulating cortisol levels (ie, the magnitude of an 
ACTH impulse is not related to preceding plasma cortisol levels). 
An example is the persistence of diurnal rhythm in patients with 
primary adrenal failure (Addison disease). ACTH secretion also 
increases in response to feeding in both humans and animals. 
 Many stresses stimulate ACTH, often superseding the normal 
diurnal rhythmicity. Physical, emotional, and chemical stresses 
such as pain, trauma, hypoxia, acute hypoglycemia, cold exposure, 
surgery, depression, and interleukin-1 and vasopressin administra-
tion have all been shown to stimulate ACTH and cortisol secre-
tion. The increase in ACTH levels during stress is mediated by 
vasopressin as well as CRH. Although physiologic cortisol levels 
do not blunt the ACTH response to stress, exogenous corticoster-
oids in high doses suppress it. 
 Negative feedback of cortisol and synthetic glucocorticoids on 
ACTH secretion occurs at both the hypothalamic and pituitary 
levels via two mechanisms: fast feedback is sensitive to the rate of 
change in cortisol levels, whereas slow feedback is sensitive to the 
absolute cortisol level. The first mechanism is probably nonnuclear; 
that is, this phenomenon occurs too rapidly to be explained by the 
influence of corticosteroids on nuclear transcription of the specific 
mRNA responsible for ACTH. Recent studies suggest fast feedback 
is mediated by a novel membrane-associated glucocorticoid receptor 
that stimulates a rapid synthesis and retrograde release of endocan-
nabinoids, thereby suppressing synaptic excitation. Slow feedback, 
occurring later, may be explained by a nuclear-mediated mechanism 
and a subsequent decrease in synthesis of ACTH. This latter form 
of negative feedback is the type probed by the clinical dexametha-
sone suppression test. In addition to the negative feedback of corti-
coids, ACTH also inhibits its own secretion (short-loop feedback). 
 GROWTH HORMONE 
 Biosynthesis 
 GH or somatotropin is a 191-amino-acid polypeptide hormone 
(MW 21,500) synthesized and secreted by the somatotrophs of 
the anterior pituitary. Its larger precursor peptide, pre-GH (MW 
28,000), is also secreted but has no physiologic significance. 
 Function 
 The primary function of GH is promotion of linear growth. Its 
basic metabolic effects serve to achieve this result, but most of the 
growth-promoting effects are mediated by insulin-like growth fac-
tor 1 (IGF-I; previously known as somatomedin C). The meta-
bolic and biologic effects of GH and IGF-I are shown in 
Tables 4–5 and 4–6 (see also Chapter 6). 
 GH, via IGF-I, increases protein synthesis by enhancing amino 
acid uptake and directly accelerating the transcription and transla-
tion of mRNA. In addition, GH tends to decrease protein catabo-
lism by mobilizing fat as a more efficient fuel source: it directly 
causes the release of fatty acids from adipose tissue and enhances 
their conversion to acetyl-CoA, from which energy is derived. 
This protein-sparing effect is an important mechanism by which 
GH promotes growth and development. 
 GH also affects carbohydrate metabolism. In excess, it decreases 
carbohydrate utilization and impairs glucose uptake into cells. 
This GH-induced insulin resistance appears to be due to a post-
receptor impairment in insulin action. These events result in glu-
cose intolerance and secondary hyperinsulinism. 
 Measurement 
 GH has a plasma half-life of 10 to 20 minutes. The healthy adult 
secretes approximately 400 μg/d (18.6 nmol/d); in contrast, 
young adolescents secrete about 700 μg/d (32.5 nmol/d). The 
early morning GH concentration in fasting unstressed adults is 
less than 2 ng/mL (90 pmol/L). There are no significant sex 
 differences. 
 About half of circulating GH is bound to specific GH-binding 
proteins (GHBPs) that function to reduce oscillations in GH levels 
(due to its pulsatile secretion) and prolong plasma GH half-life. 
GHBPs include a high-affinity GHBP (corresponding to the extra-
cellular portion of the GH receptor formed through proteolytic 
cleavage) and a low-affinity species. Measurement of serum con-
centrations of the high-affinity GHBP provides an index of GH 
receptor concentrations. For example, individuals with Laron 
dwarfism, a form of GH insensitivity characterized by mutations in 
the GH receptor, usually have abnormally low levels of GHBP. 
TABLE 4–5 Metabolic effects of GH and IGF-1 In vivo.
Function, 
Parameter 
Group
Function, 
Parameter 
Subgroup
GH
IGF-1
Carbohydrate 
metabolism
Glucose uptake in 
extrahepatic 
tissues
Decreasea
Increase
Hepatic glucose 
output
Increase
Decrease
Hepatic glycogen 
stores
Increase (jointly with 
glucocorticoids and insulin)
Plasma glucose
Increase
Decrease
Insulin sensitivity
Decrease
Increase
Lipid 
metabolism
Lipolysis in adipo-
cytes, plasma-free 
fatty acid levels
Increase
Decrease
 
Plasma ketone 
bodies
Increase
Decrease
Protein 
metabolism 
(muscle, 
connective 
tissue)  
Amino acid 
uptake
Protein synthesis
Nitrogen 
excretion
Increase (?)
Increase (?)
Decrease (?)
Increase
Increase
Decrease
aIn GH-deficient patients, administration of GH results in a short-lived insulin-like 
action. During this time, glucose uptake by peripheral (extrahepatic) tissues 
increases.
Modified from Kacsoh B. Endocrine Physiology. McGraw-Hill; 2000.
CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland     79
 Concentrations of IGF-I are determined by radioreceptor 
assays or radioimmunoassays. Determining the levels of these 
mediators of GH action may result in more accurate assessment of 
the biologic activity of GH (see Chapter 6). 
 Secretion 
 The secretion of GH is predominantly mediated by two hypotha-
lamic hormones: GHRH and somatostatin (GH-inhibiting hor-
mone), both of which contribute to the episodic pattern of GH 
secretion. These hypothalamic influences are tightly regulated by 
an integrated system of neural, metabolic, and hormonal factors. 
 Table 4–7 summarizes the many factors that affect GH secretion 
in physiologic, pharmacologic, and pathologic states. 
 A. Growth hormone–releasing hormone 
 GHRH binds 
to specific receptors, stimulating cAMP production by somatotro-
phs and stimulating both GH synthesis and secretion. The effects 
of GHRH are partially blocked by somatostatin. The administra-
tion of GHRH to normal humans leads to rapid release of GH 
(within minutes); levels peak at 30 minutes and are sustained for 
60 to 120 minutes. 
 Other peptide hormones such as ADH, ACTH, and α-MSH 
may act as GH-releasing factors when present in pharmacologic 
amounts. Even TSH and GnRH often cause GH secretion in 
patients with acromegaly; however, it is not certain whether any of 
these effects are mediated by the hypothalamus or represent direct 
effects on the somatotroph. Regulation of GHRH is primarily 
under neural control (see discussion later), but there is also short-
loop negative feedback by GHRH itself. 
 B. Somatostatin 
 Somatostatin, a tetradecapeptide, is a potent 
inhibitor of GH secretion. It decreases cAMP production in 
GH-secreting cells and inhibits both basal and stimulated GH 
secretion. Somatostatin secretion is increased by elevated levels of 
GH and IGF-I. Long-acting analogs of somatostatin have been used 
therapeutically in the management of GH excess and in conditions 
such as pancreatic and carcinoid tumors that cause diarrhea. 
 C. Growth hormone secretagogues 
 Non-GHRH secret-
agogues act to release GH, not through the GHRH receptor, but 
through a separate receptor, the growth hormone secretagogue 
receptor (GHS-R). A number of synthetic secretagogues, both 
peptides and nonpeptides, have been described.  Ghrelin , a circu-
lating peptide made by endocrine cells in the stomach, was identi-
fied in 1999 as the endogenous ligand for GHS-R. Its location in 
the stomach suggests a new mechanism for regulation of GH 
secretion. 
 D. Neural control 
 The neural control of basal GH secretion 
results in irregular and intermittent release associated with sleep 
and varying with age. Peak levels occur 1 to 4 hours after the onset 
of sleep (during stages 3 and 4) ( Figure 4–13 ). These nocturnal 
sleep bursts, which account for nearly 70% of daily GH secretion, 
are greater in children and tend to decrease with age. Glucose 
infusion does not suppress this episodic release. Emotional, physi-
cal, and chemical stress, including surgery, trauma, exercise, elec-
troshock therapy, and pyrogen administration, provoke GH 
release. In addition, impairment of secretion leading to growth 
failure has been well documented in children with severe emo-
tional deprivation (see Chapter 6). 
 E. Metabolic control 
 The metabolic factors affecting GH 
secretion include all fuel substrates: carbohydrate, protein, and fat. 
Glucose administration, orally or intravenously, lowers GH in 
TABLE 4–6 Main biologic effect of the GH-IGF-1 axis.
Target, Source
Parameter
Effect
Blood and plasma (liver, bone, and bone marrow 
actions)
IGF-1, acid-labile subunit
Increased by GH only
IGF-binding protein-3
Increased by both GH and IGF-1
Alkaline phosphatase (bone specific)
Increase (mainly IGF-1)
Fibrinogen
Increase
Hemoglobin, hematocrit
Increase (mainly IGF-1 action on bone marrow)
Cartilage, bone
Length (before epiphysial closure), width 
(periosteal and perichondrial growth)
Stimulation (mainly IGF-1)
Visceral organs (liver, spleen, thymus, thyroid), 
tongue and heart
Growth
Stimulation, organomegaly (both GH and IGF-1)
Renal 25-hydroxyvitamin D 1α-hydroxylase activity
Plasma calcitriol
Increase (mainly GH), promotes positive 
calcium balance
Kidney
GFR
Increase (IGF-1)
Skin
Hair growth
Stimulation (IGF-1?)
 
Sweat glands
Hyperplasia, hypertrophy, hyperfunction (GH?)
 
Dermis
Thickening (both GH and IGF-1)
Modified from Kacsoh B. Endocrine Physiology. McGraw-Hill; 2000.
80    CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland
healthy subjects and provides a simple physiologic maneuver use-
ful in the diagnosis of acromegaly (see discussed below). In con-
trast, hypoglycemia stimulates GH release. This effect depends on 
intracellular glycopenia, because the administration of 
2- deoxyglucose (a glucose analog that causes intracellular glucose 
deficiency) also increases GH. This response to hypoglycemia 
depends on both the rate of change in blood glucose and the abso-
lute level attained. 
 A protein meal or intravenous infusion of amino acids (eg, 
arginine) causes GH release. Paradoxically, states of protein-calorie 
malnutrition also increase GH, possibly as a result of decreased 
IGF-I production and lack of inhibitory feedback. 
 Fatty acids suppress GH responses to certain stimuli, including 
arginine and hypoglycemia. Fasting stimulates GH secretion, pos-
sibly as a means of mobilizing fat as an energy source and prevent-
ing protein loss. 
 F. Effects of other hormones 
 Responses to stimuli are 
blunted in states of cortisol excess and during hypo- and hyperthy-
roidism. Estrogen enhances GH secretion in response to 
 stimulation. 
 G. Effects of neuropharmacologic agents 
 Many neu-
rotransmitters and neuropharmacologic agents affect GH secretion. 
Biogenic amine agonists and antagonists act at the hypothalamic 
level and alter GHRH or somatostatin release. Dopaminergic, 
alpha-adrenergic, and serotonergic agents all stimulate GH 
release. 
 Dopamine agonists such as levodopa, apomorphine, and bro-
mocriptine increase GH secretion, whereas dopaminergic antago-
nists such as phenothiazines inhibit GH. The effect of levodopa, a 
precursor of both norepinephrine and dopamine, may be medi-
ated by its conversion to norepinephrine, because its effect is 
blocked by the alpha-adrenergic antagonist phentolamine. 
Moreover, phentolamine suppresses GH release in response to 
other stimuli such as hypoglycemia, exercise, and arginine, 
emphasizing the importance of alpha-adrenergic mechanisms in 
modulating GH secretion. 
 Beta-adrenergic agonists inhibit GH, and beta-adrenergic 
antagonists such as propranolol enhance secretion in response to 
provocative stimuli. 
 PROLACTIN 
 Biosynthesis 
 PRL is a 198-amino-acid polypeptide hormone (MW 22,000) 
synthesized and secreted from the lactotrophs of the anterior pitu-
itary. Despite evolution from an ancestral hormone common to 
GH and human placental lactogen (hPL), PRL shares only 16% 
of its residues with the former and 13% with hPL. A precursor 
molecule (MW 40,000-50,000) is also secreted and may consti-
tute 8% to 20% of the PRL plasma immunoreactivity in healthy 
persons and in patients with PRL-secreting pituitary tumors. PRL 
and GH are structurally related to members of the cytokine- 
hematopoietin family that include erythropoietin, granulocyte-
macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF), and interleukins 
IL-2 to IL-7. 
 Function 
 PRL stimulates lactation in the postpartum period (see Chapter 16). 
During pregnancy, PRL secretion increases and, in concert with 
many other hormones (estrogen, progesterone, hPL, insulin, and 
cortisol), promotes additional breast development in preparation 
for milk production. Despite its importance during pregnancy, 
PRL has not been demonstrated to play a role in the development 
of normal breast tissue in humans. During pregnancy, estrogen 
enhances breast development but blunts the effect of PRL on 
lactation; the decrease in both estrogen and progesterone after 
parturition allows initiation of lactation. Accordingly, galactorrhea 
may accompany the discontinuance of oral  contraceptives or 
TABLE 4–7 Factors affecting GH secretion.
Increase
Decreasea
Physiologic
Sleep
Exercise
Stress (physical or psychologic)
Postprandial
 Hyperaminoacidemia
 Hypoglycemia (relative)
Postprandial hyperglycemia
Elevated free fatty acids
Pharmacologic
Hypoglycemia
 Absolute: insulin or 2-deoxyglucose
 Relative: postglucagon
Hormones
 GHRH
 Ghrelin
 Peptide (ACTH, α-MSH, vasopressin)
 Estrogen
Neurotransmitters, etc
 Alpha-adrenergic agonists 
 (clonidine)
 Beta-adrenergic antagonists 
 (propranolol)
 Serotonin precursors
 Dopamine agonists (levodopa, 
 apomorphine, bromocriptine)
 GABA agonists (muscimol)
 Potassium infusion
 Pyrogens (pseudomonas 
 endotoxin)
Hormones
 Somatostatin
 Growth hormone
 Progesterone
 Glucocorticoids
Neurotransmitters, etc
 Alpha-adrenergic 
 antagonists 
 (phentolamine)
 Beta-adrenergic agonists 
 (isoproterenol)
 Serotonin agonists 
 (methysergide)
 Dopamine antagonists 
 (phenothiazines)
Pathologic
Protein depletion and starvation
Anorexia nervosa
Ectopic production of GHRH
Chronic renal failure
Acromegaly
 TRH
 GnRH
Obesity
Acromegaly; dopamine 
 agonists
Hypothyroidism
Hyperthyroidism
aSuppressive effects of some factors can be demonstrated only in the presence of a 
stimulus.
Modified and reproduced, with permission, from Frohman LA. Diseases of the anterior 
pituitary. In: Endocrinology and Metabolism. Felig P, et al, ed. McGraw-Hill, 1981.
CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland     81
estrogen therapy. Although basal PRL secretion falls in the 
 postpartum period, lactation is maintained by persistent breast 
suckling. 
 PRL levels are very high in the fetus and in newborn infants, 
declining during the first few months of life. 
 Although PRL does not appear to play a physiologic role in the 
regulation of gonadal function, hyperprolactinemia in humans 
leads to hypogonadism. In women, initially there is a shortening 
of the luteal phase; subsequently, anovulation, oligomenorrhea or 
amenorrhea, and infertility occur. In men, PRL excess leads to 
decreased testosterone synthesis and decreased spermatogenesis, 
which clinically present as decreased libido, impotence, and infer-
tility. The exact mechanisms of PRL inhibition of gonadal func-
tion are unclear, but the principal one appears to be alteration of 
hypothalamic-pituitary control of gonadotropin secretion. Basal 
LH and FSH levels are usually normal; however, their pulsatile 
secretion is decreased and the midcycle LH surge is suppressed in 
women. Gonadotropin reserve, as assessed by administration of 
exogenous GnRH, is usually normal. PRL also has a role in immu-
nomodulation; extrapituitary synthesis of PRL occurs in T lym-
phocytes (among other sites), and PRL receptors are present on T 
and B lymphocytes and macrophages. PRL modulates and stimu-
lates both immune cell proliferation and survival. 
 Measurement 
 The PRL secretory rate is approximately 400 μg/d (18.6 nmol/d). 
The hormone is cleared by the liver (75%) and the kidney (25%), 
and its half-time of disappearance from plasma is about 25 to 
50 minutes. 
 Basal levels of PRL in adults vary considerably, with a mean of 
13 ng/mL (0.6 nmol/L) in women and 5 ng/mL (0.23 nmol/L) in 
men. The upper range of normal in most laboratories is 15 to 
20 ng/mL (0.7-0.9 nmol/L). 
 PRL is measured using a highly specific immunoradiometric 
assay. However, when PRL levels are extremely high, which can 
occur with some PRL-secreting tumors, this assay may be susceptible 
to the “hook effect.” PRL levels are erroneously reported as normal 
or modestly elevated due to saturation of available assay antibodies. 
Appropriate sample dilutions (ie, 1:100) will avoid this artifact. 
 In some patients a form of PRL with molecular mass greater 
than 150 kDa predominates. This is termed macroprolactinemia 
and consists of aggregates of monomeric PRL as well as PRL-
immunoglobulin G complexes. These complexes may have reduced 
biological activity and can be measured using polyethylene glycol 
precipitation of serum samples. 
 Secretion 
 The hypothalamic control of PRL secretion is predominantly 
inhibitory, and dopamine is the most important inhibitory factor. 
The physiologic, pathologic, and pharmacologic factors influenc-
ing PRL secretion are listed in  Table 4–8 . 
 A. Prolactin-releasing factors 
 TRH is a potent PRL-
releasing factor that evokes release of PRL at a threshold dose 
similar to that which stimulates release of TSH. An exaggerated 
response of both TSH and PRL to TRH is observed in primary 
hypothyroidism, and their responses are blunted in hyperthyroid-
ism. In addition, PRL secretion is also stimulated by VIP and 
serotonergic pathways. 
 B. Episodic and sleep-related secretion 
 PRL secretion is 
episodic. An increase is observed 60 to 90 minutes after sleep 
0
10
20
30
40
20
10
0
Growth
hormone
(ng/mL)
REM
Sleep
stage
2
4
Meal
Meal
Meal
9 10 11 12 1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10
AM
Noon
PM
Mid
AM
Clock time
Growth
hormone
Prolactin
Prolactin (ng/mL)
 FIGURE 4–13  Sleep-associated changes in prolactin (PRL) and growth hormone (GH) secretion in humans. Peak levels of GH occur 
during sleep stages 3 or 4; the increase in PRL is observed 1 to 2 hours after sleep begins and is not associated with a specific sleep phase. 
 (Reproduced, with permission, from Sassin JF, et al. Human prolactin: 24-hour pattern with increased release during sleep.  Science . 
1972;177:1205). 
82    CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland
begins but—in contrast to GH—is not associated with a specific 
sleep phase. Peak levels are usually attained between 4 and 7 AM 
( see Figure 4–13 ). This sleep-associated augmentation of PRL 
release is not part of a circadian rhythm, like that of ACTH; it is 
related strictly to the sleeping period regardless of when it occurs 
during the day. 
 C. Other stimuli 
 Stresses, including surgery, exercise, hypo-
glycemia, and acute myocardial infarction, cause significant eleva-
tion of PRL levels. Nipple stimulation in nonpregnant women 
also increases PRL. This neurogenic reflex may also occur from 
chest wall injury such as mechanical trauma, burns, surgery, and 
herpes zoster of thoracic dermatomes. This reflex discharge of PRL 
is abolished by denervation of the nipple or by spinal cord or brain 
stem lesions. 
 D. Effects of other hormones 
 Many hormones influence 
PRL release. Estrogens augment basal and stimulated PRL secre-
tion after 2 to 3 days of use (an effect that is of special clinical 
importance in patients with PRL-secreting pituitary adenomas); 
glucocorticoids tend to suppress TRH-induced PRL secretion; 
and thyroid hormone administration may blunt the PRL response 
to TRH. 
 E. Effects of pharmacologic agents ( Table 4–8 ) 
 Many 
pharmacologic agents alter PRL secretion. Dopamine agonists (eg, 
bromocriptine) decrease secretion, forming the basis for their use 
in states of PRL excess. Dopamine antagonists (eg, receptor block-
ers such as phenothiazines and metoclopramide) and dopamine 
depletors (eg, reserpine) augment PRL release. Serotonin agonists 
enhance PRL secretion; serotonin receptor blockers suppress PRL 
release associated with stress and with nursing. 
 THYROTROPIN 
 Biosynthesis 
 TSH is a glycoprotein (MW 28,000) composed of two noncova-
lently linked alpha and beta subunits. The structure of the alpha 
subunit of TSH is identical to that of the other glycoprotein mol-
ecules—FSH, LH, and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG)—
but the beta subunits differ in these glycoproteins and is responsible 
for their biologic and immunologic specificity. The peptides of 
these subunits appear to be synthesized separately and united 
before the carbohydrate groups are attached. The intact molecule is 
then secreted, as are small amounts of nonlinked subunits. 
 Function 
 The beta subunit of TSH attaches to high-affinity receptors in the 
thyroid, stimulating iodide uptake, hormonogenesis, and rel-
ease of T 4 and T 3 . This occurs through activation of adenylyl cyclase 
and the generation of cAMP. TSH secretion also causes an increase 
in gland size and vascularity by promoting mRNA and protein 
synthesis. (For a more detailed description, see Chapter 7.) 
 Measurement 
 TSH circulates unbound in the blood with a half-life of 35 to 
50 minutes. With ultrasensitive IRMAs for measuring TSH concen-
tration, the normal range is usually 0.5 to 4.7 μU/mL (0.5-4.7 mU/L). 
These new assays are helpful in the diagnosis of primary hypothy-
roidism and hyperthyroidism; however, TSH levels alone cannot 
be used to evaluate pituitary or hypothalamic hypothyroidism. 
 The alpha subunit can be detected in about 80% of normals, 
with a range of 0.5 to 2 ng/mL. Plasma alpha subunit levels 
increase after administration of TRH in normal subjects, and basal 
levels are elevated in primary hypothyroidism, primary hypogo-
nadism, and in patients with TSH-secreting, gonadotropin- 
secreting, or pure alpha subunit-secreting pituitary adenomas. 
 Secretion 
 The secretion of TSH is controlled by both stimulatory (TRH) 
and inhibitory (somatostatin) influences from the hypothalamus 
and in addition is modulated by the feedback inhibition of  thyroid 
hormone on the hypothalamic-pituitary axis. 
 A. TRH 
 The response of TSH to TRH is modulated by the 
circulating concentration of thyroid hormones. Small changes in 
serum levels (even within the physiologic range) cause substantial 
TABLE 4–8 Factors affecting prolactin secretion.
Increase
Decrease
Physiologic
Pregnancy
Nursing
Nipple stimulation
Exercise
Stress (hypoglycemia)
Sleep
Seizures
Neonatal
Pharmacologic
TRH
Estrogen
Vasoactive intestinal peptide
Dopamine antagonists 
 (phenothiazines, haloperidol, 
 risperidone, metoclopramide, 
 reserpine, methyldopa, amoxapine, 
 opioids)
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
Cimetidine (intravenous)
Verapamil
Licorice
Dopamine agonists 
 (levodopa, apomorphine, 
 bromocriptine, 
 pergolide)
GABA
Pathologic
Pituitary tumors
Hypothalamic/pituitary stalk lesions
Neuraxis irradiation
Chest wall lesions
Spinal cord lesions
Hypothyroidism
Chronic renal failure
Severe liver disease
Pseudohypoparathyroidism
Pituitary destruction or 
 removal
Lymphocytic hypophysitis
CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland     83
alterations in the TSH response to TRH. As shown in 
 Figure 4–14 , the administration of T 3 (15 μg) and T 4 (60 μg) to 
healthy persons for 3 to 4 weeks suppresses the TSH response to 
TRH despite only small increases in circulating T 3 and T 4 levels. 
Thus, the secretion of TSH is inversely proportional to the con-
centration of thyroid hormone. 
 The set point (the level at which TSH secretion is maintained) 
is determined by TRH. Deviations from this set point result in 
appropriate changes in TSH release. Administration of TRH 
increases TSH within 2 minutes, and this response is blocked by 
previous T 3 administration; however, larger doses of TRH may 
overcome this blockade—suggesting that both T 3 and TRH act at 
the pituitary level to influence TSH secretion. In addition, T 3 and 
T 4 inhibit mRNA for TRH synthesis in the hypothalamus, indicat-
ing that a negative feedback mechanism operates at this level also. 
 B. Somatostatin 
 This inhibitory hypothalamic peptide aug-
ments the direct inhibitory effect of thyroid hormone on the 
thyrotrophs. Infusion of somatostatin blunts the early morning 
TSH surge and suppresses high levels of TSH in primary hypothy-
roidism. Octreotide acetate, a somatostatin analog, has been used 
successfully to inhibit TSH secretion in patients with TSH-
secreting pituitary tumors. 
 C. Neural control 
 In addition to these hypothalamic influ-
ences on TSH secretion, neurally mediated factors may be 
important. Dopamine physiologically inhibits TSH secretion. 
Intravenous dopamine administration decreases TSH in both 
healthy and hypothyroid subjects as well as blunts the TSH 
response to TRH. Thus, as expected, dopaminergic agonists such 
as bromocriptine inhibit TSH secretion and dopaminergic 
antagonists such as metoclopramide increase TSH secretion in 
euthyroid subjects. 
 D. Effects of cortisol and estrogens  Glucocorticoid excess 
has been shown to impair the sensitivity of the pituitary to TRH 
and may lower serum TSH to undetectable levels. However, estro-
gens increase the sensitivity of the thyrotroph to TRH; women 
have a greater TSH response to TRH than men do, and pretreat-
ment of men with estradiol increases their TRH-induced TSH 
response. (See also Chapter 7.) 
 GONADOTROPINS: LUTEINIZING 
HORMONE AND FOLLICLE-STIMULATING 
HORMONE 
 Biosynthesis 
 LH and FSH are glycoprotein gonadotropins composed of alpha 
and beta subunits and secreted by the same cell. The specific beta 
subunit confers on these hormones their unique biologic activity, 
as it does with TSH and hCG. The biologic activity of hCG, a 
placental glycoprotein, closely resembles that of LH. Human 
20
15
10
5
0
30
60
90
120
180
400 μg TRH
TSH (μU/mL)
TRH
0
30
60
90
120
180
25 μg TRH
TRH
 0           0
15   +    60
30   +   120  
Daily T3   +    T4
(μg)       (μg)
Time (min)
 FIGURE 4–14  Administration of small doses of T 3 (15 μg) and T 4 (60 μg) to healthy subjects inhibits the TSH response to two doses (400 μg, 
left; 25 μg, right) of TRH (protirelin).  (Reproduced, with permission, from Snyder PJ, Utiger RD. Inhibition of thyrotropin-releasing hormone by 
small quantities of thyroid hormones.  J Clin Invest . 1972;51:2077). 
84    CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland
menopausal gonadotropin (hMG, menotropins)—an altered mix-
ture of pituitary gonadotropins recovered from the urine of 
 postmenopausal women—is a preparation with FSH-like activity. 
Menotropins and hCG are used clinically for induction of sper-
matogenesis or ovulation (see Chapters 12 and 13). 
 Function 
 LH and FSH bind to receptors in the ovary and testis and regulate 
gonadal function by promoting sex steroid production and game-
togenesis. 
 In men, LH stimulates testosterone production from the inter-
stitial cells of the testes (Leydig cells). Maturation of spermatozoa, 
however, requires both LH and FSH. FSH stimulates testicular 
growth and enhances the production of an androgen-binding 
protein by the Sertoli cells, which are a component of the testicu-
lar tubule necessary for sustaining the maturing sperm cell. This 
androgen-binding protein promotes high local concentrations of 
testosterone within the testis, an essential factor in the develop-
ment of normal spermatogenesis (see Chapter 12). 
 In women, LH stimulates estrogen and progesterone produc-
tion from the ovary. A surge of LH in the midmenstrual cycle is 
responsible for ovulation, and continued LH secretion subse-
quently stimulates the corpus luteum to produce progesterone by 
enhancing the conversion of cholesterol to pregnenolone. 
Development of the ovarian follicle is largely under FSH control, 
and the secretion of estrogen from this follicle is dependent on 
both FSH and LH. 
 Measurement 
 The normal levels of LH and FSH vary with the age of the subject 
(see Appendix). They are low before puberty and elevated in post-
menopausal women. A nocturnal rise of LH in boys and the cyclic 
secretion of FSH and LH in girls usually herald the onset of 
puberty before clinical signs are apparent. In women, LH and 
FSH vary during the menstrual cycle; during the initial phase of 
the cycle (follicular), LH steadily increases, with a midcycle surge 
that initiates ovulation. FSH, on the other hand, initially rises and 
then decreases during the later follicular phase until the midcycle 
surge, which is concordant with LH. Both LH and FSH levels fall 
steadily after ovulation (see Chapter 13). 
 LH and FSH levels in men are similar to those in women dur-
ing the follicular phase. The alpha subunit, shared by all the pitu-
itary glycoprotein hormones, can also be measured (see TSH) and 
will rise following GnRH administration. 
 Secretion 
 The secretion of LH and FSH is controlled by GnRH, which 
maintains basal gonadotropin secretion, generates the phasic 
release of gonadotropins for ovulation, and determines the onset 
of puberty. As noted above, the size and frequency of GnRH 
pulses determine the ratio of gonadotropin secretion: low- 
frequency pulses favor FSH release while high-frequency pulses 
result in LH release. Many other factors are involved in regulation 
of this axis. For example, activins and follistatins are paracrine 
factors that exert opposing effects on gonadotrophs. Leptin, a 
hormone made in adipocytes in proportion to fat stores, is 
involved in regulation of this axis and may help to explain the 
suppression of gonadotropin secretion that accompanies caloric 
restriction. 
 A. Episodic secretion 
 In both males and females, secretion 
of LH and FSH is episodic, with secretory bursts that occur each 
hour and are mediated by a concordant episodic release of GnRH. 
The amplitude of these secretory surges is greater in patients with 
primary hypogonadism. The pulsatile nature of GnRH release is 
critical for sustaining gonadotropin secretion. A continuous, pro-
longed infusion of GnRH in women evokes an initial increase in 
LH and FSH followed by prolonged suppression of gonadotropin 
secretion. This phenomenon may be explained by downregulation 
of GnRH receptors on the pituitary gonadotrophs. Consequently, 
long-acting synthetic analogs of GnRH may be used clinically to 
suppress LH and FSH secretion in conditions such as precocious 
puberty. 
 B. Positive feedback 
 Circulating sex steroids affect GnRH 
secretion and thus LH and FSH secretion by both positive and 
negative (inhibitory) feedback mechanisms. During the menstrual 
cycle, estrogens provide a positive influence on GnRH effects on 
LH and FSH secretion, and the rise in estrogen during the follicu-
lar phase is the stimulus for the LH and FSH ovulatory surge. This 
phenomenon suggests that the secretion of estrogen is to some 
extent influenced by an intrinsic ovarian cycle. Progesterone 
amplifies the duration of the LH and FSH surge and augments the 
effect of estrogen. After this midcycle surge, the developed egg 
leaves the ovary. Ovulation occurs approximately 10 to 12 hours 
after the LH peak and 24 to 36 hours after the estradiol peak. The 
remaining follicular cells in the ovary are converted, under the 
influence of LH, to a progesterone-secreting structure, the corpus 
luteum. After about 12 days, the corpus luteum involutes, result-
ing in decreased estrogen and progesterone levels and then uterine 
bleeding (see Chapter 13). 
 C. Negative feedback 
 Negative feedback effects of sex ste-
roids on gonadotropin secretion also occur. In women, primary 
gonadal failure or menopause results in elevations of LH and 
FSH, which can be suppressed with long-term, high-dose estrogen 
therapy. However, a shorter duration of low-dose estrogen may 
enhance the LH response to GnRH. In men, primary gonadal 
failure with low circulating testosterone levels is also associated 
with elevated gonadotropins. However, testosterone is not the sole 
inhibitor of gonadotropin secretion in men, since selective 
destruction of the tubules (eg, by cyclophosphamide therapy) 
results in azoospermia and elevation of only FSH. 
 Inhibin, a polypeptide (MW 32,000) secreted by the Sertoli 
cells of the seminiferous tubules, is the major factor that inhibits 
FSH secretion by negative feedback. Inhibin consists of separate 
alpha and beta subunits connected by a disulfide bridge. Androgens 
stimulate inhibin production; this peptide may help to locally 
regulate spermatogenesis (see Chapter 12). 
CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland     85
 ENDOCRINOLOGIC EVALUATION OF THE 
HYPOTHALAMIC-PITUITARY AXIS 
 The precise assessment of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis has 
been made possible by radioimmunoassays of the major anterior 
pituitary hormones and their specific target gland hormones. In 
addition, provocative testing using synthetic or purified hormones 
(eg, ACTH, ovine CRH, glucagon, insulin) can be used to assess 
hypothalamic-pituitary reserve and excess. 
 This section describes the principles involved in testing each 
pituitary hormone as well as special situations (eg, drugs, obesity) 
that may interfere with pituitary function or pituitary testing. 
Specific protocols for performing and interpreting diagnostic pro-
cedures are outlined at the end of this section and in  Table 4–9 . 
The clinical manifestations of either hypo- or hypersecretion of 
anterior pituitary hormones are discussed in subsequent sections. 
 EVALUATION OF 
ADRENOCORTICOTROPIC HORMONE 
 ACTH deficiency leads to secondary adrenocortical insufficiency, 
characterized by decreased secretion of cortisol and the adrenal 
androgens; aldosterone secretion, controlled primarily by the renin-
angiotensin axis, is usually maintained. In contrast, excessive ACTH 
secretion leads to adrenal hyperfunction (Cushing syndrome, dis-
cussed in a later section of this chapter and in Chapter 9). 
 Plasma ACTH Levels 
 Basal ACTH measurements are usually unreliable indicators of 
pituitary function, because its short plasma half-life and episodic 
secretion result in wide fluctuations in plasma levels (see  Figure 
4–12 ). Therefore, the interpretation of plasma ACTH levels 
requires the simultaneous assessment of cortisol secretion by the 
adrenal cortex. These measurements are of greatest utility in dif-
ferentiating primary and secondary adrenocortical insufficiency 
and in establishing the etiology of Cushing syndrome (see the later 
section on Cushing disease and also Chapter 9). 
 Evaluation of ACTH Deficiency 
 In evaluating ACTH deficiency, measurement of basal cortisol 
levels is also generally unreliable. Because plasma cortisol levels are 
usually low in the late afternoon and evening, reflecting the nor-
mal diurnal rhythm, samples drawn at these times are of virtually 
no value for this diagnosis. Plasma cortisol levels are usually high-
est in the early morning; however, there is considerable overlap 
between adrenal insufficiency and normal subjects. A plasma cor-
tisol level less than 5 μg/dL (138 nmol/L) at 8 AM strongly sug-
gests the diagnosis—and the lower the level, the more likely the 
diagnosis. Conversely, a plasma cortisol greater than 20 μg/dL 
(552 nmol/L) virtually excludes the diagnosis. Similarly, salivary 
cortisol levels less than 1.8 ng/mL (5 nmol/L) at 8 AM strongly 
suggest adrenal insufficiency, while levels in excess of 5.8 ng/mL 
(16 nmol/L) greatly reduce the probability of the diagnosis. 
Consequently, the diagnosis of ACTH hyposecretion (secondary 
adrenal insufficiency) must be established by provocative testing 
of the reserve capacity of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis. 
 Adrenal Stimulation 
 Because adrenal atrophy develops as a consequence of prolonged 
ACTH deficiency, the initial and most convenient approach to 
evaluation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis is assess-
ment of the plasma cortisol response to synthetic ACTH (cosyn-
tropin). In normal individuals, injection of cosyntropin (250 μg) 
causes a rapid increase (within 30 minutes) of cortisol to at least 
18 to 20 μg/dL (496-552 nmol/L), and this response usually cor-
relates with the cortisol response to insulin-induced hypoglyce-
mia. A subnormal cortisol response to ACTH confirms 
adrenocortical insufficiency. However, a normal response does not 
directly evaluate the ability of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis to 
respond to stress (see Chapter 9). Thus, patients withdrawn from 
long-term glucocorticoid therapy may have an adequate increase 
in cortisol following exogenous ACTH that precedes complete 
recovery of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. Therefore, 
such patients should receive glucocorticoids during periods of 
stress for at least 1 year after steroids are discontinued, unless the 
hypothalamic-pituitary axis is shown to be responsive to stress as 
described below. 
 The more physiologic dose administered in the 1 μg ACTH 
test is designed to improve its sensitivity in detection of secondary 
adrenal insufficiency. The cortisol response to 1 μg of synthetic 
ACTH correlates better with the cortisol response to insulin- 
induced hypoglycemia in patients with complete chronic second-
ary adrenal insufficiency. However, the results in partial secondary 
adrenal insufficiency are less reliable and technical difficulties 
make the test impractical for routine use. Thus, the standard 
250 μg ACTH test remains the procedure of choice (see  discussion 
later and Chapter 9). 
 Pituitary Stimulation 
 Direct evaluation of pituitary ACTH reserve can be performed by 
means of insulin-induced hypoglycemia, metyrapone administra-
tion, or CRH stimulation. These studies are unnecessary if the 
cortisol response to rapid ACTH stimulation is subnormal. 
 A. Insulin-induced hypoglycemia 
 The stimulus of neuro-
glycopenia associated with hypoglycemia (blood glucose <40 mg/
dL) evokes a stress-mediated activation of the hypothalamic- 
pituitary-adrenal axis. Subjects should experience adrenergic 
symptoms (diaphoresis, tachycardia, weakness, headache) associ-
ated with the fall in blood sugar. In normal persons, plasma corti-
sol increases to more than 18 to 20 μg/dL (496-552 nmol/L), 
indicating normal ACTH reserve. Although plasma ACTH also 
rises, its determination has not proved to be as useful, because 
pulsatile secretion requires frequent sampling, and the normal 
response is not well standardized. Although insulin-induced hypo-
glycemia most reliably predicts ACTH secretory capacity in times 
of stress, it is rarely performed at present, because the procedure 
86    CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland
TABLE 4–9 Endocrine tests of hypothalamic-pituitary function.
Method
Sample Collection
Possible Side Effects; 
Contraindications
Interpretation
Rapid ACTH 
 stimulation 
 test 
 (cosyntropin 
 test)
Administer synthetic ACTH (1-24) 
(cosyntropin), 250 μg intravenously 
or intramuscularly. The test may be 
performed at any time of the day 
or night and does not require fast-
ing. The low-dose test is performed 
in the same manner except that 1 
μg of synthetic ACTH (1-24) is 
administered.
Obtain samples 
for plasma cortisol 
at 0 and 30 min or 
at 0 and 60 min.
Rare allergic reactions have been 
reported.
A normal response is a 
peak plasma cortisol level 
>18-20 μg/dL (496-552 
nmol/L).
Insulin 
 hypoglycemia 
 test
Give nothing by mouth after mid-
night. Start an intravenous infusion 
with normal saline solution. Regular 
insulin is given intravenously in a 
dose sufficient to cause adequate 
hypoglycemia (blood glucose 
<40 mg/dL). The dose is 0.1-0.15 
unit/kg (healthy subjects); 0.2-0.3 
unit/kg (obese subjects or those 
with Cushing syndrome or 
acromegaly); 0.05 unit/kg (patients 
with suspected hypopituitarism).
Collect blood for 
glucose determina-
tions every 
15 min during the 
study. Samples of 
GH and cortisol are 
obtained at 0, 
30, 45, 60, 75, 
and 90 min.
A physician must be in attendance. 
Symptomatic hypoglycemia (diapho-
resis, headache, tachycardia, weak-
ness) is necessary for adequate 
stimulation and occurs 20-35 min 
after insulin is administered in most 
patients. If severe central nervous 
system signs or symptoms occur, 
intravenous glucose (25-50 mL of 
50% glucose) should be given imme-
diately; otherwise, the test can be 
terminated with a meal or with oral 
glucose. This test is contraindicated 
in the elderly or in patients with car-
diovascular or cerebrovascular dis-
ease and seizure disorders.
Symptomatic hypoglyce-
mia and a fall in blood 
glucose to <40 mg/dL 
(2.2 mmol/L) will increase 
GH to a maximal level 
>5 ng/mL; some investiga-
tors regard an increment 
of 6 ng/mL (280 pmol/L) as 
normal. Plasma cortisol 
should increase to a peak 
level of at least 18-20 
μg/dL (496-552 nmol/L).
Metyrapone 
 test
Metyrapone is given orally between 
11 and 12 PM with a snack to mini-
mize gastrointestinal discomfort. 
The dose is 30 mg/kg.
Blood for plasma 
11-deoxycortisol 
and cortisol determi-
nations is obtained 
at 8 AM the morning 
after metyrapone is 
given.
Gastrointestinal upset may occur. 
Adrenal insufficiency may occur. 
Metyrapone should not be used in 
sick patients or those in whom 
primary adrenal insufficiency is 
suspected.
Serum 11-deoxycortisol 
should increase to >7 μg/dL 
(0.19 μmol/L). Cortisol 
should be <10 μg/dL 
(0.28 μmol/L) in order to 
ensure adequate inhibition 
of 11β-hydroxylation.
GHRH-arginine 
 infusion 
 test
The patient should be fasting after 
midnight. Give GHRH, 1 μg/kg 
intravenously over 1 min followed 
by arginine hydrochloride, 
0.5 g/kg intravenously, up to a 
maximum of 30 g over 30 min.
Blood for plasma GH 
determinations is 
collected at 0, 30, 
60, 90, and 120 min.
Mild flushing, a metallic taste, or 
nausea and vomiting may occur. This 
test is contraindicated in patients 
with severe liver disease, renal dis-
ease, or acidosis.
The lower limit of normal 
for the peak GH response 
is 6 ng/mL (280 pmol/L) 
although most normals 
reach levels of >10-15 
ng/mL (460-700 pmol/L).
Glucagon 
 stimulation 
 test
The patient should be fasting after 
midnight. Give glucagon 1 mg 
intramuscularly. 
Blood for plasma GH 
and capillary blood 
glucose at 0, 30, 60, 
90, 120, 150, and 
180 min.
Nausea and late hypoglycemia. This 
test is contraindicated in malnour-
ished patients or patients who have 
not eaten for >48 h.
GH rises to >3 μg/L in 
normal individuals. 
Glucose usually rises to 
peak around 90 min, then 
gradually declines.
Glucose 
 growth 
 hormone 
 suppression 
 test
The patient should be fasting 
after midnight; give glucose, 
75-100 g orally.
GH and glucose 
should be deter-
mined at 0, 30, and 
60 min after 
glucose 
administration.
Patients may complain of nausea 
after the large glucose load.
GH levels are suppressed 
to <2 ng/mL (90 pmol/L) in 
healthy subjects. Failure of 
adequate suppression or a 
paradoxic rise may be seen 
in acromegaly, starvation, 
protein-calorie malnutri-
tion, and anorexia nervosa.
TRH test
Fasting is not required, but since 
nausea may occur, it is preferred. 
Give protirelin, 500 μg intrave-
nously over 15-30 s. The patient 
should be kept supine, since slight 
hypertension or hypotension may 
occur. Protirelin is supplied in vials 
of 500 μg, although 400 μg will 
evoke normal responses.
Blood for determina-
tion of plasma TSH 
and PRL is obtained 
at 0, 30, and 60 min. 
An abbreviated test 
utilizes samples taken 
at 0 and 30 min only. 
A maximum TSH 
response takes 45 
min or less.
No serious complications have been 
reported. Most patients complain of 
a sensation of urinary urgency and a 
metallic taste in the mouth; other 
symptoms include flushing, palpita-
tions, and nausea. These symptoms 
occur within 1-2 min of the injection 
and last 5 min at most.
Normal TSH response:
≥ 6 μU/mL (≥6 mU/L) in 
 women and men 
 aged <49
≥ 2 μU/mL(≥ 2 mU/L) in 
 men aged 40-79
Normal PRL response 
 varies with gender and 
 age.
(Continued)
CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland     87
requires a physician’s presence and is contraindicated in elderly 
patients, patients with cerebrovascular or cardiovascular disease, 
and those with seizure disorders. It should be used with caution 
in patients in whom diminished adrenal reserve is suspected, 
because severe hypoglycemia may occur; in these patients, the test 
should always be preceded by the ACTH adrenal stimulation 
test. 
 B. Metyrapone stimulation 
 Metyrapone administration is 
an alternative method for assessing ACTH secretory reserve. 
Metyrapone inhibits P450c11 (11β-hydroxylase), the enzyme 
that catalyzes the final step in cortisol biosynthesis (see Chapter 
9). The inhibition of cortisol secretion interrupts negative feed-
back on the hypothalamic-pituitary axis, resulting in a compensa-
tory increase in ACTH. The increase in ACTH secretion 
stimulates increased steroid biosynthesis proximal to P450c11, 
and the increase can be detected as an increase in the precursor 
steroid (11-deoxycortisol) in plasma. The overnight test is pre-
ferred because of its simplicity; it is performed by administering 
30 mg/kg of metyrapone orally at midnight. Plasma 
11- deoxycortisol is determined the following morning and rises 
to more than 7 μg/dL (0.2 nmol/L) in healthy individuals. Again 
the test should be used cautiously in patients with suspected 
adrenal insufficiency and should be preceded by a rapid ACTH 
stimulation test (see discussion earlier). The traditional 3-day 
metyrapone test should not be used at present because of the risk 
of precipitating adrenal insufficiency. The overnight metyrapone 
test is most useful in patients with partial secondary adrenal 
insufficiency in whom the rapid ACTH stimulation test is nor-
mal or borderline. It has been shown to correlate well with the 
response to insulin-induced hypoglycemia. Metyrapone may be 
obtained directly from the Novartis Pharmaceutical Corporation, 
East Hanover, New Jersey. 
 C. CRH stimulation 
 Ovine CRH administered intravenously 
is used to assess ACTH secretory dynamics. In healthy subjects, 
TABLE 4–9 Endocrine tests of hypothalamic-pituitary function.
Method
Sample Collection
Possible Side Effects; 
Contraindications
Interpretation
GnRH test
The patient should be at rest but 
need not be fasting. Give GnRH 
(gonadorelin), 100 μg intrave-
nously, over 15 s.
Blood samples for 
LH and FSH deter-
minations are taken 
at 0, 30, and 60 min. 
Since the FSH 
response is some-
what delayed, a 
90-min specimen 
may be necessary.
Side effects are rare, and no con-
traindications have been reported.
This response is dependent 
on sex and the time of the 
menstrual cycle. Table 4–9 
illustrates the mean 
maximal change in LH 
and FSH after GnRH 
administration. An 
increase of LH of 
1.3-2.6 μg/L (12-23 IU/L) is 
considered to be normal; 
FSH usually responds more 
slowly and less markedly. 
FSH may not increase even 
in healthy subjects.
Clomiphene 
 test
Clomiphene is administered orally. 
For women, give 100 mg daily for 5 
d (beginning on day 5 of the cycle 
if the patient is menstruating); for 
men, give 100 mg daily for 7-10 d.
Blood for LH and 
FSH determinations 
is drawn before and 
after clomiphene is 
given.
This drug may stimulate ovulation, 
and women should be advised 
accordingly.
In women, LH and FSH lev-
els peak on the fifth day to 
a level above the normal 
range. After the fifth day, 
LH and FSH levels decline. 
In men, LH should double 
after 1 wk; FSH will also 
increase, but to a lesser 
extent.
CRH test
CRH (1 μg/kg) is given intrave-
nously as a bolus injection.
Blood samples for 
ACTH and cortisol 
are taken at 0, 15, 
30, and 60 min.
Flushing often occurs. Transient 
tachycardia and hypotension have 
also been reported.
The ACTH response is 
dependent on the assay 
utilized and occurs 15 min 
after CRH is administered. 
The peak cortisol response 
occurs at 30-60 min 
and is usually >10 μg/dL 
(276 nmol/L).
Low-dose 
 dexamethasone 
 suppression 
 test
Dexamethasone (1 mg) is given 
between 11 PM and midnight.
Blood samples for 
cortisol and dexam-
ethasone are taken 
at 8 AM the next 
morning.
Side effects are rare. Compliance is 
sometimes an issue. Some medica-
tions and patient variability can 
affect dexamethasone metabolism.
Cortisol should suppress 
to <1.8 μg/dL in normal 
individuals. This cutoff has 
a high sensitivity, but 
specificity is compromised.
(Continued)
88    CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland
CRH (1 μg/kg) provokes a peak ACTH response within 
15  minutes and a peak cortisol response within 30 to 60 minutes. 
This dose may be associated with mild flushing, occasional short-
ness of breath, tachycardia, and hypotension. Patients with pri-
mary adrenal insufficiency have elevated basal ACTH levels and 
exaggerated ACTH responses to CRH. Secondary adrenal insuf-
ficiency results in an absent ACTH response to CRH in patients 
with pituitary corticotroph destruction; however, in patients with 
hypothalamic dysfunction, there is a prolonged and augmented 
ACTH response to CRH with a delayed peak. Because of overlap 
between the responses of normal individuals and those with par-
tial secondary adrenal insufficiency, the CRH test is less useful 
than the procedures described above. 
 ACTH Hypersecretion 
 ACTH hypersecretion is manifested by adrenocortical hyperfunc-
tion (Cushing syndrome). The diagnosis and differential diagnosis 
of ACTH hypersecretion and hypercortisolism are outlined in a 
later section on Cushing disease and also in Chapter 9. The low-
dose dexamethasone suppression test is used to establish the pres-
ence of hypercortisolism regardless of its cause. Dexamethasone 
1 mg is taken orally between 11 PM and midnight. The following 
morning at 8 AM, a blood sample is obtained for cortisol (and 
dexamethasone level if available or cortisol does not suppress). 
Cortisol values less than 1.8 μg/dL are normal. Sensitivity using 
this cutoff is good though specificity is compromised. Patient 
compliance, individual differences in dexamethasone metabolism, 
drugs that affect metabolism of dexamethasone, and medical con-
ditions that alter cortisol secretion (acute illness, anxiety, depres-
sion, alcoholism) may influence the accuracy of this test. 
 EVALUATION OF GROWTH HORMONE 
 The evaluation of GH secretory reserve is important in the assess-
ment of children with short stature and in adults with suspected 
hypopituitarism. Provocative tests are necessary because basal lev-
els of GH are usually low and, therefore, do not distinguish 
between normal and GH-deficient patients. Special attention 
must be given to the methodology and the laboratory standards of 
GH measurement. Newer IRMAs give results that are 30% to 
50% lower than older radioimmunoassays. 
 Insulin-Induced Hypoglycemia 
 The most reliable stimulus of GH secretion is insulin-induced 
hypoglycemia. In normal individuals, GH levels increase to more 
than 5 ng/mL after adequate hypoglycemia is achieved. Because 
10% of normal individuals fail to respond to hypoglycemia, other 
stimulatory tests may be necessary. 
 GHRH-Arginine Test 
 Both forms of human GHRH (GHRH-40 and GHRH-44) have 
been used to evaluate GH secretory capacity. A dose of GHRH 
(1 μg/kg) combined with a 30-minute infusion of arginine 
(0.5 g/kg to a maximum of 20 g) promptly stimulates GH; the mean 
peak is 10 to 15 ng/mL (460-700 pmol/L) at 30 to 60 minutes in 
healthy subjects. The results are comparable to those achieved 
with insulin-induced hypoglycemia. Unfortunately, GHRH is no 
longer available in the United States. 
 Glucagon Stimulation Test 
 Glucagon can also be used to evaluate GH secretory capacity. A 
dose of glucagon (1 mg) is given intramuscularly and GH levels 
are measured every 30 minutes for 3 to 4 hours. In adults with 
GH deficiency, peak GH levels fail to rise above 3 ng/mL. 
 Tests with Levodopa, Arginine, 
and Other Stimuli 
 Stimulation testing with levodopa, arginine infusion alone, or 
propranolol, is less reliable in the diagnosis of GH deficiency. 
 GH Hypersecretion 
 The evaluation of GH hypersecretion is discussed in the section 
on acromegaly and is most conveniently assessed by GH suppres-
sion testing with oral glucose and measurement of IGF-I levels. 
 EVALUATION OF PROLACTIN 
 PRL secretion by the pituitary is the most resistant to local dam-
age, and decreased PRL secretory reserve indicates severe intrinsic 
pituitary disease. 
 PRL hypersecretion is a common endocrine problem. 
Macroprolactinemia can be assessed using polyethylene glycol 
precipitation of serum samples. Additional evaluation of hyper-
prolactinemia is discussed in the section on prolactinomas. 
 EVALUATION OF THYROID-STIMULATING 
HORMONE 
 Basal Measurements 
 The laboratory evaluation of TSH secretory reserve begins with an 
assessment of target gland secretion; thyroid function tests (free 
thyroxine [FT 4 ]) should be obtained. Normal thyroid function 
studies in a clinically euthyroid patient indicate adequate TSH 
secretion, and no further studies are warranted. Laboratory evi-
dence of hypothyroidism requires measurement of a TSH level. 
With primary thyroid gland failure, the TSH level is elevated; low 
or normal TSH in the presence of hypothyroidism suggests 
hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunction (see Chapter 7). 
 TRH Test 
 Because accurate methods for determining TSH and FT 4 readily 
establish the diagnosis of hypothyroidism in virtually all patients, 
the TRH test is rarely indicated today (TRH is also not currently 
commercially available). 
CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland     89
 EVALUATION OF LH AND FSH 
 Testosterone and Estrogen Levels 
 The evaluation of gonadotropin function also requires assessment 
of target gland secretory function, and measurement of gonadal 
steroids (testosterone in men, estradiol in women) is useful in the 
diagnosis of hypogonadism. In women, the presence of regular 
menstrual cycles is strong evidence that the hypothalamic- 
pituitary-gonadal axis is intact. Estradiol levels rarely fall below 
50 pg/mL (180 pmol/L), even during the early follicular phase. 
A level of less than 30 pg/mL (110 pmol/L) in the presence of 
oligomenorrhea or amenorrhea is indicative of gonadal failure. 
In men, serum testosterone (normal range, 300-1000 ng/dL; 
10-35 nmol/L) is a sensitive index of gonadal function (see 
Chapters 12 and 13). 
 LH and FSH Levels 
 In the presence of gonadal insufficiency, high LH and FSH levels 
are a sign of primary gonadal failure; low or normal LH and FSH 
suggest hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunction (hypogonadotropic 
hypogonadism). 
 GnRH Test 
 LH and FSH secretory reserves may be assessed with the use of 
synthetic GnRH (gonadorelin). Administration of GnRH causes 
a prompt increase in plasma LH and a lesser and slower increase 
in FSH. However, in most patients, the GnRH test provides no 
more useful information than is obtained by measurement of basal 
gonadotropin and gonadal steroid levels. Thus, this test is uncom-
monly performed. 
 PROBLEMS IN EVALUATION OF THE 
HYPOTHALAMIC-PITUITARY AXIS 
 This section briefly outlines some of the disorders and conditions 
that may cause confusion and lead to misinterpretation of pitu-
itary function tests. The effects of drugs are described in the next 
section. 
 Obesity 
 GH dynamics are impaired in many severely obese patients; all 
provocative stimuli, including insulin-induced hypoglycemia, argi-
nine, levodopa, and glucagon plus propranolol, often fail to pro-
voke GH secretion. The GH response to GHRH is also impaired 
in obesity and improves with weight loss. Obesity is also a common 
cause of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism in adult men. 
 Diabetes Mellitus 
 Although glucose normally suppresses GH secretion, most indi-
viduals with type 1 diabetes have normal or elevated GH levels 
that often do not rise further in response to hypoglycemia or argi-
nine. Levodopa increases GH in some diabetic patients, and even 
a dopamine infusion (which produces no GH change in nondia-
betic subjects, because it does not cross the blood–brain barrier), 
stimulates GH in diabetic patients. Despite the increased GH 
secretion in patients with inadequately controlled diabetes, the 
GH response to GHRH in insulin-dependent diabetic patients is 
similar to that of nondiabetic subjects. IGF-I levels are low in 
insulin-deficient diabetes despite the elevated GH levels. 
 Uremia 
 Basal levels of GH, PRL, LH, FSH, TSH, and free cortisol tend 
to be elevated, for the most part owing to prolongation of their 
plasma half-life. GH may paradoxically increase following glucose 
administration and is often hyperresponsive to a hypoglycemic 
stimulus. Although the administration of TRH (protirelin) has no 
effect on GH secretion in healthy subjects, the drug may increase 
GH in patients with chronic renal failure. The response of PRL to 
TRH is blunted and prolonged. Gonadotropin response to syn-
thetic GnRH usually remains intact. Dexamethasone suppression 
of cortisol may be impaired. 
 Starvation and Anorexia Nervosa 
 GH secretion increases with fasting and malnutrition, and such 
conditions may cause a paradoxical increase in GH following glu-
cose administration. Severe starvation, such as occurs in patients 
with anorexia nervosa, may result in low levels of gonadal steroids. 
LH and FSH responses to GnRH may be intact despite a state of 
functional hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. Cortisol levels may 
be increased and fail to suppress adequately with dexamethasone. 
PRL and TSH dynamics are usually normal despite a marked 
decrease in circulating total thyroid hormones (see Chapter 7). 
 Depression 
 Depression may alter the ability of dexamethasone to suppress 
plasma cortisol and may elevate cortisol secretion; the response to 
insulin-induced hypoglycemia usually remains intact. In addition, 
late-evening salivary cortisol levels usually remain normal and are 
not elevated as seen in patients with Cushing syndrome. The 
ACTH response to CRH is blunted in endogenous depression. 
Some depressed patients also have abnormal GH dynamics: TRH 
may increase GH, and hypoglycemia or levodopa may fail to 
increase GH. These patients may also show blunted TSH 
responses to TRH. 
 EFFECTS OF PHARMACOLOGIC AGENTS 
ON HYPOTHALAMIC-PITUITARY 
FUNCTION 
 Glucocorticoid excess impairs the GH response to hypoglycemia, 
the TSH response to TRH, and the LH response to GnRH. 
Estrogens tend to augment GH dynamics as well as the PRL and 
TSH response to TRH. Estrogens increase plasma cortisol second-
ary to a rise in corticosteroid-binding globulin and may result in 
inadequate suppression with dexamethasone. 
90    CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland
 Phenytoin enhances the metabolism of dexamethasone, mak-
ing clinical testing in patients of this agent difficult to interpret. 
Phenothiazines may blunt the GH response to hypoglycemia and 
levodopa and frequently cause hyperprolactinemia. The many 
other pharmacologic agents that increase PRL secretion are listed 
in  Table 4–8 . 
 Narcotics, including heroin, morphine, and methadone, may 
all raise PRL levels and suppress GH and cortisol response to 
hypoglycemia. 
 In chronic alcoholics, alcohol excess or withdrawal may 
increase cortisol levels and cause inadequate dexamethasone sup-
pression and an impaired cortisol increase after hypoglycemia. 
 ENDOCRINE TESTS OF 
HYPOTHALAMIC-PITUITARY 
FUNCTION 
 Methods for performing endocrine tests and their normal responses 
are summarized in  Table 4–9 . The indications for and the clinical 
utility of these procedures are described in the preceding section 
and will be mentioned again in the section on pituitary and hypo-
thalamic disorders. 
 NEURORADIOLOGIC EVALUATION 
 Symptoms of pituitary hormone excess or deficiency, headache, or 
visual disturbance lead the clinician to consider a hypothalamic- 
pituitary disorder. In this setting, accurate neuroradiologic assessment 
of the hypothalamus and pituitary is essential in confirming the exis-
tence and defining the extent of hypothalamic-pituitary lesions. 
However, the diagnosis of such lesions should be based on both endo-
crine and radiologic criteria, because variability of pituitary anatomy 
in the normal population may lead to false-positive interpretations. 
Furthermore, patients with pituitary microadenomas may have nor-
mal neuroradiologic studies. Imaging studies must be interpreted in 
light of the fact that 10% to 20% of the general population harbor 
nonfunctional and asymptomatic pituitary microadenomas. 
 Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
 MRI is the current procedure of choice for imaging the hypo-
thalamus and pituitary. It has superseded the use of computed 
tomography (CT) because it allows better definition of normal 
structures and has better resolution in defining tumors. 
Arteriography is rarely utilized at present except in patients with 
intrasellar or parasellar aneurysms. 
 Imaging is performed in sagittal and coronal planes at 1.5 to 
2 mm intervals. This allows clear definition of hypothalamic and 
pituitary anatomy and can accurately visualize lesions as small as 
3 to 5 mm. The use of the heavy-metal contrast agent gadolinium 
allows even more precise differentiation of small pituitary ade-
nomas from normal anterior pituitary tissue and other adjacent 
structures as shown in  Figure 4–15 . 
 A. Normal anatomy 
 The normal anterior pituitary is 5 to 
7 mm in height and approximately 10 mm in its lateral dimen-
sions. The superior margin is flat or concave but may be upwardly 
convex with a height of 10 to 12 mm in healthy menstruating 
young women. The floor of the sella turcica is formed by the bony 
roof of the sphenoid sinus, and its lateral margins are formed by 
the dural membranes of the cavernous sinuses, which contain the 
carotid arteries and the third, fourth, and sixth cranial nerves. The 
posterior pituitary appears on MRI as a high-signal-intensity 
structure, the “posterior pituitary bright spot,” which is absent in 
patients with diabetes insipidus. The pituitary stalk, which is nor-
mally in the midline, is 2 to 3 mm in diameter and 5 to 7 mm in 
length. The pituitary stalk joins the inferior hypothalamus below 
the third ventricle and posterior to the optic chiasm. All of these 
normal structures are readily visualized with MRI; the normal 
pituitary and the pituitary stalk show increased signal intensity 
with gadolinium. 
 B. Microadenomas 
 These lesions, which range from 2 to 
10 mm in diameter, appear as low-signal-intensity lesions on MRI 
and do not usually enhance with gadolinium. Adenomas less than 
5 mm in diameter may not be visualized and do not usually alter 
the normal pituitary contour. Lesions greater than 5 mm in diam-
eter create a unilateral convex superior gland margin and usually 
cause deviation of the pituitary stalk toward the side opposite the 
adenoma. 
 MRI scans must be interpreted with caution, because minor 
abnormalities occur in 10% of patients who have had incidental 
high-resolution scans but no clinical pituitary disease. These 
abnormalities may represent the clinically insignificant pituitary 
abnormalities that occur in 10% to 20% of the general popula-
tion, and they may also be due to small intrapituitary cysts, which 
usually occur in the pars intermedia. Artifacts within the sella 
turcica associated with the bones of the skull base may also result 
in misinterpretation of imaging studies. Finally, many patients 
with pituitary microadenomas have normal high-resolution MRI 
scans. Therefore, despite increased accuracy of neuroradiologic 
diagnosis, the presence or absence of a small pituitary tumor and 
the decision concerning its treatment must be based on the entire 
clinical picture. 
 C. Macroadenomas 
 Pituitary adenomas greater than 10 mm 
in diameter are readily visualized with MRI scans, and the scan 
also defines the adjacent structures and degree of extension of the 
lesion. Thus, larger tumors show compression of the normal pitu-
itary and distortion of the pituitary stalk. Adenomas larger than 
1.5 cm frequently have suprasellar extension, and MRI scans show 
compression and upward displacement of the optic chiasm. Less 
commonly, there is lateral extension and invasion of the cavernous 
sinus. 
 D. Other uses 
 High-resolution MRI scanning is also a valu-
able tool in the diagnosis of empty sella syndrome, hypothalamic 
tumors, and other parasellar lesions. 
CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland     91
 PITUITARY AND HYPOTHALAMIC 
DISORDERS 
 Hypothalamic-pituitary lesions present with a variety of manifes-
tations, including pituitary hormone hypersecretion and hypose-
cretion, sellar enlargement, and visual loss. The approach to 
evaluation should be designed to ensure early diagnosis at a stage 
when the lesions are amenable to therapy. 
 Etiology and Early Manifestations 
 In adults, the most common cause of hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunc-
tion is a pituitary adenoma, of which the great majority are hyperse-
creting. Thus, the earliest symptoms of such tumors are due to 
endocrinologic abnormalities—hypogonadism is the most frequent 
manifestation—and these precede sellar enlargement and local mani-
festations such as headache and visual loss, which are late manifesta-
tions seen only in patients with larger tumors or suprasellar extension. 
 FIGURE 4–15  Upper panel: A: The coronal magnetic resonance (MR) image shows a large nonfunctioning pituitary adenoma (arrows) 
with pronounced suprasellar extension and chiasmal compression.  B: A sagittal MR image of another large pituitary adenoma shows spontane-
ous hemorrhage within the suprasellar portion of the adenoma (arrows).  (Photographs courtesy of David Norman, MD. Reproduced, with per-
mission, from  West J Med . 1995;162:342, 350.) 
 Lower panel: Gadolinium-enhanced MR images are shown of the pituitary gland.  A and B: Coronal and sagittal images show the normal, uni-
formly enhancing pituitary stalk and pituitary gland.  C: A pituitary microadenoma appears as a low-intensity lesion in the inferior aspect of the 
right lobe of the gland (arrow).  D: The pituitary microadenoma appears as a low-intensity lesion between the left lobe of the pituitary and the 
left cavernous sinus (arrow).  (Photographs courtesy of David Norman, MD.) 
92    CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland
 In children, pituitary adenomas are uncommon; the most fre-
quent structural lesions causing hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunc-
tion are craniopharyngiomas and other hypothalamic tumors. 
These also usually manifest as endocrine disturbances (low GH 
levels, delayed puberty, diabetes insipidus) prior to the develop-
ment of headache, visual loss, or other central nervous system 
symptoms. 
 Common and Later Manifestations 
 A. Pituitary hypersecretion 
 PRL is the hormone most 
commonly secreted in excess amounts by pituitary adenomas, and 
it is usually elevated in patients with hypothalamic disorders and 
pituitary stalk compression as well. Thus, PRL measurement is 
essential in evaluating patients with suspected pituitary disorders 
and should be performed in patients presenting with galactorrhea, 
gonadal dysfunction, secondary gonadotropin deficiency, or 
enlargement of the sella turcica. Hypersecretion of GH or ACTH 
leads to the more characteristic syndromes of acromegaly and 
Cushing disease (see discussion later). 
 B. Pituitary insufficiency 
 Although panhypopituitarism is a 
classic manifestation of pituitary adenomas, it is present in less 
than 20% of patients in current large series because of earlier 
diagnosis of these lesions. 
 The earliest clinical manifestation of a pituitary adenoma in 
adults is hypogonadism secondary to elevated levels of PRL, GH, 
or ACTH and cortisol. The hypogonadism in these patients is due 
to interference with the secretion of GnRH rather than to destruc-
tion of anterior pituitary tissue. Thus, patients with hypogonad-
ism should first be screened with FSH and LH measurements to 
exclude primary gonadal failure (elevated FSH or LH) and those 
with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism should have serum PRL 
levels measured and be examined for clinical evidence of GH or 
ACTH and cortisol excess. 
 In children, short stature is the most frequent clinical presenta-
tion of hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunction; in these patients, GH 
deficiency should be considered (see Chapter 6). 
 TSH or ACTH deficiency is relatively unusual and, if present, 
usually indicates panhypopituitarism. Thus, patients with second-
ary hypothyroidism or hypoadrenalism should undergo a com-
plete assessment of pituitary function and neuroradiologic studies, 
because panhypopituitarism and large pituitary tumors are com-
mon in this setting. PRL measurement is again essential, because 
prolactinomas are the most frequent pituitary tumors in adults. 
 C. Enlarged sella turcica 
 Patients may present with enlarge-
ment of the sella turcica, which may be noted on radiographs 
performed for head trauma or on sinus series. These patients usu-
ally have either a pituitary adenoma or empty sella syndrome. 
Other less common causes include craniopharyngioma, lympho-
cytic hypophysitis, and carotid artery aneurysm. Evaluation 
should include clinical assessment of pituitary dysfunction and 
measurements of PRL and thyroid and adrenal function. Pituitary 
function is usually normal in the empty sella syndrome; this diag-
nosis can be confirmed by MRI. Patients with clinical or  laboratory 
evidence of pituitary dysfunction usually have a pituitary 
 adenoma. 
 D. Visual field defects 
 Patients presenting with bitemporal 
hemianopsia or unexplained visual field defects or visual loss 
should be considered to have a pituitary or hypothalamic disorder 
until proven otherwise. The initial steps in diagnosis should be 
neuro-ophthalmologic evaluation and neuroradiologic studies 
with MRI, which will reveal the tumor if one is present. These 
patients should also have PRL measurements and be assessed for 
anterior pituitary insufficiency, which is especially common with 
large pituitary adenomas. 
 In addition to causing visual field defects, large pituitary 
lesions may extend laterally into the cavernous sinus, compromis-
ing the function of the third, fourth, or sixth cranial nerve, leading 
to diplopia. 
 E. Diabetes insipidus 
 Diabetes insipidus is a common 
manifestation of hypothalamic lesions and metastases to the pitu-
itary, but is rare in primary pituitary lesions. Diagnostic evaluation 
is described in Chapter 5. In addition, all patients should undergo 
radiologic evaluation and assessment of anterior pituitary 
 function. 
 EMPTY SELLA SYNDROME 
 Etiology and Incidence 
 Empty sella syndrome occurs when the subarachnoid space 
extends into the sella turcica, partially filling it with cerebrospinal 
fluid. This process causes remodeling and enlargement of the sella 
turcica and flattening of the pituitary gland. 
 Primary empty sella syndrome resulting from congenital 
incompetence of the diaphragma sellae ( Figure 4–16 ) is common, 
with an incidence in autopsy series ranging from 5% to 23%. It is 
the most frequent cause of enlarged sella turcica. An empty sella is 
also commonly seen after pituitary surgery or radiation therapy 
and may also occur following postpartum pituitary infarction 
(Sheehan syndrome). In addition, both PRL-secreting and 
GH-secreting pituitary adenomas may undergo subclinical hem-
orrhagic infarction and cause contraction of the overlying supra-
sellar cistern downward into the sella. Therefore, the presence of 
an empty sella does not exclude the possibility of a coexisting 
pituitary tumor. 
 Clinical Features 
 A. Symptoms and signs 
 Most patients are middle-aged 
obese women. Many have systemic hypertension; benign intracra-
nial hypertension may also occur. Although 48% of patients 
complain of headache, this feature may have only initiated the 
evaluation (ie, skull x-rays), and its relationship to the empty sella 
is probably coincidental. Serious clinical manifestations are 
uncommon. Spontaneous cerebrospinal fluid rhinorrhea and 
visual field impairment may occur rarely. 
CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland     93
 B. Laboratory findings 
 Tests of anterior pituitary function 
are almost always normal, although some patients have hyperpro-
lactinemia. Endocrine function studies should be performed to 
exclude pituitary hormone insufficiency or a hypersecretory pitu-
itary microadenoma. 
 Diagnosis 
 The diagnosis of empty sella syndrome can be readily confirmed 
by MRI, which demonstrates the herniation of the diaphragma 
sellae and the presence of cerebrospinal fluid in the sella turcica. 
 HYPOTHALAMIC DYSFUNCTION 
 Hypothalamic dysfunction is most often caused by tumors, of 
which craniopharyngioma is the most common in children, adoles-
cents, and young adults. In older adults, primary central nervous 
system tumors and those arising from hypothalamic (epidermoid 
and dermoid tumors) and pineal structures (pinealomas) are more 
common. Other causes of hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunction are 
discussed below in the section on hypopituitarism. 
 Clinical Features 
 A. Craniopharyngioma 
 Craniopharyngiomas are thought to 
originate from metaplasia of remnant epithelial cell rests in Rathke 
pouch and the craniopharyngeal duct during development. The 
differential diagnosis includes Rathke cleft cysts and arachnoid 
cysts. Rathke cleft cysts are a common incidental finding within 
the pituitary, but may present with symptoms similar to cranio-
pharyngiomas. Although Rathke cleft cysts and craniopharyn-
giomas are both thought to arise from Rathke pouch during 
development, craniopharyngiomas tend to be more aggressive and 
are more likely to recur after resection. 
 The initial symptoms of craniopharyngioma in children and 
adolescents are predominantly endocrinologic; however, these 
manifestations are frequently unrecognized, and at diagnosis more 
than 80% of patients have hypothalamic-pituitary endocrine defi-
ciencies. These endocrine abnormalities may precede presenting 
symptoms by months or years; GH deficiency is most common, 
with about 50% of patients having growth retardation and 
approximately 70% decreased GH responses to stimulation at 
diagnosis. Gonadotropin deficiency leading to absent or arrested 
puberty is usual in older children and adolescents; TSH and 
ACTH deficiencies are less common, and diabetes insipidus is 
present in about 15%. 
 Symptoms leading to the diagnosis are frequently neurologic 
and due to the mass effect of the expanding tumor. Symptoms of 
increased intracranial pressure such as headache and vomiting are 
present in about 40% of patients; decreased visual acuity or visual 
field defects are the presenting symptoms in another 35%. MRI 
confirms the tumor in virtually all patients; in 95%, the tumor is 
suprasellar. 
 In adults, craniopharyngiomas have similar presentations; that 
is, the diagnosis is usually reached as a result of investigation of 
complaints of headache or visual loss. However, endocrine mani-
festations—especially hypogonadism, diabetes insipidus, or other 
deficiencies of anterior pituitary hormones—usually precede these 
late manifestations. MRI readily demonstrates the tumors, which 
in adults are almost always both intrasellar and suprasellar. The 
appearance is typically of a heterogeneous, cystic mass that 
enhances with contrast. Calcifications may also be present. 
 B. Other tumors 
 Other hypothalamic or pineal tumors and 
primary central nervous system tumors involving the hypothala-
mus have variable presentations in both children and adults. Thus, 
presentation is with headache, visual loss, symptoms of increased 
intracranial pressure, growth failure, various degrees of 
Normal
Empty sella
Arachnoid
Dura
Pia
Basilar cisterns
(CSF)
Diaphragma
sellae
Arachnoid
CSF
Pars
distalis
 FIGURE 4–16  Representation of the normal relationship of the meninges to the pituitary gland  (left) and the findings in the empty sella 
 (right) as the arachnoid membrane herniates through the incompetent diaphragma sellae.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Jordan RM, 
Kendall JW, Kerber CW. The primary empty sella syndrome: analysis of the clinical characteristics, radiographic features, pituitary function, and 
cerebrospinal fluid adenohypophysial hormone concentrations.  Am J Med . 1977;62:569). 
94    CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland
 hypopituitarism, or diabetes insipidus. Endocrine deficiencies 
usually precede neurologic manifestations. Hypothalamic tumors 
in childhood may present with precocious puberty. 
 C. Other manifestations of hypothalamic dysfunc-
tion 
 Lesions in the hypothalamus can cause many other abnor-
malities, including disorders of consciousness, behavior, thirst, 
appetite, and temperature regulation. These abnormalities are usu-
ally accompanied by hypopituitarism and diabetes insipidus. 
 Somnolence can occur with hypothalamic lesions, as can a 
variety of changes in emotional behavior. Decreased or absent 
thirst may occur and predispose these patients to dehydration. 
When diminished thirst accompanies diabetes insipidus, fluid 
balance is difficult to control. Hypothalamic dysfunction may 
also cause increased thirst, leading to polydipsia and polyuria 
that may mimic diabetes insipidus. Obesity is common in 
patients with hypothalamic tumors because of hyperphagia, 
decreased satiety, and decreased activity. Frohlich syndrome, or 
adiposogenital dystrophy, is characterized by obesity, growth 
retardation, and delayed development of sexual organs. 
Anorexia and weight loss are unusual manifestations of these 
tumors. 
 Temperature regulation can also be disordered in these patients. 
Sustained or, less commonly, paroxysmal hyperthermia can occur 
following acute injury due to trauma, hemorrhage, or craniotomy. 
This problem usually lasts less than 2 weeks. Poikilothermia, the 
inability to adjust to changes in ambient temperature, can occur 
in patients with bilateral hypothalamic lesions. These patients 
most frequently exhibit hypothermia but can also develop hyper-
thermia during hot weather. A few patients manifest sustained 
hypothermia due to anterior hypothalamic lesions. 
 Diagnosis 
 Patients with suspected hypothalamic tumors should undergo 
MRI to determine the extent and nature of the tumor. Complete 
assessment of anterior pituitary function is necessary in these 
patients, because deficiencies are present in the great majority 
(see section on Hypopituitarism below), and the evaluation will 
establish the requirements for replacement therapy. PRL levels 
should also be determined, because most hypothalamic lesions 
cause hyperprolactinemia either by hypothalamic injury or by 
damage to the pituitary stalk. 
 Treatment 
 Treatment depends on the type of tumor. Because complete resec-
tion of craniopharyngioma is usually not feasible, this tumor is 
best managed by limited neurosurgical removal of accessible 
tumor and decompression of cysts, followed by radiotherapy. 
Patients treated by this method have a recurrence rate of 
 approximately 20%; with surgery alone, the recurrence rate 
approximates 80%. 
 Other hypothalamic tumors are usually not completely 
 resectable; however, biopsy is indicated to arrive at a histologic 
diagnosis. 
 HYPOPITUITARISM 
 Hypopituitarism is manifested by diminished or absent secretion 
of one or more pituitary hormones. The development of signs and 
symptoms is often slow and insidious, depending on the rate of 
onset and the magnitude of hypothalamic-pituitary damage—
factors that are influenced by the underlying pathogenesis. 
Hypopituitarism is either a primary event caused by destruction of 
the anterior pituitary gland or a secondary phenomenon resulting 
from deficiency of hypothalamic stimulatory factors normally act-
ing on the pituitary. In general, acquired loss of anterior pituitary 
function follows the sequence of GH, LH/FSH, TSH, ACTH, 
and PRL. Treatment and prognosis depend on the extent of hypo-
function, the underlying cause, and the location of the lesion in 
the hypothalamic-pituitary axis. 
 Etiology 
 The etiologic considerations in hypopituitarism are diverse. As 
shown below, a helpful mnemonic device is the phrase “nine Is”: 
invasive, infarction, infiltrative, injury, immunologic, iatrogenic, 
infectious, idiopathic, and isolated. Most of these lesions may 
cause pituitary or hypothalamic failure (or both). Establishing the 
precise cause of hypopituitarism is helpful in determining treat-
ment and prognosis. 
 A. Invasive 
 Space-occupying lesions cause hypopituitarism by 
destroying the pituitary gland or hypothalamic nuclei or by dis-
rupting the hypothalamic-hypophysial portal venous system. 
Large pituitary adenomas cause hypopituitarism by these mecha-
nisms, and pituitary function may improve after their removal. 
Small pituitary tumors—microadenomas (<10 mm in diameter)—
characteristically seen in the hypersecretory states (excess PRL, 
GH, ACTH) do not directly cause pituitary insufficiency. 
Craniopharyngioma, the most common tumor of the hypotha-
lamic-pituitary region in children, frequently impairs pituitary 
function by its compressive effects. Primary central nervous sys-
tem tumors, including meningioma, chordoma, optic glioma, 
epidermoid tumors, and dermoid tumors, may decrease hypotha-
lamic-pituitary secretion by their mass effects. Metastatic lesions 
to this area are common (especially breast carcinoma) but rarely 
result in clinically obvious hypopituitarism. Anatomic malforma-
tions such as basal encephalocele and parasellar aneurysms cause 
hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunction and may enlarge the sella 
turcica and mimic pituitary tumors. 
 B. Infarction 
 Ischemic damage to the pituitary has long been 
recognized as a cause of hypopituitarism. In 1914, Simmonds 
reported pituitary necrosis in a woman with severe puerperal sepsis 
and in 1937 Sheehan published his classic description of its occur-
rence following postpartum hemorrhage and vascular collapse. 
The mechanism for the ischemia in such cases is not certain. 
Hypotension along with vasospasm of the hypophysial arteries is 
currently believed to compromise arterial perfusion of the anterior 
pituitary. During pregnancy, the pituitary gland may be more 
sensitive to hypoxemia because of its increased metabolic needs or 
CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland     95
more susceptible to the prothrombotic effects of the hyperestro-
genic state. Some investigators have noted that the hypopituitar-
ism does not always correlate with the degree of hemorrhage but 
that there is good correlation between the pituitary lesion and 
severe disturbances of the clotting mechanism (as in patients with 
placenta previa). Ischemic pituitary necrosis has also been reported 
to occur with greater frequency in patients with diabetes 
 mellitus. 
 The extent of pituitary damage determines the rapidity of 
onset as well as the magnitude of pituitary hypofunction. The 
gland has a great secretory reserve, and more than 75% must be 
destroyed before clinical manifestations are evident. The initial 
clinical feature in postpartum necrosis may be failure to lactate 
after parturition; failure to resume normal menstrual periods is 
another clue to the diagnosis. However, the clinical features of 
hypopituitarism are often subtle, and years may pass before pitu-
itary insufficiency is recognized following an ischemic insult. 
 Spontaneous hemorrhagic infarction of a pituitary tumor 
(pituitary apoplexy) frequently results in partial or total pituitary 
insufficiency. Pituitary apoplexy is often a fulminant clinical syn-
drome manifested by severe headache, visual impairment, oph-
thalmoplegias, meningismus, and an altered level of consciousness. 
Pituitary apoplexy is usually associated with a pituitary tumor; it 
may also be related to diabetes mellitus, radiotherapy, or open 
heart surgery. Acute pituitary failure with hypotension may result, 
and rapid mental deterioration, coma, and death may ensue. 
Emergency treatment with corticosteroids (see Chapter 24) and 
transsphenoidal decompression of the intrasellar contents may be 
lifesaving and may prevent permanent visual loss. Most patients 
who have survived pituitary apoplexy have developed multiple 
adenohypophysial deficits, but infarction of the tumor in some 
patients may cure the hypersecretory pituitary adenoma and its 
accompanying endocrinopathy. Pituitary infarction may also be a 
subclinical event (silent pituitary apoplexy), resulting in improve-
ment of pituitary hormone hypersecretion without impairing the 
secretion of other anterior pituitary hormones. 
 C. Infiltrative 
 Hypopituitarism may be the initial clinical 
manifestation of infiltrative disease processes such as sarcoidosis, 
hemochromatosis, and Langerhan histiocytosis. 
 1.  Sarcoidosis— The most common intracranial sites of involve-
ment of sarcoidosis are the hypothalamus and pituitary gland. 
At one time, the most common endocrine abnormality in 
patients with sarcoidosis was thought to be diabetes insipidus; 
however, many of these patients actually have centrally medi-
ated disordered control of thirst that results in polydipsia and 
polyuria, which in some cases explains the abnormal water 
metabolism. Deficiencies of multiple anterior pituitary hor-
mones have been well documented in sarcoidosis and are usu-
ally secondary to hypothalamic insufficiency. Granulomatous 
involvement of the hypothalamic-pituitary unit is occasionally 
extensive, resulting in visual impairment, and therefore, may 
simulate the clinical presentation of a pituitary or hypotha-
lamic tumor. 
 2. Hemochromatosis— Hypopituitarism, particularly hypogo-
nadotropic hypogonadism, is a prominent manifestation of iron 
storage disease—either primary (hereditary)  hemochromatosis 
or transfusional iron overload. Hypogonadism occurs in most 
such cases and is often the initial clinical feature of iron excess; 
complete iron studies should be considered in any patient 
presenting with unexplained hypogonadotropic hypogonad-
ism. If the diagnosis is established early, hypogonadism in 
hemochromatosis may be reversible with iron depletion. 
Pituitary deficiencies of TSH, GH, and ACTH may occur 
later in the course of the disease and are not reversible by iron 
chelation therapy. 
 3.  Langerhan histiocytosis— In this disorder, the infiltration of 
multiple organs by well-differentiated histiocytes, is often 
heralded by the onset of diabetes insipidus and anterior pitu-
itary hormone deficiencies. Most histologic and biochemical 
studies have indicated that this infiltrative process involves 
chiefly the hypothalamus, and hypopituitarism occurs only as 
a result of hypothalamic damage. 
 D. Injury 
 Severe head trauma may cause anterior pituitary 
insufficiency and diabetes insipidus. Posttraumatic anterior 
hypopituitarism may be due to injury to the anterior pituitary, the 
pituitary stalk, or the hypothalamus. Pituitary insufficiency with 
growth retardation has been described in battered children who 
suffer closed head trauma with subdural hematoma. 
 E. Immunologic 
 Lymphocytic hypophysitis resulting in ante-
rior hypopituitarism is a distinct entity, occurring most often in 
women during pregnancy or in the postpartum period. It may 
present as a mass lesion of the sella turcica with visual field distur-
bances simulating pituitary adenoma. An autoimmune process 
with extensive infiltration of the gland by lymphocytes and plasma 
cells destroys the anterior pituitary cells. These morphologic fea-
tures are similar to those of other autoimmune endocrinopathies 
(eg, thyroiditis, adrenalitis, and oophoritis). About 50% of 
patients with lymphocytic hypophysitis have other endocrine 
autoimmune disease, and circulating pituitary autoantibodies 
have been found in several cases. It is presently uncertain how this 
disorder should be diagnosed and treated. It must be considered 
in the differential diagnosis of women with pituitary gland 
enlargement and hypopituitarism during pregnancy or the post-
partum period. 
 Lymphocytic hypophysitis may result in isolated hormone defi-
ciencies (especially ACTH or prolactin). Consequently, women 
with this type of hypopituitarism may continue to menstruate while 
suffering from secondary hypothyroidism or hypoadrenalism. 
 F. Iatrogenic 
 Both surgical and radiation therapy to the pitu-
itary gland may compromise its function. The anterior pituitary is 
quite resilient during transsphenoidal microsurgery, and despite 
extensive manipulation during the search for microadenomas, 
anterior pituitary function is usually preserved. The dose of con-
ventional radiation therapy presently employed to treat pituitary 
tumors is 4500 to 5000 cGy and results in a 50% to 60% inci-
dence of hypothalamic and pituitary insufficiency. Such patients 
most frequently have modest hyperprolactinemia (PRL 30-
100 ng/mL [1.3-4.5 nmol/L]) with GH and gonadotropin failure; 
TSH and ACTH deficiencies are less common. Heavy particle 
(proton beam) irradiation and gamma knife radiosurgery for 
96    CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland
 pituitary tumors results in a 15% to 55% incidence of hypopitu-
itarism. Irradiation of tumors of the head and neck (nasopharyn-
geal cancer, brain tumors) and prophylactic cranial irradiation in 
leukemia may also cause hypopituitarism. The clinical onset of 
pituitary failure in such patients is usually insidious and results 
from both pituitary and hypothalamic injury. 
 G. Infectious 
 Although many infectious diseases, including 
tuberculosis, syphilis, and mycotic infections, have been impli-
cated as causative agents in pituitary hypofunction, antimicrobial 
drugs have now made them rare causes of hypopituitarism. 
 H. Idiopathic 
 In some patients with hypopituitarism, no 
underlying cause is found. These may be isolated (see discussion 
later) or multiple deficiencies. Familial forms of hypopituitarism 
characterized by a small, normal, or enlarged sella turcica have 
been described. Both autosomal recessive and X-linked recessive 
inheritance patterns have been reported. A variety of complex 
congenital disorders may include deficiency of one or more pitu-
itary hormones (eg, Prader-Willi syndrome, septo-optic dyspla-
sia). Although progress has been made into understanding the 
genetic basis for some of these disorders, the pathogenesis remains 
uncertain. 
 I. Isolated 
 Isolated (monotropic) deficiencies of the anterior 
pituitary hormones have been described. Some of these have been 
associated with mutations in the genes coding for the specific 
hormones. Others, particularly GH deficiency, have been associ-
ated with mutations in genes necessary for normal pituitary devel-
opment as noted. 
 1.  GH deficiency— In children, congenital monotropic GH 
deficiency may be sporadic or familial. These children, who 
may experience fasting hypoglycemia, have a gradual decelera-
tion in growth velocity after 6 to 12 months of age. Diagnosis 
must be based on failure of GH responsiveness to provocative 
stimuli and the demonstration of normal responsiveness of 
other anterior pituitary hormones. Monotropic GH deficiency 
and growth retardation have also been observed in children 
suffering severe emotional deprivation. This disorder is reversed 
by placing the child in a supportive psychosocial milieu. A 
more detailed description of GH deficiency and growth failure 
is provided in Chapter 6. 
 2. ACTH deficiency— Monotropic ACTH deficiency is rare and 
is manifested by the signs and symptoms of adrenocortical 
insufficiency. LPH deficiency has also been noted in such 
patients. The defect in these patients may be due to primary 
failure of the corticotrophs to release ACTH and its related 
peptide hormones or may be secondary to impaired secretion 
of CRH by the hypothalamus. Most acquired cases of mono-
tropic ACTH deficiency are presumed to be due to lympho-
cytic hypophysitis. 
 3. Gonadotropin deficiency— Isolated deficiency of gonadotro-
pins is not uncommon. Kallmann syndrome initially described 
in the 1940s, is characterized by an isolated defect in GnRH 
secretion associated with maldevelopment of the olfactory cen-
ter with hyposmia or anosmia; X-linked recessive, autosomal 
dominant, and autosomal recessive patterns of inheritance are 
seen. Sporadic cases occur, and other neurologic defects such as 
color blindness and nerve deafness have been reported. At least 
five Kallmann syndrome genes have been identified: KAL1, 
FGFR1, FGF8, PROKR2, and PROK2. KAL1 mutations are 
responsible for the X-linked form of the disease and result in 
decreased expression of the extracellular glycoprotein anos-
min-1. This in turn interferes with the normal embryonic 
development and migration of GnRH-secreting neurons. 
Because anterior pituitary function is otherwise intact, young 
men with isolated hypogonadotropic hypogonadism develop a 
eunuchoid appearance, since testosterone deficiency results in 
failure of epiphysial closure (see Chapter 12). In women, a 
state of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism manifested by oli-
gomenorrhea or amenorrhea often accompanies weight loss, 
emotional or physical stress, and athletic training. Anorexia 
nervosa and marked obesity both result in hypothalamic dys-
function and impaired gonadotropin secretion. Hypothalamic 
hypogonadism has also been observed in overtrained male 
athletes. Sickle cell anemia also causes hypogonadotropic 
hypogonadism due to hypothalamic dysfunction and results in 
delayed puberty. Clomiphene treatment has been effective in 
some cases. Isolated gonadotropin deficiency may also be seen 
in the polyglandular autoimmune syndrome; this deficiency is 
related to selective pituitary gonadotrope failure from autoim-
mune hypophysitis. Other chronic illnesses (eg, poorly con-
trolled diabetes, malnutrition) may result in gonadotropin 
deficiency. Isolated deficiencies of both LH and FSH without 
an obvious cause such as those described have been reported 
but are rare. In addition, acquired partial gonadotropin defi-
ciency may occur in middle-aged men. The cause and exact 
frequency of this disorder are unknown. 
 4. TSH deficiency— Monotropic TSH deficiency is rare and can 
be caused by a reduction in either hypothalamic TRH secre-
tion (tertiary hypothyroidism) or pituitary TSH secretion 
(secondary hypothyroidism). These defects have reported in 
association with gene mutations, empty sella, lymphocytic 
hypophysitis, and pituitary tumors. Some patients with chronic 
renal failure also appear to have impaired TSH secretion. 
 5. Prolactin deficiency— PRL deficiency almost always indicates 
severe intrinsic pituitary damage, and panhypopituitarism is 
usually present. However, isolated PRL deficiency has been 
reported after lymphocytic hypophysitis. Deficiencies of TSH 
and PRL have been noted in patients with pseudohypoparathy-
roidism. 
 6. Multiple hormone deficiencies isolated from other pitu-
itary damage— Multiple hormone deficiencies result from 
abnormal pituitary development related to abnormalities of the 
genes encoding the transcription factors, PIT-1 (TSH, GH, 
and PRL) and PROP-1 (TSH, GH, PRL, LH, FSH, and 
ACTH). 
 Clinical Features 
 The onset of pituitary insufficiency is usually gradual, and the 
classic course of progressive hypopituitarism is an initial loss of 
GH and gonadotropin secretion followed by deficiencies of TSH, 
then ACTH, and finally PRL. 
 A. Symptoms 
 Impairment of GH secretion causes decreased 
growth in children but may be clinically occult in adult patients. 
GH deficiency is associated with a decreased sense of well-being 
and a lower health-related quality of life. Decreased muscle mass 
CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland     97
and increased fat mass can also be seen, although this may be dif-
ficult to discern in any given individual. 
 Hypogonadism, manifested by amenorrhea in women and 
decreased libido or erectile dysfunction in men, may antedate the 
clinical appearance of a hypothalamic-pituitary lesion. The only 
symptom of PRL deficiency is failure of postpartum lactation. 
 Hypothyroidism caused by TSH deficiency generally simulates 
the clinical changes observed in primary thyroid failure; however, 
it is usually less severe, and goiter is absent. Cold intolerance, dry 
skin, mental dullness, bradycardia, constipation, hoarseness, and 
anemia have all been observed; gross myxedematous changes are 
uncommon. 
 ACTH deficiency causes adrenocortical insufficiency, and its 
clinical features resemble those of primary adrenal failure. 
Weakness, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, weight loss, fever, and 
hypotension may occur. The zona glomerulosa and the renin-
angiotensin system are usually intact; therefore, the dehydration 
and sodium depletion seen in Addison disease are uncommon. 
However, these patients are susceptible to hypotension, shock, 
and cardiovascular collapse, because glucocorticoids are neces-
sary to maintain vascular reactivity, especially during stress. In 
addition, because of their gradual onset, the symptoms of sec-
ondary adrenal insufficiency may go undetected for prolonged 
periods, becoming manifest only during periods of stress. 
Hypoglycemia aggravated by GH deficiency may occur with 
fasting and has been the initial presenting feature of some 
patients with isolated ACTH deficiency. In contrast to the 
hyperpigmentation that occurs during states of ACTH excess 
(Addison disease, Nelson syndrome), depigmentation and 
diminished tanning have been described as a result of ACTH 
insufficiency. In addition, lack of ACTH-stimulated adrenal 
androgen secretion will cause a decrease in body hair if gonado-
tropin deficiency is also present. 
 B. Signs 
 Abnormal findings on physical examination may be 
subtle and require careful observation. Patients with hypopituitar-
ism are not cachectic. A photograph of a cachectic patient with 
“Simmonds syndrome” that appeared in some older textbooks of 
endocrinology caused confusion. That particular patient probably 
suffered from anorexia nervosa and was found to have a normal 
pituitary gland at postmortem examination. 
 Patients with pituitary failure are usually slightly overweight. 
The skin is fine, pale, and smooth, with fine wrinkling of the face. 
Body and pubic hair may be deficient or absent, and atrophy of 
the genitalia may occur. Postural hypotension, bradycardia, 
decreased muscle strength, and delayed deep tendon reflexes occur 
in more severe cases. Neuro-ophthalmologic abnormalities depend 
on the presence of a large intrasellar or parasellar lesion. 
 C. Laboratory and other findings 
 These may include ane-
mia (related to thyroid and androgen deficiency and chronic dis-
ease), hypoglycemia, hyponatremia (related to hypothyroidism 
and hypoadrenalism, which cause inappropriate water retention, 
not sodium loss), and low-voltage bradycardia on electrocardio-
graphic testing. Hyperkalemia, which is common in primary 
adrenal failure, is not present. Adult GH deficiency is associated 
with decreased red blood cell mass, increased LDL cholesterol, 
and decreased bone mass. 
 Diagnosis 
 A. Assessment of target gland function ( Figure 4–17 ) 
 If 
endocrine hypofunction is suspected, pituitary hormone deficien-
cies must be distinguished from primary failure of the thyroid, 
adrenals, or gonads. Basal determinations of each anterior pitu-
itary hormone are useful only if compared to target gland secre-
tion. Baseline laboratory studies should include thyroid function 
tests (free T 4 ) and determination of serum testosterone levels. 
Testosterone is a sensitive indicator of hypopituitarism in women 
as well as in men. In women, a substantial decrease in testosterone 
is commonly observed in pituitary failure related to hypofunction 
of the two endocrine glands responsible for its production—the 
ovary and the adrenal. Adrenocortical reserve should initially be 
evaluated by a rapid ACTH stimulation test. 
 B. Evaluation of prolactin 
 Because hyperprolactinemia 
(discussed later), regardless of its cause, leads to gonadal dysfunc-
tion, serum PRL should be measured early in the evaluation of 
hypogonadism. 
 C. Differentiation of primary and secondary hypofunc-
tion 
 Subnormal thyroid function as shown by appropriate tests, 
a low serum testosterone level, or an impaired cortisol response to 
the rapid ACTH stimulation test requires measurement of basal 
levels of specific pituitary hormones. In primary target gland 
hypofunction, such as autoimmune polyglandular syndromes 
types 1 and 2 (APS 1 and 2), TSH, LH, FSH, or ACTH will be 
elevated. Low or normal values for these pituitary hormones sug-
gest hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunction. 
 D. Stimulation tests 
 Provocative endocrine testing may then 
be employed to confirm the diagnosis and to assess the extent of 
hypofunction. At present, these tests are not required in most 
patients. 
 Treatment 
 A. ACTH 
 Treatment of secondary adrenal insufficiency, like 
that of primary adrenal failure, must include glucocorticoid sup-
port (see Chapter 9). Hydrocortisone (15-25 mg/d orally) or 
prednisone (5-7.5 mg/d orally) in two or three divided doses pro-
vides adequate glucocorticoid replacement for most patients. The 
minimum effective dosage should be given in order to avoid iatro-
genic hypercortisolism. Increased dosage is required during peri-
ods of stress such as illness, surgery, or trauma. Patients with only 
partial ACTH deficiency may need steroid treatment only during 
stress. A two- to threefold increase in steroid dosage during the 
stressful situation should be recommended, followed by gradual 
tapering as the stress resolves. Unlike primary adrenal insuffi-
ciency, ACTH deficiency does not usually require mineralocorti-
coid therapy. Patients with adrenal insufficiency should wear 
98    CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland
medical alert bracelets so they may receive prompt treatment in 
case of emergency. 
 B. TSH 
 The management of patients with secondary hypo-
thyroidism must be based on clinical grounds and the circulating 
concentration of serum thyroxine (see Chapter 7). The  treatment 
of secondary and tertiary hypothyroidism is identical to that for 
primary thyroid failure. Full oral replacement dose of levothy-
roxine sodium is 1.6 μg/kg daily (0.1-0.15 mg/d is usually ade-
quate). Response to therapy is monitored clinically and with 
measurement of serum free thyroxine levels, which should be 
maintained in the mid to upper range of normal. Measurement 
Clinical history and examination
Endocrine-hypofunction suspecteda
No disease
Hypopituitarism
Low
Serum TSH, LH, FSH
Plasma ACTH
Impaired cortisol response
Normal
Primary target
gland failure
Low or normal
Low or normal
Elevated
Insulin hypoglycemia, TRH, GnRH,
or clomiphene tests
Confirm diagnosis, extent of hypofunction,
and level of abnormality
Thyroid function tests
Serum testosteroneb
IGF-1
Rapid ACTH
stimulation test
aEvaluate GH in children (see text).
bMeasure prolactin if hypogonadism suspected.
 FIGURE 4–17  Diagnostic evaluation of hypothalamic-pituitary-target gland hypofunction. 
CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland     99
of TSH levels is obviously of no value in the management of 
these patients. 
 Caution: Because thyroid hormone replacement in patients 
with hypopituitarism may aggravate even partial adrenal insuffi-
ciency, the adrenal hormone deficiency should be treated first. 
 C. Gonadotropins 
 The object of treatment of secondary 
hypogonadism is to replace sex steroids and restore fertility (see 
Chapters 12 and 13). 
 1.  Estrogens and progesterone— In premenopausal women, 
estrogen replacement is essential. Adequate estrogen treatment 
maintains secondary sex characteristics (eg, vulvar and vaginal 
lubrication), prevents osteoporosis, and abolishes vasomotor 
symptoms, with an improvement in sense of well-being. Many 
estrogen preparations are available (eg, oral estradiol, 1-2 mg 
daily; conjugated estrogens, 0.3-1.25 mg orally daily; or trans-
dermal estradiol, 0.05-0.1 mg daily). Estrogens should be 
cycled with a progestin compound (eg, medroxyprogesterone, 
5-10 mg orally daily during the last 10 days of estrogen therapy 
each month) to induce withdrawal bleeding and prevent endo-
metrial hyperplasia. Many oral contraceptive pill combinations 
are also clinically available. 
 2. Ovulation induction— Ovulation can often be restored 
in women with hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunction (see 
Chapter 13). In patients with gonadal failure of hypothalamic 
origin, clomiphene citrate may cause a surge of gonadotropin 
secretion resulting in ovulation. Pulsatile subcutaneous injec-
tions of GnRH with an infusion pump can also be used to 
induce ovulation and fertility in women with hypothalamic 
dysfunction. Combined treatment with FSH (human meno-
pausal gonadotropins; menotropins) and LH (chorionic 
gonadotropin) can be utilized to provoke ovulation in women 
with intrinsic pituitary failure. This form of therapy is 
expensive, and multiple births are a risk (see Chapter 13). 
 3. Androgens in women— Because of a deficiency of both ovar-
ian and adrenal androgens, some women with hypopituitarism 
have diminished libido despite adequate estrogen therapy. 
Although experience is limited, small doses of long-acting 
androgens (testosterone enanthate, 25-50 mg intramuscularly 
every 4-8 weeks) may be helpful in restoring sexual activity 
without causing hirsutism. In addition, some reports have sug-
gested that oral dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) in doses of 
25 to 50 mg/d may restore plasma testosterone levels to nor-
mal. A transdermal delivery system is being evaluated for use in 
women, but efficacy appears to be modest and the long-term 
safety is unknown. 
 4. Androgens in men— The treatment of male hypogonadism is 
discussed in Chapter 12. Testosterone gels (available in packets 
in doses of 2.5, 5, or 10 g, or from a metered-dose pump in 
1.25 g increments) and testosterone patches (in doses of 2.5 or 
5 mg) are applied daily. A transbuccal formulation is adminis-
tered at a dose of 30 mg twice daily. Other therapeutic prepara-
tions include intramuscular testosterone enanthate or cypionate 
in doses of 100 mg every week or 200 mg every 2 weeks. 
Testosterone undecanoate is an intramuscular preparation 
available in several countries that can be given every 3 months. 
Oral testosterone preparations available in the United States 
are rarely used out of concern for hepatic side effects. 
 5. Spermatogenesis— Spermatogenesis can be achieved in many 
patients with the combined use of hCG and recombinant 
FSH. If pituitary insufficiency is of recent onset, therapy with 
hCG alone may restore both fertility and adequate gonadal 
steroid production. Pulsatile GnRH infusion pumps have also 
been used to restore fertility in male patients with secondary 
hypogonadism. 
 D. Growth hormone (also see chapter 6) 
 Human GH 
(hGH) produced by recombinant DNA technology is available for 
use in children with hypopituitarism and for adults with GH 
deficiency and known pituitary disease. Some studies indicate 
improvement in body composition, bone density, psychologic 
well-being, and functional status with GH therapy. However, the 
long-term benefits and risks remain to be established. In adults, 
GH is usually administered subcutaneously, once per day in a dos-
age of 2 to 5 μg/kg. Monitoring of effectiveness is accomplished 
by measurement of IGF-I, and the dosage of GH is adjusted 
accordingly (up to about 10 μg/kg/d). Side effects (eg, edema, 
paresthesias, arrhythmias, glucose intolerance, diabetes) should be 
assessed. Contraindications to GH therapy include the presence of 
diabetic retinopathy, active malignancy, intracranial hypertension, 
or airway obstruction in individuals with Prader-Willi syndrome. 
 PITUITARY ADENOMAS 
 Advances in endocrinologic and neuroradiologic research in recent 
years have allowed earlier recognition and more successful therapy 
of pituitary adenomas. Prolactinomas are the most common type, 
accounting for about 60% of primary pituitary tumors; GH 
hypersecretion occurs in approximately 20%; and ACTH excess 
in 10%. Hypersecretion of TSH, the gonadotropins, or alpha 
subunits is unusual. Nonfunctional tumors currently represent 
only 10% of all pituitary adenomas, and some of these may in fact 
be gonadotropin-secreting or alpha subunit-secreting adenomas. 
The differential diagnosis of nonpituitary sellar and parasellar 
masses is listed in  Table 4–10 . 
 Early clinical recognition of the endocrine effects of excessive 
pituitary secretion, especially the observation that PRL excess 
causes secondary hypogonadism, has led to early diagnosis of pitu-
itary tumors before the appearance of late manifestations such as 
sellar enlargement, panhypopituitarism, and suprasellar extension 
with visual impairment. 
 Pituitary  microadenomas are defined as intrasellar adenomas 
less than 1 cm in diameter that present with manifestations of 
hormonal excess without sellar enlargement or extrasellar exten-
sion. Panhypopituitarism does not occur, and such tumors can 
usually be treated successfully. 
 Pituitary  macroadenomas are those larger than 1 cm in diam-
eter and cause generalized sellar enlargement. Tumors 1 to 2 cm in 
diameter confined to the sella turcica can usually be successfully 
treated; however, larger tumors—especially those with suprasellar, 
sphenoid sinus, or lateral extensions—are much more difficult to 
manage. Panhypopituitarism and visual loss increase in frequency 
with tumor size and suprasellar extension. 
 Insights into the pathogenesis and biologic behavior of pitu-
itary tumors have been gained from studies of pituitary tumor 
100    CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland
clonality and somatic mutations. Analyses of allelic X inactivation 
of specific genes has shown that most pituitary adenomas are 
monoclonal, a finding most consistent with a somatic mutation 
model of tumorigenesis; polyclonality of tumors would be 
expected if tonic stimulation by hypothalamic-releasing factors 
were the mechanism underlying neoplastic transformation. In 
fact, transgenic animals expressing GHRH have exhibited pitu-
itary hyperplasia but not pituitary adenomas. One somatic muta-
tion has been found in 30% to 40% of GH-secreting tumors (but 
not in leukocytes from the same patients). Point mutations in the 
alpha subunit of the GTP-binding protein responsible for activa-
tion of adenylyl cyclase result in constitutive stimulation of pitu-
itary cell growth and function. In studies of anterior pituitary cell 
ontogeny, PIT-1 has been identified as a transcription factor 
important in pituitary differentiation. The restriction of its 
expression to somatotrophs, lactotrophs, and thyrotrophs may 
account for the plurihormonal expression seen in some tumors. A 
host of other candidate genes have been described, including the 
pituitary tumor transforming gene  (PTTG) . Overexpression of 
this gene has been found in all pituitary tumor types and may 
promote tumorigenesis through cell cycle disruption, stimulation 
of fibroblast growth factor secretion, and abnormal chromatid 
separation. Several genetic syndromes are associated with 
pituitary tumors including multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1, 
McCune-Albright syndrome, Carney syndrome, and familial 
acromegaly. 
 Treatment 
 Pituitary adenomas are treated with surgery, irradiation, or drugs 
to suppress hypersecretion by the adenoma or its growth. The 
aims of therapy are to correct hypersecretion of anterior pituitary 
hormones, to preserve normal secretion of other anterior pituitary 
hormones, and to remove or suppress the adenoma itself. These 
objectives are currently achievable in most patients with pituitary 
microadenomas; however, in the case of larger tumors, multiple 
therapies are frequently required and may be less successful. 
 A. Surgical treatment 
 The transsphenoidal microsurgical 
approach to the sella turcica, now done endoscopically in most 
centers, is the procedure of choice; transfrontal craniotomy is 
required only in the rare patient with massive suprasellar extension 
of the adenoma. In the transsphenoidal procedure, the surgeon 
approaches the pituitary from the nasal cavity through the sphe-
noid sinus, removes the anterior-inferior sellar floor, and incises 
the dura. The adenoma is selectively removed; normal pituitary 
tissue is identified and preserved. Success rates approach 90% in 
patients with microadenomas. Major complications, including 
postoperative hemorrhage, cerebrospinal fluid leak, meningitis, 
and visual impairment, occur in less than 5% of patients and are 
most frequent in patients with large or massive tumors. Transient 
diabetes insipidus lasting a few days to 1 to 2 weeks occurs in 
approximately 15%; permanent diabetes insipidus is rare. A tran-
sient form of the syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidi-
uretic hormone (SIADH) with symptomatic hyponatremia occurs 
in 10% of patients within 5 to 14 days of transsphenoidal pitu-
itary microsurgery. These abnormalities of water balance can occur 
within days of each other making medical management difficult. 
A  triphasic response of diabetes insipidus, SIADH, and diabetes 
insipidus is occasionally encountered and thought to be due to 
early hypothalamic dysfunction, followed by release of ADH from 
the degenerating pituitary, and then depletion of ADH stores. 
Surgical hypopituitarism is rare in patients with microadenomas 
but approaches 5% to 10% in patients with larger tumors. The 
perioperative management of such patients should include gluco-
corticoid administration in stress doses (see Chapter 9) and post-
operative assessment of daily weight, fluid balance, and electrolyte 
status to look for evidence of diabetes insipidus. Mild diabetes 
insipidus is managed by giving fluids orally; in more severe 
 cases—urine output greater than 5 to 6 L/24 h—ADH therapy in 
the form of desmopressin, or DDAVP, can be administered intra-
nasally, orally, subcutaneously, or parenterally (see Chapter 5). 
SIADH is managed by fluid restriction; however, in more severe 
cases, hypertonic saline may be required. ADH receptor antago-
nists (tolvaptan is given orally and conivaptan is administered 
intravenously) are also now available for use in some patients 
(see section on SIADH). 
 B. Radiotherapy 
 Pituitary irradiation should be reserved for 
patients who have had incomplete resection of larger pituitary 
TABLE 4–10  Differential diagnosis of sellar and 
parasellar masses (excluding pituitary 
adenomas).
Benign tumors
 Craniopharyngioma
 Rathke cleft cyst
 Meningioma
 Enchondroma
 Arachnoid cyst
 Dermoid cyst
Empty sella
Nonadenomatous pituitary hyperplasia
 Lactotroph hyperplasia during pregnancy
 Somatotroph hyperplasia from ectopic GHRH-secreting tumor
 Thyrotroph, gonadotroph hyperplasia
Malignant tumors
 Sarcoma
 Chordoma
 Germ cell tumor (ectopic pinealoma)
Metastatic lesions (breast, lung)
Gliomas
 Optic glioma
 Astrocytoma
 Oligodendroglioma
 Ependymoma
Vascular lesions
Granulomatous, inflammatory, infectious
 Lymphocytic hypophysitis
 Sarcoidosis
 Histiocytosis X
 Tuberculosis
 Pituitary abscess
CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland     101
adenomas and whose tumors are not amenable to, or have failed, 
medical therapy. 
 1.  Conventional irradiation— Conventional irradiation using 
high-energy sources, in total doses of 4000 to 5000 cGy given 
in daily doses of 180 to 200 cGy, is most commonly employed. 
The response to radiation therapy is slow, and 5 to 10 years 
may be required to achieve the full effect (see section on 
Acromegaly). Treatment is ultimately successful in about 80% 
of patients with acromegaly but in only about 55% to 60% of 
patients with Cushing disease. The response rate in prolactino-
mas is not precisely known, but tumor progression is prevented 
in most patients. Morbidity during radiotherapy is minimal, 
although some patients experience malaise and nausea, and 
serous otitis media may occur. Hypopituitarism is common, 
and the incidence increases with time following radiotherapy—
about 50% to 60% at 5 to 10 years. Rare late complications 
include damage to the optic nerves and chiasm, seizures, and 
radionecrosis of brain tissue. Recent studies from the United 
Kingdom have shown that conventional radiotherapy is a 
major risk factor for excess mortality in acromegaly. 
 2. Gamma knife radiosurgery— This form of radiotherapy uti-
lizes stereotactic CT-guided cobalt-60 gamma radiation to 
deliver high radiation doses to a narrowly focused area. 
Remission rates have been reported in the range of 43% to 
78%. An adequate distance of the pituitary tumor from the 
optic chiasm is needed to prevent radiation-induced damage. 
Repeat treatments put patients at higher risk of new visual or 
third, fourth, or sixth cranial nerve deficits. 
 3. Proton stereotactic radiotherapy —Experience with this 
modality is limited. In one study, 52% of patients with 
Cushing disease had clinical remission. A similar rate of new 
pituitary hormone deficiencies was seen, although no visual 
complications or brain injury was reported. 
 C. Medical treatment 
 Medical management of pituitary 
adenomas became feasible with the availability of bromocriptine, a 
dopamine agonist that suppresses both PRL and tumor growth in 
patients with prolactinomas. Somatostatin analogs are useful in the 
therapy of acromegaly and some TSH-secreting adenomas. Specifics 
of the use of these and other medications are discussed later. 
 Posttreatment Follow-Up 
 Patients undergoing transsphenoidal microsurgery should be 
reevaluated 4 to 8 weeks postoperatively to document that com-
plete removal of the adenoma and correction of endocrine hyper-
secretion has been achieved. Prolactinomas are assessed by basal 
PRL measurements, GH-secreting tumors by glucose suppression 
testing and IGF-I levels, and ACTH-secreting adenomas by mea-
surement of urine-free cortisol and the response to low-dose dex-
amethasone suppression (see later). Other anterior pituitary 
hormones—TSH, ACTH, and LH/FSH—should also be assessed 
as described earlier in the section on endocrine evaluation. In 
patients with successful responses, yearly evaluation should be 
performed to watch for late recurrence; late hypopituitarism does 
not occur after microsurgery. MRI is not necessary in patients 
with normal postoperative pituitary function but should be uti-
lized in patients with persistent or recurrent disease. 
 Follow-up of patients treated by pituitary irradiation is also 
essential, because the response to therapy may be delayed and the 
incidence of hypopituitarism increases with time. Yearly endocri-
nologic assessment of both the hypersecreted hormone and the 
other pituitary hormones is recommended. 
 1. PROLACTINOMAS 
 PRL hypersecretion is the most common endocrine abnormality 
due to hypothalamic-pituitary disorders, and PRL is the hormone 
most commonly secreted in excess by pituitary adenomas. 
 The understanding is that PRL hypersecretion causes not 
only galactorrhea but also gonadal dysfunction, and the use of 
PRL measurements in screening such patients has permitted 
recognition of these PRL-secreting tumors before the develop-
ment of sellar enlargement, hypopituitarism, or visual impair-
ment. Thus, plasma PRL should be measured in patients with 
galactorrhea, suspected hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunction, or 
sellar enlargement and in those with unexplained gonadal dys-
function, including amenorrhea, infertility, decreased libido, or 
impotence ( Table 4–11 ). 
 Pathology 
 PRL-secreting pituitary adenomas arise most commonly from the 
lateral wings of the anterior pituitary, but with progression they 
fill the sella turcica and compress the normal anterior and poste-
rior lobes. Tumor size varies greatly from microadenomas to large 
invasive tumors with extrasellar extension. Most patients have 
microadenomas (ie, tumors <1 cm in diameter at diagnosis). 
 Prolactinomas usually appear chromophobic on routine histo-
logic study, reflecting the inadequacy of the techniques used. The 
cells are small and uniform, with round or oval nuclei and scanty 
cytoplasm, and secretory granules are usually not visible with rou-
tine stains. The stroma contains a diffuse capillary network. 
 Electron microscopic examination shows that prolactinoma 
cells characteristically contain secretory granules that usually range 
from 100 to 500 nm in diameter and are spherical. Larger granules 
(400-500 nm), which are irregular or crescent-shaped, are less 
commonly seen. The cells show evidence of secretory activity, with 
a large Golgi area, nucleolar enlargement, and a prominent endo-
plasmic reticulum. Immunocytochemical studies of these tumors 
have confirmed that the secretory granules indeed contain PRL. 
 Clinical Features 
 The clinical manifestations of PRL excess are the same regardless 
of the cause (see later). The classic features are galactorrhea and 
TABLE 4–11 Indications for prolactin measurement.
Galactorrhea
Enlarged sella turcica
Suspected pituitary tumor
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
 Unexplained amenorrhea
 Unexplained male hypogonadism or infertility
102    CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland
amenorrhea in women and decreased libido or impotence in men. 
Although the sex distribution of prolactinomas is approximately 
equal, microadenomas are much more common in women, pre-
sumably because of earlier recognition of the endocrine conse-
quences of PRL excess. 
 A. Galactorrhea 
 Galactorrhea occurs in the majority of 
women with prolactinomas and is much less common in men. It 
is usually not spontaneous, or may be present only transiently or 
intermittently. The absence of galactorrhea despite markedly ele-
vated PRL levels is probably due to concomitant deficiency of the 
gonadal hormones required to initiate lactation (see Chapter 16). 
 B. Gonadal dysfunction 
 1.  In women— Amenorrhea, oligomenorrhea with anovulation, 
or infertility is present in approximately 90% of women with 
prolactinomas. These menstrual disorders usually present con-
currently with galactorrhea if it is present but may either pre-
cede or follow it. The amenorrhea is usually secondary and 
may follow pregnancy or oral contraceptive use. Primary 
amenorrhea occurs in the minority of patients who have onset 
of hyperprolactinemia during adolescence. The necessity of 
measuring PRL in patients with unexplained primary or sec-
ondary amenorrhea is emphasized by several studies showing 
that hyperprolactinemia occurs in as many as 20% of patients 
with neither galactorrhea nor other manifestations of pituitary 
dysfunction. A number of these patients have been shown to 
have prolactinomas. 
 Gonadal dysfunction in these women is due to interference 
with the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis by the hyperpro-
lactinemia and except in patients with large or invasive ade-
nomas is not due to destruction of the gonadotropin-secreting 
cells. This has been documented by the return of menstrual 
function following reduction of PRL levels to normal by drug 
treatment or surgical removal of the tumor. Although basal 
gonadotropin levels are frequently within the normal range 
despite reduction of sex steroid levels in hyperprolactinemic 
patients, PRL inhibits both the normal pulsatile secretion of 
LH and FSH and the midcycle LH surge, resulting in anovula-
tion. The positive feedback effect of estrogen on gonadotropin 
secretion is also inhibited; in fact, patients with hyperpro-
lactinemia are usually estrogen deficient. 
 Estrogen deficiency in women with prolactinomas may be 
accompanied by decreased vaginal lubrication, other symptoms 
of estrogen deficiency, and low bone mass as assessed by bone 
densitometry. Other symptoms may include weight gain, fluid 
retention, and irritability. Hirsutism may also occur, accompa-
nied by elevated plasma levels of dehydroepiandrosterone 
(DHEA) sulfate. Patients with hyperprolactinemia may also 
suffer from anxiety and depression. In small clinical trials, 
treatment with dopamine agonists has been shown to improve 
psychologic well-being in such patients. 
 2.  In men— In men, PRL excess may also occasionally cause 
galactorrhea; however, the usual manifestations are those of 
hypogonadism. The initial symptom is decreased libido, which 
may be dismissed by both the patient and physician as due to 
psychosocial factors; thus, the recognition of prolactinomas in 
men is frequently delayed, and marked hyperprolactinemia 
(PRL >200 ng/mL [9.1 nmol/L]) and sellar enlargement are 
usual. Unfortunately, prolactinomas in men are often not 
 diagnosed until late manifestations such as headache, visual 
impairment, or hypopituitarism appear; virtually all such 
patients have a history of sexual or gonadal dysfunction. Serum 
testosterone levels are low, and in the presence of normal or 
subnormal gonadotropin levels, PRL excess should be sus-
pected as should other causes of hypothalamic-pituitary-go-
nadal dysfunction (see section on Hypopituitarism). Impotence 
also occurs in hyperprolactinemic males. Its cause is unclear, 
because testosterone replacement may not reverse it if hyper-
prolactinemia is not corrected. Male infertility accompanied by 
reduction in sperm count is a less common initial complaint. 
 C. Tumor progression 
 In general, the growth of prolactino-
mas is slow; several studies have shown that most microadenomas 
do not change significantly in size, and macroadenomas tend to 
grow very slowly. 
 Differential Diagnosis 
 The many conditions associated with hyperprolactinemia are 
listed in  Table 4–8 . Pregnancy, hypothalamic-pituitary disorders, 
primary hypothyroidism, and drug ingestion are the most com-
mon causes. 
 Hypothalamic lesions frequently cause PRL hypersecretion by 
decreasing the secretion of dopamine that tonically inhibits PRL 
release; the lesions may be accompanied by panhypopituitarism. 
Similarly, traumatic or surgical section of the pituitary stalk leads 
to hyperprolactinemia and hypopituitarism. Nonfunctional pitu-
itary macroadenomas frequently cause mild hyperprolactinemia 
by compression of the pituitary stalk or hypothalamus. 
 Pregnancy leads to a physiologic increase in PRL secretion; the 
levels increase as pregnancy continues and may reach 200 ng/mL 
(9.1 nmol/L) during the third trimester. Following delivery, basal 
PRL levels gradually fall to normal over several weeks but increase 
in response to breast feeding. Hyperprolactinemia persisting for 6 
to 12 months or longer following delivery is an indication for 
evaluation. PRL levels are also high in normal neonates. 
 Several systemic disorders lead to hyperprolactinemia. Primary 
hypothyroidism is a common cause, and measurement of thyroid 
function, and especially TSH, should be part of the evaluation. In 
primary hypothyroidism, there is hyperplasia of both thyrotrophs 
and lactotrophs, presumably due to TRH hypersecretion. This 
may result in significant pituitary gland enlargement, which may 
be mistaken for a PRL-secreting pituitary tumor. The PRL 
response to TRH is usually exaggerated in these patients. PRL 
may also be increased in liver disease, particularly in patients with 
severe cirrhosis, and in patients with chronic renal failure. 
 PRL excess and galactorrhea may also be caused by breast 
disease, nipple stimulation, disease or injury to the chest wall, 
and spinal cord lesions. These disorders increase PRL secretion 
by stimulation of afferent neural pathways. Artifactual elevations 
in PRL levels may be observed in the presence of anti-PRL anti-
bodies or of macroprolactinemia. In the latter, a high-molecular-
weight complex of PRL molecules maintains immunologic 
activity, but minimal or no bioactivity. Macroprolactinemia can 
be assessed with polyethylene glycol precipitation of serum 
samples. 
CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland     103
 The most common cause of hyperprolactinemia is drug inges-
tion, and a careful history of drug intake must be obtained. 
Elevated PRL levels, galactorrhea, and amenorrhea may occur fol-
lowing estrogen therapy or oral contraceptive use, but their persis-
tence should suggest prolactinoma. Many other drugs also cause 
increased PRL secretion and elevated plasma levels (see  Table 4–8 ). 
PRL levels are usually less than 200 ng/mL (9 nmol/L), and the 
evaluation should focus on discontinuation of the drug or medica-
tion and reevaluation of the patient after several weeks. In patients 
in whom drug withdrawal is not feasible, neuroradiologic studies, 
if normal, usually exclude prolactinoma. 
 Diagnosis 
 A. General evaluation 
 The evaluation of patients with 
galactorrhea or unexplained gonadal dysfunction with normal or 
low plasma gonadotropin levels should first include a history 
regarding menstrual status, pregnancy, fertility, sexual function, 
and symptoms of hypothyroidism or hypopituitarism. Current or 
previous use of medication, drugs, or estrogen therapy should be 
documented. Basal PRL levels, gonadotropins, thyroid function 
tests, and TSH levels should be established, as well as serum tes-
tosterone in men. Liver and kidney function should be assessed. A 
pregnancy test should be performed in women with amenorrhea. 
 Patients with galactorrhea but normal menses may not have 
hyperprolactinemia and usually do not have prolactinomas. If the 
PRL level is normal, they may be reassured and followed with 
sequential PRL measurements. Those with elevated levels require 
further evaluation as described later. 
 B. Specific diagnosis 
 When other causes of hyperprolactine-
mia have been excluded, the most likely cause of persistent hyper-
prolactinemia is a prolactinoma, especially if there is associated 
hypogonadism. Because currently available suppression and stim-
ulation tests do not distinguish PRL-secreting tumors from other 
causes of hyperprolactinemia, the diagnosis must be established by 
the assessment of both basal PRL levels and neuroradiologic stud-
ies. Patients with large tumors and marked hyperprolactinemia 
usually present little difficulty. With very rare exceptions, basal 
PRL levels greater than 200 to 300 ng/mL (9.1-13.7 nmol/L) are 
virtually diagnostic of prolactinoma. In addition, because there is 
a general correlation between the PRL elevation and the size of the 
pituitary adenoma, these patients usually have sellar enlargement 
and obvious macroadenomas. Similarly, if the basal PRL level is 
between 100 and 200 ng/mL (4.5 and 9.1 nmol/L), the cause is 
usually prolactinoma. These patients may have either micro- or 
macroadenomas; however, with basal levels of PRL greater than 
100 ng/mL (4.5 nmol/L), the PRL-secreting tumor is usually 
radiologically evident, and again the diagnosis is generally straight-
forward. Patients with mild to moderate hyperprolactinemia 
(20-100 ng/mL [0.9-4.5 nmol/L]) present the greatest difficulty 
in diagnosis, because both PRL-secreting microadenomas and the 
many other conditions causing hyperprolactinemia (see  Table 
4–8 ) cause PRL hypersecretion of this degree. In such patients, 
MRI frequently demonstrates a definite pituitary microadenoma. 
Scans showing only minor or equivocal abnormalities should be 
 interpreted with caution, because of the high incidence of false-
positive scans in the normal population (see Neuroradiologic 
Evaluation, above). Because the diagnosis cannot be either estab-
lished or excluded in patients with normal or equivocal neurora-
diologic studies, they require further evaluation or serial assessment 
(see later). Dilutions of prolactin samples can be performed in 
patients with modest prolactin elevation or macroadenomas to 
rule out interference from the high-dose  hook effect ; large quanti-
ties of antigen can impair antigen-antibody binding, resulting in 
erroneously low prolactin measurements in some immunoassays. 
 Treatment 
 Satisfactory control of PRL hypersecretion, cessation of galactor-
rhea, and return of normal gonadal function can be achieved in 
most patients with PRL-secreting microadenomas. In patients 
with hyperprolactinemia, ovulation should not be induced with-
out careful assessment of pituitary anatomy, because pregnancy 
may cause further expansion of these tumors as discussed later. 
 Although most microadenomas do not progress, treatment of 
these patients is recommended to restore normal estrogen levels 
and fertility and to prevent early osteoporosis secondary to persis-
tent hypogonadism. In addition, medical or surgical therapy is 
more successful in these patients than in those with larger tumors. 
All patients with PRL-secreting macroadenomas should be treated, 
because of the risks of further tumor expansion, hypopituitarism, 
and visual impairment. Patients with persistent hyperprolactine-
mia and hypogonadism and normal neuroradiologic studies—that 
is, those in whom prolactinoma cannot be definitely established—
may be managed by observation if hypogonadism is of short dura-
tion. However, in patients whose hypogonadism has persisted for 
more than 6 to 12 months, dopamine agonists should be used to 
suppress PRL secretion and restore normal gonadal function. In 
women with macroprolactinomas, replacement estrogen therapy 
should be initiated only after PRL hypersecretion has been con-
trolled by dopamine agonist therapy since estrogen stimulates 
lactotroph hyperplasia and may increase tumor size. In this regard, 
periodic measurement of serum PRL should be performed in 
women with microadenomas on estrogen therapy who are not also 
receiving dopamine agonist therapy. 
 A. Dopamine agonists 
 Bromocriptine became available in 
the United States more than 30 years ago and was the first effective 
medical therapy for pituitary adenomas; however, cabergoline is 
more potent, much longer acting, and better tolerated. Cabergoline 
has, therefore, become the dopamine agonist of choice in the 
therapy of prolactinomas. 
 1. Bromocriptine— Bromocriptine stimulates dopamine recep-
tors and has effects at both the hypothalamic and pituitary 
levels. It is effective therapy for a PRL-secreting pituitary ade-
noma and directly inhibits PRL secretion by the tumor. Doses 
of 2.5 to 5 mg daily are often effective. However, at present, 
cabergoline is the therapy of choice 
 2. Cabergoline— Cabergoline, a newer nonergot dopamine ago-
nist, is administered once or twice a week and has a better 
side-effect profile than bromocriptine. It is as effective as 
104    CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland
 bromocriptine in reducing macroadenoma size and is more 
effective in reducing PRL levels. It has been used successfully 
in most patients previously intolerant or resistant to bro-
mocriptine. Cabergoline should be started at a dosage of 
0.25 mg twice per week and increased if necessary to 0.5 mg 
twice per week. Although several recent studies have demon-
strated associations between cabergoline and cardiac valve dis-
ease in patients treated for Parkinson disease, clinically relevant 
valve disease in patients treated for prolactinoma appears to be 
rare, likely because doses used to manage symptoms of 
Parkinsonism are often 20 to 30 times higher and administered 
daily rather than twice weekly. The risk also appears to be 
related to the affinity of different dopamine agonists for valvu-
lar serotonin (5-HT2B) receptors. Until larger, prospective 
safety studies are available, some authorities recommend 
echocardiographic evaluation in patients who are expected to 
need long-term treatment, especially at high doses. 
 a. Microadenomas— Cabergoline is successful in about 90% 
of patients, and very few are intolerant or resistant. 
Correction of hyperprolactinemia allows recovery of normal 
gonadal function; ovulation and fertility are restored, so that 
mechanical contraception should be advised if pregnancy is 
not desired. Bromocriptine induces ovulation in most 
female patients who wish to become pregnant. In these 
patients with microadenomas, the risk of major expansion of 
adenoma during the pregnancy is less than 2%; however, 
both the patient and the physician must be aware of this 
potential complication. Current data do not indicate an 
increased risk of multiple pregnancy, abortion, or fetal mal-
formations in pregnancies occurring in women taking dop-
amine agonists; however, patients should be instructed to 
discontinue these drugs at the first missed menstrual period 
and obtain a pregnancy test. Although no late toxicity has 
yet been reported other than the side effects noted above, 
questions about possible long-term risk are currently unan-
swered. Maternal hyperprolactinemia should not be harmful 
to the developing fetus; prolactin increases normally during 
pregnancy and does not appear to cross the placenta. 
 b. Macroadenomas— Dopamine agonists are effective in con-
trolling hyperprolactinemia in patients with PRL-secreting 
macroadenomas even when basal PRL levels are markedly 
elevated. Dopamine agonists may be used either as initial 
therapy or to control residual hyperprolactinemia in patients 
unsuccessfully treated with surgery or radiotherapy. 
Dopamine agonists should not be used to induce ovulation 
and pregnancy in women with untreated macroadenomas, 
because the risk of tumor expansion and visual deficits in the 
later part of pregnancy is approximately 15% to 25%. These 
patients should first have tumor volume decreased with 
medical therapy or be treated with surgery prior to induc-
tion of ovulation. 
 Dopamine agonists normalize PRL secretion in about 
60% to 70% of patients with macroadenomas and also 
reduce tumor size in about the same percentage of patients. 
Reduction of tumor size may occur within days to weeks 
following institution of therapy. The drugs have been used 
to restore vision in patients with major suprasellar extension 
and chiasmal compression. 
 c. Long-Term Remission— Current studies suggest that 30% 
to 40% of patients with micro- and macroadenomas will 
remain in long-term remission after withdrawal of cabergo-
line therapy of 2 to 3 years duration provided that they have 
normalization of PRL levels and tumor shrinkage. Larger 
macroadenomas (>2.0 cm) are likely to recur, and long-term 
dopamine agonist therapy should be continued in these 
patients. 
 B. Surgical treatment 
 Transsphenoidal microsurgery is the 
surgical procedure of choice in patients with prolactinomas. 
 1.  Microadenomas— In patients with microadenomas, remission, 
as measured by restitution of normal PRL levels, normal men-
ses, and cessation of galactorrhea, is achieved in 85% to 90% 
of cases. Success is most likely in patients with basal PRL levels 
under 200 ng/mL (9.1 nmol/L) and duration of amenorrhea of 
less than 5 years. In these patients, the incidence of surgical 
complications is less than 2%, and hypopituitarism is a rare 
complication. Thus, in this group of patients with PRL-
secreting microadenomas, PRL hypersecretion can be cor-
rected, gonadal function restored, and secretion of TSH and 
ACTH preserved. Recurrence rates vary considerably in 
reported series. In our experience, approximately 85% of 
patients have had long-term remissions, and 15% have had 
recurrent hyperprolactinemia. 
 2. Macroadenomas— Transsphenoidal microsurgery is consider-
ably less successful in restoring normal PRL secretion in 
patients with macroadenomas; many clinicians would treat 
these patients with dopamine agonists alone. The surgical out-
come is directly related to tumor size and the basal PRL level. 
Thus, in patients with tumors 1 to 2 cm in diameter without 
extrasellar extension and with basal PRL levels less than 
200 ng/mL (9.1 nmol/L), transsphenoidal surgery is successful 
in about 80% of cases. In patients with higher basal PRL levels 
and larger or invasive tumors, the success rate—defined as 
complete tumor resection and restoration of normal basal PRL 
secretion—is 25% to 50%. Although progressive visual loss or 
pituitary apoplexy is a clear indication for surgery, the great 
majority of these patients should be treated with dopamine 
agonists. 
 C. Radiotherapy 
 Conventional radiation therapy is reserved 
for patients with PRL-secreting macroadenomas who have persis-
tent hyperprolactinemia and who have not responded to attempts 
to control their pituitary adenomas with surgery or dopamine 
agonists. In this group of patients, radiotherapy with 4000 to 
5000 cGy prevents further tumor expansion, although PRL levels 
usually do not fall into the normal range. Impairment of anterior 
pituitary function occurs in approximately 50% to 60% of 
patients. Experience with gamma knife radiosurgery in prolactino-
mas is limited and rates of remission and reduction in tumor 
volume have been reported with varying degrees of success. 
 Selection of Therapy for Prolactinomas 
 The selection of therapy for prolactinomas depends on the wishes 
of the patient, the patient’s plans for pregnancy and tolerance of 
medical therapy, and the availability of a skilled neurosurgeon. 
 A. Microadenomas 
 All patients should be treated to prevent 
the occasional tumor progression, loss of bone mass, and the other 
effects of prolonged hypogonadism. Medical therapy with 
CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland     105
 cabergoline effectively restores normal gonadal function and fertil-
ity, and pregnancy carries only a small risk of tumor expansion. 
Those patients who respond should be treated for 2 to 3 years, and 
then the drug should be withdrawn to determine if long-term 
remission will occur. Patients who have recurrence of hyperpro-
lactinemia after cabergoline withdrawal may resume the drug or 
choose to have surgical excision. Transsphenoidal adenectomy, 
either initially or after a trial of dopamine agonist therapy, carries 
little risk when performed by an experienced neurosurgeon and 
offers a high probability of long-term remission. 
 B. Macroadenomas 
 Primary surgical therapy in these 
patients usually does not result in long-term remission, so medical 
therapy is the primary therapy of choice, particularly when the 
patient’s PRL levels are greater than 200 ng/mL (9.1 nmol/L) and 
the tumor is larger than 2 cm. Although transsphenoidal micro-
surgery rapidly decreases tumor size and decompresses the pitu-
itary stalk, the optic chiasm, and the cavernous sinuses, there is 
usually residual tumor and hyperprolactinemia. Thus, these 
patients require additional therapy with dopamine agonists. 
Although tumor growth and PRL secretion can be controlled by 
medical therapy in most patients, therapeutic failure can result 
from drug intolerance, poor compliance, or resistance. Radiation 
therapy is reserved for postsurgical patients with residual ade-
nomas who are not controlled with dopamine agonists. 
 2. ACROMEGALY AND GIGANTISM 
 GH-secreting pituitary adenomas are second in frequency to pro-
lactinomas and cause the classic clinical syndromes of acromegaly 
and gigantism. 
 The characteristic clinical manifestations are the consequence 
of chronic GH hypersecretion, which in turn leads to excessive 
generation of IGF-I, the mediator of most of the effects of GH 
(see Chapter 6). Although overgrowth of bone is the classic fea-
ture, GH excess causes a generalized systemic disorder with delete-
rious effects and an increased mortality rate, although deaths are 
rarely due to the space-occupying or destructive effects of pituitary 
adenoma per se. 
 Acromegaly and gigantism are virtually always secondary to a 
pituitary adenoma. Ectopic GHRH secretion has been identified 
as another cause of GH hypersecretion and acromegaly in a few 
patients with carcinoid or islet cell tumors. Reports of intrapitu-
itary GHRH-secreting gangliocytomas in direct contiguity with 
GH-secreting somatotroph adenomas and a report of a GHRH-
secreting hypothalamic hamartoma in a patient with acromegaly 
provide a link between ectopic and eutopic GHRH production. 
Ectopic secretion of GH per se is very rare but has been docu-
mented in a few lung tumors. 
 In adults, GH excess leads to acromegaly, the syndrome char-
acterized by local overgrowth of bone, particularly of the skull and 
mandible. Linear growth does not occur, because of prior fusion 
of the epiphyses of long bones. In childhood and adolescence, the 
onset of chronic GH excess leads to gigantism. Most of these 
patients have associated hypogonadism, which delays epiphysial 
closure and the combination of IGF-I excess and hypogonadism 
leads to a striking acceleration of linear growth. Most patients 
with gigantism also have features of acromegaly if GH hypersecre-
tion persists through adolescence and into adulthood. 
 Pathology 
 Pituitary adenomas causing acromegaly are usually more than 
1 cm in diameter when the diagnosis is established. These tumors 
arise from the lateral wings of the anterior pituitary; less than 10% 
are diagnosed as microadenomas. 
 GH-secreting adenomas are of two histologic types: densely 
and sparsely granulated. However, there appears to be no differ-
ence in the degree of GH secretion or clinical manifestations in 
these patients. About 15% of GH-secreting tumors also contain 
lactotrophs, and these tumors thus hypersecrete both GH and 
PRL. 
 Etiology and Pathogenesis 
 In most cases, excessive pituitary GH secretion is a primary pitu-
itary disorder. A somatic mutation in the G s protein leading to 
excessive cAMP production has been identified in 40% of 
GH-secreting adenomas. Pituitary adenomas are present in virtu-
ally all patients and are usually greater than 1 cm in diameter; 
hyperplasia alone is rare, and nonadenomatous anterior pituitary 
tissue does not exhibit somatotroph hyperplasia when examined 
histologically. In addition, there is a return of normal GH levels 
and dynamic control of GH secretion following selective removal 
of the pituitary adenoma. 
 Pathophysiology 
 In acromegaly, GH secretion is increased and its dynamic control 
is abnormal. Secretion remains episodic; however, the number, 
duration, and amplitude of secretory episodes are increased, and 
they occur randomly throughout the 24-hour period. The charac-
teristic nocturnal surge is absent, and there are abnormal responses 
to suppression and stimulation. Thus, glucose suppressibility is 
lost (see Diagnosis, later), and GH stimulation by hypoglycemia 
is usually absent. TRH and GnRH may cause GH release, whereas 
these substances do not normally stimulate GH secretion. 
Dopamine and dopamine agonists such as bromocriptine and 
apomorphine, which normally stimulate GH secretion, paradoxi-
cally cause GH suppression in about 70% to 80% of patients with 
acromegaly. 
 Most of the deleterious effects of chronic GH hypersecretion 
are caused by its stimulation of excessive amounts of IGF-I (see 
Chapter 6), and plasma levels of this protein are increased in 
acromegaly. The growth-promoting effects of IGF-I (DNA, 
RNA, and protein synthesis) lead to the characteristic prolifera-
tion of bone, cartilage, and soft tissues and increase in size of 
other organs to produce the classic clinical manifestations of 
acromegaly. The insulin resistance and carbohydrate intolerance 
seen in acromegaly appear to be direct effects of GH and not due 
to IGF-I excess. 
106    CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland
 Clinical Features 
 The sex incidence of acromegaly is approximately equal; the mean 
age at diagnosis is approximately 40 years; and the duration 
of symptoms is usually 5 to 10 years before the diagnosis is 
established. 
 Acromegaly is a chronic disabling and disfiguring disorder with 
increased late morbidity and mortality if untreated. Although 
spontaneous remissions have been described, the course is slowly 
progressive in the great majority of cases. 
 A. Symptoms and signs 
 Early manifestations ( Table 4–12 ) 
include soft tissue proliferation, with enlargement of the hands 
and feet and coarsening of the facial features. This is usually 
accompanied by increased sweating, heat intolerance, oiliness of 
the skin, fatigue, and weight gain. 
 At diagnosis, most patients have classic manifestations, and 
acral and soft tissue changes are always present. Bone and cartilage 
changes affect chiefly the face and skull. These changes include 
thickening of the calvarium; increased size of the frontal sinuses, 
which leads to prominence of the supraorbital ridges; enlargement 
of the nose; and downward and forward growth of the mandible, 
which leads to prognathism and widely spaced teeth. Soft tissue 
growth also contributes to the facial appearance, with coarsening 
of the features and facial and infraorbital puffiness. The hands and 
feet are predominantly affected by soft tissue growth; they 
are large, thickened, and bulky, with blunt, spade-like fingers 
( Figure 4–18 ) and toes. A bulky, sweaty handshake frequently sug-
gests the diagnosis, and there are increases in ring, glove, and shoe 
sizes. There is generalized thickening of the skin, with increased 
oiliness and sweating. Acne, sebaceous cysts, and fibromata mol-
lusca (skin tags and papillomas) are common, as is acanthosis 
nigricans of the axillae and neck and hypertrichosis in women. 
 These bony and soft tissue changes are accompanied by sys-
temic manifestations, which include hyperhidrosis, heat intoler-
ance, lethargy, fatigue, and increased sleep requirement. Sleep 
apnea, both obstructive and central, is very common in patients 
with acromegaly. This has particular importance for the anesthesi-
ologist who must take special precautions to protect the airway 
during surgery. Moderate weight gain usually occurs. Paresthesias, 
usually due to carpal tunnel compression, occur in 70%; senso-
rimotor neuropathies occur uncommonly. Bone and cartilage 
overgrowth leads to arthralgias and in longstanding cases to 
degenerative arthritis of the spine, hips, and knees. Photophobia 
of unknown cause occurs in about half of cases and is most trou-
blesome in bright sunlight and during night driving. 
 GH excess leads to generalized visceromegaly, clinically evident 
as thyromegaly and enlargement of the salivary glands. Enlargement 
of other organs is usually not clinically detectable. 
 Hypertension occurs in about 25% of patients and cardio-
megaly in about 15%. Cardiac enlargement may be secondary to 
hypertension, atherosclerotic disease, or, rarely, to acromegalic 
cardiomyopathy. Renal calculi occur in 11% secondary to the 
hypercalciuria induced by GH excess. 
 Other endocrine and metabolic abnormalities are common 
and may be due either to GH excess or to mechanical effects of 
the pituitary adenoma. Glucose intolerance and hyperinsulinism 
occur in 50% and 70% of patients, respectively, owing to 
GH-induced insulin resistance. Overt clinical diabetes occurs in 
a minority, and diabetic ketoacidosis is rare. Hypogonadism 
occurs in 60% of female and 46% of male patients and is of 
multifactorial origin; tumor growth and compression may impair 
pituitary gonadotropin secretion, and associated hyperprolactine-
mia (see later) or the PRL-like effect of excessive GH secretion 
may impair gonadotropin and gonadal function. In men, low 
total plasma testosterone levels may be due to GH suppression of 
sex hormone–binding globulin (SHBG) levels; in these cases, 
plasma-free testosterone levels may be normal, with normal 
gonadal function. With earlier diagnosis, hypothyroidism and 
hypoadrenalism due to destruction of the normal anterior pitu-
itary are unusual and are present in only 13% and 4% of patients, 
respectively. Galactorrhea occurs in about 15% and is usually 
caused by hyperprolactinemia from a pituitary adenoma with a 
mixed cell population of somatotrophs and lactotrophs. 
Gynecomastia of unknown cause occurs in about 10% of men. 
Although acromegaly may be a component of multiple endocrine 
neoplasia (MEN) type 1 syndrome, it is distinctly unusual, and 
concomitant parathyroid hyperfunction or pancreatic islet cell 
tumors are rare. 
TABLE 4–12  Clinical manifestations of acromegaly 
in 100 patients.
Manifestations of GH excess
 Acral enlargement
 Soft tissue overgrowth
 Hyperhidrosis
 Lethargy or fatigue
 Weight gain
 Paresthesias
 Joint pain
 Photophobia
 Papillomas
 Hypertrichosis
 Goiter
 Acanthosis nigricans
 Hypertension
 Cardiomegaly
 Renal calculi
100a
100
88
87
73
70
69
46
45
33
32
29
24
16
11
Disturbance of other endocrine functions
 Hyperinsulinemia
 Glucose intolerance
 Irregular or absent menses
 Decreased libido or impotence
 Hypothyroidism
 Galactorrhea
 Gynecomastia
 Hypoadrenalism
70
50
60
46
13
13
8
4
Local manifestations
 Enlarged sella
 Headache
 Visual deficit
90
65
20
aPercentage of patients in whom these features were present.
Adapted from Tyrrell JB, Wilson CB. Pituitary syndromes. In: Friesen SR, ed. Surgical 
Endocrinology: Clinical Syndromes. Lippincott; 1978.
CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland     107
 When GH hypersecretion is present for many years, late com-
plications occur, including progressive cosmetic deformity and 
disabling degenerative arthritis. In addition, the mortality rate is 
increased; after age 45, the death rate in acromegaly from cardio-
vascular and cerebrovascular atherosclerosis, respiratory diseases, 
and colon cancer is two to four times that of the normal popula-
tion. Death rates tend to be higher in patients with hypertension, 
cardiovascular disease, or clinical diabetes mellitus. 
 Space-occupying manifestations of the pituitary adenoma are 
also common in acromegaly (eg, 65% of patients have headache). 
Although visual impairment was usually present in older series, it 
now occurs in only 15% to 20%, because most patients are now 
diagnosed because of the manifestations of GH excess. 
 B. Laboratory findings 
 In addition to elevations in IGF-I 
and GH, postprandial plasma glucose may be elevated, and serum 
insulin is increased in 70% of cases. Elevated serum phosphate 
(due to increased renal tubular resorption) and hypercalciuria 
appear to be due to direct effects of GH or IGF-I. 
 C. Imaging studies 
 Plain films ( Figure 4–19 ) show sellar 
enlargement in 90% of cases. Thickening of the calvarium, 
enlargement of the frontal and maxillary sinuses, and enlargement 
of the jaw can also be seen. Radiographs of the hand show 
increased soft tissue bulk, “arrowhead” tufting of the distal phalan-
ges, increased width of intra-articular cartilages, and cystic changes 
of the carpal bones. Radiographs of the feet show similar changes, 
 FIGURE 4–18  Markedly increased soft tissue bulk and blunt fingers in a middle-aged man with acromegaly. 
 FIGURE 4–19  Radiologic signs in acromegaly.  Left: Skull with enlarged sella turcica and frontal sinuses, thickening of the calvarium, and 
enlargement of the mandible.  Center: Hand with enlarged sesamoid bone and increased soft tissue shadows.  Right : Thickened heel pad. 
 (Reproduced, with permission, from Levin SR. Manifestations and treatment of acromegaly.  Calif Med . 1972;116:57). 
108    CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland
and there is increased thickness of the heel pad (normal, 
<22 mm). 
 Diagnosis 
 Acromegaly is usually clinically obvious and can be readily con-
firmed by assessment of GH secretion; basal fasting GH levels 
(normal, 1-5 ng/mL [46-232 pmol/L]) are greater than 10 ng/mL 
(465 pmol/L) in more than 90% of patients and range from 
5 ng/mL (232 pmol/L) to greater than 500 ng/mL 
(23,000 pmol/L), with a mean of approximately 50 ng/mL 
(2300 pmol/L). However, single measurements are not entirely reli-
able, because GH secretion is episodic in acromegaly and because 
other conditions may increase GH secretion (see discussed later). 
 A. Glucose suppression 
 Suppression with oral glucose is 
the simplest and most specific dynamic test for acromegaly. In 
healthy subjects, oral administration of 100 g of glucose causes a 
reduction of the GH level to less than 1 ng/mL (47 pmol/L) at 
60 minutes. In acromegaly, GH levels may decrease, increase, or 
show no change; however, they do not decrease to less than 1 ng/mL 
(47 pmol/L), and this lack of response establishes the diagnosis. 
 Supersensitive GH assays have been developed and are becom-
ing commercially available. With these assays, normal individuals 
may suppress GH levels to less than 0.1 ng/mL. Thus, the criteria 
expressed above may need to be adjusted in the near future. 
 B. IGF-I measurement 
 Measurement of IGF-I (see Chapter 6) 
is a useful means of establishing the diagnosis of GH hypersecre-
tion. IGF-I results must be interpreted according to age- and sex-
adjusted normative data. IGF-I levels directly reflect GH activity. 
IGF-I has a long half-life, so that IGF-I levels fluctuate much less 
than GH levels. IGF-I levels are elevated in virtually all patients 
with acromegaly (normal ranges vary widely in different laborato-
ries, and some commercial assays are not reliable). 
 C. Tumor localization 
 Radiographic localization of the pitu-
itary adenoma causing acromegaly is usually straightforward (see 
Neuroradiologic Evaluation, above). In virtually all patients, 
tumor location and size can be shown by MRI; 90% have tumors 
greater than 1 cm in diameter that are readily visualized. In the 
rare patient with normal neuroradiologic studies, an extrapituitary 
ectopic source of GH or GHRH should be considered. If scans 
suggest diffuse pituitary enlargement or hyperplasia, ectopic 
GHRH should also be suspected. 
 Differential Diagnosis 
 A. Other causes of GH or IGF-I hypersecretion 
 The 
presence of clinical features of GH excess, elevated GH and IGF-I 
secretion, and abnormal GH dynamics, together with the demon-
stration of a pituitary tumor by neuroradiologic studies, are diag-
nostic of acromegaly. However, other conditions associated with 
GH hypersecretion must be considered in the differential diagno-
sis. These include anxiety, exercise, acute illness, chronic renal 
failure, cirrhosis, starvation, protein-calorie malnutrition, anorexia 
nervosa, and type I (insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus. Estrogen 
therapy may increase GH responsiveness to various stimuli. These 
conditions may be associated with abnormal GH suppressibility 
by glucose and by abnormal GH responsiveness to TRH; however, 
patients with these conditions do not have clinical manifestations 
of GH excess and are thus readily differentiated from patients with 
acromegaly. In addition, the conditions listed above do not lead to 
elevation of IGF-I concentrations. Use of testosterone or the con-
traceptive depot medroxyprogesterone acetate has been associated 
with modest elevations in IGF-I. 
 B. Ectopic GH or GHRH secretion 
 These rare patients with 
acromegaly due to ectopic secretion of GH or GHRH have typical 
clinical manifestations of acromegaly. This may occur in lung 
carcinoma, carcinoid tumors, and pancreatic islet cell tumors. 
These syndromes should be suspected in patients with a known 
extrapituitary tumor who have GH excess or in those with clinical 
and biochemical features of acromegaly who have radiologic pro-
cedures that show normal pituitary glands or that suggest diffuse 
pituitary enlargement or hyperplasia. 
 Treatment 
 All patients with acromegaly should undergo therapy to halt pro-
gression of the disorder and to prevent late complications and 
excess mortality. The objectives of therapy are removal or destruc-
tion of the pituitary tumor, reversal of GH hypersecretion, and 
maintenance of normal anterior and posterior pituitary function. 
These objectives are currently attainable in most patients, espe-
cially those with smaller tumors and only moderate GH hyperse-
cretion. In patients with large tumors who have marked GH 
hypersecretion, several therapies are usually required to achieve 
normal GH secretion. 
 The criteria for an adequate response to therapy continue to 
evolve. Recent reports described increased late mortality in patients 
with GH levels by radioimmunoassay greater than 2.5 ng/mL 
(116 pmol/L) after therapy. Therefore, current guidelines for 
remission are a fasting GH of 1 ng/mL (47 pmol/L) or less and a 
glucose-suppressed GH of 1 ng/mL (47 pmol/L) or less accompa-
nied by a normal level of IGF-I. 
 The initial therapy of choice is transsphenoidal microsurgery 
because of its high success rate, rapid reduction of GH levels, the 
low incidence of postoperative hypopituitarism, and the low surgi-
cal morbidity rate. Patients with persisting GH hypersecretion 
after surgery should currently be treated medically with soma-
tostatin analogs, dopamine agonists, or a GH receptor antagonist. 
Radiation therapy should be reserved for those patients with inad-
equate responses to surgery and medical therapy. 
 A. Surgical treatment 
 Transsphenoidal selective adenoma 
removal is the procedure of choice; craniotomy is necessary in the 
rare patient in whom major suprasellar extension precludes the 
transsphenoidal approach. Successful reduction of GH levels is 
achieved in approximately 60% to 80% of patients. In those with 
small or moderate-sized tumors (<2 cm), success is achieved in 
more than 80%, whereas in those with larger tumors and basal 
CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland     109
GH levels greater than 50 ng/mL (2325 pmol/L)—and particu-
larly in those with major extrasellar extension of the adenoma—
successful responses occur in only 30% to 60%. Recurrence rates 
in those with a successful initial response are low (about 5% of 
patients at our institution). Surgical complications (discussed ear-
lier) occur in less than 2%. 
 B. Medical treatment 
 Octreotide acetate, a somatostatin 
analog, was the first effective medical therapy for patients with 
acromegaly. However, the drug required high doses (100-500 μg) 
given subcutaneously three times daily. Its use in acromegaly has 
been superseded by sustained-release somatostatin analogs with 
activities lasting up to 1 month. Preparations include octreotide 
LAR and lanreotide acetate given by injection every 4 weeks. 
Octreotide LAR normalizes GH and IGF-I levels in 75% of 
patients when used at doses of 20 to 40 mg/mo; however, tumor 
reduction occurs in a much smaller percentage. These long-acting 
agents have become the therapy of choice for patients with resid-
ual GH hypersecretion following surgery. Side effects of this class 
of agents consist mainly of gastrointestinal symptoms and the 
development of gallstones. Impaired glucose tolerance has been 
reported in some studies. The dopamine agonist cabergoline nor-
malizes IGF-I levels in about 30% of acromegalic patients when 
used at doses of 1 to 2 mg/wk. However, it has not been com-
monly used as sole therapy. When cabergoline is added to soma-
tostatin analog therapy, the number of patients with normalization 
of GH and IGF-I levels is increased. 
 Pegvisomant, the latest medical therapy for acromegaly, is a 
GH receptor antagonist. In doses of 10 to 20 mg/d given by sub-
cutaneous injection, it reduces IGF-I levels to normal in more 
than 90% of patients. Although there are concerns regarding the 
continued excess GH secretion and possible tumor progression, 
serious problems have not arisen to date. Pegvisomant is effective, 
but its use is limited by cost and the need for daily injection. 
Therefore, it is currently used mainly in those patients who have 
failed therapy with surgery and somatostatin analogs. 
 C. Radiotherapy 
 Conventional supervoltage irradiation in 
doses of 4500 to 5000 cGy, although ultimately successful in 60% 
to 80% of patients, should not be used, because GH levels may not 
return to normal until 10 to 15 years after therapy. In one series, 
GH levels were under 10 ng/mL (460 pmol/L) in only 38% of 
patients at 2 years posttreatment; however, at 5 and 10 years, 73% 
and 81% had achieved such levels. The incidence of hypopituitar-
ism is appreciable, and in this series hypothyroidism occurred in 
19%, hypoadrenalism in 38%, and hypogonadism in approxi-
mately 50% to 60% of patients as a consequence of radiotherapy. 
Gamma knife radiosurgery has also been used for tumors confined 
to the sella. Current series, although limited, suggest remission 
rates of about 50% to 70% at 2 years following therapy. 
 Response to Treatment 
 In patients with successful reduction in GH hypersecretion, there 
is cessation of bone overgrowth. In addition, these patients experi-
ence considerable clinical improvement, including reduction in 
soft tissue bulk of the extremities, decreased facial puffiness, 
increased energy, and cessation of hyperhidrosis, heat intolerance, 
and oily skin. Bony changes typically do not regress. Headache, 
carpal tunnel syndrome, arthralgias, sleep apnea, and photophobia 
are also reversible with successful therapy. Glucose intolerance and 
hyperinsulinemia as well as hypercalciuria are also reversed in most 
cases. 
 Recent studies have also shown that the excess mortality 
 associated with acromegaly can be reversed if GH levels are 
 normalized. 
 Posttreatment Follow-Up 
 Posttreatment assessment includes evaluation of GH secretion, 
anterior pituitary function, and tumor size. Patients undergoing 
surgery should be seen 4 to 8 weeks after the operation for assess-
ment of GH secretion and pituitary function. Those with persis-
tent GH hypersecretion (>1 ng/dL [47 pmol/L]) should receive 
further therapy with somatostatin analogs. Patients with postop-
erative GH levels under 1 ng/mL (47 pmol/L) should have fol-
low-up GH and IGF-I determinations at 6-month intervals for 
2 years and yearly thereafter to rule out recurrences. Recurrent 
elevations in IGF-I should prompt a repeat MRI of the sella. Late 
hypopituitarism after surgery alone does not occur. GH replace-
ment therapy in patients with history of acromegaly and hypopi-
tuitarism is controversial and further studies are needed. 
 3. ACTH-SECRETING PITUITARY 
ADENOMAS: CUSHING DISEASE 
 In 1932, Harvey Cushing documented the presence of small baso-
philic pituitary adenomas in six of eight patients with clinical 
features of adrenocortical hyperfunction. Years later, ACTH 
hypersecretion was identified from such tumors and found to be 
the cause of bilateral adrenal hyperplasia. Pituitary ACTH hyper-
secretion (Cushing disease) is now recognized as the most com-
mon cause of spontaneous hypercortisolism (Cushing syndrome) 
and must be distinguished from the other forms of adrenocorti-
costeroid excess—ectopic ACTH syndrome and adrenal tumors 
(see Chapter 9). 
 Pathology 
 ACTH-secreting pituitary tumors exist in virtually all patients 
with Cushing disease. These tumors are usually benign microad-
enomas under 10 mm in diameter; 50% are 5 mm or less in 
diameter, and microadenomas as small as 1 mm have been 
described. These tumors in Cushing disease are either basophilic 
or chromophobe adenomas and may be found anywhere within 
the anterior pituitary. Rarely, ACTH-secreting tumors are large, 
with invasive tendencies, and malignant tumors have rarely been 
reported. 
 Histologically, the tumors are composed of compact sheets of 
uniform, well-granulated cells (granule size, 200-700 nm by elec-
tron microscopy) with a sinusoidal arrangement and a high con-
tent of ACTH and its related peptides (β-LPH, β-endorphin). A 
zone of perinuclear hyalinization (Crooke changes) is frequently 
110    CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland
observed as a result of exposure of the corticotroph cells to pro-
longed hypercortisolism. A specific ultrastructural finding in these 
adenomas is the deposition of bundles of perinuclear microfila-
ments that encircle the nucleus; these are the ultrastructural 
equivalent of Crooke hyaline changes seen on light microscopy. In 
contrast to the adenoma’s cells, ACTH content in the portion of 
the anterior pituitary not involved with the tumor is decreased. 
 Diffuse hyperplasia of anterior pituitary corticotrophs or ade-
nomatous hyperplasia, presumed to result from hypersecretion of 
CRH, occurs rarely. 
 The adrenal glands in Cushing disease are enlarged, weighing 
12 to 24 g (normal, 8-10 g). Microscopic examination shows a 
thickened cortex due to hyperplasia of both the zona reticularis 
and zona fasciculata; the zona glomerulosa is normal. In some 
cases, ACTH-secreting pituitary adenomas cause bilateral nodular 
hyperplasia; the adrenals show diffuse bilateral cortical hyperplasia 
and the presence of one or more nodules that vary from micro-
scopic to several centimeters in diameter, with multiple small 
nodules being the most common. 
 Pathogenesis 
 The weight of current evidence is that Cushing disease is a pri-
mary pituitary disorder and that hypothalamic abnormalities are 
secondary to hypercortisolism. The endocrine abnormalities in 
Cushing disease are as follows: (1) hypersecretion of ACTH, with 
bilateral adrenocortical hyperplasia and hypercortisolism; 
(2) absent circadian periodicity of ACTH and cortisol secretion; 
(3) absent responsiveness of ACTH and cortisol to stress (hypo-
glycemia or surgery); (4) abnormal negative feedback of ACTH 
secretion by glucocorticoids; and (5) subnormal responsiveness of 
GH, TSH, and gonadotropins to stimulation. 
 Evidence that Cushing disease is a primary pituitary disorder is 
based on the high frequency of pituitary adenomas, the response to 
their removal, and the interpretation of hypothalamic abnormalities 
as being secondary to hypercortisolism. In addition, molecular stud-
ies have found that nearly all corticotroph adenomas are monoclo-
nal. These findings suggest that ACTH hypersecretion arises from a 
spontaneously developing pituitary adenoma and that the resulting 
hypercortisolism suppresses the normal hypothalamic-pituitary axis 
and CRH release, thereby abolishing the hypothalamic regulation 
of circadian variability and stress responsiveness. 
 Analysis of the response to therapy by pituitary microsurgery 
sheds some light on the pathogenesis of Cushing disease. Selective 
removal of pituitary microadenomas by transsphenoidal microsur-
gery corrects ACTH hypersecretion and hypercortisolism in most 
patients. After selective removal of the pituitary adenoma, the fol-
lowing return to normal: the circadian rhythmicity of ACTH and 
cortisol, the responsiveness of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis to 
hypoglycemic stress, and the dexamethasone suppressibility of 
cortisol secretion. 
 Clinical Features 
 Cushing disease presents with the signs and symptoms of hyper-
cortisolism and adrenal androgen excess (see Chapter 9). The 
onset of these features is usually insidious, developing over months 
or years. Obesity (with predominantly central fat distribution), 
hypertension, glucose intolerance, and gonadal dysfunction 
(amenorrhea or impotence) are common features. Other common 
manifestations include moon (rounded) facies, plethora, osteope-
nia, proximal muscle weakness, easy bruisability, psychologic dis-
turbances, violaceous striae, hirsutism, acne, poor wound healing, 
and superficial fungal infections. Unlike patients with the classic 
form of ectopic ACTH syndrome, patients with Cushing disease 
rarely have hypokalemia, weight loss, anemia, or hyperpigmenta-
tion. Virilization, observed occasionally in patients with adrenal 
carcinoma, is unusual in Cushing disease. Clinical symptoms 
related to the ACTH-secreting primary tumor itself, such as head-
ache or visual impairment, are rare because of the small size of 
these adenomas. 
 The usual age range is 20 to 40 years, but Cushing disease has 
been reported in infants and in patients over 70. There is a 
female:male ratio of approximately 8:1. In contrast, the ectopic 
ACTH syndrome occurs more commonly in men (male:female 
ratio of 3:1). 
 Diagnosis 
 The initial step in the diagnosis of an ACTH-secreting pituitary 
adenoma is the documentation of endogenous hypercortisolism, 
which is confirmed by increased urine-free cortisol secretion, 
abnormal cortisol suppressibility to low-dose dexamethasone, 
and/or abnormal late night salivary cortisol measurement. The 
differentiation of an ACTH-secreting pituitary tumor from other 
causes of hypercortisolism must be based on biochemical studies, 
including the measurement of basal plasma ACTH levels and 
central venous sampling, to detect a central to peripheral gradient 
of ACTH levels (see Chapter 9). The diagnosis and differential 
diagnosis of Cushing syndrome are presented in Chapter 9. 
 Treatment 
 Transsphenoidal microsurgery is the procedure of choice in 
Cushing disease. A variety of other therapies—operative, radio-
logic, pharmacologic—are discussed below. 
 A. Surgical treatment 
 Selective transsphenoidal resection of 
ACTH-secreting pituitary adenomas is the initial treatment of 
choice. At operation, meticulous exploration of the intrasellar 
contents by an experienced neurosurgeon is required. The tumor, 
which is usually found within the anterior lobe tissue, is selectively 
removed, and normal gland is left intact. 
 In about 85% of patients with microadenomas, selective 
microsurgery is successful in correcting hypercortisolism. Surgical 
damage to anterior pituitary function is rare, but most patients 
develop transient secondary adrenocortical insufficiency requiring 
postoperative glucocorticoid support until the hypothalamic- 
pituitary-adrenal axis recovers, usually in 2 to 18 months. The role 
of total hypophysectomy is currently unclear, however; hemihypo-
physectomy based on central venous sampling lateralization is 
successful in only about 50% to 70% of patients. 
CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland     111
 By contrast, transsphenoidal surgery is successful in only 25% 
of the 10% to 15% of patients with Cushing disease with pituitary 
macroadenomas or in those with extrasellar extension of tumor. 
 Transient diabetes insipidus occurs in about 10% of patients, 
but other surgical complications (eg, hemorrhage, cerebrospinal 
fluid rhinorrhea, infection, visual impairment, permanent diabe-
tes insipidus) are rare. Hypopituitarism occurs only in patients 
who undergo total hypophysectomy. 
 Before the introduction of pituitary microsurgery, bilateral 
total adrenalectomy was the preferred treatment of Cushing dis-
ease and may still be employed in patients in whom other thera-
pies are unsuccessful. Total adrenalectomy, which can now be 
performed laparoscopically, corrects hypercortisolism but pro-
duces permanent hypoadrenalism, requiring lifelong glucocorti-
coid and mineralocorticoid therapy. The ACTH-secreting pituitary 
adenoma persists and may progress, causing hyperpigmentation 
and invasive complications (Nelson syndrome; see below). 
Persistent hypercortisolism may occasionally follow total adrena-
lectomy as ACTH hypersecretion stimulates adrenal remnants or 
congenital rests. 
 B. Radiotherapy 
 Conventional radiotherapy of the pitu-
itary is of benefit in patients who have persistent or recurrent 
disease following pituitary microsurgery. In these patients, 
reported remission rates are 55% to 70% at 1 to 3 years after 
radiotherapy. 
 Gamma knife radiosurgery achieves remission rates of 65% to 
75%. However, as noted above, both forms of radiotherapy cause 
late loss of pituitary function in more than 50% of patients and 
visual deficits can occur with damage to the optic chiasm or cra-
nial nerves. 
 C. Medical treatment 
 Drugs that inhibit adrenal cortisol 
secretion are useful in Cushing disease, often as adjunctive therapy 
(see Chapter 9). No drug currently available successfully sup-
presses pituitary ACTH secretion. 
 Ketoconazole , an imidazole derivative, has been found to 
inhibit adrenal steroid biosynthesis. It inhibits the cytochrome 
P450 enzymes P450scc and P450c11. In daily doses of 600 to 
1200 mg, ketoconazole has been effective in the management of 
Cushing syndrome. Hepatotoxicity is common, however, but may 
be transient.  Metyrapone , which inhibits P450c11, and  amino-
glutethimide , which inhibits P450scc, have also been utilized to 
reduce cortisol hypersecretion. Metyrapone is only available 
directly through the manufacturer and aminoglutethimide is no 
longer manufactured in the United States. 
 The use of these drugs is accompanied by increased ACTH 
levels that may overcome the enzyme inhibition. In addition, they 
cause gastrointestinal side effects that may limit their effectiveness. 
More effective control of hypercortisolism with fewer side effects 
is obtained by combined use of these agents. Adequate data are 
not available on the long-term use of these drugs as the sole treat-
ment of Cushing disease. Thus, ketoconazole and aminoglute-
thimide ordinarily are used while awaiting a response to therapy 
or in the preparation of patients for surgery. 
 The adrenolytic drug  mitotane results in adrenal atrophy pre-
dominantly of the zonae fasciculata and reticularis. Remission of 
hypercortisolism is achieved in approximately 80% of patients with 
Cushing disease, but most relapse after therapy is discontinued. 
Mitotane therapy is limited by the delayed response, which may 
take weeks or months, and by the frequent side effects, including 
severe nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, somnolence, and skin rash. 
 The anesthesia induction agent  etomidate inhibits P450c11. It 
must be given intravenously and is generally reserved for life-
threatening cases of hypercortisolism resistant to conventional 
therapy or when oral medications are contraindicated. 
 Pharmacologic inhibition of ACTH secretion in Cushing dis-
ease has also been attempted with cyproheptadine, bromocriptine, 
and cabergoline. However, few patients have had successful 
responses, and the use of these agents is not recommended. 
 4. NELSON SYNDROME 
 The clinical appearance of an ACTH-secreting pituitary adenoma 
following bilateral adrenalectomy as initial therapy for Cushing 
disease was first described by Nelson and coworkers in 1958. 
However, with the evolution of pituitary microsurgery as the ini-
tial therapy for Cushing disease, the Nelson syndrome is now a 
rare occurrence. 
 Pathogenesis 
 It now seems likely that Nelson syndrome represents the clinical 
progression of a preexisting adenoma after the restraint of hyper-
cortisolism on ACTH secretion and tumor growth is removed. 
Thus, following adrenalectomy, the suppressive effect of cortisol is 
no longer present, ACTH secretion increases, and the pituitary 
adenoma may progress. 
 Incidence 
 Prior to the development of transsphenoidal surgery, when bilat-
eral adrenalectomy was the initial therapy for Cushing disease, the 
incidence of Nelson syndrome ranged from 10% to 78% depend-
ing on what criteria were used for diagnosis (see Chapter 9). In 
one series, approximately 30% of patients adrenalectomized for 
Cushing disease developed classic Nelson syndrome with progres-
sive hyperpigmentation and an obvious ACTH-secreting tumor; 
another 50% developed evidence of a microadenoma without 
marked progression; and about 20% never developed a progressive 
tumor. The reasons for these differences in clinical behavior are 
uncertain. Prophylactic pituitary radiotherapy is controversial. At 
present, when adrenalectomy is utilized only in those patients who 
fail pituitary microsurgery, the incidence of Nelson syndrome is 
less than 10%. Nevertheless, continued examination, including 
plasma ACTH levels and MRI, is required following bilateral 
adrenalectomy in patients with Cushing disease. 
 Clinical Features 
 The pituitary tumors in patients with classic Nelson syndrome can 
be among the most aggressive and rapidly growing of all pituitary 
112    CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland
tumors. These patients present with hyperpigmentation and with 
manifestations of an expanding intrasellar mass lesion. Visual field 
defects, headache, cavernous sinus invasion with extraocular 
muscle palsies, and even malignant changes with local or distant 
metastases may occur. Pituitary apoplexy may also complicate the 
course of these tumors. 
 Diagnosis 
 Plasma ACTH levels are markedly elevated, usually over 1000 pg/
mL (222 pmol/L) and often as high as 10,000 pg/mL 
(2220 pmol/L). MRI defines the extent of the tumor. 
 Treatment 
 Pituitary surgery by the transsphenoidal approach is the initial 
mode of treatment. Complete resection is usually not possible, 
because of the large size of these tumors. Conventional radio-
therapy or gamma knife radiosurgery is employed postoperatively 
in patients with residual tumor or extrasellar extension. 
 5. THYROTROPIN-SECRETING PITUITARY 
ADENOMAS 
 TSH-secreting pituitary adenomas are rare tumors manifested as 
hyperthyroidism with goiter in the presence of elevated TSH. 
Patients with TSH-secreting tumors are often resistant to routine 
ablative thyroid therapy, requiring large, often multiple doses of 
 131 I and several operations for control of thyrotoxicosis. 
Histologically, the tumors are chromophobe adenomas. They are 
often very large and cause visual impairment, which alerts the 
physician to a pituitary abnormality. Patients with these tumors 
do not have extrathyroidal systemic manifestations of Graves dis-
ease such as ophthalmopathy or dermopathy. 
 The diagnosis is based on findings of hyperthyroidism (ele-
vated T 4 or T 3 ) with elevated serum TSH and alpha subunit, and 
neuroradiologic studies consistent with pituitary tumor. The dif-
ferential diagnosis includes those patients with primary hypothy-
roidism (thyroid failure) that develops major hyperplasia of 
pituitary thyrotrophs and lactotrophs with sellar enlargement and 
occasional suprasellar extension. These patients can be identified 
by symptoms of hypothyroidism and low thyroid hormone levels. 
Thyroid hormone resistance may be more difficult to exclude as 
T 4 and T 3 levels can also be elevated. These patients, however, tend 
to be clinically euthyroid or hypothyroid, have a family history of 
thyroid hormone resistance, and generally do not present with 
sellar masses. Alpha subunit levels in these patients are usually not 
elevated. 
 Treatment should be directed initially at the adenoma via the 
transsphenoidal microsurgical approach. However, additional ther-
apy is usually required because of the large size of these adenomas. 
 Somatostatin analogs normalize TSH and T 4 levels in more 
than 70% of these patients when given in doses similar to those 
used for the treatment of acromegaly (see discussion earlier). 
Shrinkage of the tumor has been observed in about 40% of 
patients. 
 If tumor growth and TSH hypersecretion cannot be controlled by 
surgery and somatostatin analogs, the next step is pituitary irradia-
tion. In addition, such patients may also require ablative therapy of 
the thyroid with either  131 I or surgery to control their thyrotoxicosis. 
 6. GONADOTROPIN-SECRETING 
PITUITARY ADENOMAS 
 Although many pituitary adenomas synthesize gonadotropins 
(especially FSH) and their subunits, only a minority of these 
patients have elevated serum levels of FSH or LH. The majority of 
these tumors produce FSH and the alpha subunit, but tumors 
secreting both FSH and LH and a tumor secreting only LH have 
been described. 
 Gonadotropin-secreting pituitary adenomas are usually large 
chromophobe adenomas presenting with visual impairment. Most 
patients have hypogonadism and many have panhypopituitarism. 
Hormonal evaluation reveals elevated FSH in some patients 
accompanied by normal LH values. Basal levels of the alpha sub-
unit may also be elevated. The presence of elevation of both FSH 
and LH should suggest primary hypogonadism. TRH stimulation 
leads to an increase in FSH secretion in 33% and an increase in 
LH-β in 66% of patients. 
 Therapy for gonadotropin-secreting adenomas has been 
directed at surgical removal. Because of their large size, adequate 
control of the tumor is difficult to achieve, and radiotherapy is 
usually required. 
 7. ALPHA SUBUNIT-SECRETING 
PITUITARY ADENOMAS 
 Excessive quantities of the alpha subunit of the glycoprotein pitu-
itary hormones have been observed in association with the hyper-
secretion of many anterior pituitary hormones (TSH, GH, PRL, 
LH, FSH). However, pure alpha subunit hypersecretion has been 
identified in several patients with large invasive chromophobe 
adenomas and partial panhypopituitarism. Thus, the determina-
tion of the alpha subunit may be a useful marker in patients with 
presumed “nonfunctioning” pituitary adenomas. 
 8. NONFUNCTIONAL PITUITARY 
ADENOMAS 
 “Nonfunctional” chromophobe adenomas once represented 
approximately 80% of all primary pituitary tumors; however, with 
clinical application of radioimmunoassay of anterior pituitary 
hormones, these tumors currently account for only about 10% of 
all pituitary adenomas. Thus, the great majority of these chromo-
phobe adenomas have now been documented to be PRL-secreting; 
a smaller number secrete TSH or the gonadotropins. 
 Nonfunctional tumors are usually large when the diagnosis is 
established; headache and visual field defects are the usual present-
ing symptoms. However, endocrine manifestations are usually 
present for months to years before the diagnosis is made, with 
gonadotropin deficiency being the most common initial  symptom. 
CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland     113
Hypothyroidism and hypoadrenalism are also common, but the 
symptoms are subtle and may be missed. 
 Evaluation should include MRI and visual field testing; endo-
crine studies should include assessment of pituitary hormones and 
end-organ function to determine whether the adenoma is hyper-
secreting or whether hormonal replacement is needed. 
 Because these tumors are generally large, both surgery and 
radiation therapy are usually required to prevent tumor progression 
or recurrence. In the absence of an endocrine index of tumor 
hypersecretion such as PRL excess, serial scans at yearly intervals are 
required to assess the response to therapy and to detect possible 
recurrence. 
 9. PITUITARY CARCINOMA 
 Pituitary carcinomas are extremely rare with fewer than 200 cases 
reported and defined by the distant metastases of a pituitary 
tumor. Most present as hormone-producing invasive macroade-
nomas with symptoms of mass effect. ACTH- and PRL-secreting 
tumors are most common. Metastases may present many years 
after diagnosis of the primary pituitary tumor. Survival rates are 
low and treatment may include additional surgery, radiotherapy, 
or chemotherapy. 
 REFERENCES 
 Neuroendocrinology 
 Anderson JR, Antoun N, Burnet N, et al. Neurology of the pituitary gland. 
 J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiat . 1999;66:703. [PMID: 10329742] 
 Ben-Jonathan N, Hnasko R. Dopamine as a prolactin (PRL) inhibitor.  Endocr Rev . 
2001;22:724. [PMID: 11739329] 
 Burgess R, Lunyak V, Rosenfeld MG. Signaling and transcriptional control of 
pituitary development.  Curr Opin Gene Develop . 2002;12:534. [PMID: 
12200158] 
 Burrows HL, Douglas KR, Seasholtz AF, Camper SA. Genealogy of the anterior 
pituitary gland: tracing a family tree.  Trends Endocrinol Metab . 1999;10:343. 
[PMID: 10511693] 
 Coppari R, Ramadori G, Elmquist JK. The role of transcriptional regulators in 
central control of appetite and body weight.  Nat Clin Pract Endocrinol 
Metab . 2009;5:160. [PMID: 19229236] 
 Davies T, Marians R, Latif R. The TSH receptor reveals itself.  J Clin Invest . 
2002;110:209. [PMID: 12122107] 
 Elmquist JK. Hypothalamic pathways underlying the endocrine, autonomic, and 
behavioral effects of leptin.  Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord . 2001;25:S78. 
[PMID: 11840221] 
 Fauquier T, Lacampagne A, Travo P, Bauer K, Mollard P. Hidden face of the ante-
rior pituitary.  Trends Endocrinol Metab . 2002;13:304. [PMID: 12163233] 
 Le Roith D, Bondy C, Yakar S, Liu JL, Butler A. The somatomedin hypothesis. 
 Endocr Rev . 2001;22:53. [PMID: 11159816] 
 Moller M, Baeres FM. The anatomy and innervation of the mammalian pineal 
gland.  Cell Tissue Res . 2002;309:139. [PMID: 12111544] 
 Muccioli G, Tschop M, Papotti M, Deghenghi R, Heiman M, Ghigo E. 
Neuroendocrine and peripheral activities of ghrelin: implications in 
metabolism and obesity.  Eur J Pharmacol . 2002;440:235. [PMID: 
12007539] 
 Richard D, Lin Q, Timofeeva E. The corticotropin-releasing factor family of pep-
tides and CRF receptors: their roles in the regulation of energy balance.  Eur 
J Pharmacol . 2002;12:189. [PMID: 12007535] 
 Sheng HZ, Westphal H. Early steps in pituitary organogenesis.  Trends Genet . 
1999;15:236. [PMID: 10354584] 
 Tasker JG. Rapid glucocorticoid actions in the hypothalamus as a mechanism of 
homeostatic integration.  Obesity . 2006;14:259S. [PMID: 17021378] 
 van Vliet-Ostaptchouk JV, Hofker MH, Van Der Schouw YT. Genetic variation in 
the hypothalamic pathways and its role on obesity.  Obes Rev . 2009;10:593. 
[PMID: 19712437] 
 Zigman JM, Elmquist JK. Minireview: from anorexia to obesity—the yin and 
yang of body weight control.  Endocrinology . 2003;144:3749. [PMID: 
12933644] 
 Pituitary Function Testing and Neuroradiology 
 Biller BM, Samuels MH, Zagar A, et al. Sensitivity and specificity of six tests for 
the diagnosis of adult GH deficiency.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2002;87:2067. 
[PMID: 11994342] 
 Gasco V, Corneli G, Rovere S, et al. Diagnosis of adult GH deficiency.  Pituitary . 
2008;11:121. [PMID: 18404387] 
 Kazlauskaite R, Evans AT, Villabona CV, et al. Corticotropin tests for hypothalam-
ic-pituitary-adrenal insufficiency: a metaanalysis.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2008;93:4245. [PMID: 18697868] 
 Patronas N, Bulakbasi N, Stratakis CA, et al. Spoiled gradient recalled acquisition 
in the steady state technique is superior to conventional postcontrast spin 
echo technique for magnetic resonance imaging detection of adrenocorti-
cotropin-secreting pituitary tumors.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2003;88:1565. 
[PMID: 12679440] 
 Raff H. Utility of salivary cortisol measurements in Cushing’s syndrome and adre-
nal insufficiency.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2009;94:3647. [PMID: 
19602555] 
 Smith TP, Kavanagh L, Healy ML, McKenna TJ. Technology insight: measuring 
prolactin in clinical samples.  Nat Clin Pract Endocrinol Metab . 2007;3:279. 
[PMID: 17315036] 
 Pituitary Adenomas: General 
 Al-Brahim NY, Asa SL. My approach to pathology of the pituitary gland.  J Clin 
Pathol . 2006;59:1245. [PMID: 17142570] 
 Asa SL, Ezzat S. The pathogenesis of pituitary tumors.  Annu Rev Pathol . 2009;4:97. 
[PMID: 19400692] 
 Brada M, Jankowska P. Radiotherapy for pituitary adenomas.  Endocrinol Metab 
Clin N Am . 2008;37:263. [PMID: 18226740] 
 Dekkers OM, Pereira AM, Romijn JA. Treatment and follow-up of clinically non-
functioning pituitary macroadenomas.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2008;93:3717. [PMID: 18682516] 
 Elston MS, McDonald KL, Clifton-Bligh RJ, Robinson BG. Familial pituitary 
tumor syndromes.  Nat Rev Endocrinol . 2009;5:453. [PMID: 19564887] 
 Ezzat S, Asa SL, Couldwell WT, et al. The prevalence of pituitary adenomas: a 
systematic review.  Cancer . 2004;101:613. [PMID: 15274075] 
 Jagannathan J, Kanter AS, Sheehan JP, Jane JA Jr, Laws ER Jr. Benign brain tumors: 
sellar/parasellar tumors.  Neurol Clin . 2007;25:1231. [PMID 17964033] 
 Komninos J,Vlassopoulou V, Protopapa D, et al. Tumors metastatic to the pitu-
itary gland: case report and literature review.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2004;89:574. [PMID: 14764764] 
 Krikorian A, Aron D. Evaluation and management of pituitary incidentalomas—
revisiting an acquaintance.  Nat Clin Pract Endocrinol Metab . 2006;2:138. 
[PMID 16932273] 
 Lopes MB, Scheithauer BW, Schiff D. Pituitary carcinoma: diagnosis and treat-
ment.  Endocrine . 2005;28:115. [PMID: 16311418] 
 Vance ML. Pituitary adenoma: a clinician’s perspective.  Endocr Pract . 2008;14:757. 
[PMID: 18996799] 
 ACTH: Cushing Disease 
 Assié G, Bahurel H, Bertherat J, et al. The Nelson’s syndrome… revisited. 
 Pituitary . 2004;7:209. [PMID: 16132203] 
 Findling JW, Raff H. Cushing’s syndrome: important issues in diagnosis and man-
agement.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2006;91:3746. [PMID: 16868050] 
 Jehle S, Walsh JE, Freda PU, Post KD. Selective use of bilateral inferior petrosal 
sinus sampling in patients with adrenocorticotropin-dependent Cushing’s 
syndrome prior to transsphenoidal surgery.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2008;93:4624. [PMID: 18796519] 
114    CHAPTER 4 Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland
 Nieman LK, Biller BM, Findling JW, et al. The diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome: 
an Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guideline.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2008;93:1526. [PMID:18334580] 
 Sonino N, Boscaro M. Medical therapy for Cushing’s disease.  Endocrinol Metab 
Clin North Am . 1999;28:211. [PMID: 10207692] 
 Vance ML. Cushing’s disease: radiation therapy.  Pituitary . 2009;12:11. [PMID: 
18437577] 
 Growth Hormone: Acromegaly 
 Freda PU, Post KD, Powell JS, Wardlaw SL. Evaluations of disease status with 
sensitive measures of growth hormone secretion in 60 postoperative patients 
with acromegaly.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 1998;83:3808. [PMID: 
9814451] 
 Melmed S. Acromegaly pathogenesis and treatment.  J Clin Invest . 2009;119:3189. 
[PMID: 19884662] 
 PRL: Prolactinoma 
 Gibney J, Smith TP, McKenna TJ. Clinical relevance of macroprolactin.  Clin 
Endocrinol (Oxf) . 2005;62:633. [PMID: 15943822] 
 Molitch ME. Medication-induced hyperprolactinemia.  Mayo Clin Proc . 
2005;80:1050. [PMID: 16092584] 
 Schade R, Andersohn F, Suissa S, Haverkamp W, Garbe E. Dopamine agonists and 
the risk of cardiac-valve regurgitation.  N Engl J Med . 2007;356:29. [PMID: 
17202453] 
 Schlechte JA. Long-term management of prolactinomas.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2007;92:2861. [PMID: 17682084] 
 Vilar L, Freitas MC, Naves LA, et al. Diagnosis and management of hyperpro-
lactinemia: results of a Brazilian multicenter study with 1234 patients. 
 J Endocrinol Invest . 2008;31:436. [PMID: 18560262] 
 Gonadotropins (LH/FSH): Gonadotropin-Secreting 
Pituitary Tumors 
 Shomali ME, Katznelson L. Medical therapy for gonadotroph and thyrotroph tumors. 
 Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am . 1999;28:223. [PMID: 10207693] 
 Snyder PJ. Extensive personal experience: gonadotroph adenomas.  J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab . 1995;80:1059. [PMID: 7714066] 
 TSH-Secreting Pituitary Tumors 
 Brucker-Davis F, Oldfield EH, Skarulis MC, Doppman JL, Weintraub BD. 
Thyrotropin-secreting pituitary tumors: diagnostic criteria, thyroid hormone 
sensitivity, and treatment outcome in 25 patients followed at the National 
Institutes of Health.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 1999;84:476. [PMID: 
10022404] 
 Laws ER, Vance ML, Jane JA, Jr. TSH adenomas.  Pituitary . 2006:9:313. [PMID: 
17080266] 
 Shomali ME, Katznelson L. Medical therapy for gonadotroph and thyrotroph 
tumors.  Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am . 1999;28:223. [PMID: 
10207693] 
 Hypopituitarism and Other Hypothalamic-Pituitary Disorders 
 Bihan H, Christozova V, Dumas JL, et al. Sarcoidosis: clinical, hormonal, and 
magnetic resonance  imaging (MRI) manifestations of hypothalamic-
pituitary disease in 9 patients and review of the literature.  Medicine . 
2007;86:259. [PMID: 17873755] 
 Carpinteri R, Patelli I, Casanueva FF, Giustina A. Pituitary tumours: inflammatory 
and granulomatous expansive lesions of the pituitary.  Best Pract Res Clin 
Endocrinol Metab . 2009;23:639. [PMID19945028] 
 Cohen LE, Radovick S, Wondisford FE. Transcription factors and hypopituitar-
ism.  Trends Endocrinol Metab . 1999;10:326. [PMID: 10481164] 
 Hardelin JP, Dode C. The complex genetics of Kallmann syndrome: KAL1, 
FGFR1, FGF8, PROKR2, PROK2, et al.  Sex Dev . 2008;2:181. [PMID: 
18987492] 
 Molitch ME, Gillam MP. Lymphocytic hypophysitis.  Horm Res . 2007;68:145. 
[PMID: 18174733] 
 Schneider HJ, Kreitschmann-Andermahr I, Ghigo E, Stalla GK, Agha A. 
Hypopituitarism.  Lancet . 2007;369:1461. [PMID: 17467517] 
 Schneider HJ, Kreitschmann-Andermahr I, Ghigo E, Stalla GK, Agha A. 
Hypothalamopituitary dysfunction following traumatic brain injury and 
aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage: a systematic review.  JAMA . 
2007;298:1429. [PMID: 17895459] 
 Vance ML, Mauras N. Growth hormone therapy in adults and children.  N Engl J 
Med . 1999;341:1206. [PMID: 10519899] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
115
5
 The Posterior Pituitary 
(Neurohypophysis) 
 Alan G. Robinson, MD 
 ACTH 
Adrenocorticotropic hormone 
 ADH 
Antidiuretic hormone 
 AIDS 
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome 
 AVP 
Arginine vasopressin 
 CSW 
Cerebral salt wasting 
 DDAVP 
Desamino, D-8 arginine vasopressin 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 PHYSIOLOGY OF HORMONE FUNCTION 
 Vasopressin is the water-retaining hormone in all mammals and 
along with thirst is the primary regulator of osmolality. Pressure 
and volume are primarily regulated by changes in sodium balance 
mediated via renin, angiotensin, and aldosterone. The relative 
importance of vasopressin in regulation of osmolality versus regu-
lation of pressure is reflected in the sensitivity to changes in osmo-
lality versus changes in pressure/volume.  Figure 5–1 illustrates the 
exquisite sensitivity of the osmostat to as little as a 1% change in 
osmolality. The regulation of vasopressin secretion by barorecep-
tors, however, involves many concurrent and synergistic sympa-
thetic inputs, and decrease in volume or pressure of 10% to 15% 
is necessary before there is a measurable increase in plasma vaso-
pressin. 
 The exquisite sensitivity in the relation of plasma osmolality to 
urine osmolality and urine volume is illustrated in  Figure 5–2 . 
While the normal range of plasma osmolality encompasses a range 
of approximately 10 mOsm/L, for any individual, the set-point is 
much more narrow. Small changes in osmolality produce a corre-
sponding and linear change in plasma vasopressin. As illustrated 
in  Figure 5–2 , the normal range of plasma osmolality and plasma 
vasopressin produces a corresponding linear increase in urine 
osmolality from maximally dilute to maximally concentrated. This 
entire range from maximally dilute urine to maximally concen-
trated urine is accomplished by a narrow range of plasma vasopres-
sin (from approximately 1 to 5 pg/mL). In unusual circumstances, 
plasma osmolality can rise higher than the normal range, and there 
 PAVP 
Plasma vasopressin concentration 
 pOsm 
Plasma osmolality 
 SIADH 
Syndrome of inappropriate 
 
antidiuretic hormone secretion 
 V 1-3 
Vasopressin receptor, types 1-3 
is a corresponding increase in plasma vasopressin, but urine osmo-
lality plateaus at the concentration of the renal inner medulla. 
When urine in the collecting duct is iso-osmotic with the urine in 
the inner medulla, maximum urine concentration is achieved. 
While the relation of plasma osmolality, plasma vasopressin, and 
urine osmolality are linear, the relation of these to urine volume is 
not linear. Rather, there is a logarithmic relationship between 
urine volume and urine osmolality. The total urine volume 
required to excrete a fixed quantity of urine osmolytes changes 
relatively little until plasma vasopressin and urine concentration 
are nearly absent, then urine volume increases dramatically from a 
few liters per day to 18 to 20 L/d. 
 In the kidney, fluid is conserved by reabsorption of sodium and 
fluid in the distal and the proximal tubules and then reabsorption 
of water in the collecting duct. The counter-current multiplier 
system in the loop of Henle generates a high osmolality in the 
renal medulla. Vasopressin acts on principal cells in the collecting 
duct by V 2 receptors that stimulate the expression of intracellular 
water channels, aquaporin-2. When vasopressin binds to the V 2 
receptor, adenylate cyclase is activated to produce cyclic AMP 
which stimulates both the production of new aquaporin-2 protein 
and the transfer of existing aquaporin-2 from the cytoplasm into 
the cell membrane. In the cell membrane, aquaporins act as water 
channels in the hydrophobic lipid bilayer so that water moves 
down the osmotic gradient from the collecting duct into the prin-
cipal cell. Aquaporins-3 and -4 are involved in moving water out 
of the principal cell into the medullary extracellular fluid and from 
there into the circulation. In response to changes in vasopressin, 
116    CHAPTER 5 The Posterior Pituitary (Neurohypophysis)
aquaporin-2 can be quickly shuttled in and out of the membrane 
producing rapid changes in water reabsorption and concentration 
of urine. 
 Volume/pressure regulation by vasopressin operates through V 1 
receptors on blood vessels. These receptors cause contraction of 
smooth muscle to raise blood pressure and, secondarily reduce 
intravascular volume. 
 V 2 receptors also stimulate antihemophilic and von Willebrand 
factors. There is a third type receptor (V 3 ) on anterior pituitary 
cells that stimulates ACTH. These functions are not further con-
sidered in this chapter. 
 In most physiologic situations, changes in osmolality and vol-
ume are additive or synergistic in producing the appropriate 
physiologic response. For example, most cases of dehydration 
result in greater loss of water than solute. This produces an 
increase in plasma osmolality and a decrease in volume that act 
together to stimulate thirst and the secretion of vasopressin, which 
promotes retention of water. Similarly, excess ingestion of hypo-
tonic fluid produces a decrease in plasma osmolality and an 
increase in plasma volume, both of which decrease plasma vaso-
pressin and result in excretion of dilute urine. The normal regula-
tion of osmolality is an elegant and simple system. Fluid ingested 
and water produced from metabolized food is in excess of true 
need. The retained water causes a small decrease in plasma osmo-
lality with a small decrease in vasopressin and an excretion of the 
ingested fluid. If the water intake is not sufficient to supply body 
needs, plasma osmolality rises, producing concentrated urine to 
reduce fluid loss, and stimulates thirst that induces drinking to 
replenish body fluid. 
25
20
15
10
5
0
Plasma vasopressin (pg/mL)
+10
(Osmolality)
0
+20
Percent change
+30
−10
(Pressure or
volume)
0
−20
−30
Osmolality
Pressure
Volume
 FIGURE 5–1  Vasopressin secretion in response to percentage 
increases in osmolality or decreases in pressure or volume.  (Redrawn, 
with permission, from Robertson GL, Berl T. Water metabolism. In: 
Brenner BM, Rector FC, Jr, eds.  The Kidney . vol. 1. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, 
PA: WB Saunders; 1986: 385.) 
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
350
700
1050
1400
0
3
6
9
12
0
3
6
9
12
0
3
6
9
Thirst
12
0
PAVP
PAVP
PAVP
uOsm
1400
1050
700
350
0
320
310
300
290
280
270
pOsm
uOsm
U Volume/24 h
C
B
A
 FIGURE 5–2  Normal physiologic relationship between plasma 
osmolality (pOsm; mOsm/kg H 2 O), plasma vasopressin (PAVP; pg/mL), 
urine osmolality (uOsm; mOsm/kg H 2 O), and urine volume (L/d).
  (A) Changes in osmolality induce linear changes in vasopressin with 
a normal physiologic range of osmolality producing vasopressin lev-
els of 0.5 to 5 pg/mL.  (B) The physiologic range of vasopressin pro-
duces linear changes in urine osmolality. At vasopressin levels above 
5 to 6 pg/mL, urine osmolality is at the maximum, determined by the 
osmolality of the inner medulla of the kidney.  (C) Assuming a con-
stant osmolar load, the relationship of volume to urine osmolality is 
logarithmic. The urine volume to excrete a given osmolar load at the 
urine osmolality in  (B) is indicated in  C . (Calculated from formulas in 
Robertson GL, Shelton RL, Athar S. The osmoregulation of vasopres-
sin.  Kidney Int . 1976;10:25-37.)  (Copyright 2003, A.G. Robinson, 
University of California at Los Angeles.) 
CHAPTER 5 The Posterior Pituitary (Neurohypophysis)     117
 Fluid and electrolyte balance is not well regulated in elderly 
people. By age 80, total body water declines to as low as 50% of 
the level in normal young adults. Older subjects may have a 
decrease in glomerular filtration rate, and the collecting duct is less 
responsive to vasopressin. Numerous studies have indicated a 
decreased thirst with dehydration in elderly subjects, but also a 
lessened ability to excrete a water load. These age-related changes 
in body fluid and renal function predispose elderly people to both 
hypernatremia and hyponatremia. Also, elderly people are more 
likely to have comorbid diseases which enhance their tendency to 
become hyponatremic or hypernatremic. It is incumbent upon the 
physician to pay special attention to fluid balance in older people. 
 ANATOMY OF HORMONE SYNTHESIS 
AND RELEASE 
 The posterior pituitary (unlike the anterior pituitary) is not a 
gland but only the distal axon terminals of the hypothalamic mag-
nocellular neurons that make up the neurohypophysis. The cell 
bodies of these neurons are located in paired supraoptic nuclei and 
paired paraventricular nuclei of the hypothalamus. The paraven-
tricular nuclei are located on each side of the third ventricle and 
axons from these neurons trace laterally and anteriorly to the loca-
tion of the magnocellular neurons of the supraoptic nucleus just 
lateral to and above the optic chiasm. Axons of the supraoptic 
nucleus join axons of the paraventricular nucleus and course to the 
basal hypothalamus where they join the axons from the other side 
and course through the infundibular stalk to the axon terminals in 
the posterior pituitary. 
 The anatomic location of the physiologic regulators of osmotic 
and pressure/volume (baroreceptor) are located in vastly different 
sites. Osmoreceptors that control both thirst and osmotic regula-
tion of vasopressin are located in the hypothalamus just anterior 
to the third ventricle, so the entire regulation of osmotic-induced 
changes in thirst and vasopressin secretion resides in a small and 
discrete area in the hypothalamus. Increases in osmolality stimu-
late the osmoreceptor to send a positive signal to stimulate thirst 
and to release vasopressin. For volume and pressure regulation, the 
receptors are located in the chest. There are high-pressure arterial 
baroreceptors in the carotid sinus and aortic arch and low-pressure 
volume receptors in the atria and pulmonary venous system. The 
pressure/volume receptor afferent signals are carried through cra-
nial nerves 9 and 10 and synapse in the medulla before carrying 
their input to the magnocellular neurons. Both excitatory and 
inhibitory baroreceptor influences act on the magnocellular neu-
rons, although some evidence indicates that a predominant 
mechanism involves the tonic inhibition of vasopressin secretion. 
A decrease in pressure/volume decreases the inhibition and stimu-
lates release of vasopressin. 
 Vasopressin and oxytocin are nonapeptides that are synthesized 
in the cell bodies of the magnocellular neurons as part of a larger 
precursor peptide. Like other polypeptide hormones, the precur-
sor proteins traverse the endoplasmic reticulum and the Golgi 
apparatus to be packaged in secretory granules. The neurosecre-
tory granules then travel down the long axons through the stalk of 
the infundibulum to the posterior pituitary where the granules are 
stored. During transport, peptide enzymes (peptidases) cleave the 
prohormone into the hormone (vasopressin or oxytocin), a carrier 
protein (neurophysin), and (for vasopressin only) a glycopeptide. 
The synthesis of oxytocin and vasopressin is in separate neurons 
organized in clusters within the paraventricular nuclei and 
supraoptic nuclei. This allows stimulation of individual neurons 
and independent release of individual hormones. The stimulus for 
secretion of vasopressin or oxytocin is by neurotransmitters acting 
on the appropriate magnocellular cell body. An action potential 
propagates along the axon, causing an influx of calcium at the 
axon terminal and release of the hormone content of neurosecre-
tory granules into the perivascular space. 
 PATHOPHYSIOLOGY 
 All defined pathophysiology of the posterior pituitary is related to 
the function of vasopressin rather than oxytocin. Both decreased 
function of vasopressin and increased function of vasopressin 
manifest as abnormalities of water balance and depend upon 
action of vasopressin on the V 2 receptor of the kidney rather than 
the V 1 vascular receptors. The clinical presentation of low vaso-
pressin function (diabetes insipidus) or excess vasopressin function 
(syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone, 
SIADH) is determined by the physiology of thirst. In humans 
thirst is well regulated to turn on when needed but not well regu-
lated to turn off when not needed. When vasopressin is decreased 
or absent (diabetes insipidus), there is abnormal excretion of a 
large volume of dilute urine. This should cause hyperosmolality 
and an increase in serum sodium. However, as illustrated in 
 Figure 5–2 , an elevated plasma osmolality stimulates thirst, and a 
patient will drink a large volume of fluid to keep their sodium in 
the normal range. So, the clinical presentation of decreased vaso-
pressin is one associated with polyuria and dilute urine together 
with polydipsia but with a normal serum sodium. Alternatively, 
when vasopressin is increased, there is abnormal concentration of 
urine and retention of water. The volume expansion by water 
dilutes serum sodium. If thirst were inhibited by hypo-osmolality 
as efficiently as thirst is stimulated by hyperosmolality, then the 
decrease in osmolality would produce a profound decrease in fluid 
intake, and a normal serum sodium would be maintained by the 
natural loss of fluid with perspiration, gastrointestinal fluid loss, 
and the urine output necessary to excrete ingested osmoles pro-
duced by food intake. Thirst, however, is not sufficiently inhib-
ited, and the volume expansion not only dilutes serum sodium, 
but induces sodium excretion to reduce extracellular volume, 
which worsens the hyponatremia. So, the presentation of increased 
vasopressin is a chemical presentation of hyponatremia. There is 
concurrent concentrated urine with no change in thirst, modest 
volume expansion, hyponatremia, and natriuresis. 
 The other physiologic principles which determine some of the 
pathophysiology of abnormal secretion of vasopressin are: osmola-
lity is regulated by changes in water balance, and volume is regu-
lated by changes in sodium balance. When in conflict, volume will 
be preserved at the expense of osmolality. Thus, as described later, 
118    CHAPTER 5 The Posterior Pituitary (Neurohypophysis)
if dehydration is produced by diabetes insipidus, sodium will be 
retained to protect volume, even if it aggravates hypernatremia. 
With SIADH when sodium is diluted and extracellular volume is 
expanded, natriuresis is initiated to decrease extracellular volume in 
spite of the need to retain sodium to correct the hypo-osmolality. 
 DEFICIENT VASOPRESSIN: 
DIABETES INSIPIDUS 
 Diabetes insipidus is literally the excretion of a large volume of 
urine (diabetes) that is hypotonic, dilute, and tasteless (insipid). 
Patients present with polyuria. Other causes of polyuria such as 
osmotic diuresis that occur in diabetes mellitus or intrinsic renal 
disease must be excluded. Frequent urination, without an increase 
in urine volume, suggests a urologic abnormality. Most adults will 
tolerate polyuria without complaint until it exceeds 3 to 4 L/d. If 
polyuria is shown to be dilute, the pathophysiologic mechanisms 
include: (1) primary ingestion of excess fluid, (2) abnormally 
decreased synthesis and secretion of vasopressin, (3) increased 
metabolism of vasopressin, and (4) decreased end-organ response 
to vasopressin. 
 A. Ingestion of excess fluid and normal urine excretion—
primary polydipsia 
 Primary polydipsia with ingestion of 
large quantities of water produces modest decreases in plasma 
osmolality, decreased secretion of vasopressin, and excretion of 
profound quantities of urine. As the volume of dilute fluid deliv-
ered to the collecting duct is approximately 18 L/d, this quantity 
of dilute urine can be excreted on a daily basis while maintaining 
serum osmolality in the normal range. Virtually any pathologic 
process in the hypothalamus that causes diabetes insipidus may 
rarely cause primary stimulation of the thirst center and primary 
polydipsia on an organic basis. Alternatively, primary polydipsia 
may occur as a behavioral abnormality in psychiatric patients in 
whom the excess water ingestion and urination may represent 
delusions tied to bodily cleansing. The large volume of urine pass-
ing through the collecting duct in these patients washes urea out 
of the inner medulla and reduces the inner medulla osmolality. 
Additionally, the chronic suppression of vasopressin release and 
lack of action of vasopressin on the renal collecting duct decreases 
the synthesis of aquaporins in the collecting duct cells, adding to 
the inability to concentrate the urine maximally. Each of these 
abnormalities returns to normal in several days to weeks after fluid 
ingestion is decreased to normal. 
 Primary polyuria may be induced in a normal person if excess 
fluid is administered parenterally. This occasionally occurs in post-
operative cases that do not involve the pituitary. In many surgical 
procedures, the stress of the surgery is a stimulus to release of 
vasopressin, and administered fluids may be retained during the 
procedure. Postoperatively, the stress is released, and patients have 
a normal diuresis of the retained fluids. If this normal excretion of 
fluid is matched by increased fluids administered parenterally, the 
patient will continue to excrete large volumes of urine. If the 
administered fluid is normal saline, the patients will excrete a large 
volume of isotonic urine. If the volume administered is suffi-
ciently great, the patients will be unable to dilute or concentrate 
their urine above or below an iso-osmotic level regardless of thera-
peutic agents. The large osmotic load delivered to the kidney may 
make the patient unresponsive even to administered desmopres-
sin, producing an iatrogenic therapeutic dilemma. 
 B. Abnormal synthesis and secretion of vasopressin 
 It 
is important to remember that the complaint of polyuria is based 
upon the volume of the urine not the urinary concentration. 
Therefore, as evident from  Figure 5–2 , considerable loss of ability 
to secrete vasopressin may occur before there is much loss of abil-
ity to concentrate the urine and even greater loss may occur before 
there is a noticeable increase in urine volume. 
 1.  GENETIC ABNORMALITIES OF 
NEUROHYPOPHYSEAL NEURONS 
 Familial hypothalamic diabetes insipidus. 
 Familial diabetes 
insipidus may be caused by an autosomal dominant mutation in the 
vasopressin gene. Usually the mutation involves DNA sequences in 
the neurophysin or signal peptide region of the precursor gene rather 
than the region encoding vasopressin itself. These mutations cause 
abnormal folding of the precursor protein which produces abnormal 
trafficking and accumulation of a mutant prohormone in the endo-
plasmic reticulum. This produces alterations in packaging of the 
prohormone into neurosecretory granules in the Golgi apparatus. By 
ill-defined mechanisms, this leads to cell death of the vasopressin-
producing neurons. Because the pathology in these neurons develops 
over time, young children may have normal urine output, and dia-
betes insipidus is not expressed until late childhood. An autosomal 
dominant form of diabetes insipidus also occurs in association with 
diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy, and deafness (DIDMOAD), also 
known as Wolfram syndrome. 
 2.  PATHOLOGIC LESIONS OF 
NEUROHYPOPHYSEAL NEURONS 
 Solid tumors and hematologic malignancies. 
 The most 
common solid tumor to produce diabetes insipidus is craniophar-
yngioma. Suprasellar germinoma or pinealoma, which may be 
associated with precocious puberty, commonly produces diabetes 
insipidus. Metastatic disease to the pituitary hypothalamic area, for 
example, from breast or lung cancer, is more likely to produce 
diabetes insipidus than a deficiency of anterior pituitary hormones 
because the metastases lodge in the portal system of the hypothala-
mus where the vasopressin axons from the two sides join to form 
the pituitary stalk. Usually, there are widespread unidentified 
metastatic lesions elsewhere. Lymphoma or infiltration of the 
hypothalamus with leukemia are rare causes of diabetes insipidus. 
 Trauma or surgery. 
 The anatomy of the neurohypophyseal 
system aids our understanding of this pathology. Hormone syn-
thesis and regulation of release is high in the hypothalamus. 
Surgery or trauma at the level of the pituitary traumatizes only the 
axon terminals. Trauma of the axon terminals may disrupt the 
CHAPTER 5 The Posterior Pituitary (Neurohypophysis)     119
release of hormone, but usually this produces only a transient 
inability to secrete hormone and transient diabetes insipidus. 
Sectioning of the posterior pituitary stalk produces a characteristic 
pattern of diabetes insipidus known as the triphasic response. This 
is illustrated in  Figure 5–3 . Initial axonal shock inhibits the release 
of any vasopressin, and there is a period of diabetes insipidus that 
lasts for 5 to 10 days. Then, the severed axons in the posterior 
pituitary become necrotic and there is uncontrolled release of 
vasopressin. If excess fluid is administered during this time, the 
syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone is produced with 
hyponatremia (described later). This lasts for 5 to 10 days until all 
of the residual vasopressin leaks from the axon terminals when 
there is return of diabetes insipidus. While the classic response to 
stalk section is the three phases, in many clinical situations not all 
three phases occur. The most common occurrence after surgery in 
the pituitary or hypothalamus is transient diabetes insipidus that 
lasts a few days without subsequent sequelae. With partial damage 
to the pituitary stalk rather than total section, it is possible that the 
second phase will occur without preceding or subsequent diabetes 
insipidus (ie, isolated second phase). In the isolated second phase, 
there are sufficient normally functioning vasopressinergic neurons 
to avoid diabetes insipidus in the first and third phase; however, 
the damaged axon terminals leak vasopressin that will, when 
coupled with excess fluid intake, produce SIADH and hypona-
tremia. Characteristically, hyponatremia occurs 5 to 10 days after 
pituitary surgery, lasts for 5 to 10 days, and then resolves. Late 
occurrence of diabetes insipidus, that is, third phase without a first 
or second phase, is distinctly uncommon. 
 Patients with diabetes insipidus due to surgery or trauma may 
eventually recover. The level of section determines the number of 
magnocellular neurons that are actually killed. The higher in the 
stalk and the closer the section to the perikaria, the greater the 
number of neurons that die. Vasopressin-producing neurons 
whose axons terminate in the hypothalamus and serve as secret-
agogues for ACTH in the anterior pituitary may persist and 
hypertrophy after surgery or trauma. Additionally, branching of 
axons may develop in the hypothalamus after surgery or trauma, 
and these branches may generate new connections of vasopressin-
ergic neurons to blood vessels. By these mechanisms, sufficient 
vasopressin function may return (usually within 1 year) to have 
normal fluid balance and no symptoms of diabetes insipidus. 
 Granulomatous disease. 
 Langerhans cell histiocytosis is the 
generic term that includes severe fulminant visceral Letterer-Siwe 
disease, multifocal Hand-Schuller-Christian disease, and benign 
eosinophilic granuloma. Diabetes insipidus is part of the central 
nervous system involvement in these disorders and is associated 
with other abnormalities of the head involving the cranial bones, 
oral mucosa, or brain. Systemic manifestations in the lung, bone, 
and skin may also be present. Wegener granulomatosis and sarcoi-
dosis may also have diabetes insipidus as a part of the central 
nervous system pathology. 
 Lymphocytic infundibulohypophysitis. 
 It is now recog-
nized that many cases of diabetes insipidus, that were previously 
termed idiopathic and for which there was no specific etiology, are 
probably due to lymphocytic infiltration of the neurohypophysis 
on an autoimmune basis. X-rays may reveal enlargement of the 
pituitary stalk as evidence of the lymphocytic invasion. There may 
be resolution of the autoimmune response with time and the stalk 
may return to normal size, but the diabetes insipidus is usually 
permanent. 
 Essential hypernatremia—Adipsic hypothalamic diabetes 
insipidus. 
 A rare variant of diabetes insipidus involves an 
absent osmoreceptor function, but an intact baroreceptor func-
tion. In this form of diabetes insipidus, patients do not sense thirst 
and, therefore, do not drink water. This results in an elevation of 
serum osmolality because the osmostat does not respond to the 
increased osmolality by releasing vasopressin or stimulating thirst. 
However, vasopressin synthesis and storage are normal as demon-
strated by specific tests of baroreceptor function. Characteristically, 
these patients do not drink water and become sufficiently dehy-
drated that their baroreceptors stimulate vasopressin release, they 
then remain in a balanced situation with an elevated serum 
sodium level, relatively concentrated urine, and lack of thirst. 
 Cerebral anoxia/brain death. 
 Brain dead patients who are 
on life support often have diabetes insipidus as part of the central 
nervous system pathology. It is standard practice to maintain elec-
trolyte and water balance for maximal preservation of organs for 
transplantation. 
 C. Increased metabolism of vasopressin in pregnancy 
to produce diabetes insipidus 
 During pregnancy, there is a 
true resetting of the osmostat at an osmolality approximately 
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Urine output/24 h
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
15
14
13
12
11
10
16
0
Days post surgery
Diabetes
insipidus
Antidiuretic
interphase
Diabetes
insipidus
 FIGURE 5–3  Illustration of the phases of urine output after sec-
tion of the pituitary stalk. The  triphasic response consists of: (1) diabe-
tes insipidus due to axonal shock and lack of release of vasopressin; 
(2) an antidiuretic interphase when vasopressin leaks from the sev-
ered neurons; and (3) return of diabetes insipidus when the store of 
vasopressin in the posterior pituitary is depleted. 
120    CHAPTER 5 The Posterior Pituitary (Neurohypophysis)
10 mOsm/kg H 2 O less than the normal pOsm–PAVP relation-
ship. So, in  Figure 5–2 (A), the pOsm–PAVP would have the same 
linear relationship but would be shifted downward on the graph 
with the increase in PAVP beginning at pOsm of 270. Both 
increases and decreases in plasma vasopressin occur at the lower 
pOsm while the uOsm and U volume response to PAVP remains 
the same. There is a similar change in the regulation of plasma 
volume. In normal pregnancy, total body water is increased by 7 
to 8 L as a result of profound vasodilatation. This expanded vol-
ume is also sensed as normal with vasopressin increasing and 
decreasing around this new volume. Relaxin, which is produced in 
pregnancy, is the mediator of these effects. In pregnancy the pla-
centa produces an enzyme, cysteine aminopeptidase, that is 
known as oxytocinase but similarly degrades vasopressin. Therefore, 
vasopressin metabolism is increased in pregnancy, markedly so 
from 20 to 40 weeks of gestation. 
 Because of the reset osmostat, a “normal” serum sodium during 
pregnancy may represent dehydration. There are two types of diabe-
tes insipidus that are associated with pregnancy. In the first, the 
patient has a preexisting limitation of vasopressin function such as 
partial hypothalamic diabetes insipidus or mild nephrogenic diabe-
tes insipidus. The ability to concentrate the urine may be limited 
but sufficient to maintain acceptable urine volume prepartum. 
During pregnancy, however, the metabolism of vasopressin is accel-
erated. With increased metabolism of vasopressin, these patients 
may then not have sufficient concentrating ability to maintain an 
acceptable urine volume (see vasopressin–volume relationships in 
 Figure 5–2 ) and manifest diabetes insipidus that reverts to the exist-
ing asymptomatic condition when the pregnancy ends. A second 
form of diabetes insipidus occurs when the level of cysteine amino-
peptidase is extraordinarily higher than in normal pregnancy and 
produces diabetes insipidus in a patient with normal pituitary and 
renal function. There may be other associated pathology with the 
latter disease such as preeclampsia, fatty liver, and coagulopathies. 
Diabetes insipidus in this situation also abates when the pregnancy 
ends and may not recur with subsequent pregnancies. 
 D. Decreased end organ response to vasopressin—
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus 
 1.  Congenital nephrogenic diabetes insipidus  There are 
two causes of congenital nephrogenic diabetes insipidus: 
(1) an X-linked recessive mutation of the V 2 receptor, which 
accounts for 90% of the cases; and, (2) an autosomal recessive 
mutation of the aquaporin-2 water channels. The X-linked 
disorder, of course, only occurs in males while disease due to 
mutations of the aquaporin-2 gene occurs in males and 
females. Female carriers of the X-linked V 2 receptor abnor-
mality usually have no clinical disease nor do heterozygote 
carriers of the recessive aquaporin-2 mutations. Nephrogenic 
diabetes insipidus due to aquaporin-2 defects is produced 
when the child inherits a mutated gene from each parent that 
carries the recessive mutation. 
 Regardless of etiology, the presentation of nephrogenic dia-
betes insipidus usually occurs in the first week of life presenting 
with vomiting, constipation, failure to thrive, fever, and polyu-
ria. The patients are found to be hypernatremic with low urine 
osmolality. When measured, vasopressin levels are elevated. 
 2.  Acquired nephrogenic diabetes insipidus  The ability to 
produce concentrated urine depends upon hyperosmolality 
of the inner medulla which in turn requires normal kidney 
architecture with descending and ascending limbs of the 
loop of Henle, normal sodium transport, functional aqua-
porins, and intact long loop vascular structures (vasa recta) 
so that the hyperosmolality in the inner medulla is not 
washed away by normal blood flow. One form of nephro-
genic diabetes insipidus is produced by renal disease that 
distorts the architecture of the kidney as in polycystic renal 
disease, infarcts, sickle cell anemia, and so forth. The polyu-
ria associated with potassium deficiency and hypercalcemia 
both are associated with decreased expression of aquaporin-2. 
Among drugs that may produce nephrotoxicity, the most 
common to produce nephrogenic diabetes insipidus are 
lithium (commonly when used to treat bipolar disorders) 
and demeclocycline. 
 DIAGNOSTIC TESTS OF DIABETES 
INSIPIDUS 
 One can determine whether there is true polyuria by measuring 
the 24-hour urine output, but collecting this large volume is 
inconvenient. Alternatively, the patient can keep a diary, recording 
the time and volume of each voided urine without saving the 
urine for examination. 
 A. Dehydration test 
 After other causes of polyuria are elimi-
nated, the diagnosis of diabetes insipidus is accomplished by some 
form of dehydration test. The dehydration test should be done in 
a controlled environment. The description here is for adults. 
Dehydration of children requires special attention and should 
only be done by a pediatrician. Dehydration tests should not be 
done in infants. The patient is weighed at the beginning of the 
test, and a serum sodium concentration and plasma osmolality are 
obtained. Nothing is allowed by mouth, and the volume and 
osmolality of each voided urine are recorded. The patient is 
weighed after each liter of urine is excreted. When two consecutive 
measures of urine osmolality differ by less than 10% and the 
patient has lost 2% of his body weight, the serum sodium concen-
tration and plasma osmolality are again determined, and a blood 
sample is drawn for a determination of plasma vasopressin. The 
patient is then given parenterally 2 µg of desmopressin, a synthetic 
analogue of vasopressin described later, and urine osmolality and 
output are recorded for an additional 2 hours. The duration of the 
test varies, but in most patients a plateau in the urine osmolality 
will be reached by 18 hours. The test is discontinued if the patient 
loses 3% of the body weight. The different responses to this test-
ing are depicted in  Figure 5–4 . If the patient is dehydrated and 
hyperosmolar and the urine is dilute when first seen, no further 
dehydration is necessary. Blood is drawn to measure plasma vaso-
pressin, and the response to desmopressin is determined. 
 Patients with primary polydipsia are distinguished from 
 diabetes insipidus by the concentration of the urine at a plateau 
which is frequently 500 to 700 mOsm/kg and by the lack of fur-
ther response to administered desmopressin. Patients with 
CHAPTER 5 The Posterior Pituitary (Neurohypophysis)     121
 hypothalamic diabetes insipidus have undetectable or low plasma 
vasopressin levels at the end of dehydration, minimal concentra-
tion of the urine, and an additional increase in urine osmolality to 
administered desmopressin of at least 50% but often 200% to 
400%. Patients with nephrogenic diabetes insipidus do not con-
centrate their urine similar to hypothalamic diabetes insipidus, 
but the levels of plasma vasopressin are high, often greater than 
5 pg/mL at the end of the test. Additionally, there is no further 
increase in urine osmolality after the administration of desmopres-
sin. Occasionally, patients with partial hypothalamic diabetes 
insipidus concentrate their urine minimally with dehydration, but 
their maximum urinary concentration is not achieved, and there 
is an additional boost with administered desmopressin. This pat-
tern can be similar to some patients with primary polydipsia who 
achieve a plateau level of urine osmolality before reaching their 
maximum attainable urine osmolality and show a boost in urine 
osmolality in response to desmopressin. These patients are usually 
distinguished by their response to desmopressin over time. 
Patients with partial hypothalamic diabetes insipidus do well 
while those with primary polydipsia may continue to drink exces-
sive amounts of water and develop hyponatremia. 
 Measurements of plasma vasopressin by clinically available 
assays is only of help in distinguishing nephrogenic diabetes 
insipidus (in which the level will be unequivocally elevated) from 
other causes of diabetes insipidus. Recent reports have described a 
radioimmunoassay of copeptin, the inactive carboxy peptide that 
is cleaved from the provasopressin molecule and secreted with 
vasopressin and neurophysin, but the clinical usefulness has yet to 
be determined. 
 B. Imaging in diabetes insipidus 
 Imaging of the hypo-
thalamus is an important diagnostic tool in diabetes insipidus. 
The exquisite sensitivity of the kidney to vasopressin, especially 
with regard to urine volume, determines that even 10% of the 
vasopressin neurons may be sufficient to maintain homeostasis 
without symptoms. Because of the wide anatomic distance 
between the paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei, tumors that 
produce diabetes insipidus are either sufficiently large to destroy 
90% of the vasopressin neurons or, most commonly, are located 
just above the diaphragma sella where the neurohypophyseal tracts 
of the two sides converge as they enter the pituitary stalk. Small 
tumors of the anterior pituitary confined to the sella are never the 
cause of diabetes insipidus. On T1-weighted images, the normal 
posterior pituitary appears as a bright spot on MRI studies. The 
bright spot is produced by the stored hormone in the posterior 
pituitary. Most normal subjects have the bright spot, although it 
decreases with age, and most patients with diabetes insipidus do 
not have a bright spot. An MRI may reveal thickening of the stalk 
and absence of the posterior pituitary bright spot. This is a char-
acteristic finding of some granulomatous diseases of the neurohy-
pophysis and of lymphocytic infundibulitis. 
 TREATMENT OF DIABETES INSIPIDUS 
 As noted above, adults with intact thirst mechanisms usually drink 
sufficient fluid to maintain serum sodium levels in the normal 
range. Babies and adults without access to fluid or patients who 
are unconscious may not drink and will develop severe dehydra-
tion and hypernatremia. If hypothalamic diabetes insipidus is 
caused by a specific disease such as a granulomatous disorder, that 
condition should be treated. Rarely, however, does successful treat-
ment of the underlying disease produce remission of the diabetes 
insipidus. 
 Hypothalamic diabetes insipdus is best treated by the vasopres-
sin analogue desmopressin (desamino, D-8 arginine vasopressin, 
DDAVP). In desmopressin, the amine at position 1 is removed, 
increasing the half-life of the compound, and at position 8, 
L-arginine is changed to D-arginine, markedly reducing the pressor 
activity. Thus, the agent is highly selective for the V 2 receptor and 
is nearly 2000 times more specific for antidiuresis than is the 
naturally occurring L-arginine vasopressin. Desmopressin is avail-
able as tablets (0.1 and 0.2 mg), a solution for nasal installation 
(100 µg/mL), and a parenteral solution (4 µg/mL). There is con-
siderable individual variability in the duration of action of desmo-
pressin, so the dosing should be adjusted for each individual. 
Usually, a satisfactory schedule can be achieved with 2 to 3 tablets 
per day or one to two intranasal doses. A parenteral preparation 
can be given intravenously, intramuscularly, or subcutaneously 
and is 5 to 20 times more potent than the intranasally adminis-
tered dose. The drug is expensive, and in many patients, a smaller 
dose given more frequently is more cost-effective. Other agents 
that prolong the action of vasopressin or the release of vasopressin 
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
Urine osmolality (mOsm/kg H2O)
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
Hours of water deprivation
Desmopressin
Normal
Partial central DI
Primary polydipsia
Complete central DI
Nephrogenic DI
 FIGURE 5–4   Urine osmolality during a dehydration test fol-
lowed by administration of desmopressin to differentiate various 
types of diabetes insipidus and primary polydipsia as described by 
Miller et al. (Miller M, Dalakos T, Moses AM, Fellerman H, Streeten D. 
Recognition of partial defects in antidiuretic hormone secretion.  Ann 
Int Med . 1970;73:721-729). See text for discussion of the differential 
diagnosis based on the plateau of urine osmolality with dehydration 
and subsequent response to administered desmopressin. 
122    CHAPTER 5 The Posterior Pituitary (Neurohypophysis)
include chlorpropamide, carbamazepine, clofibrate, and indo-
methacin, but these are not first-line therapies. Desmopressin is 
the only therapeutic agent recommended for treatment of diabetes 
insipidus in pregnancy because desmopressin is not destroyed by 
cysteine aminopeptidase and has minimal oxytocic activity on the 
uterus. 
 In patients with inadequate thirst, the best treatment is con-
tinuous administration of desmopressin to maintain a concen-
trated urine and then rigid adjustment of the amount of fluid that 
must be taken every 6 to 8 hours to maintain normal serum 
sodium. 
 In nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, any offending drug or elec-
trolyte abnormality that might produce acquired nephrogenic 
diabetes insipidus should be stopped or corrected. In congenital 
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, therapy is aimed at reducing urine 
volume through a low sodium diet and a thiazide diuretic. This 
causes a natriuresis which produces some contraction of the extra-
cellular fluid volume, decreased glomerular filtration rate, decreased 
delivery of fluid to the collecting duct, and a decreased urine vol-
ume. Amiloride is especially recommended in this setting because 
it is potassium sparing. Amiloride may also have some advantage 
in lithium-induced nephrogenic diabetes insipdus because 
amiloride decreases lithium entrance into cells in the distal tubule. 
Indomethacin has an antidiuretic action that especially prolongs 
the action of vasopressin and administered desmopressin. It also 
decreases urine volume in nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, but 
there is concern about gastrointestinal bleeding. 
 When diabetes insipidus occurs in patients who also have ante-
rior pituitary deficiency, adequate treatment with thyroid hor-
mone and hydrocortisone is essential to maintain normal renal 
response to desmopressin. Clinical situations such as surgical pro-
cedures, treatments that require a saline diuresis, and periods 
when patients are not allowed fluids by mouth require careful bal-
ance of antidiuretics, administered fluid, and sodium. 
 EXCESS VASOPRESSIN: 
SYNDROME OF INAPPROPRIATE 
ANTIDIURETIC HORMONE 
 Excess vasopressin becomes a clinical problem when there is con-
current retention of water producing hypo-osmolality. Hypo-
osmolality is common in hospitalized patients but in most cases is 
due to underlying illness. Statistically, hyponatremia is associated 
with increased morbidity and mortality because it is a measure of 
the severity of the underlying illness. This chapter focuses on cases 
in which inappropriately elevated vasopressin and water retention 
are the cause of the hypo-osmolality (see also Chapter 21 Humoral 
Manifestations of Malignancy). 
 The differential diagnosis of hypo-osmolality is based upon 
measuring the serum sodium concentration and estimating the 
extracellular fluid status. Sodium is the major cation of the 
 extracellular fluid, and potassium is the major cation of the intra-
cellular fluid. Water moves freely between the intracellular and 
extracellular fluid, so osmolality is always equivalent in both 
 compartments. The relative balance between solute depletion and 
water retention, as a cause of hypo-osmolality, is complex, but in 
virtually all cases of clinically significant hypo-osmolality, there is 
some element of impaired water excretion and/or excessive water 
intake. 
 Plasma osmolality can be measured directly by freezing point 
depression or vapor pressure of plasma, but usually, hypo- 
osmolality is brought to clinical attention because of decreased 
concentration of sodium rather than measure of osmolality. In the 
extracellular fluid, the major contributions to osmolality are 
sodium, glucose, and blood urea nitrogen (BUN). A calculated 
osmolality usually correlates well with measured osmolality.
 Plasma osmolality (mOsm/kg H 2 O) 
= 2 × [Na + ] (mEq/L) + Glucose (mg/dL)/18 
+ BUN (mg/dL)/2.8 
 Occasionally, when the serum sodium concentration is mea-
sured by flame photometry the measured sodium is artifactually 
low because flame photometry calculates the sodium in a fixed 
volume of plasma. If a large proportion of the plasma volume is 
taken up by extremely elevated levels of lipid or protein, sodium 
determined by flame photometry is low. Plasma osmolality deter-
mined by freezing point or vapor pressure is a direct measure of 
particles in solution and will be normal in these situations. So the 
low sodium level by flame photometry is referred to as pseudohy-
ponatremia. Hyperglycemia will produce hyponatremia because of 
the shift of water from the intracellular fluid to the extracellular 
fluid; however, the calculated osmolality will be normal. The 
serum sodium can be corrected for the glucose elevation by adding 
1.6 to 2.4 mEq/L for each 100 mg/dL increase in serum glucose. 
 When true hypo-osmolality is found to exist, the differential 
diagnosis is of hyponatremia as illustrated in  Table 5–1 . The dis-
order is divided into four major subgroups based on the extracel-
lular fluid volume status and the measured urinary sodium. 
Extracellular fluid volume status may be determined by central 
venous pressure, BUN/creatinine, hematocrit, or plasma protein 
concentrations, but usually it is estimated by physical  examination. 
TABLE 5–1  Differential diagnosis of hyponatremia.
Volume 
Urine Na+ 
Diagnosis 
Low (evidence of 
 dehydration) 
< 20 mEq/L 
> 25 mEq/L 
Category 1: Total body Na+ 
 depleted, normal renal 
 response (eg, hemorrhage, Gl 
 losses) 
Category 2: Renal Na+ loss (eg, 
 renal disease, diuretics, CSW 
 Addison disease) 
Normal or 
 expanded 
 (edema may 
 be present) 
< 20 mEq/L 
> 40 mEq/L 
Category 3: Hyperaldos teronism 
 secondary to inadequate 
 perfusion (eg, CHF ascites, etc) 
Category 4: SIADH-Na+ loss 
 secondary to volume expansion 
Copyright 2005, A.G. Robinson, University of California at Los Angeles. 
CHAPTER 5 The Posterior Pituitary (Neurohypophysis)     123
If the patient is dehydrated and the urinary sodium is low, this 
indicates normal physiologic response to extra renal sodium loss 
(with continued intake of water) such as vomiting or diarrhea. 
The appropriate therapy is to replace the sodium and fluid defi-
ciency with normal saline. If the patient is dehydrated but the 
urinary sodium is increased, this indicates a renal loss of sodium 
inappropriate to the decreased volume and hyponatremia. This 
may be due to intrinsic renal disease, diuretic use, aldosterone 
deficiency (see discussion of Addison disease in Chapter 9), or 
cerebral salt wasting (to be discussed later). Appropriate therapy is 
to replace the sodium and fluid loss with normal saline but also 
with appropriate treatment of the underlying defect. If the extra-
cellular fluid volume is expanded with edema or ascites and the 
urinary sodium is low, this indicates hyperaldosteronism, second-
ary to reduced or ineffective plasma volume as in cirrhosis or 
congestive heart failure, and the appropriate therapy is treatment 
of the underlying condition. Where the extracellular fluid volume 
appears to be normal with increased urinary sodium, this indicates 
the pathophysiology of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic 
hormone. Note that the urine osmolality will not be maximally 
dilute and that measured vasopressin will not be maximally sup-
pressed in any of the four categories in  Table 5–1 . Although not 
appropriate to the osmolality, in the first three categories, the ele-
vation of vasopressin is appropriate to the real or perceived 
decreased plasma volume. It is only in the fourth category 
(SIADH) that vasopressin is inappropriate both for plasma vol-
ume and osmolality. Copeptin, the inactive carboxy peptide that 
is cleaved from the provasopressin molecule and secreted with 
vasopressin and neurophysin, was mentioned earlier. Some studies 
have indicated that measurement of levels of this peptide might be 
useful in evaluating various causes of hyponatremia, but the clini-
cal utility of such measurements is not yet established. 
 A. The pathophysiology of the hyponatremia in SIADH 
The pathophysiology of SIADH begins with uncontrolled 
 secretion of vasopressin. Thirst is not adequately suppressed so 
water intake continues. This produces volume expansion and 
hyponatremia in the sequence illustrated in  Figure 5–5 . Vasopressin 
ECF
Na+ 140
ICF
280 mOsm
(B)
(C)
(D)
ICF
220 mOsm
ECF
K+
Osmolytes
(E)
H2O
Escape
Na+ 110
ICF
220 mOsm
ECF
Na+ 110
Na+
ICF
220 mOsm
(A)
ECF
Na+ 110
Aquaporins
 FIGURE 5–5  Illustration of the changes in intracellular fluid and extracellular fluid volumes in the pathophysiology of SIADH with the chrono-
logic pattern of:  (A) Expanded ECF and ICF volume with solute dilution.  (B) Natriuresis to decrease ECF volume expansion.  (C) Extrusion of intracellu-
lar potassium and osmolytes to decrease intracellular volume expansion.  (D) Restoration of near normal volume in ECF and ICF.  (E) Renal adaptation 
to allow excretion of more dilute urine in spite of excess vasopressin.  (Copyright 2005, A.G. Robinson, University of California at Los Angeles.) 
124    CHAPTER 5 The Posterior Pituitary (Neurohypophysis)
limits the excretion of water in the urine. Continued ingestion of 
water (part A) produces an expansion of extracellular and intracel-
lular volume. The body attempts to bring the extracellular fluid 
volume back to normal by natriuresis (part B) of isotonic urine. 
The mechanism of natriuresis is complex and involves increased 
glomerular filtration, pressure natriuresis, and natriuretic factors, 
especially atrial natriuretic peptide and brain natriuretic peptide. 
This natriuresis decreases total body water and total body sodium 
but because it is isotonic, it contributes little to the degree of 
hyponatremia. Next, the body attempts to return intracellular 
fluid volume to normal by (part C) excreting from the intracel-
lular fluid potassium and organic osmolytes such as glutamine, 
glutamate, myoinositol, aspartate, and  N -acetylaspartate. In spite 
of the attempt to normalize extracellular and intracellular fluid, 
there remains a tendency for these compartments to be slightly 
expanded. The last adaptation (part D) is caused by this tendency 
for volume expansion and produces changes in the kidney to make 
it less responsive to the chronically inappropriate excess of vaso-
pressin and to allow an increase in water excretion. Vasopressin 
retains water by increasing the number of aquaporin-2 molecules 
in the principal cells of the collecting duct. With chronic excess of 
vasopressin, the density of aquaporins in the membrane increases 
dramatically, producing a state of super water retention. The adap-
tation to chronic volume expansion is to reduce the number of 
aquaporins in principal cells. In this new state (part E), ingestion 
of sodium somewhat reexpands the extracellular fluid volume and 
is excreted, while ingestion of water is more easily excreted because 
of the renal adaptation to decrease aquaporins—therefore a new 
steady state. 
 Of the differential diagnoses of hyponatremia shown in  Table 
5–1 , the two categories that are most difficult to differentiate are 
those with elevated urinary sodium concentrations. On physical 
examination, it may be difficult to differentiate moderately low 
extracellular fluid volume from normal extracellular fluid volume. 
In this situation, the differential diagnosis may be aided by a vol-
ume challenge of normal saline infused at a modest rate over a few 
hours while following urinary sodium and plasma sodium deter-
minations. If the patient is in diagnostic category 4 (SIADH) and 
relatively equilibrated, the administered saline will be excreted so 
there will be an increase in urinary sodium and no change or a 
slight decrease in serum sodium concentration. If the patient is in 
category 2 with a renal loss of sodium, sodium from the adminis-
tered saline will be retained, and the water excreted will somewhat 
dilute urinary sodium. This will result in a decrease in urinary 
sodium while the serum sodium concentration will rise. This vol-
ume challenge in difficult cases is not considered therapy, but only 
an assist to make the appropriate diagnosis, which will then lead 
to the initiation of appropriate therapy. 
 In diagnostic category 2 ( Table 5–1 ), there is considerable 
controversy regarding the diagnosis and incidence of cerebral salt 
wasting (CSW). CSW is severe primary natriuresis producing 
volume depletion and hyponatremia. The diagnosis is only con-
firmed when volume depletion can be confirmed by some combi-
nation of decreased central venous pressure, decreased plasma 
volume, increased BUN/creatinine, or increased hematocrit and 
plasma protein levels. Cerebral salt wasting has been intensively 
studied as a cause of hyponatremia in subarachnoid hemorrhage. 
Natriuretic peptides are increased in subarachnoid hemorrhage, 
but they are also increased in well-documented SIADH. Measured 
plasma volume in subarachnoid hemorrhage is difficult to inter-
pret because of the lack of sensitivity of readily available clinical 
measures. There may be both inappropriate secretion of vasopres-
sin and inappropriate natriuresis in these patients with the clinical 
presentation depending on the relative contributions of each. It is 
consistent that infusion of isotonic saline does not correct the 
hyponatremia in SIADH but may do so with CSW. The most 
convincing cases of cerebral salt wasting are those that occur in 
hospitalized patients in whom there is a sudden unexplained 
increase in urine volume (not seen in SIADH) and urine sodium 
excretion. This has been reported in several cases of children with 
traumatic brain injury or brain surgery. The acute massive diuresis 
and natriuresis is accompanied by definitive volume contraction 
by the measures listed above. Most of these cases respond to 
replacement with normal or hypertonic saline. 
 B. Symptoms of hyponatremia 
 The symptoms of hypona-
tremia are largely dependent on the rapidity of the development 
of hyponatremia. When hyponatremia develops rapidly and is 
severe (serum sodium level <120 mEq/L), patients are at risk for 
cerebral edema with herniation of the brain stem (especially chil-
dren and young women). Other complications include neurogenic 
pulmonary edema, seizures, coma, and respiratory arrest. 
Hyponatremia that develops slowly over a long period of time is 
surprisingly well-tolerated even at very low levels of serum sodium. 
Neurologic symptoms usually do not occur with sodium values 
above 120 mEq/L, but any degree of hyponatremia might exacer-
bate other comorbid conditions. Hyponatremia is usually consid-
ered chronic if hyponatremia has developed slowly and persisted 
for greater than 48 hours. 
 C. Clinical syndromes of SIADH 
 The clinical criteria for 
SIADH remain those described by Bartter and Schwartz in 1967: 
decreased plasma osmolality; inappropriate concentration of the 
urine; clinical euvolemia; increased urinary sodium excretion; and 
absence of other causes of euvolemic hypo-osmolality such as 
hypothyroidism, adrenal insufficiency, or diuretic use. The three 
main etiologies of SIADH are ectopic production of vasopressin 
by cancer (see Chapter 21), drug-induced SIADH, and lesions in 
the pathway of the baroreceptor system, especially central nervous 
system disorders and pulmonary disorders. As noted earlier, the 
baroreceptors consist of a diffuse system of receptors in the chest 
and synapses in the brain. Some of the input from them is inhibi-
tory. Lesions which disrupt the flow of signals in the lung or in the 
brain may decrease this inhibitory signal and produce inappropri-
ate secretion of vasopressin. Acquired immune deficiency syn-
drome (AIDS) is a recognized cause of SIADH, although 
dehydration, adrenal insufficiency, pneumonitis, and renal tubular 
toxicity associated with therapy may confound the ability to make 
the diagnosis of SIADH an exclusive cause of the hyponatremia. 
Prolonged strenuous exercise (eg, marathon running) may increase 
CHAPTER 5 The Posterior Pituitary (Neurohypophysis)     125
secretion of vasopressin and with excessive intake of hypotonic 
fluid induce SIADH. A rare cause of SIADH reported in two 
pediatric patients is a genetic mutation of the V 2 receptor in prin-
cipal cells producing unregulated activation. These patients have 
the manifestations of hyponatremia and SIADH but no measur-
able plasma vasopressin. Some elderly patients fit the criteria for 
SIADH without a definitive diagnosis. 
 Specific disorders, which have been reported to cause SIADH, 
are detailed in  Table 5–2 , but because of the diffuse regulation of 
the baroreceptor system and the multiple disorders that can influ-
ence vasopressin release via this system, no list should ever be 
considered complete. 
 TREATMENT OF HYPONATREMIA 
IN SIADH 
 The therapy of hyponatremia follows pari passu the symptoms of 
hyponatremia. When hyponatremia is known to have occurred 
rapidly and is severe and symptomatic, the patient should be 
treated quickly. When the onset is slow and the syndrome chronic, 
the treatment should be slow. Acute hyponatremia is arbitrarily 
defined as having developed over less than 48 hours. Usually, the 
serum sodium must be less than 120 mEq/L to produce 
 symptomatology. Discontinuing the administration of hypotonic 
fluid and the administration of hypertonic NaCl (eg, 3%), possi-
bly with the addition of a diuretic, should be promptly consid-
ered. Often acute disorders occur in the hospital in a surgical or 
obstetrical setting and children and young women are at the great-
est risk. For chronic hyponatremia, overly aggressive treatment 
may cause new and additional pathology. As shown in  Figure 5–5 , 
tissue adaptation to chronic hyponatremia results in the loss of 
intracellular osmolytes. In the brain these are the same osmolytes 
that would normally increase in neurons to protect brain volume 
from a sudden shift of intracellular fluid to the extracellular fluid 
when there is an acute increase in osmolality of the extracellular 
fluid. If during the treatment of hyponatremia in SIADH the 
extracellular fluid osmolality is rapidly increased, the brain has lost 
the ability to protect intracellular volume and water rapidly moves 
out of neurons. Brain shrinkage is thought to be the cause of a 
syndrome of myelinolysis which was first described in the pons—
hence the term central pontine myelinolysis. The process can 
occur diffusely throughout the brain. The cause may be disruption 
of the blood–brain barrier and influx of plasma components that 
are toxic to the oligodendrocytes. The syndrome consists of neu-
rologic deterioration over several days with fluctuating conscious-
ness, convulsions, hypoventilation, and hypotension. Eventually, 
these patients may develop pseudobulbar palsy with difficulty in 
swallowing and inability to speak, even leading to quadriparesis. 
Recovery from this syndrome is variable, and many neurologic 
complications are permanent. MRI scans will demonstrate the 
demyelination, but usually not until 3 to 4 weeks after correction 
of the hyponatremia. 
 In chronic hyponatremia that is asymptomatic, the safest 
therapy is restriction of free water intake and slow correction of 
the hyponatremia over days. For chronic hyponatremia that has 
central nervous system symptoms, carefully controlled and limited 
increases in the osmolality should be undertaken. Coma or con-
vulsions are obvious signs of neurologic symptoms that may be 
produced by hyponatremia, but nausea, vomiting, and confusion 
may be less specific signs of neurologic impairment. There is con-
siderable debate in the literature about the exact rate of correction 
of the sodium concentration in these cases, and one should review 
the most up to date recommendations prior to initiating therapy. 
At present, general parameters of therapy are that the first 10% of 
increase of serum sodium might be accomplished at a rate of 0.5 
to 1 mEq/L/h with a total correction not to exceed 12 mEq/L in 
the first 24 hours, and 18 in the first 48 hours. Active correction 
is stopped when the patient’s symptoms are abolished, the serum 
sodium level is greater than 120 mEq/L, or the total magnitude of 
correction of 18 to 20 mEq has been achieved. Further treatment 
is undertaken with fluid restriction as for asymptomatic hypona-
tremia. While fluid intake is restricted in chronic SIADH, salt 
intake is not, as all of these patients have some degree of sodium 
loss secondary to the volume expansion and natriuresis. 
 The tetracycline derivative demeclocycline, known to cause 
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, has been used to treat chronic 
SIADH. Dosages in the range of 600 to 1200 mg/d in divided 
doses decrease urine osmolality. Three to four days are required for 
TABLE 5–2 Major etiologies of SIADH.
Ectopic production of vasopressin by tumors
 Bronchogenic carcinoma
 Carcinoma of duodenum and pancreas
 Ureteral, prostate, bladder carcinoma
 Carcinoma of the uterus
 Thymoma
 Mesothelioma
 Lymphoma and leukemia
Drug induced
 Desmopressin and oxytocin
 Chlorpropamide
 Carbamazepine
 Clofibrate
 Ecstasy
 Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
 Tricyclic antidepressants
 Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
 Vinca alkaloids, cisplatin, cyclophosphamide
Disrupt neural pathways
 Pulmonary disorders: pneumonia, tuberculosis, fungal infection, 
  empyema, positive pressure ventilation
 Central nervous system disorders: infection, trauma, surgery, 
  hemorrhage, inflammatory diseases, degenerative diseases, porphyria
Nephrogenic SIADH
 Extremely rare mutation of the V2 receptor producing 
 chronic activation
Other etiologies
 AIDS
 Marathon running or other strenuous exercise
 Acute psychosis
126    CHAPTER 5 The Posterior Pituitary (Neurohypophysis)
the effect to reach equilibrium. Azotemia and nephrotoxicity have 
been reported with demeclocycline especially in patients with cir-
rhosis. 
 Any of the therapies for hyponatremia and especially fluid 
restriction will reduce the extracellular fluid volume and, hence, 
remove the volume-mediated stimulus of renal adaptation illus-
trated in part D of  Figure 5–5 in which the kidney becomes 
somewhat less responsive to the excess vasopressin by reduction 
in the amount of aquaporin-2 water channels. When the 
 volume stimulus is removed, there is again an increase in the 
density of membrane water channels, and the kidney becomes 
more efficient in retaining water. This accounts for the common 
clinical observation that fluid restriction that is initially effec-
tive may have to be increasingly severe to maintain a beneficial 
effect. 
 The most specific treatment for SIADH is to block the V 2 
receptors in the kidney. There are recently approved vasopressin 
receptor antagonists, vaptans, that enhance renal free water 
excretion (aquaresis) without sodium excretion (natriuresis). 
Unlike the agonist desmopressin, these antagonist are nonpep-
tide drugs. Conivaptan is a combined V 1A and V 2 receptor 
antagonist that is available for intravenous administration to 
hospitalized patients. Tolvaptan is a selective V 2 receptor antago-
nist that can be administered orally and is approved to treat 
severe hyponatremia (serum Na <125 mEq/L) in patients who 
are symptomatic or patients who have failed to correct with fluid 
restriction. Clinical trials with these agents indicate they will be 
useful to treat hyponatremia of SIADH and of other causes. The 
risk of brain myelolysis caused by too rapid correction of sodium 
with these agents is the same as with other therapies, so the same 
recommendations about rates of correction of serum sodium 
described earlier will apply as physicians gain further experience 
with these agents. 
 SUMMARY 
 Table 5–3 compares and contrasts pathophysiologic entities asso-
ciated with decreased vasopressin, diabetes insipidus, and excess 
vasopressin, SIADH. 
 OXYTOCIN 
 The anatomy and synthesis of oxytocin is similar to that described 
for vasopressin. While there are a number of central nervous sys-
tem actions that have been attributed to oxytocin (probably acting 
as a neurotransmitter), the physiologic functions are limited to 
lactation and parturition. 
 A. Lactation 
 The hypothalamic/pituitary hormones critical 
to lactation are prolactin and oxytocin. Prolactin secretion from 
the anterior pituitary is described in Chapter 4, and its primary 
activity is to promote milk production. Oxytocin stimulates milk 
letdown associated with nursing. The milk-producing unit of the 
breast is the alveolar system in which clusters of milk-producing 
cells are surrounded by specialized myoepithelial cells. Milk is 
synthesized in glandular cells of the alveoli. Oxytocin receptors are 
localized on glandular cells and on myoepithelial cells along the 
duct. Oxytocin stimulates the cells along the duct to shorten and 
the ducts to widen, enhancing milk flow through the ducts to the 
nipple. Suckling at the breast stimulates mechanoreceptors or 
tactile receptors that ascend through the spinal cord to the lateral 
cervical nucleus and eventually to the oxytocinergic magnocellular 
neurons in the supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei. 
Neurotransmitters trigger the release of oxytocin. Oxytocin is 
released in a pulsatile fashion producing a pumping action on the 
alveoli and promoting maximal emptying of milk from the alveoli. 
There is no evidence for a central pacemaker to regulate the secre-
tion of oxytocin, and the mechanism of synchrony among indi-
vidual oxytocinergic neurons is unknown. The importance of 
oxytocin in maintaining milk secretion is demonstrated in trans-
genic mice with a knockout of oxytocin synthesis. These animals 
deliver their young normally, demonstrating the redundant sys-
tems for parturition, and produce milk normally, demonstrating 
the role of prolactin, but are unable to release milk when the pups 
suckle, demonstrating the importance of oxytocin for milk let-
down. The pups die of dehydration with no milk in their stom-
achs. Administration of oxytocin to the knockout mothers restores 
milk secretion, and the pups survive. 
 B. Parturition 
 Estrogen activates many events that initiate 
and stimulate parturition whereas progesterone inhibits these 
events. The uterine myometrial cells have intrinsic contraction 
activity and are responsive to oxytocin. During pregnancy, oxy-
tocin is released, but oxytocinase decreases the plasma level of 
oxytocin, and progesterone and relaxin decrease the intrinsic 
contractility of the myometrium. In humans, there is a dramatic 
increase in uterine responsiveness to oxytocin as parturition 
approaches. Several hormones other than oxytocin including 
prostaglandins, endothelins, adrenergic agonists, corticotropin-
releasing hormone, glucocorticoids, and cytokines also partici-
pate in the initiation and completion of labor. The most specific 
role of oxytocin may be the release of oxytocin brought about 
by vaginal and cervical dilatation, known as the Fergusson 
reflex. This may be important in stimulating uterine muscle to 
contract maximally and clamp down blood vessels to decrease 
blood loss. It is perhaps not surprising that parturition, which 
is so important to survival of the species, is controlled by many 
different pathways of cross-stimulation and feed-forward activ-
ity. The many redundant systems ensure survival of the species. 
Oxytocin remains the strongest stimulant to myometrial con-
traction, explaining its value as a therapeutic agent in inducing 
parturition. 
 C. Other actions 
 Other actions of oxytocin have been 
described in a number of species including effects on behavior of 
animals, effects on feeding and satiety, response to stress, stimula-
tion of sperm transport, effects on memory, and so forth. None of 
these have been documented to be physiologically important in 
humans. 
 
CHAPTER 5 The Posterior Pituitary (Neurohypophysis)     127
TABLE 5–3 Comparison and contrasting the pathophysiology of DI and SIADH.
Pathophysiologic
Lack of Vasopressin: Diabetes Insipidus
Excess Vasopressin: SIADH
Urine
Dilute with increased volume—polyuria
Concentrated with decreased or normal volume
Thirst
Increased and protective—polydipsia
Not decreased and not protective—normal intake
Serum sodium
Tendency to hypernatremia, but high normal due 
to polydipsia 
Decreased—hyponatremia due to water retention
Initial plasma volume
Decreased by polyuria
Increased by water retention
Urine sodium
Variable
Inappropriately elevated for hyponatremia—
natriuresis induced by volume expansion
Presentation
Polyuria and polydipsia
Hyponatremia (in SIADH accompanying euvolemia 
and natriuresis)
 
Differential diagnostic considerations
 
 
with the presenting symptoms and
 
 
laboratory data
Excess water intake (primary polydipsia where
 
polyuria is normal)
Renal Na+ loss (diuretics, Addison disease, renal 
 
disease, cerebral salt wasting)
Elevated urine Na+, but plasma volume is low
Solute diuresis producing polyuria and polydipsia,
 
eg, diabetes mellitus
Volume expansion, hyper-aldosteronism (CHF, ascites,
 
etc.), but urine Na+ is low
ECF loss (sweating, diarrhea), but volume is decreased
 
and urine Na+ is low
Decreased or increased synthesis of 
vasopressin based on anatomy
Tumors with suprasellar origin or extension—
infiltrative lesions of the basal hypothalamus—
neurohypophyseal infundibulitis
Interruption of inhibitory input from baroreceptors 
in the chest or CNS
Decreased or increased synthesis 
based on genetics
Hereditary hypothalamic DI—autosomal recessive 
AVP gene in AVP producing neurons
Ectopic production of vasopressin by gene depres-
sion in cancer
Disruption of normal control 
mechanisms
Osmoreceptor system—discrete lesions in anterior 
hypothalamic area decrease positive signal to AVP 
neurons and decrease AVP
Baroreceptor system—diffuse lesions in chest, brain 
stem, and hypothalamus decrease negative input to 
AVP neurons and increase AVP
Abnormal metabolism of vasopressin
DI in pregnancy
None
Decreased or increased response of V2 
receptor
Nephrogenic DI—X-linked recessive mutated inac-
tive V2 receptor
Nephrogenic SIADH—mutated activated V2 recep-
tor—rare—unmeasurable AVP
Decreased or increased response of 
aquaporins
Nephrogenic DI—autosomal recessive mutated 
inactive aquaporin 2
None
Diagnostic laboratory tests
Elevated pOsm with low uOsm
Decreased pOsm with high uOsm (not maximally 
dilute)
Urine Na+ inappropriate for hyponatremia
AVP elevated in nephrogenic DI, low in other DI
AVP elevated in SIADH but also in all differential 
causes of hyponatremia
Masked by adrenal or thyroid deficiency, which 
inhibits free water excretion
Normal cortisol, and thyroid and no diuretic ther-
apy; each may cause hyponatremia
Diagnostic imaging—MRI
Head, suprasellar area, tumors, infiltrates, widened 
stalk, absent posterior pituitary bright spot.
Chest—for any pathology, but especially for cancer; 
head for CNS pathology; full body for cancer
Treatment
Encourage water
Restrict water
Diuretics cause volume contraction and reduce 
urine volume in nephrogenic DI
Drugs that inhibit renal action of vasopressin— 
demeclocycline
Vasopressin receptor agonists—desmopressin
Vasopressin receptor antagonists—vaptans
If hypernatramic, overaggressive treatment may 
rapidly decrease pOsm and produce cerebral 
edema
Acute onset = rapid therapy
Chronic disease = slow therapy
Overaggressive treatment to rapidly increase serum 
Na+ may produce osmotic demyelination
Copyright © 2005, A.G. Robinson, University of California at Los Angeles.
128    CHAPTER 5 The Posterior Pituitary (Neurohypophysis)
 REFERENCES 
 General References 
 Morgenthaler NG, Struck J, Jochberger S, Dunser MW. Copeptin: clinical use of 
a new biomarker.  Trends Endocrinol Metab . 2008;19:43. [PMID: 
18291667] 
Robinson AG, Verbalis JG. The posterior pituitary gland. In: Larsen PR, 
Kronenberg H, Melmed S, Polonsky K, eds.  Williams Textbook of 
Endocrinology . 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2008. 
 Schrier RW, Cadnapaphornchai MA. Renal aquaporin water channels: from molecules 
to human disease.  Prog Biophys Mol Biol . 2003;81:117. [PMID: 12565698] 
 Diabetes Insipidus 
 Bichet DG. Vasopressin receptor mutations in nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. 
 Semin Nephrol . 2008;28:245. [PMID: 18519085] 
 Fujisawa I. Magnetic resonance imaging of the hypothalamic-neurohypophyseal 
system.  J Neuroendocrinol . 2004;16:297. [PMID: 15089965] 
 Kalelioglu I, Kubat Uzum A, Yildirim A, Ozkan T, Gungor F, Has R. Transient 
gestational diabetes insipidus diagnosed in successive pregnancies: review of 
pathophysiology, diagnosis, treatment, and management of delivery. 
 Pituitary . 2007;10:87. [PMID: 17308961] 
Majzoub JA, Srivatsa A. Diabetes insipidus: clinical and basic aspects.  Pediatr 
Endocrinol Rev . 2006;4:60. [PMID: 17261971] 
 Sands JM, Bichet DG. Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.  Ann Intern Med . 
2006;144:186. [PMID: 16461963] 
 Smith D, Finucane F, Phillips J, et al. Abnormal regulation of thirst and vasopres-
sin secretion following surgery for craniopharyngioma.  Clin Endocrinol 
(Oxf) . 2004;61:273. [PMID: 15272926] 
 Smith M. Physiologic changes during brain stem death&#151;lessons for management 
of the organ donor.  J Heart Lung Transplant . 2004;9:S217. [PMID: 15381167] 
 Valenti G, Procino G, Tamma G, Carmosino M, Svelto M. Minireview: aquaporin 
2 trafficking.  Endocrinology . 2005;146:5063. [PMID: 16150901] 
 SIADH 
 Bartter FC, Schwartz WB. The syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic 
hormone. Am J Med 1967; 42(5):790-806. [PMID:5337379]
 Ecelbarger CA, Murase T, Tian Y, Nielsen S, Knepper MA, Verbalis JG. Regulation 
of renal salt and water transporters during vasopressin escape.  Prog Brain Res . 
2002;139:75. [PMID: 12436927] 
 Feldman BJ, Rosenthal SM, Vargas, GA, et al. Nephrogenic syndrome of inap-
propriate antidiuresis.  N Engl J Med . 2005;352:1884. [PMID: 15872203] 
 Greenberg A, Verbalis JG. Vasopressin receptor antagonists.  Kidney Int . 
2006;69:2124. [PMID: 16672911] 
 Hartung TK, Schofield E, Short AI, Parr MJ, Henry, JA. Hyponatraemic states 
following 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA, “ecstasy”) 
ingestion.  Quart J Med . 2002;95:431. [PMID: 12096147] 
 Kratz A, Siegel AJ, Verbalis JG, et al. Sodium status of collapsed marathon runners. 
 Arch Pathol Lab Med . 2005;129:227. [PMID: 15679427] 
Loh JA, Verbalis JG. Disorders of water and salt metabolism associated with pituitary 
disease.  Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am . 2008;37:213. [PMID: 18226738]
 Sterns RH, Baer J, Ebersol S, Thomas D, Lohr JW, Kamm DE. Organic osmolytes 
in acute hyponatremia.  Am J Physiol . 1993;264:F833. [PMID: 8498536] 
 Sterns RH, Thomas DJ, Herndon RM. Brain dehydration and neurologic dete-
rioration after rapid correction of hyponatremia.  Kidney Int . 1989;35:69. 
[PMID: 2709662] 
 Verbalis JG, Murase T, Ecelbarger CA, Nielsen S, Knepper MA. Studies of renal 
aquaporin-2 expression during renal escape from vasopressin-induced antidi-
uresis.  Adv Exp Med Biol . 1998;449:395. [PMID: 10026831] 
 Cerebral Salt Wasting 
 Berkenbosch JW, Lentz CW, Jimenez, DF, Tobias JD. Cerebral salt wasting syndrome 
following brain injury in three pediatric patients: suggestions for rapid diagnosis 
and therapy.  Pediatr Neurosurg . 2002;36:75. [PMID: 11893888] 
 Betjes MG. Hyponatremia in acute brain disease: the cerebral salt wasting syn-
drome.  Eur J Intern Med . 2002;13:9. [PMID: 11836078] 
Cerda-Esteve M, Cuadrado-Godia E, Chillaron JJ, et al. Cerebral salt wasting 
syndrome: review.  Eur J Intern Med . 2008;19:249. [PMID: 18471672] 
 Donati-Genet PC, Dubuis JM, Girardin E, Rimensberger PC. Acute symptomatic 
hyponatremia and cerebral salt wasting after head injury: an important 
clinical entity.  J Pediatr Surg . 2001;36:1094. [PMID: 11431791] 
 Palmer BF. Hyponatremia in patients with central nervous system disease: SIADH 
versus CSW.  Trends Endocrinol Metab . 2003;14:182. [PMID: 12714279] 
 Sviri GE, Feinsod M, Soustiel JF. Brain natriuretic peptide and cerebral vasospasm 
in subarachnoid hemorrhage. Clinical and TCD correlations.  Stroke . 
2000;31:118. [PMID: 10625725] 
 von Bismarck P, Ankermann T, Eggert P, Claviez A, Fritsch MJ, Krause MF.. 
Diagnosis and management of cerebral salt wasting (CSW) in children: the 
role of atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP). 
 Childs Nerv Syst . 2006;22:1275. [PMID: 16607534] 
 Parturition 
 Blanks AM, Thornton S. The role of oxytocin in parturition.  Br J Obstet Gyn . 
2003;110(suppl 20):46. [PMID: 12763111] 
 Brown AG, Leite RS, Strauss JF, 3rd. Mechanisms underlying “functional” proges-
terone withdrawal at parturition.  Ann N Y Acad Sci . 2004;1034:36. [PMID: 
15731298] 
 Gross G, Imamura T, Muglia LJ. Gene knockout mice in the study of parturition. 
 J Soc Gynecol Investig . 2000;7:88. [PMID: 10785607] 
 Hertelendy F, Zakar T. Prostaglandins and the myometrium and cervix. 
 Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids . 2004;70:207. [PMID: 14683694] 
 Smith JG, Merrill DC. Oxytocin for induction of labor.  Clin Obstet Gynecol . 
2006;49:594. [PMID: 16885666] 
 Smith R. Parturition.  N Engl J Med . 2007;356:271. [PMID: 17229954] 
 Young WS, 3 rd , Shepard E, Amico J, et al. Deficiency in mouse oxytocin prevents 
milk ejection, but not fertility or parturition.  J Neuroendocrinol . 1996;8:847. 
[PMID: 8933362] 
 Lactation 
 Buhimschi CS. Endocrinology of lactation.  Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am . 
2004;31:963. [PMID: 15550345] 
 Neville MC, Morton J, Umemura S. The transition from pregnancy to lactation. 
 Pediatr Clin North Am . 2001;48:35. [PMID: 11236732] 
 Other Oxytocin 
 Marazziti D, Catena Dell’osso M. The role of oxytocin in neuropsychiatric disor-
ders.  Curr Med Chem . 2008;15:698. [PMID: 18336283] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
129
6
 Growth 
 Dennis Styne, MD 
 ACTH 
Adrenocorticotropin 
 ALS 
Acid labile subunit 
 cAMP 
Cyclic adenosine monophosphate 
 CPHD 
Combined pituitary hormone deficiency 
 EGF 
Epidermal growth factor 
 EGF-R 
Epidermal growth factor receptor 
 FGF 
Fibroblast growth factor 
 FGF-R 
Fibroblast growth factor receptor 
 GH 
Growth hormone 
 GHBP 
Growth hormone–binding protein 
 GHRH 
Growth hormone–releasing hormone 
 GnRH 
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
 hCG 
Human chorionic gonadotropin 
 hCS 
Human chorionic somatomammotropin 
 HDL 
High-density lipoprotein 
 HESX1 
Hesx1 homeodomain 
 hGH 
Human growth hormone 
 IGHD 
Isolated growth hormone deficiency 
 IGF-I 
Insulin-like growth factor I 
 IGF-II 
Insulin-like growth factor II 
 IGFBP 
Insulin-like growth factor–binding 
 
protein 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 Assessment of growth in stature is an essential part of the pediatric 
examination. Growth is an important index of physical and men-
tal health and of the quality of the child’s psychosocial environ-
ment; chronic problems in any of these areas may be reflected in 
a decreased growth rate which may be a critical clue as to the onset 
of the condition. We shall consider influences on normal growth, 
the normal growth pattern, the measurement of growth, and con-
ditions that lead to disorders of growth. 
 IUGR 
Intrauterine growth retardation or restriction 
 JAK-STAT 
Janus kinase-signal transducers and 
 
activators of transcription 
 LDL 
Low-density lipoptrotein 
 LH 
Luteinizing hormone 
 LS 
Lower segment 
 MC4R 
Melanocortin 4 receptor 
 NSD1 
Nuclear receptor–binding SET domain 
 
protein 1 
 Pit1/POU1F1 Pituitary-specific transcription factor 1 or 
 
POU class 1 homeobox 1 
 PTH 
Parathyroid hormone 
 PTPN11 
Protein tyrosine phosphatase 
 
nonreceptor 11 
 RTA 
Renal tubular acidosis 
 SOD 
Septo-optic dysplasia 
 SGA 
Small-for-gestational age 
 SHOX 
Short stature homeobox 
 TBG 
Thyroxine-binding globulin 
 SRIF 
Somatostatin 
 TRH 
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone 
 TSH 
Thyrotropin 
 US 
 Upper segment 
 NORMAL GROWTH 
 INTRAUTERINE GROWTH 
 The growth of a fetus begins with a single fertilized cell and ends 
with differentiation into more than 200 cell types, length increas-
ing by 5000-fold, surface area by 6 × 10 6 -fold, and weight by 6 × 
10 12 -fold. This  all to leads to an approximately 7 lb newborn. Overall, 
130    CHAPTER 6 Growth
the growth of the fetus is dependent on the availability of adequate 
oxygen and nutrition delivered by the placenta and is orchestrated 
by a group of growth factors, all overseen by a basic genetic plan. 
Genetic factors are more important early in gestation, whereas the 
maternal environment attains more importance late in gestation. 
 The classic definition of small-for-gestational age (SGA), 
although somewhat arbitrary, is a birth weight 2 standard devia-
tions below the mean or below the fifth percentile for birth weight, 
or birth weight below 2500 g for a term infant in the United 
States. The term intrauterine growth retardation or intrauterine 
growth restriction (IUGR) is not synonymous with SGA, because 
IUGR refers to decreased intrauterine growth velocity noted on 
ultrasound. Statistics and charts showing various percentiles of 
weight for gestational age are available to determine which prema-
ture infants are SGA and what weights are appropriate for gesta-
tional age. About 20% of SGA infants remain short as children 
and adults, in contrast to appropriate-for-gestational-age prema-
ture infants, who are smaller at birth but generally experience 
catch-up growth in the first 2 years. Those SGA infants who do 
not experience catch-up growth by 2 years of age may be candi-
dates for growth hormone therapy. Recent studies suggest that 
preterm, AGA babies who show poor growth in the first 3 postna-
tal months follow growth patterns similar to SGA infants; thus 
consideration of GH therapy may be warranted as this situation 
receives further study. 
 THE PLACENTA 
 The placenta acting as an endocrine organ influences most aspects 
of fetal growth, including the supply of adequate nutrition and 
oxygen and regulation of hormones and growth factors. Aberrant 
delivery or control of any of these factors affects fetal growth; pla-
cental weight is usually directly related to birth weight. 
 CLASSIC HORMONES OF GROWTH AND 
FETAL GROWTH 
 The hormones that mediate postnatal growth do not necessarily 
play the same roles in fetal growth. Growth hormone (GH) is 
present in very high concentrations in the fetus, in contrast to the 
limited presence of GH receptors. Although this discrepancy sug-
gests limited activity of GH in the fetus, GH does play a role in 
fetal growth as reflected in the average birth weight 1 standard 
deviation (SD) below the mean in GH-deficient infants. Infants 
with GH resistance due to abnormal, reduced or absent GH 
receptors (eg, Laron syndrome) have elevated GH and low serum 
insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I levels; they also have decreased 
birth length and weight. Thyroid hormone deficiency does not 
directly affect human birth weight, but prolonged gestation can be 
a feature of congenital hypothyroidism, and this factor will itself 
increase weight. Placental lactogen exerts no effect on birth size in 
human beings. However, the concentration of placental-derived 
GH (from the  GHV gene) is significantly decreased in the serum 
of a pregnant woman bearing a fetus with IUGR. 
 GROWTH FACTORS AND ONCOGENES IN 
FETAL GROWTH 
 Oncogenes may be responsible for neoplastic growth in postnatal 
life, but expression of these genes is important in the normal 
development of many fetal organs. Remarkably, the same onco-
genes that cause postnatal neoplasia are prevented from causing 
tumors in the normally differentiating fetus. For example, a muta-
tion in the  von Hippel-Lindau gene predisposes to retinal, cerebel-
lar, and spinal hemangioblastomas, renal cell carcinomas, and 
pheochromocytomas, but the normal  VHL gene is expressed in all 
three germ cell layers of the embryo and in the central nervous 
system, kidneys, testis, and lung of the fetus, suggesting a role in 
normal fetal development for this gene. 
 INSULIN-LIKE GROWTH FACTORS, 
RECEPTORS, AND BINDING PROTEINS 
 IGF-I in the fetus is regulated by metabolic factors other than 
GH, in contrast to the dependence of IGF-I generation upon GH 
in postnatal life. One explanation is that there are fewer GH 
receptors in the fetus than after birth. In the human fetus, serum 
GH falls during later gestation owing to maturation of central 
nervous system’s negative control, whereas serum IGF-I and IGF-
binding protein (IGFBP)-3 rise during gestation, demonstrating 
their independence from GH stimulation. 
 Studies of knockout mice, which lack various growth factors or 
binding proteins, indicate a role for IGF-II in growth during early 
gestation and one for IGF-I during later gestation. Knockout of 
type 1 IGF receptors leads to a more profound growth failure than 
is found in IGF-I knockout mice alone, suggesting that factors 
other than IGF-I (eg, IGF-II) exert effects on fetal growth through 
the type 1 receptor. 
 Study of transgenic mice overexpressing IGFBPs supports the 
concepts that excess IGFBP-1 stunts fetal growth while excess 
IGFBP-3 leads to selective organomegaly. For example, overex-
pression of IGFBP-3 in mice led to organomegaly of the spleen, 
liver, and heart, although birth weight was not different from that 
of wild-type mice. 
 Although controversy remains over some of the data regarding 
IGFs and fetal growth, a summary of the complex IGF system in 
the fetus, based on the evidence from various species, appears to 
apply to the human being as follows. 
 1. IGFs are detectable in many fetal tissues from the first trimes-
ter onward. 
 2. Concentrations of IGFs in the fetal circulation increase during 
pregnancy, and at term the concentrations of IGF-I are directly 
related to birth weight. 
 3. In mice, disruption of the  IGF genes leads to severe growth 
retardation. 
 4. There is a striking increase in IGFBP-1 and IGFBP-2 concen-
trations in amniotic fluid at the end of the first trimester. 
 5. The major binding proteins in the human fetus are IGFBP-1 
and IGFBP-2. 
CHAPTER 6 Growth     131
 6. From as early as 16 weeks, there is an inverse correlation 
between fetal concentrations of IGFBP-1 and birth weight. 
 7. In the mother, circulating concentrations of IGF-I and 
IGFBP-1 increase during pregnancy. 
 8. Maternal IGFBP-1 concentrations are elevated in severe pre-
eclampsia and IUGR. 
 9. Fetal concentrations of IGFBP-1 are elevated in cases of 
IUGR, especially those associated with specific evidence of 
reduced uteroplacental blood flow. Production of IGFBP-1 
appears to be a sensitive indicator of the short- or long-term 
response to reduced fetal nutrition. 
 INSULIN 
 Although insulin is a major regulatory factor for carbohydrate 
metabolism, many lines of evidence demonstrate that it is a growth 
factor as well and has importance in fetal growth. Macrosomia is a 
well-known effect of fetal hyperinsulinism as is found in the infant 
of the diabetic mother. Errors in the normal pattern of  IGF-II gene 
expression from the paternal chromosome and type 2 IGF receptor 
(for IGF-II) from the maternally derived gene underlie the patho-
genesis of Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome. Affected infants are 
large and have elevated insulin concentrations. Increased weight 
gain in pregnant women over 40 lb leads to significantly increased 
risk of fetal macrosomia in gestational diabetes mellitus as well as 
in those with normal glucose tolerance test results. 
 Just as increased insulin stimulates fetal growth, syndromes of 
fetal insulin deficiency such as congenital diabetes mellitus, pancre-
atic dysgenesis, or fetal insulin resistance (eg, leprechaunism) are 
characterized by IUGR. Infants born to diabetic mothers with 
vascular disease, hypertension, and or eclampsia or preeclampsia 
also have IUGR and are born SGA. In that situation, it is clear that 
limited nutrient delivery compromises the growth of the infant. 
 EPIDERMAL GROWTH FACTOR 
 Epidermal growth factor (EGF) is involved with fetal growth, and 
expression varies with disordered fetal growth. Microvilli purified 
from the placentas of infants with IUGR have decreased or absent 
placental epidermal growth factor receptor (EGF-R) phosphoryla-
tion and tyrosine kinase activity. Maternal smoking decreases birth 
weight by an average of 200 g, with the major effect occurring late 
in pregnancy; the placenta responds to smoking by significant 
changes in its vascularity, which leads to fetal hypoxia. There are 
decreased numbers of EGF-Rs and a reduced affinity of these 
receptors for EGF in the placentas of women who are smokers. 
Hypertensive patients also have decreased numbers of placental 
EGF-Rs, which may result in IUGR. 
 EGF levels in amniotic fluid are normally increased near term 
but decreased in pregnancies complicated by IUGR—although 
not, conversely, increased in infants who are large for gestational 
age. EGF levels in the first urines to be voided by IUGR and 
macrosomic infants are lower than in control infants. 
 EGF administered to fetal monkeys results in histologic and 
biochemical maturation of their lungs, leading to improved air 
exchange and a diminished requirement for respiratory support. 
Surfactant apoprotein A concentration and the lecithin-sphingo-
myelin ratio are both significantly higher in the amniotic fluid of 
EGF-treated fetuses. Whereas birth weight is not affected by EGF, 
adrenal and gut weights, standardized for body weight, are 
increased significantly. Furthermore, EGF stimulates gut muscle, 
gut enzyme maturation, and gut size and content, improving the 
ability of the infant to absorb nutrients. Lastly, EGF advances the 
maturation of the fetal adrenal cortex, increasing the expression of 
3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase. Because EGF can be 
absorbed orally, this raises a question as to whether EGF could be 
a useful treatment for premature infants or, postnatally, for caus-
ing more rapid maturation of the neonate and improving survival 
in premature infants. 
 FIBROBLAST GROWTH FACTOR 
 Genetically engineered fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGF-R)-
deficient mice are severely growth-retarded and die before gastru-
lation. Aberrant FGF signaling during limb and skeletal 
development in the human being can lead to syndromes of dys-
morphia. For example, achondroplasia is due to mutations in the 
transmembrane domain of the type 3 FGF-R. 
 GENETIC, MATERNAL, AND UTERINE 
FACTORS 
 Maternal factors, often expressed through the uterine environ-
ment, exert more influence on birth size than paternal factors. The 
height of the mother correlates better with fetal size than the 
height of the father. However, there is a genetic component to 
length at birth that is not sex specific. Firstborn infants are on the 
average 100 g heavier than subsequent infants; maternal age over 
38 years leads to decreased birth weight; and male infants are 
heavier than female infants by an average of 150 to 200 g. Poor 
maternal nutrition is the most important condition leading to low 
birth weight and length on a worldwide basis. Chronic maternal 
disease and eclampsia can also lead to poor fetal growth. Maternal 
alcohol ingestion has severe adverse effects on fetal length and 
mental development and predisposes to other physical abnormali-
ties seen in the fetal alcohol syndrome such as microcephaly, 
mental retardation, midfacial hypoplasia, short palpebral fissures, 
wide-bridged nose, long philtrum, and narrow vermilion border 
of the lips. Affected infants never recover from this loss of length 
but attain normal growth rates in the postnatal period. Abuse of 
other substances and chronic use of some medications (eg, pheny-
toin) can cause IUGR. Cigarette smoking causes not only retarded 
intrauterine growth but also decreased postnatal growth for as 
long as 5 years after parturition. Maternal infection—most com-
monly toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus infection, herpes 
simplex infection, and HIV infection—leads to many develop-
mental abnormalities as well as short birth length. In multiple 
births, the weight of each fetus is usually less than that of the aver-
age singleton. Uterine tumors or malformations may decrease fetal 
growth. 
132    CHAPTER 6 Growth
 CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES AND 
MALFORMATION SYNDROMES 
 Infant’s with abnormal karyotypes may have malformation syn-
dromes and may also demonstrate poor fetal or postnatal growth. 
In most cases, endocrine abnormalities have not been noted. For 
further discussion of this extensive subject, the reader is referred to 
other sources listed in the references at the end of this chapter. 
 FETAL ORIGINS OF ADULT DISEASE 
 The metabolic syndrome, “syndrome X,” or the insulin resistance 
syndrome consists of (1) hypertension, (2) impaired glucose toler-
ance, and (3) elevated triglycerides among other features (see 
Chapter 17). Insulin resistance is a cardinal feature and might be 
the basis for most or all of these complications or may be just one 
feature of the syndrome, according to some. The metabolic syn-
drome is one of the long-lasting effects of abnormalities in fetal 
growth. Evidence from many international studies indicates a 
relationship between low birth weight or low weight at 1 year of 
age and chronic disease in adulthood. An opposing view is that 
catch-up growth, rather than low birth weight, is responsible for 
these defects long into the child’s future. 
 Inanition during the last two trimesters of pregnancy, which 
occurred during the famine in Holland during World War II, led 
to an 8% to 9% decrease in birth weight; however, female infants 
born under these conditions later gave birth to normal-sized 
infants. On the other hand, in the Dutch and Leningrad famines, 
infants born after early gestational starvation of their mothers, but 
with improved maternal nutrition in late gestation were of normal 
size at birth. However, the female infants, born of normal size after 
this early gestational maternal starvation themselves gave birth to 
small infants (SGA of 300-500 g decrease). In other populations, 
women with a history of SGA tend to have SGA infants them-
selves, and some studies show that generations of malnutrition 
must be followed by generations of normal nutrition before there 
is correction of the birth weight of subsequent infants. The sparse 
environment of the fetus early in gestation in a mother with vari-
ous degrees of starvation  programs the fetal metabolism for survival 
of the fetus but later in life these survival techniques become mal-
adaptive in an environment of plenty. Insulin resistance in fetal life 
may spare nutrients from utilization in muscle, thus leaving them 
available for the brain; this mechanism would serve to minimize 
central nervous system damage in the fetus during periods of mal-
nutrition. The complexity of the situation is not completely 
understood but is the target of extensive research in vivo, in vitro, 
and in long-term clinical studies. 
 Birth weight and rate of postnatal growth (ie, catch-up growth)—
not prematurity alone—are inversely related to cardiovascular mor-
tality and the prevalence of the metabolic syndrome. It is not yet 
clear what the optimal nutrition is for a premature or small-
for-gestational-age infant to avoid this metabolic programming. 
 Studies of otherwise normal but thin children, who had a his-
tory of SGA, demonstrated insulin resistance before the teenage 
years, supporting the concept of early metabolic programming. 
Present-day adults, who were born in the Netherlands during the 
Dutch famine who had the lowest birth weights and the lowest 
maternal weights (those subjects whose mothers experienced mal-
nutrition during the last two trimesters noted above), show a 
degree of insulin resistance that is directly related to their degree of 
SGA, further documenting the relationship between fetal undernu-
trition and adult insulin resistance as the etiology of poor growth. 
 On the other hand, large infants born to mothers with diabe-
tes mellitus often develop childhood obesity and insulin resis-
tance even if they have a period of normal weight between 1 and 
5 years of age. Remarkably, studies of the offspring of Dutch 
mothers exposed to famine during World War II in the first two 
trimesters (the time in which birth weight is least affected by 
maternal starvation) demonstrated a two-fold increase in the 
incidence of obesity at 18 years of age, compared with a 40% 
decrease in the incidence of obesity if the individual was exposed 
to famine in the last trimester (the time in which birth weight is 
most negatively impacted by maternal starvation). 
 Individuals born SGA also have variations in pubertal devel-
opment and reproductive hormones. SGA girls tend to have 
earlier puberty, or if puberty occurs at an average age, more rapid 
progression of puberty or polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS). 
Adult males born SGA have increased aromatase and increased 
5-alpha reductase demonstrating effects on reproduction in the 
male as well as the female. In sum, prenatal and early postnatal 
growth affects the older child and adult in many ways. 
 POSTNATAL GROWTH 
 Postnatal growth in stature follows a characteristic pattern in nor-
mal children ( Figures 6–1 and  6–2 ). The highest overall growth 
rate occurs in the fetus, the highest postnatal growth rate just after 
birth, and a slower growth rate follows in mid-childhood ( Figures 
6–3 and  6–4 ). There are two periods characterized by brief growth 
spurts in childhood: the infant-childhood growth spurt between 
1½ years and 3 years and the mid-childhood growth spurt 
between 4 and 8 years. The mid-childhood growth spurt does not 
occur in all children, is more frequent in boys than girls, and its 
presence is hereditary. After another plateau, the striking increase 
in stature, the pubertal growth spurt follows, causing a second 
peak growth velocity. The final decrease in growth rate then 
ensues, until the epiphyses of the long bones fuse and growth 
ceases. 
 In addition, an  adiposity rebound of accelerating weight gain 
and rising body mass index (BMI) occurs in early childhood after 
a period of relative stability of weight gain. An early adiposity 
rebound is a risk factor for the development of obesity later in 
childhood and thereafter. 
 Endocrine Factors 
 A. Growth hormone and insulin-like growth factors 
 As 
discussed in Chapter 4, somatotropin or GH is suppressed by 
CHAPTER 6 Growth     133
200
190
185
180
175
170
165
160
155
150
145
140
135
130
125
120
115
110
105
100
95
90
85
80
75
cm
cm
in
78
76
74
72
70
68
66
64
62
60
58
56
54
52
50
48
46
44
42
40
38
36
34
32
30
in
97th
90th
75th
50th
25th
10th
3rd
in
78
76
74
72
70
68
66
64
62
60
58
56
54
52
50
48
46
44
42
40
38
36
34
32
30
in
Stature for age
Boys 2-20 y
2
3        4
5
6
7
8
9
10 
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
195
Age (y)
 FIGURE 6–1  Growth chart for boys in most clinical situations showing the 3rd to the 97th percentiles. The lines for the 3rd and the 97th 
percentiles approximate those for −2.5 standard deviations and +2.5 standard deviations from the mean. (Redrawn from the original developed 
by the National Center for Health Statistics in collaboration with the National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. http://
www.cdc.gov/growthcharts. Published May 30, 2000 [modified 11/21/00].)
hypothalamic GH release-inhibiting factor (somatostatin or SRIF) 
and stimulated by GH-releasing hormone (GHRH or GRF). The 
gene for GH is located on the long arm of chromosome 17 in a 
cluster of five genes:  GHN codes for human GH (a single 191-
amino-acid polypeptide chain with a molecular weight of 22 kD); 
 GHV codes for a variant GH produced in the placenta;  CSH1 and 
 CSH2 code for prolactin; and  CSHP1 codes for a variant prolactin 
molecule. A 20-kD variant of pituitary GH accounts for 5% to 
10% of circulating GH and is derived from the same gene,  GHN , 
but results from alternative splicing. The 22-kD variant is poorly 
characterized but when derived from the placental gene,  GHV , in 
vitro it has less diabetogenic effect but similar growth-promoting 
and lipolytic activity. 
 The effects of GH are mainly mediated by the IGFs, but GH 
also directly stimulates lipolysis, increased amino acid transport 
into tissues, and increased protein and glucose synthesis in liver. It 
also has direct effect on cartilage growth. GH in excess causes 
insulin resistance and is diabetogenic. GH is secreted in a pulsatile 
manner, so that serum concentrations are low much of the day, 
but peak during short intervals. Values are higher in the immedi-
ate neonatal period, decrease through childhood, and rise again as 
a result of increased pulse amplitude (but not frequency) during 
puberty. GH secretion falls again during aging. 
 GH circulates in plasma bound to a protein, the GH-binding 
protein (GHBP), with a sequence equivalent to that of the extra-
cellular membrane domain of the GH receptor. The physiology of 
134    CHAPTER 6 Growth
200
190
185
180
175
170
165
160
155
150
145
140
135
130
125
120
115
110
105
100
95
90
85
80
75
cm
cm
in
78
76
74
72
70
68
66
64
62
60
58
56
54
52
50
48
46
44
42
40
38
36
34
32
30
in
97th
90th
75th
50th
25th
10th
3rd
in
78
76
74
72
70
68
66
64
62
60
58
56
54
52
50
48
46
44
42
40
38
36
34
32
30
in
Stature for age
Girls 2-20 y
2
3        4
5
6
7
8
9
10 
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
195
Age (y)
 FIGURE 6–2 Growth chart for girls in most clinical situations showing the 3rd to 97th percentiles. The lines for the 3rd and the 97th percen-
tiles approximate those for −2.5 standard deviations and +2.5 standard deviations from the mean. (Redrawn from the original developed by the 
National Center for Health Statistics in collaboration with the National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. http://
www.cdc.gov/growthcharts. Published May 30, 2000 [modified 11/21/00].) 
the GHBP appears to reflect important interrelationships between 
GH and GHR in terms of effects on growth. For example, obese 
patients have lower plasma GH concentrations but higher GHBP 
levels, whereas starvation raises GH concentrations and lowers 
GHBP levels. Patients with abnormalities of the GH receptor (eg, 
Laron dwarfism) also have a defect reflected in the serum GHBP 
concentrations; those with decreased numbers of GH receptors 
have decreased serum GHBP concentrations. Patients who are 
unable to dimerize the GH receptors to allow activation of the 
complex or those who have intracellular defects in the JAK-STAT 
system have no alteration in GHBP concentration, but are short. 
 GH exerts its effects on growth mainly, but not solely, through 
the IGFs and their binding proteins. IGF-I and IGF-II have struc-
tures similar to that of the proinsulin molecule but differ from 
insulin in regulation, receptors, and biologic effects. The structure 
of the IGFs (originally called sulfation factor and then somatome-
din), the genes responsible for their production, and information 
about their physiology have been elucidated. Recombinant IGF is 
available for clinical use and some recent studies compared the 
effect of a GH and IGF-I combination to see if it is more benefi-
cial than GH treatment alone. The single copy gene for prepro-
IGF-I is located on the long arm of chromosome 12. 
Posttranslational processing produces the 70-amino acid mature 
form; alternative splicing mechanisms produce structural variants 
of the molecule. The IGF-I cell membrane receptor (the type 1 
receptor) resembles the insulin receptor in its structure consisting of 
two alpha and two beta chains. Binding of IGF-I to type 1 receptors 
stimulates tyrosine kinase activity and autophosphorylation of 
CHAPTER 6 Growth     135
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
2
1
0
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Growth velocity, cm/year
Age at mid−interval, years
P3
P10
P25
P50
P75
P90
P97
Yearly increments in height
Valid for measuring intervals from 10.2 − 13.8 months
(0.85 − 1.15 years)
Increment (cm/year) = (g −g ) (t −t ), at age (t + t ) 2
 FIGURE 6–3  Incremental growth charts for boys derived from Flemish children and generally applicable to the US population. Height 
velocity can be compared with the percentiles labeled on each curve. Increments in height are calculated over periods of no less than 10.2 
months (0.85 years) and no more than 13.8 months (1.15 years) in order to avoid the effect of seasonal variation in growth and to reduce the 
effect of measurement error on the estimation of yearly increment in stature. The yearly increment in stature is calculated as the difference 
between measurements of height (g2 – g1) divided by the size of the interval (t2 – t1). This formula is also shown on the charts for yearly incre-
ments in height. It is important to plot the increments at an age which corresponds to the centre of the interval, i.e. at the age (t1 + t2)/2. 
(Modified from Flemish Growth Charts 2004. Accessed at http://www.vub.ac.be/groeicurven/files/2-20050604-EP2-20M.pdf) 
P3
P10
P25
P50
P75
P90
P97
Yearly increments in height
Valid for measuring intervals from 10.2 − 13.8 months (0.85 − 1.15 years)
Increment (cm/year) = (g −g ) (t −t ), at age (t + t ) 2
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
2
1
0
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Growth velocity, cm/year
Age at mid−interval, years
FIGURE 6–4 Incremental growth charts for girls derived from Flemish children and generally applicable to the US population. Height veloc-
ity can be compared with the percentiles labeled on each curve. Increments in height are calculated over periods of no less than 10.2 months 
(0.85 years) and no more than 13.8 months (1.15 years) in order to avoid the effect of seasonal variation in growth and to reduce the effect of 
measurement error on the estimation of yearly increment in stature. The yearly increment in stature is calculated as the difference between 
measurements of height (g2 – g1) divided by the size of the interval (t2 – t1). This formula is also shown on the charts for yearly increments in 
height. It is important to plot the increments at an age which corresponds to the centre of the interval, i.e. at the age (t1 + t2)/2. (Modified from 
Flemish Growth Charts 2004. Accessed at http://www.vub.ac.be/groeicurven/files/2-20050604-EP2-20F.pdf.)
136    CHAPTER 6 Growth
tyrosine residues in the receptor. This leads to cell  differentiation 
or division (or both). IGF-I receptors are downregulated by 
increased IGF-I concentrations, whereas decreased IGF-I concen-
trations increase IGF-I receptors. 
 IGF molecules in the circulation are mostly bound to a 6 
IGFBPs. IGFBP-1 and IGFBP-3 have been most extensively stud-
ied. IGFBP-1 is a 25-kD protein and mainly inhibits IGF-I 
action. Serum levels of IGFBP-1 are inversely proportional to 
insulin levels. This protein does not appear to be regulated by GH. 
It is present in high concentrations in fetal serum and amniotic 
fluid. Newborn serum concentrations of IGFBP-1 are inversely 
proportional to birth weight. 
 IGF-I circulates bound to IGFBP-3 and an acid labile subunit 
(ALS) in a 150-kD complex. Abnormalities of the ALS lead to 
decreased growth. Serum IGFBP-3 concentrations are directly 
proportional to GH concentrations but also to nutritional status. 
In malnutrition, IGFBP-3 and IGF-I levels fall while GH rises as 
does IGFBP-1. IGF-I directly regulates IGFBP-3 as well. IGFBP-3 
rises with advancing age through childhood, with highest values 
achieved during puberty; however, the pattern of change of IGF-I 
at puberty is different from that of IGFBP-3. The molar ratio of 
IGF-I to IGFBP-3 rises at puberty, suggesting that more IGF-I is 
free to influence growth during this period. 
 IGF-I is produced in most tissues and is exported to neighbor-
ing cells to act on them in a paracrine manner or on the cell of 
origin in an autocrine manner. Thus, serum IGF-I concentrations 
may not reflect the most significant actions of this growth factor. 
The liver is a major site of IGF-I synthesis, and much of the cir-
culating IGF-I probably originates in the liver; serum IGF-I con-
centrations vary in liver disease, falling with reductions in 
functional hepatic mass. IGF-I is a progression factor, so that a cell 
which has been exposed to a competence factor such as platelet-
derived growth factor (PDGF) in stage G 0 of the cell cycle and has 
progressed to G 1 can, with IGF-I exposure in G 1 , undergo division 
in the S phase of the cell cycle. Aside from the stimulatory effects 
of IGF-I on cartilage growth, IGF-I has stimulatory effects on 
hematopoiesis, ovarian steroidogenesis, myoblast proliferation and 
differentiation, and differentiation of the lens. 
 IGF-I was in short supply until production by recombinant 
DNA technology became possible. IGF-I administration in clini-
cal trials increased nitrogen retention and decreased blood urea 
nitrogen. In GH-resistant patients (Laron dwarfs), IGF-I stimu-
lates growth in the absence of GH. IGF-I has recently been 
approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use in 
short stature due to primary IGF-I deficiency. IGF-I may prove 
useful in treatment of various clinical conditions such as catabolic 
states, including the postoperative period and burns in addition to 
short stature, but experience is limited. GH is used in these situa-
tions by some authorities with some publications showing benefi-
cial results. 
 IGF-II is a 67-amino acid peptide. The gene for prepro-IGF-II 
is located on the short arm of chromosome 11, close to the gene 
for preproinsulin. The type 2 IGF receptor preferentially binds 
IGF-II and is identical to the mannose 6-phosphate receptor, a 
single-chain transmembrane protein. Although most of the effects 
of IGF-II appear to be mediated by its interaction with the type 1 
receptor, independent actions of IGF-II, via the type 2 receptor, 
have been described. 
 Plasma concentrations of the IGFs vary with age and physio-
logic condition. IGF-I concentrations are low at term in neonates 
and remain relatively low in childhood until a peak is reached dur-
ing puberty, with values rising higher than at any other time in 
life. Serum IGF-I then decreases to adult levels, values higher than 
in childhood but lower than in puberty. With advancing age, 
serum GH and IGF-I levels decrease. IGF-I concentrations are 
more highly correlated in monozygotic twins than in same-sex 
dizygotic twins, indicating a genetic effect on regulation of IGF-I 
levels. 
 GH deficiency leads to lower serum IGF-I and IGF-II con-
centrations, whereas GH excess leads to elevated IGF-I but no 
rise in IGF-II above normal. Because serum IGF-I is lower during 
states of nutritional deficiency, IGF-I is not a perfect tool in the 
differential diagnosis of conditions of poor growth, which often 
include impaired nutritional state. IGF-I suppresses GH secre-
tion by a negative feedback mechanism, so that patients who lack 
GH receptors (Laron dwarfs) or who are unable to produce 
IGF-I, have elevated GH concentrations but negligible IGF-I 
concentrations. Rare patients with poor growth who lack IGF-I 
receptors have elevated concentrations of IGF-I which exerts no 
biological activity. 
 B. Thyroid hormone 
 As noted above, newborns with con-
genital hypothyroidism are of normal length, but if untreated, 
they manifest exceedingly poor growth soon after birth. Infants 
with untreated congenital hypothyroidism suffer permanent 
developmental delay so early treatment is necessary. Newborn 
screening for congenital hypothyroidism is universal in the United 
States and most countries. Acquired hypothyroidism leads to a 
markedly decreased growth rate but no permanent intellectual 
defects. Bone age advancement is severely delayed in hypothyroid-
ism, usually more so than in GH deficiency, and epiphyseal dys-
genesis is seen as calcification of the epiphyses progresses. The 
normal decrease in the upper to lower segment ratio with age 
( Figure 6–5 ) is delayed, and therefore, the ratio is elevated, owing 
to poor lower limb growth in hypothyroidism. 
 C. Sex steroids 
 Gonadal sex steroids exert an important influ-
ence on the pubertal growth spurt, whereas absence of these factors 
is not of major importance in prepubertal growth. Gonadal and 
adrenal sex steroids in excess can cause a sharp increase in growth 
rate as well as the premature appearance and progression of second-
ary sexual features. If unabated, increased sex steroids mediated by 
estrogen will cause advancement of skeletal age, premature epiphy-
seal fusion, and short adult stature. The pubertal rise in gonadal 
steroids exerts direct and indirect effects on IGF-I production. 
Estradiol (secreted or aromatized from testosterone) directly stimu-
lates the production of IGF-I from cartilage and also increases GH 
secretion, which stimulates IGF-I production indirectly. Both 
actions appear important in the pubertal growth spurt. 
CHAPTER 6 Growth     137
 published by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC) in 2001 are not ethnicity specific because it is believed 
that the major growth differences between ethnic groups are due 
to socioeconomic status and nutrition rather than genetic 
endowments. Indeed, the World Health Organization (WHO) 
has developed internationally relevant growth charts for all 
populations. 
 C. Nutritional factors 
 The influence of malnutrition 
accounts for much of the socioeconomic discrepancy in height 
noted above, but malnutrition may occur in the midst of plenty 
and must always be suspected in disorders of growth. Other fac-
tors may be blamed for poor growth when nutritional deficiencies 
are actually responsible. For example, Sherpas were thought to 
have short stature mainly because of genetic factors or the effects 
of high altitude living on the slopes of Mount Everest; however, 
nutritional supplementation increased stature in this group, dem-
onstrating the effects of adequate nutrition. The developed world 
places a premium on appearance, and women portrayed as beauti-
ful in the media are characteristically thin. Significant numbers of 
children, chiefly teenagers, voluntarily decrease their caloric intake 
even if they are not obese; this accounts for some cases of poor 
growth. Chronic disease, which hampers adequate nutrition, often 
leads to short stature. For example, bronchopulmonary dysplasia 
decreases growth to some degree because it increases metabolic 
demands, shifting nutrient usage away from growth; improved 
nutrition increases growth in these patients. Celiac disease is 
another common disorder that impairs growth, pubertal develop-
ment, and bone acquisition. 
 Feeding problems in infants, resulting from inexperience of 
parents or poor child–parent interactions (maternal deprivation), 
may account for poor growth. Fad diets, such as poorly con-
structed vegan diets that put children at risk for vitamin B 12 or 
iron deficiency, as well as major dietary manipulation, such as a 
severely low-fat diet, may place children at risk for deficiency of 
fat-soluble vitamins. Deliberate starvation of children by caregiv-
ers is an extreme form of child abuse that may be first discovered 
because of poor growth. 
 Remarkably, obesity increases IGF-I concentrations by increas-
ing GH receptors even though GH secretion is suppressed to 
levels that might suggest GH deficiency. There are significant 
endocrine changes associated with malnutrition. Decreased GH 
receptors or postreceptor defects in GH action, leading to 
decreased production of IGF-I and decreased concentration of 
serum IGF-I are notable. The characteristic results of malnutrition 
are an elevation of serum GH and a decrease in IGF-I. IGFBP-1, 
a suppressor of IGF-I effects, is elevated in obesity. 
 D. Psychologic factors 
 Aberrant intrafamilial dynamics, 
psychologic stress, or psychiatric disease can inhibit growth either 
by altering endocrine function or by secondary effects on nutri-
tion (psychosocial dwarfism or maternal deprivation). It is essen-
tial to diagnose those situations that might suggest organic disease 
states as the management approach is very different. 
 D. Glucocorticoids 
 Endogenous or exogenous glucocorti-
coids in excess quickly stop growth; this effect occurs more quickly 
than weight gain. The absence of glucocorticoids has little effect 
on growth if the individual is clinically well in other respects (eg, 
in the absence of hypotension or hypoglycemia). 
 Other Factors 
 A. Genetic factors 
 Genetic factors influence adult height. 
There is correlation between midparental height and the child’s 
height; appropriate methods to utilize this phenomenon and deter-
mine the target height for a child are presented in  Figure 6–6 . There 
is a change in growth. These effects are sex specific. 
 B. Socioeconomic factors 
 Worldwide, the most common 
cause of short stature is poverty and its effects. Thus, poor nutri-
tion, poor hygiene, and poor health influence growth both 
before and after birth. Parasitic infection by endemic worms is 
prevalent in less developed countries and severely stunts growth 
and depletes energy. In people of the same ethnic group and in 
the same geographic location, variations in stature are often 
attributable to socioeconomic factors. For example, Japanese 
individuals born and reared in North America after World War 
II were generally taller than Japanese-born immigrants to North 
America. Conversely, when factors are equal, the differences in 
average height between various ethnic groups are mainly genetic. 
The newest growth charts for children in the United States 
+2 SD
+1 SD
Mean
−1 SD
−2 SD
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
16 
18 
Age (y)
1.20
1.10
1.00
0.90
0.80
US:LS
 FIGURE 6–5  Normal upper:lower segment (US:LS) ratios, based 
on findings in 1015 white children. Values are slightly lower for black 
children.  (Reproduced, with permission, from McKusick V.  Hereditable 
Disorders of Connective Tissue . 4th ed. St. Louis: CV Mosby; 1972.) 
138    CHAPTER 6 Growth
200
190
185
180
175
170
165
160
155
150
145
140
135
130
125
120
115
110
105
100
95
90
85
80
75
cm
cm
in
78
76
74
72
70
68
66
64
62
60
58
56
54
52
50
48
46
44
42
40
38
36
34
32
30
in
97th
90th
75th
50th
25th
10th
3rd
in
78
76
74
72
70
68
66
64
62
60
58
56
54
52
50
48
46
44
42
40
38
36
34
32
30
in
Stature for age
Boys 2-20 y
2
3        4
5
6
7
8
9
10 
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
195
Age (y)
MPH
+2 SD
–2 SD
Mother
Father
 FIGURE 6–6  Determination of target height in a shorter family. This 10-year-old boy is 124 cm tall, his mother is 61 in tall (adults recall their 
heights in inches and feet but, if they are available, their height should be actually measured in centimeters), and the father is 63 in tall. Five 
inches are added to the mother’s height to convert her height percentile to the equivalent percentile on a boy’s chart. (If we were considering a 
daughter whose height is plotted on a girl’s chart, the mother’s height would be directly plotted and 5 in would be subtracted from the father’s 
height to correct his height percentile to the equivalent for an adult woman.) Her corrected height and that of the father are plotted at the far 
right of the chart where adult heights are displayed. The midparental height is calculated by adding the father’s height to the corrected moth-
er’s height, and the sum is divided by two; the result is the target height. The limits of 2 standard deviations (SDs) above and below the target 
height are displayed by plotting 2 SDs (∼4 in above and below the target height). This process is equivalent to moving the 50th percentile for 
the US population to a conceptual 50th percentile for the family under consideration. It is evident that the height of the child, although below 
the third percentile for the United States, is within the bounds of the percentiles described by ±2 SD from the target height, and the child 
appears to fit within the genetic pattern of the family. The growth velocity and the degree of skeletal maturation are some of the factors neces-
sary to evaluate this child in more detail. 
CHAPTER 6 Growth     139
 E. Chronic disease 
 Many chronic systemic diseases interfere 
with growth independent of poor nutrition. For example, 
 congestive heart failure and asthma, if uncontrolled, are associated 
with decreased stature; in some cases, adult height is in the normal 
range because growth continues over a longer period of time. 
Children of mothers with HIV infection are often small at birth 
and have an increased incidence of poor postnatal growth, delayed 
bone age development, and reduced IGF-I concentrations. In 
addition, thyroid dysfunction may develop, further complicating 
the growth pattern. Infants born of HIV-infected mothers, who 
are not infected themselves, may exhibit catch-up growth. 
 Catch-up Growth 
 Correction of growth-retarding disorders may be temporarily fol-
lowed by an abnormally high growth rate as the child approaches 
normal height for age. This catch-up growth occurs after initiation 
of therapy for hypothyroidism and GH deficiency, after correction 
of glucocorticoid excess, and after appropriate treatment of many 
chronic diseases such as celiac disease. Catch-up growth is usually 
short-lived and is followed by a more standard growth rate. 
Catch-up growth after small-for-gestational-age birth may not be 
beneficial as it is linked by some evidence to metabolic disease, 
particularly insulin resistance, in later life. 
 MEASUREMENT OF GROWTH 
 Accurate measurement of height is an essential part of the physical 
examination of children and adolescents. The onset of a chronic 
disease may often be determined by an inflection point in the 
growth chart. In other cases, a detailed growth chart indicates a 
normal constant growth rate in a child observed to be short for 
age. If careful growth records are kept, a diagnosis of constitu-
tional delay in growth and adolescence or genetic short stature 
may be made in such a patient; without previous measurements, 
the child might be subjected to unnecessary diagnostic testing, or 
months of delay may occur as the child’s growth is finally carefully 
monitored. Poor measurement technique may suggest lack of 
growth in a child who is growing normally, subjecting the child to 
unnecessary testing as well. 
 Height 
 The National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) revised the 
growth charts for children in the United States in 2001 ( see 
Figures 6–1 and  6–2 ). The new charts display the 3rd and 97th 
percentiles rather than the 5th and 95th percentiles, and SDs of 
height for age are also available. Charts displaying BMI by age con-
tain data appropriate for the evaluation of obesity and underweight. 
All of these charts and are available online or from companies mak-
ing GH or infant formulas. 
 But growth charts still leave 6 of 100 healthy children outside 
of their boundaries, with 3 of 100 below the more worrisome (to 
parents)  lower limits of normal . It is both unnecessary and imprac-
tical to evaluate 3% of the population. Instead, the examining 
physician should determine which short children warrant further 
evaluation and which ones (and their parents) require only reas-
surance that they are healthy. When parents see that their child is 
below the third percentile and in a section of the chart colored 
differently from the  normal area , they assume that there is a seri-
ous problem. Thus, the format of the chart can dictate parental 
reaction to height, because all parents want their children to be in 
the  normal range . Figures 6–1 and 6–2 furnish data necessary to 
evaluate the height of children at various ages using percentiles or 
the SD method used by the WHO. SD determination is more 
useful in extremely short children below the second or first per-
centile. 
 Pathologic short stature is usually more than 3.5 SD below 
the mean, whereas the third percentile is only at 2 SD below the 
mean. However, a diagnosis of pathologic short stature should 
not be based on a single measurement. Serial measurements are 
required because they allow determination of growth velocity, 
which is a more sensitive index of the growth process than a 
single determination. A very tall child who develops a postnatal 
growth problem will not fall 3.5 SD below the mean in height 
for years but will fall below the mean in growth velocity soon 
after the onset of the disorder. As  Figures 6–3 and  6–4 demon-
strate, growth velocity varies at different ages, but as a rough 
guide, a growth rate of less than 5 cm/y between age 4 years and 
the onset of puberty is abnormal. In children under 4 years of 
age, normal growth velocity changes more strikingly with age. 
Healthy term newborns tend to be clustered in length measure-
ments around 21 in (mostly owing to difficulties in obtaining 
accurate measurements). 
 In the ensuing 24 postnatal months, the healthy child’s height 
will enter a channel on the growth chart and remain there 
throughout childhood. Thus, a child with constitutional delay in 
growth or genetic short stature, whose height is at the mean at 
birth and gradually falls to the 10th percentile at 1 year of age and 
to the 5th percentile by 2 years of age, may in fact be healthy in 
spite of crossing percentile lines in the journey to a growth chan-
nel at the 5th percentile. Although the growth rate may decrease 
during these years, it should not be less than the fifth percentile 
for age. A steeper decrease in growth rate may be a sign of disease. 
Alternatively, catch-up growth after SGA birth may not be benefi-
cial because, as stated before, it is linked by some evidence to 
metabolic disease, particularly insulin resistance later in life. When 
a question of abnormal growth arises, previous measurements are 
essential. Every physician treating children should record supine 
length (<2 years of age) or standing height (>2 years of age) as well 
as weight at every office visit. As the child leaves infancy, height 
and growth velocity should be determined in relation to the stan-
dards for the child’s age on a graphic chart with indication of the 
child’s position (supine or standing) at measurement which is 
especially important at the time children switch from lying to 
standing. Failure to recognize a change in measurement technique 
as the child moves from lying to standing may falsely suggest a 
growth problem. 
 Patients who cannot be measured in the standing position (eg, 
because of cerebral palsy) require other approaches. The use of 
arm span is a possible surrogate for the measurement of height, 
and there are formulas available for the calculation of height based 
140    CHAPTER 6 Growth
on the measurement of upper arm length, tibial length, and knee 
length (see below). 
 This discussion pre-supposes accuracy of measurements. 
However, it is reported that screening examinations in the real 
world fall short of that ideal. Forty-one percent of a presumably 
normal population screened at a school in England met the crite-
ria for evaluation of abnormal growth (approximately two-thirds 
grew faster than the normal growth category and one-third were 
in the slower than normal category), leading to an unreasonable 
size of a referral population, all due to simple measuring error. 
 Relation to Midparental Height: 
The Target Height 
 There is a positive correlation between midparental height (the aver-
age of the heights of both parents) and the stature of a child. One 
way to use this relationship of parents’ heights to the expected 
heights of children within a given family is to calculate target adult 
height range using parents’ heights, correcting these heights for the 
sex of the child and plotting the results on the child’s growth chart. 
There is an average 5-in difference between adult men and women 
in the United States. Thus, for boys, add 5 in to the mother’s height, 
add the result to the father’s height, and divide by 2. This is the 
target height, and it is expected that sons of these parents will reach 
a height within 2 SD of this target—or, for simplicity, within 4 in 
above or 4 in below the target height. (Two inches approximates 1 
SD for adult stature.) For girls, subtract 5 in from the father’s height 
and add the result to the mother’s height and divide by 2, leading to 
the target height for the girl. The range for girls will also be within 
4 in above and below this target. In effect, this corrects the North 
American growth charts for the particular family being considered. 
The calculated target height corresponds to the 50th percentile for 
the family, and the limits of the ±2 SD approximate the 5th to 95th 
percentile for the family. This method is useful only in the absence 
of disease affecting growth, and the prediction is more valid when 
the parents are of similar rather than of widely different heights. 
 Figures 6–6 and  6–7 demonstrate the calculation of target height 
and the ranges. When there is a large discrepancy between the 
heights of the mother and the father, prediction of target height 
becomes difficult. A child may follow the growth pattern of the 
shorter parent more closely than the midparental height. A boy may, 
for example, follow the growth pattern of a short mother rather than 
a taller father. 
 A parent who spent the growing years in poverty, with chronic 
disease, or in an area of political unrest might have shorter adult 
height, due to nutritional factors or disease, that may not be 
passed on to the children. Of course, the height of an adopted 
child will have no relationship to the adoptive parents’ heights. All 
of these factors must be determined by history. 
 Technique of Measurement 
 Length and height must be measured accurately. Hasty measure-
ments derived from marks made on paper at an infant’s foot and 
head while the infant is squirming on the paper on the examining 
table are useless. Infants must be measured on a firm horizontal 
surface with a permanently attached rule, a stationary plate per-
pendicular to the rule for the head, and a movable  perpendicular 
plate for the feet. One person should hold the head stable while 
another makes sure the knees are straight and the feet are firm 
against the movable plate. Children over age 2 are measured stand-
ing up. Standing height is on the average 1.25 cm less than supine 
length, and it is essential to record the position of measurement 
each time during the change over from lying to standing height at 
2 to 3 years of age; shifting from supine height at 2 years to stand-
ing height at 2½ years can falsely suggest an inadequate growth 
rate over that 6-month period. 
 These measurements cannot be accurately performed with the 
measuring rod that projects above the common weight scale; the 
rod is too flexible, and the scale footplate will in fact drop lower 
when the patient stands on it. Instead, height should be measured 
with the child standing back to the wall with heels at the wall, 
ankles together, and knees and spine straight against a vertical 
metal rule permanently attached to the wall or to a wide upright 
board. The child’s head is to be horizontal with the eyes looking 
ahead and the chin gently elevated if necessary. Height is measured 
at the top of the head by a sliding perpendicular plate (or square 
wooden block). A Harpenden stadiometer is a mechanical measur-
ing device capable of such accurate measurement. It is preferable 
to measure in the metric system, because the smaller gradations 
make measurements more accurate by minimizing the effect of 
rounding off numbers. 
 Growth is not constant but is characterized by short spurts and 
periods of slowed growth. The interval between growth measure-
ments should be adequate to allow an accurate evaluation of 
growth velocity. Appropriate sampling intervals vary with age but 
should not be less than 3 months in childhood, with a 6-month 
interval being optimal. 
 The problem of measuring the growth rate of children with 
orthopedic deformities or contractures is significant, because these 
patients may have nutritional and/or endocrine disorders as well. 
The measurement of knee height, tibial length, or upper arm 
length correlates well with standing height ( r = 0.97); thus, these 
measurements may be translated, using special linear regression 
equations, into total height, which is then plotted on standard 
growth charts. Specialized laser-calibrated devices to measure tibial 
length (kneeometry) are reported to be accurate for assessment of 
short-term growth down to weekly intervals. 
 In addition to height or length, other significant measurements 
include: (1) the frontal-occipital head circumference; (2) horizon-
tal arm span (between the outspread middle fingertips with the 
patient standing against a flat backboard); and (3) the upper seg-
ment (US) to lower segment (LS) ratio. For the latter, the LS is 
measured from the top of the symphysis pubis vertically to the 
floor with the patient standing straight, and the US is determined 
by subtracting the LS from the standing height measurement 
noted above. (Normal standard US-LS ratios are shown in 
 Figure 6–5 .) These measurements become important in skeletal or 
reproductive disorders. Sitting height is used in some clinical stud-
ies of growth, but the sitting stadiometer is rarely available. 
CHAPTER 6 Growth     141
200
190
185
180
175
170
165
160
155
150
145
140
135
130
125
120
115
110
105
100
95
90
85
80
75
cm
cm
in
78
76
74
72
70
68
66
64
62
60
58
56
54
52
50
48
46
44
42
40
38
36
34
32
30
in
97th
90th
75th
50th
25th
10th
3rd
in
78
76
74
72
70
68
66
64
62
60
58
56
54
52
50
48
46
44
42
40
38
36
34
32
30
in
Stature for age
Boys 2-20 y
2
3        4
5
6
7
8
9
10 
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
195
Age (y)
MPH
+2 SD
–2 SD
Mother
Father
 FIGURE 6–7  Determination of target height in a taller family. This 10-year-old boy is 124 cm tall just as in  Figure 6–6 , his mother is 65 in tall, 
and the father is 73.5 in tall. Five inches are added to the mother’s height to convert her height percentile to the equivalent percentile on a 
boy’s chart. (If we were considering a daughter whose height is plotted on a girl’s chart, the mother’s height would be directly plotted and 5 in 
would be subtracted from the father’s height to correct his height percentile to the equivalent height percentile for an adult woman.) Her cor-
rected height and that of the father are plotted at the far right of the chart where adult heights are displayed. The midparental height is calcu-
lated by adding the father’s height to the corrected mother’s height, and the sum is divided by 2; the result is the target height. The limits of 2 
standard deviations (SDs) above and below the target heights are displayed by plotting 2 SDs (about 4 in. above and below the target height). 
This is equivalent to moving the 50th percentile for the United States population to a conceptual 50th percentile for the family under consider-
ation. It is evident that the height of the child, which is below the third percentile for the United States, is even farther outside the bounds of 
the percentiles described by ±2 SD from the target height, and, thus, the child appears to fall far outside the genetic pattern of the family, and 
this is of clinical concern. The growth velocity and the degree of skeletal maturation are some of the other factors necessary to evaluate this 
analysis in more detail. 
142    CHAPTER 6 Growth
 Height and Growth Rate Summary 
 In summary, we may consider three criteria for pathologic short 
stature: (1) height more than 3.5 SD below the mean for 
 chronologic age; (2) growth rate more than 2 SD below the mean 
for chronologic age; and (3) height more than 2 SD below the 
target height when corrected for midparental height. 
 Weight 
 The measured weight should be plotted for age on standard 
graphs developed by the NCHS, which are available online or 
from various companies (http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts/
clinical_charts.htm). BMI charts displaying percentiles of BMI 
(weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared) are 
widely available and provide an essential method to assess 
 nutritional status. 
 SKELETAL (BONE) AGE 
 Skeletal development is a reflection of physiologic maturation. For 
example, menarche is better correlated with a bone age of 13 years 
than with a given chronologic age. However, bone age is as vari-
able as chronologic age at the onset of puberty. 
 Estrogen plays the major role in advancing skeletal maturation. 
Patients with aromatase deficiency, who cannot convert testoster-
one to estradiol, and patients with estrogen receptor defects, who 
cannot respond to estrogen, grow taller well into their twenties 
without having epiphysial fusion. Bone age indicates remaining 
growth available to a child and can be used to predict adult height. 
However, bone age is not a definitive diagnostic test of any disease; 
it can assist in diagnosis only when considered along with other 
factors. 
 Bone age is determined by comparing the shapes and stage 
of fusion of epiphyses or bones on the patient’s radiograph with 
an atlas demonstrating normal skeletal maturation for various 
ages. The Greulich and Pyle atlas of radiographs of the left hand 
and wrist is most commonly used in the United States, but 
other methods of skeletal age determination, such as Tanner 
and Whitehouse maturity scoring, are preferred in Europe. Any 
bone age more than 2 SD above or below the mean for chrono-
logic age is out of the normal range. The standard deviation of 
bone age readings for chronological age is a full year by the mid 
teenage years, indicating the imprecision of prediction. Further, 
there appear to be ethnic differences in bone age maturation 
that is not reflected in the guidelines for interpretation. For 
newborn infants, knee and foot radiographs are compared with 
an appropriate bone age atlas. For late pubertal children, just 
before epiphyseal fusion, the knee atlas reveals whether any 
further growth can be expected or whether the epiphyses are 
fused. All the methods are imperfect, as there is great variation 
in bone age in relation to chronologic age even in typically 
developing children. 
 Height is predicted most often in the United States by deter-
mining bone age and height at the time the radiograph was taken 
and consulting the Bayley-Pinneau tables in the Greulich and Pyle 
skeletal atlas of the hand to determine the amount of growth left 
before epiphyseal fusion. Height prediction by any method 
becomes more accurate as the child approaches the time of 
epiphyseal fusion. 
 DISORDERS OF GROWTH 
 SHORT STATURE DUE TO 
NONENDOCRINE CAUSES 
 There are many causes of decreased childhood growth and short 
adult height ( Table 6–1 ). The following discussion covers only the 
more common conditions, emphasizing those that might be 
included in an endocrine differential diagnosis. Shorter than aver-
age stature need not be considered a disease, because variation in 
stature is a normal feature of human beings, and a normal child 
should not be burdened with a misdiagnosis. Although the classifi-
cations described below may apply to most patients, some will still 
be resistant to definitive diagnosis. 
 1. CONSTITUTIONAL SHORT STATURE 
 Constitutional short stature (constitutional delay in growth and 
adolescence) is not a disease but rather a variation from normal for 
the population and is considered a slowing of the pace of develop-
ment. There is usually an associated delay in pubertal develop-
ment as well as a decrease in growth (see Constitutional Delay in 
Adolescence, Chapter 15). It is characterized by moderate short 
stature (usually not far below the third percentile), thin habitus, 
and retardation of bone age. The family history often includes 
similarly affected members (eg, mother with delayed menarche or 
father who first shaved later than peers and continued to grow past 
his teen years). 
 All other causes of decreased growth must be considered and 
ruled out before this diagnosis can be made with confidence. 
The patient may be considered physiologically (but not men-
tally) delayed in development. Characteristic growth patterns 
include normal birth length and height, with a gradual decrease 
in percentiles of height for age by 2 years; on the contrary, a 
rapid decrease in percentiles is an ominous sign of pathology. 
Onset of puberty is usually delayed for chronologic age but nor-
mal for skeletal age. Adult height is in the normal range but 
varies according to parental heights. The height is often less than 
the predicted height, because growth is less than expected during 
puberty. Aromatase inhibitors have been used in clinical studies 
for boys with constitutional delay in growth; they inhibit the 
conversion of androgens to estrogen so that bone age does not 
advance and growth continues longer. While this is not a treat-
ment in general clinical use, most studies suggest that it causes 
no ill effects, although long-term data dealing with effects on 
bone mineral density as a result of the use of these agents are not 
available. Elevated testosterone levels and testicular enlargement 
result from aromatase inhibition. 
CHAPTER 6 Growth     143
 2. FAMILIAL SHORT STATURE 
 Short stature may also occur in a familial pattern without retarded 
bone age or delay in puberty; this is considered  familial short 
stature . Affected children are closer to the mean on the normal 
population growth charts after familial correction for mid-parental 
height by calculation of the target height ( see Figures 6–6 and 
 6–7 ). Adult height depends on the mother’s and father’s heights. 
Patients with the combination of constitutional short stature and 
genetic short stature are quite noticeably short due to both factors, 
and these patients are most likely to seek evaluation. Boys are 
brought to consultation more often than girls. Children in these 
families may be born AGA but exhibit slowed  growth in the first 
2 postnatal years; this process is gradual in comparison to the 
striking changes in growth rate that are characteristic of diseases 
that primarily affect growth, but it may still be difficult to tell the 
difference without extended observation. 
 3. PREMATURITY AND SGA 
 Although the majority of SGA infants show catch-up growth, 
about 20% may follow a lifelong pattern of short stature. In com-
parison, appropriate-for-gestational-age premature infants usually 
catch up to the normal range of height and weight by 1 to 2 years 
of age. Severe premature infants with birth weights less than 800 g 
(that are appropriate for gestational age), however, may maintain 
their growth retardation at least through their third year; only fol-
low-up studies will determine whether this group of premature 
infants reaches reduced adult heights. Bone age and yearly growth 
rate are normal in SGA patients until puberty occurs, and the 
patients are characteristically thin. SGA is now recognized as a risk 
factor for premature thelarche or early menarche, so bone age may 
advance more rapidly after childhood (Chapter 15). 
 Within this grouping are many distinctive genetic or sporadi-
cally occurring syndromes. The most common example is Russell-
Silver dwarfism (OMIM #180860), characterized by small size at 
birth, triangular facies, and a variable degree of asymmetry of the 
extremities; this condition is due to epigenetic changes of DNA 
hypomethylation at the telomeric imprinting control region 
(ICR1) on chromosome 11p15, involving the  H19 and  IGF-II 
genes or to maternal, uniparental disomy of chromosome 7. 
Intrauterine infections with  Toxoplasma gondii , rubella virus, cyto-
megalovirus, herpesvirus, and HIV are noted to cause SGA. 
Furthermore, maternal drug usage, either illicit (eg, cocaine), legal 
but ill-advised (eg, alcohol during pregnancy), or legally pre-
scribed medication (eg, phenytoin) may cause SGA. Reports of 
other syndromes in SGA infants can be found in sources listed in 
the bibliography. 
 Although SGA is not an endocrine cause of short stature, GH 
treatment is approved by the FDA and leads to increased adult 
height. Those SGA infants with the Δ3-isoform (genomic deletion 
of exon 3) of the GH receptor (GHR) are more likely catch up on 
GH therapy, as are girls with Turner syndrome. Remarkably, this 
same isoform is associated with reduced prenatal growth. The 
presence of this isoform does not guarantee taller adult stature 
even if growth velocity is greater while on GH treatment. 
 There are many endocrine associations with being born SGA 
including premature adenarche, puberty, and menarche in girls and 
dyslipidemia and insulin resistance in boys and girls. Girls have a 
predilection to develop PCOS after being SGA. GH antagonizes 
the action of insulin given the tendency for SGA children to have 
TABLE 6–1 Causes of abnormalities of growth.
I. CAUSES OF SHORT STATURE
Nonendocrine Causes
Constitutional short stature
Genetic short stature
Intrauterine growth retardation 
 and SGA
Syndromes of short stature
Turner syndrome and its  variants
Noonan syndrome  (pseudo-
 Turner syndrome)
Laurence-Moon and Bardet-Biedl
 syndromes
Other autosomal abnormalities 
 and dysmorphic syndromes
Chronic disease
Cardiac disorders
 Left to right shunt
Congestive heart failure
Pulmonary disorders
Cystic fibrosis
Asthma
Gastrointestinal disorders
Malabsorption
Celiac disease
Disorders of swallowing 
Hepatic disorders 
Hematologic disorders
Sickle cell anemia
Thalassemia
Renal disorders
Renal tubular acidosis
Chronic uremia
Immunologic disorders
Connective tissue disease
Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis
Chronic infection
Central nervous system disorders
Malnutrition
Decreased bioavailability of 
 nutrients
Fad diets
Voluntary dieting
Anorexia nervosa
Anorexia of cancer 
  chemotherapy
Endocrine Disorders
GH deficiency and variants
Congenital GH deficiency
Isolated GH deficiency
With other pituitary 
 hormone deficiencies
With midline defects
Pituitary agenesis
Holoprosencephaly
Other anomalies
Acquired GH deficiency
Hypothalamic-pituitary 
 tumors
Histiocytosis X
Central nervous system 
 infections
Head injuries
GH deficiency following 
 cranial 
irradiation
Central nervous system 
 vascular accidents
Hydrocephalus
Empty sella syndrome
Abnormalities of GH action
Primary IGF-1  abnormality 
 Laron dwarfism 
 Pygmies
 IGF-1 receptor defect
Psychosocial dwarfism
Hypothyroidism
Glucocorticoid excess (Cushing 
syndrome)
Endogenous
Exogenous
Psuedohypoparathyroidism
Disorders of vitamin D 
 metabolism
Diabetes mellitus, poorly 
 controlled
II. CAUSES OF TALL STATURE
Nonendocrine Causes
Constitutional tall stature
Genetic tall stature
Syndromes of tall stature
 Cerebral gigantism
 Marfan syndrome
 Homocystinuria
 Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome
 XYY and XYYY syndromes
 Klinefelter syndrome
Endocrine Disorders
Pituitary gigantism
Sexual precocity
Thyrotoxicosis
Infants of diabetic mothers
144    CHAPTER 6 Growth
insulin resistance, there may be concerns regarding the potential 
additive effect. Recent studies of insulin sensitivity in SGA subjects 
receiving GH treatment indicate that in most cases the effects are 
not long lasting and do not seem to have clinical significance. 
 4. SYNDROMES OF SHORT STATURE 
 Many syndromes include short stature as a characteristic feature, 
and some also include SGA. Common conditions are described 
briefly below. Laurence-Moon, Biedl-Bardet, or Prader-Willi syn-
drome may combine obesity with short stature (as do the endocrine 
conditions, hypothyroidism, glucocorticoid excess, pseudohy-
poparathyroidism with Albright Hereditary Osteodystrophy 
(OMIM #103580), and GH deficiency). Moderately obese but 
otherwise normal children without these conditions tend to have 
slightly advanced bone age and advanced physiologic maturation 
with increased stature during childhood and early onset of puberty. 
Thus, short stature in an overweight child must be considered to 
have an organic cause until proven otherwise. 
 Turner Syndrome and Its Variants 
 Although classic Turner syndrome of 45,XO gonadal dysgenesis 
(see Chapter 14) is often correctly diagnosed, it is not always appre-
ciated that any phenotypic female with short stature may have a 
variant of Turner syndrome. Thus, a karyotype determination 
should be performed for every short girl if no other cause for short 
stature is found, especially if puberty is delayed (see Chapter 15). 
The short stature of Turner syndrome is due to a mutation of the 
 short stature homeobox ( SHOX ) gene on the short (p) arm in the 
pseudoautosomal region of the X chromosome (OMIM #312865). 
A mutation of the  SHOX gene may also cause the Léri-Weill 
dyschondrosteosis form of short-limbed dwarfism (OMIM # 
127300). 
 Noonan Syndrome (Pseudo-Turner 
Syndrome) (OMIM #163950) 
 This syndrome shares several phenotypic characteristics of Turner 
syndrome, including short stature, webbed neck, low posterior hair-
line, and facial resemblance to Turner syndrome, but the karyotype 
is 46,XX in the female or 46,XY in the male with Noonan syndrome, 
and other features clearly differentiate it from Turner syndrome. For 
example, in Turner syndrome, there is characteristically left-sided 
heart disease and in Noonan syndrome right-sided heart disease. 
Noonan syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder at gene locus 
12q24 (see Chapter 14). GH therapy is approved by the FDA for 
Noonan syndrome to increase height. About half of patients with 
Noonan syndrome have a mutation of the protein tyrosine phos-
phatase nonreceptor type 11 (PTPN11) (OMIM #176876). These 
children have a decreased response to GH treatment and tend to 
have low IGF-I and ALS with normal IGFBP-3 levels. 
 Prader-Willi Syndrome (OMIM #176270) 
 This condition is characterized by poor intrauterine movement, 
acromicria (small hands and feet), developmental delay, and 
almond-shaped eyes along with infantile hypotonia. Short stature 
is common but not invariable. Although hypotonia limits feeding 
in infancy, later insatiable hunger develops and leads to extreme 
 obesity. Glucose intolerance and delayed puberty are characteristic. 
This syndrome is due to deletion of the small nuclear riboprotein 
polypeptide N (SNRPN) on paternal chromosome 15 (q11-13), 
uniparental disomy of maternal chromosome 15, or methylation of 
this region of chromosome 15 of paternal origin. If a mutation of 
the same locus is derived from the mother, Angelman syndrome 
results. GH therapy is approved by the FDA for Prader-Willi syn-
drome to improve body composition and muscle strength. There is 
the  possibility of fatal complications of GH given in the presence 
of obstructive sleep apnea, so sleep patterns must be carefully 
 monitored. 
 Laurence-Moon Syndrome and 
Biedl-Bardet Syndrome 
 Biedl-Bardet syndrome (OMIM #209900), associated with muta-
tions on chromosome 16 (q21), is characterized by developmental 
delay, retinitis pigmentosa, polydactyly, and obesity. Laurence-
Moon syndrome (OMIM #245800) is characterized by develop-
mental delay, retinitis pigmentosa, delayed puberty, and spastic 
paraplegia. Both syndromes are associated with poor growth and 
obesity. They are inherited as autosomal recessive disorders. Study 
of large Canadian kindreds once again suggests combining the 
syndromes into one, as was done in the past. Biedl-Bardet syn-
drome is thought to be caused by a defect of the basal body of 
primary cilia resulting in cellular dysfunction. 
 Autosomal Chromosomal Disorders and 
Syndromes 
 Numerous other autosomal disorders and syndromes of dysmor-
phic children with or without developmental disorders are charac-
terized by short stature. Often the key to diagnosis is the presence 
of several major or minor physical abnormalities that indicate the 
need for karyotype determination. Other abnormalities may 
include unusual body proportions, such as short extremities, lead-
ing to aberrant US:LS ratios, and arm spans quite discrepant from 
stature. Details of these syndromes can be found in the references 
listed at the end of the chapter. 
 Skeletal Dysplasias 
 There are more than 100 known types of genetic skeletal dysplasias 
(osteochondrodysplasias). Often they are noted at birth because of 
the presence of short limbs or trunk, but some are only diagnosed 
after a period of postnatal growth. The most common condition is 
autosomal dominant achondroplasia (OMIM #100800). This 
condition is characterized by short extremities in the proximal 
regions, a relatively large head with a prominent forehead due to 
frontal bossing and a depressed nasal bridge, and lumbar lordosis 
in later life. Adult height is decreased, with a mean of 132 cm for 
males and 123 cm for females. Intelligence is normal. Mutations of 
CHAPTER 6 Growth     145
the tyrosine kinase domain of the  fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 
( FGFR3) gene locus 4p16.3 (OMIM #134934) have been identi-
fied in this condition. Limb lengthening operations are used to 
increase stature in a few centers but the techniques are complex, 
and complications appear to be frequent. 
 Height, height velocity, weight, and BMI curves from birth to 
16 years of age are available for achondroplasia. Children with 
achondroplasia who have received GH have in some instances 
demonstrated improved growth; however, atlanto-occipital dislo-
cation is reported. The potential for abnormal brain growth and 
its relationship to aberrant skull shape mandates the caution that 
GH is not established therapy for this condition. 
 Hypochondroplasia (OMIM #146000) is manifested on a 
continuum from severe short-limbed dwarfism to apparent nor-
mal development until puberty, when there is an attenuated or 
absent pubertal growth spurt, leading to short adult stature. This 
disorder may be caused by an abnormal allele in the same gene 
causing achondroplasia ( FGFR3 at locus 4p16.3). 
 5. CHRONIC DISEASE 
 Severe chronic disease involving any organ system can cause poor 
growth in childhood and adolescence. In many cases, there are 
adequate physical findings by the time of consultation to permit 
diagnosis. In some cases, however—most notably celiac disease and 
regional enteritis—short stature and decreased growth may precede 
obvious signs of malnutrition or gastrointestinal disease. In some 
cases, growth is only delayed and may spontaneously improve. In 
others, growth can be increased by improved nutrition; patients 
with gastrointestinal disease, kidney disease, or cancer may benefit 
from nocturnal parenteral nutritional infusions. Cystic fibrosis 
combines several causes of growth failure: lung disease impairs 
oxygenation and predisposes to chronic infections, gastrointestinal 
disease decreases nutrient availability, and late-developing abnor-
malities of the endocrine pancreas cause diabetes mellitus. Children 
with cystic fibrosis experience decreased growth rates after 1 year of 
age following a normal birth size. The pubertal growth spurt is 
often decreased in magnitude and delayed in its timing; secondary 
sexual development may be delayed, especially in those with 
impaired pulmonary function. Study of growth in these patients 
allowed development of a cystic fibrosis specific growth chart and 
indicates that a reasonable outcome is an adult height in the 25th 
percentile. GH treatment in several studies demonstrated increased 
growth and weight gain in cystic fibrosis. 
 Children with congestive heart failure due to a variety of con-
genital heart diseases or acquired myocarditis grow poorly unless 
successfully treated with medications or surgery. Patients with 
cyanotic heart disease experience less deficits in growth. 
 Celiac disease is very common and may present initially with 
growth failure. Early diagnosis can be made by determination of 
tissue transglutaminase antibodies and IgA values while on a nor-
mal wheat-containing diet. However, a biopsy may still be 
required for diagnosis. On a gluten-free diet, patients experience 
catch-up growth. Adult height may still be impaired, depending on 
the duration of the period without treatment. Untreated patients 
with celiac disease have decreased serum IGF-I concentrations, 
presumably due to malnutrition, while IGF-I concentrations rise 
with dietary therapy. Thus, serum IGF-I in this condition, as in 
many with nutritional deficiencies, is not a reliable indicator of 
GH secretory status. 
 Crohn disease is associated with poor growth and decreased 
serum IGF-I concentrations. On an elemental diet, growth rate 
increases, and with glucocorticoid therapy (moderate doses), 
growth rate improves even though serum IGF-I decreases. 
 Patients with chronic hematologic diseases, such as sickle cell 
anemia or thalassemia, often have poor growth, delayed puberty, 
and short adult stature: iron deposition may itself cause endocrine 
complications. Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis may compromise 
growth before or after therapy with glucocorticoids. GH treat-
ment is reported to increase the growth rate of these children, but 
it is too early to draw conclusions about the efficacy and safety of 
such therapy in juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. Hypophosphatemic 
vitamin D-resistant rickets usually leads to short adult stature, but 
treatment with 1,25-hydroxyvitamin D and oral phosphate in 
most cases will improve bone growth as well as increase adult 
stature. Chronic renal disease is known to interfere with growth, 
but increased growth rate occurs with improved nutrition and GH 
therapy which is approved for affected children. 
 Proximal or distal renal tubular acidosis (RTA) may both cause 
short stature. Proximal RTA demonstrates bicarbonate wasting at 
normal or low plasma bicarbonate concentrations; patients have 
hypokalemia, alkaline urine pH, severe bicarbonaturia, and later, 
acidemia. The condition may be inherited, sporadic, or secondary 
to many metabolic or medication-induced disorders. Distal RTA 
is caused by inability to acidify the urine; it may occur in sporadic 
or familial patterns or be acquired as a result of metabolic disor-
ders or medication. Distal RTA is characterized by hypokalemia, 
hypercalciuria, and occasional hypocalcemia. The administration 
of bicarbonate is the primary therapy for proximal RTA, and 
proper treatment can substantially improve growth rate. 
 Obstructive sleep apnea is associated with poor growth. The 
amount of energy expended during sleep in children with sleep 
apnea appears to limit weight and length gain, a pattern which 
reverses with the resolution of the obstruction. Paradoxically, 
obstructive sleep apnea can be found with obesity that is more 
likely to be found with tall stature. 
 Hemoglobin, white blood cell count, erythrocyte sedimentation 
rate, serum carotene and folate levels, tissue transglutaminase anti-
bodies, IgA values, plasma bicarbonate levels, and liver and kidney 
function should be assessed in short but otherwise apparently 
healthy children before endocrine screening tests are performed. 
Urinalysis should be done, with attention to specific gravity (to rule 
out diabetes insipidus) and ability to acidify urine (to evaluate pos-
sible RTA). All short girls without another diagnosis should 
undergo karyotype analysis to rule out Turner syndrome. A list of 
chronic diseases causing short stature is presented in  Table 6–1 . 
 6. MALNUTRITION 
 Malnutrition (other than that associated with chronic disease) is 
the most common cause of short stature worldwide and is the 
cause of much short stature in the developing world. Diagnosis in 
146    CHAPTER 6 Growth
the developed world is based on historical and physical findings, 
particularly the dietary history. Food faddism and anorexia 
nervosa—as well as excessive voluntary dieting—can cause poor 
growth. Infection with parasites such as  Ascaris lumbricoides or 
 Giardia lamblia can decrease growth and is the cause of much 
short stature in the developing world. 
 Specific nutritional deficiencies can have particular effects on 
growth. For example, severe iron deficiency can cause a thin habi-
tus as well as growth retardation. Zinc deficiency can cause 
anorexia, decreased growth, and delayed puberty, usually in the 
presence of chronic systemic disease or infection. Children with 
nutritional deficiencies characteristically demonstrate failure of 
weight gain before growth rate decreases, and weight for height 
decreases. This is in contrast to many endocrine causes of poor 
growth, where weight for height remains in the normal or high 
range. This simple rule often determines whether nutritional or 
endocrine evaluations are most appropriate. There are no simple 
laboratory tests for diagnosis of malnutrition. Serum IGF-I con-
centrations are low in malnutrition, as they are in GH deficiency. 
This distinction is important since misdiagnosing GH deficiency 
in the face of malnutrition would be tragic as well as costly. 
 7. MEDICATIONS 
 Children with hyperactivity disorders (or those incorrectly diag-
nosed as such) are frequently managed with chronic methylpheni-
date administration or similar medication. In larger doses, these 
agents can decrease weight gain—probably because of their effects 
on appetite—and they have been reported to lower growth rate, 
albeit inconsistently. These drugs must be used in moderation and 
only in children who definitely respond to them during careful 
evaluation and follow-up. 
 Exogenous glucocorticoids are a potent cause of poor growth 
(see discussed later), as are excessive endogenous glucocorticoids. 
 SHORT STATURE DUE TO ENDOCRINE 
DISORDERS 
 1. GROWTH HORMONE DEFICIENCY 
AND ITS VARIANTS 
 The incidence of GH deficiency is estimated to be between 
1:4000 and 1:3500, so the disorder should not be considered rare. 
Using the conservative criteria of height (less than third percentile) 
and growth velocity (<5 cm/y for inclusion in the study), the 
incidence of endocrine disease in 114,881 Utah children who met 
these cutoff results was 5%, with a higher incidence in boys than 
girls by a ratio of more than 2.5:1. In this population, 48% of the 
children with Turner syndrome or GH deficiency were not diag-
nosed prior to the careful evaluation afforded by this study. 
 There may be abnormalities at various levels of the hypotha-
lamic-pituitary, GH-IGF-I axis. Most patients with idiopathic 
GH deficiency apparently lack GHRH. One autopsied 
GH-deficient patient had an adequate number of pituitary soma-
totrophs that contained considerable GH stores. Thus, the 
 pituitary gland produced GH, but it could not be released. Long-
term treatment of such patients with GHRH can cause GH 
release and increase growth. Patients with pituitary tumors or 
those rare patients with congenital absence of the pituitary gland 
lack somatotrophs. Several kindreds have been described that lack 
various regions of the  GH gene responsible for producing GH. 
Alternatively, gene defects responsible for the embryogenesis of 
the pituitary gland may cause multiple pituitary deficiencies. 
Absence of the  PIT1 gene encoding a pituitary-specific transcrip-
tion factor causes deficient GH, TSH, and prolactin synthesis and 
secretion. Mutations of the prophet of PIT 1 ( PROP1) gene cause 
deficiencies of GH, TSH, FSH, LH, and ACTH production. 
 Congenital Growth Hormone Deficiency 
 Congenital GH deficiency presents with slightly decreased birth 
length (−1 SD), but the growth rate decreases in some cases strik-
ingly soon after birth. The disorder is identified by careful measure-
ment in the first year and becomes more obvious by 1 to 2 years of 
age. Patients with classic GH deficiency have short stature, 
increased fat mass leading to a chubby or cherubic appearance with 
immature facial appearance, immature high-pitched voice, and 
delay in skeletal maturation. Less severe forms of partial GH defi-
ciency are described with few abnormal characteristics apart from 
short stature and delayed bone age. GH-deficient patients lack the 
lipolytic effects of GH, partially accounting for the pudgy appear-
ance. There is a higher incidence of hyperlipidemia with elevated 
total cholesterol and low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol in 
GH deficiency, and longitudinal studies demonstrate increases in 
high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol levels with GH treat-
ment. Males with GH deficiency may have microphallus (penis <2 
cm in length at birth), especially if the condition is accompanied 
by gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) deficiency 
( Figure 6–8 ). GH deficiency in the neonate or child can also lead 
to symptomatic hypoglycemia and seizures; if ACTH deficiency is 
also present, hypoglycemia is usually more severe. The differential 
diagnosis of neonatal hypoglycemia in a full-term infant who has 
not sustained birth trauma must include neonatal hypopituitarism. 
If microphallus (in a male subject), optic hypoplasia, or some other 
midline facial or central nervous system defect is noted, the diag-
nosis of congenital GH deficiency is more likely (see later). 
Congenital GH deficiency is also correlated with breech delivery. 
Intelligence is normal in GH deficiency unless repeated or severe 
hypoglycemia is present or a significant anatomic defect has com-
promised brain development. When thyrotropin-releasing hor-
mone (TRH) deficiency is also present, there may be additional 
signs of hypothyroidism. Secondary or tertiary congenital hypothy-
roidism is not usually associated with physical findings of cretinism 
or developmental delay as is congenital primary hypothyroidism, 
but a few cases of isolated TRH deficiency and severe mental retar-
dation have been reported. 
 Congenital GH deficiency may present with midline anatomic 
defects. Optic hypoplasia with visual defects ranging from nystag-
mus to blindness is found with variable hypothalamic endocrinopa-
thies in 71.7% of one series: 64.1% of subjects had GH axis 
abnormalities, 48.5% hyperprolactinemia, 34.9% hypothyroidism, 
CHAPTER 6 Growth     147
17.1% adrenal insufficiency, and 4.3% diabetes insipidus (DI) in 
this group of 47 subjects. About half of patients with optic hyp-
oplasia have absence of the septum pellucidum on computed 
tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), leading 
to the diagnosis of septo-optic dysplasia. Septo-optic dysplasia is 
most often sporadic in occurrence. Affected individuals are 
reported with mutations of the  homeobox gene expressed in ES 
cells ( HESX1) (OMIM #601802) and septo-optic dysplasia 
(OMIM #182230). Cleft palate or other forms of oral dysraphism 
are associated with GH deficiency in about 7% of cases. Such 
children may need nutritional support to improve their growth. 
An unusual midline defect associated with GH deficiency is 
described in children with a single maxillary incisor. 
 Congenital absence of the pituitary gland, which occurs in an 
autosomal recessive pattern, leads to severe hypopituitarism with 
hypoglycemia. Affected patients have shallow development of or 
absence of the sella turcica. This defect is quite rare but clinically 
devastating if treatment is delayed. This is the most common MRI 
manifestation of PROP1 gene mutation (OMIM #601538). 
 Hereditary GH deficiency is described in several kindreds. 
Various genetic defects of the  GHN gene (17q22-24) occur in 
affected families. Isolated type 1A GH deficiency (IGHDIA 
OMIM #262400) is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. 
Patients have deletions, frameshifts, and nonsense mutations in 
the  GH gene. Unlike those with classic sporadic GH deficiency, 
some of these children are reported with significantly shortened 
birth lengths. Patients with absent or abnormal  GH genes do ini-
tially respond to exogenous human GH (hGH) administration, 
but some soon develop high antibody titers that eliminate the 
effect of therapy. One reported kindred had a heterogeneous 
response: one sibling continued to grow and did not develop 
blocking antibodies, while the opposite effect occurred in two 
other siblings in the same family. Patients with high titers of 
blocking antibodies are reported to benefit from IGF-I therapy in 
place of GH therapy. Isolated GH deficiency (IGHD) type 1B 
(OMIM #612781) patients have autosomal recessive splice site 
mutations and incomplete GH deficiency. They are less severely 
affected. Type 2 (IGHD2) (OMIM #173100) patients have auto-
somal dominant GH deficiency due to splice site or missense 
mutations. Type 2 patients have X-linked GH deficiency often 
associated with hypogammaglobulinemia. A few patients are 
described with abnormalities of the  GHRH gene, whereas others 
are described with mutant  GH genes. Mutations in pituitary tran-
scription factors can lead to various combinations of pituitary 
hormone deficiencies. Mutations in Pit1/POU1F1 (POU class 1 
homeobox 1) (OMIM #173110) lead to GH, PRL, TSH deficien-
cies. Mutations in PROP 1 (Prophet of PIT1, paired-like home-
odomain transcription factor) (OMIM #601538) leads to GH, 
PRL, TSH, LH, FSH, and sometimes ACTH deficiency. Mutations 
in HESX1 lead to GH, PRL, TSH, LH, FSH, ACTH, IGHD, 
and CPHD deficiencies. 
 Acquired Growth Hormone Deficiency 
 Onset of GH deficiency in late childhood or adolescence, particu-
larly if accompanied by other pituitary hormone deficiencies, is 
ominous and may be due to a hypothalamic-pituitary tumor. The 
development of posterior pituitary deficiency in addition to ante-
rior pituitary deficiency makes a tumor even more likely. The 
empty sella syndrome is more frequently associated with hypotha-
lamic-pituitary abnormalities in childhood than in adulthood; 
thus, GH deficiency may be found in affected patients. 
 Some patients, chiefly boys with constitutional delay in growth 
and adolescence, may have transient GH deficiency on testing 
before the actual onset of puberty. When serum testosterone con-
centrations begin to increase in these patients, GH secretion and 
 FIGURE 6–8  A 12-month-old boy with congenital hypopituitar-
ism. He had hypoglycemic seizures at 12 hours of age. At 1 year, he 
had another hypoglycemic seizure (plasma glucose, 25 mg/dL) asso-
ciated with an episode of otitis media, and it was noted that his penis 
was quite small. At 12 months, body length was 66.5 cm (−2 standard 
deviation [SD]) and weight was 8.5 kg [−3 SD]). The penis was less 
than 1.5 cm long, and both testes were descended (each 1 cm in 
diameter). Plasma GH did not rise above 1 ng/mL after arginine and 
levodopa testing (no insulin was given because of the history of 
hypoglycemia). LH rose very little after administration of GnRH 
(gonadorelin), 100 μg. Serum thyroxine was low (T 4 , 6.6 μg/ dL; T 4 
index, 1.5), and after administration of 200 μg of protirelin (TRH), 
serum TSH rose with a delayed peak characteristic of tertiary hypo-
thyroidism. Plasma ACTH rose only to 53 pg/mL after metyrapone. 
Thus, the patient had multiple defects in the hypothalamic-pituitary 
axis including decreased secretion of GH, ACTH, and TSH probably 
due to deficient secretion of hypothalamic hormones. He was given 
six doses of 2000 units each of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) 
intramuscularly over 2 weeks, and plasma testosterone rose to 62 ng/dL, 
indicating normal testicular function. He was then treated with 25 mg 
of testosterone enanthate every month for 3 months, and his phallus 
enlarged to 3.5 × 1.2 cm without significant advancement of bone 
age. With hGH therapy (0.05 mg/kg intramuscularly every other day), 
he grew at a greater than normal rate for 12 months (catch-up 
growth), and growth then continued at a normal rate. 
148    CHAPTER 6 Growth
growth rate also increase. This transient state may incorrectly sug-
gest bona fide GH deficiency but does not require therapy. A 
priming dose of estrogen is sometimes invoked to increase growth 
hormone secretion maximally so that bone fide GH deficiency is 
not diagnosed spuriously. Central nervous system conditions that 
cause acquired GH deficiency (eg, craniopharyngiomas, germino-
mas, gliomas, histiocytosis X) are described in Chapter 4. It is 
remarkable that after craniopharyngioma removal, some patients, 
mainly obese subjects, continue to grow quite well in spite of the 
absence of GH secretion. This persistent growth appears to be 
caused by hyperinsulinemia. 
 Cranial irradiation of the hypothalamic-pituitary region to 
treat CNS tumors or acute lymphoblastic leukemia may result in 
GH deficiency starting approximately 12 to 18 months later, 
owing to radiation-induced hypothalamic (or perhaps pituitary) 
damage. Higher doses of irradiation such as the 24-Gy regimen 
previously used for the treatment of central nervous system leu-
kemia have greater effect (adult height may be as much as 1.7 SD 
below the mean) than the lower (eg, 18 Gy) regimens and higher 
doses are more likely to cause TSH, ACTH, and gonadotropin 
deficiency as well as hyperprolactinemia or even precocious 
puberty. Girls treated at an early age with this lower regimen still 
appear to be at risk of growth failure. All children must be care-
fully observed for growth failure after irradiation since growth 
failure may occur years later. If these patients receive spinal irra-
diation, upper body growth may also be impaired, causing a 
decreased US-LS ratio and a further tendency to short stature. 
Abdominal irradiation for Wilms tumor may also lead to 
decreased spinal growth (estimated loss of 10 cm height from 
megavoltage therapy at 1 year of age, and 7 cm from treatment at 
5 years of age). Others receiving gonadal irradiation (or chemo-
therapy) have impaired gonadal function, lack onset or progres-
sion of puberty, and/or have diminished or absent pubertal 
growth spurt. Recent data suggests chemotherapy for acute lym-
phocytic leukemia without irradiation may also lead to GH 
deficiency, so follow-up of growth after treatment for cancer is 
always necessary. 
 CNS trauma is well established as a cause of hypopituitarism 
in adults. Cross sectional studies in children reveal both high and 
low rates of subsequent hypopitutirarism after head trauma but 
the rare prospective studies demonstrate lower risk in children 
than in adults. 
 Other Types of GH Dysfunction 
 Primary IGF-I deficiency is due to GH insensitivity (Laron syn-
drome and its variants (OMIM #262500). These disorders reflect 
GH receptor or postreceptor defects that are inherited in auto-
somal recessive fashion. The soluble GH-binding protein (GHBP) 
found in the circulation derives from the extracellular portion of 
the GH receptor, and since they derive from the same gene, circu-
lating GHBP reflects the abundance of GH receptors. Patients 
with decreased or absent GH receptors have decreased serum 
GHBP levels, whereas those with postreceptor defects have nor-
mal GHBP concentrations. Affected children are found through-
out the world, including Israel, where the syndrome was first 
reported, and Ecuador, where several generations of a large kin-
dred were studied in great detail. Defects in various kindreds 
include nonsense mutations, deletions, RNA processing defects, 
and translational stop codons. GH/JAK-STAT axis signal-trans-
duction impairment leads to short stature when this intracellular 
system fails to activate in response to receptor occupancy by the 
GH ligand. Defects in the dimerization of the GH receptors also 
lead to short stature. Serum GH is elevated, due to decreased or 
absent IGF-I which results in lack of negative feedback inhibition. 
The condition does not respond to GH treatment. Patients are 
short at birth, confirming the importance of IGF-I in fetal growth 
(demonstrated previously in murine  IGF-I gene knockout stud-
ies). About one-third have hypoglycemia, and half of boys have 
microphallus. Patients treated with recombinant IGF-I grow at an 
improved rate but do not respond quite as well to IGF-I as 
GH-deficient children do to GH treatment, indicating that GH 
may have a direct role in fostering growth above and beyond that 
conferred by IGF-I. 
 Other forms of GH resistance are described, but the majority 
of patients with disorders of the GH axis have abnormalities of 
GH secretion, not action. Very short, poorly growing children 
with delayed skeletal maturation, normal GH and IGF-I values, 
and no signs of organic disease have responded to GH therapy 
with increased growth rates equal to those of patients with bona 
fide GH deficiency. These patients may have a variation of consti-
tutional delay in growth or genetic short stature, but a subtle 
abnormality of GH secretion or action is possible. 
 Pygmies (OMIM #265850) have normal serum GH, low 
IGF-I, and normal IGF-II concentrations. They have a congenital 
inability to produce IGF-I, which has greater importance in 
stimulating growth than IGF-II. Pygmy children are reported to 
lack a pubertal growth spurt, suggesting that IGF-I is essential to 
attain a normal peak growth velocity. Efe pygmies, the shortest of 
the pygmies, are significantly smaller at birth than neighboring 
Africans who are not pygmies, and their growth is slower through-
out childhood, leading to statures displaced progressively below 
the mean. A few patients are reported with defects of the  IGF-I 
gene or with deficiency of the IGF-I receptor and extreme short 
stature. 
 There are rare reports of IGF-I receptor (IGF-IR) defects 
(OMIM #147370) leading to short stature not responsive to IGF-I. 
Intrauterine growth deficiency is usually reported in these cases. 
 Why do certain normal children, perhaps within a short family, 
have stature significantly lower than the mean? There is no defi-
nite answer to this persistent question, but some patients have 
decreased serum GHBP concentration, which suggests a decrease 
in GH receptors in these children. A minority of short, poorly 
growing children have definable genetic abnormalities of their GH 
receptors. Short stature is the final common pathway of numerous 
biochemical abnormalities. 
 Adults who had GH deficiency in childhood or adolescence 
have decreased bone mass compared with normals even when 
bone mass is corrected for their smaller size. There is progressive 
bone loss in adults who are GH deficient even if bone density was 
improved with childhood therapy; GH is approved for adults with 
GH deficiency and can reverse this trend (see Chapter 4). 
CHAPTER 6 Growth     149
 Diagnosis of GH Deficiency 
 Because basal values of serum GH are low in normal children and 
GH-deficient patients alike, the diagnosis of GH deficiency has 
classically rested on demonstration of an inadequate rise of serum 
GH after provocative stimuli or on some other measure of GH 
secretion. This process is complicated because different radioim-
munoassay systems vary widely in their measurements of GH in 
the same blood sample (eg, a result on a single sample may be 
above 10 ng/mL in one assay but only 6 ng/mL in another). The 
physician must be familiar with the standards of the laboratory 
being used. Most insurance companies and state agencies accept 
inability of GH to rise above 10 ng/mL with stimulation as diag-
nostic of GH deficiency. 
 Another complicating factor is the state of pubertal develop-
ment. Prepubertal children secrete less GH than pubertal subjects 
and, especially as they approach the onset of puberty, may have 
sufficiently reduced GH secretion to falsely suggest bona fide GH 
deficiency. This factor is sometimes addressed by administering a 
dose of estrogen to such subjects before testing. The very concept 
of GH testing provides a further complication. GH is released in 
episodic pulses. Although a patient who does not secrete GH in 
response to standard challenges is generally considered to be 
 classically GH-deficient, a normal GH response to these tests may 
not rule out the efficacy of GH treatment. Testing should occur 
after an overnight fast; carbohydrate or fat ingestion suppresses 
GH response. Obesity suppresses GH secretion, and an over-
weight or obese child may falsely appear to have GH deficiency. 
Even within the normal range, variations of BMI affect peak GH 
after  stimulation. 
 Because 10% or more of healthy children do not have an ade-
quate rise in GH with one test of GH reserve, at least two methods 
of assessing GH reserve are necessary before the diagnosis of classic 
GH deficiency is assigned. Of course, if GH rises above 10 ng/mL 
in a single test, classic GH deficiency is eliminated. Serum GH 
values should rise after 10 minutes of vigorous exercise; this is used 
as a screening test. After an overnight fast, GH levels should rise 
in response to arginine infusion (0.5 g/kg body weight [up to 
20 g] over 30 minutes), oral levodopa (125 mg for up to 15 kg 
body weight, 250 mg for up to 35 kg, or 500 mg for >35 kg), or 
clonidine (0.1 mg/m 2 orally). Side effects of levodopa include 
nausea; those of clonidine include some drop in blood pressure 
and drowsiness. Glucagon stimulation testing determines both 
GH and ACTH secretory ability. 
 GH levels also rise after acute hypoglycemia due to insulin 
administration; however, this test carries a risk of seizure if the 
blood glucose level drops excessively. An insulin tolerance test 
may be performed if a 10% to 25% dextrose infusion is available 
for emergency administration in the face of hypoglycemic coma 
or seizure and if the following conditions are satisfied: (1) an 
intravenous infusion line with heparin lock or low-rate saline 
infusion is available before the test begins, (2) the patient can be 
continuously observed by a physician, and (3) the patient has no 
history of hypoglycemic seizures. The patient must have a nor-
mal glucose concentration at the beginning of the test in the 
morning after an overnight fast (water intake is acceptable). 
Regular insulin, 0.075 to 0.1 U/kg in saline, may be given as an 
intravenous bolus. In 20 to 40 minutes, a 50% drop in blood 
glucose will occur, and a rise in serum GH and cortisol and 
ACTH should follow. Serum glucose should be monitored, and 
an intravenous line must be  maintained for emergency dextrose 
infusion in case the patient becomes unconscious or has a hypo-
glycemic seizure. If dextrose infusion is necessary, it is imperative 
that blood glucose not be raised far above the normal range, 
because hyperosmolality has been reported from overzealous 
glucose replacement; undiluted 50% dextrose should not be 
used (see Chapter 4). 
 A family of penta- and hexapeptides called GH-releasing pep-
tides (GHRPs) stimulate GH secretion in normals and in 
GH-deficient subjects. GHRPs act via ghrelin receptors that are 
different from the GH-releasing factor (GHRF) receptors, and 
their effects are additive to that of GHRF. Ghrelin is a gastrointes-
tinal-derived peptide that naturally binds to these receptors in the 
central nervous system, causing GH secretion, but it also stimu-
lates appetite and is classified as an orexigenic agent. Recently, 
mutations in the GH secretagogue receptor (GHSR) were found 
in children with short stature; treatment with GH increases 
growth rate. 
 Patients who respond to the pharmacologic stimuli noted 
above, but not to physiologic stimuli such as exercise or sleep, were 
said to have neurosecretory dysfunction. These patients have 
decreased 24-hour secretion of GH (or integrated concentrations 
of GH) compared with healthy subjects, patterns similar to those 
observed in GH-deficient patients. It is not clear how frequently 
this condition is encountered. 
 This long discussion of the interpretation of GH after secret-
agogue testing brings into question the very standard for the 
diagnosis of GH deficiency. It is clear that pharmacologic testing 
cannot always determine which patients truly need GH therapy, 
and many authorities suggest that we abandon such dynamic test-
ing in favor of measurements of IGF-I and IGFBP-3. This is the 
practice of the author whenever possible, although dynamic GH 
testing may still be required by a few insurance plans. Serum 
IGF-I and IGFBP-3 measurements are alternative methods for 
evaluating GH adequacy. Serum IGF-I values are low in most 
GH-deficient subjects, but, as noted above, some short patients 
with normal serum IGF-I concentrations may require GH treat-
ment to improve growth rate. Moreover, starvation lowers IGF-I 
values in healthy children and incorrectly suggests GH deficiency. 
Children with psychosocial dwarfism—who need family therapy 
or foster home placement rather than GH therapy—have low GH 
and IGF-I concentrations and may falsely appear to have GH 
deficiency. Likewise, patients with constitutional delay in adoles-
cence have low IGF-I values for chronologic age, but normal val-
ues for skeletal age, and may have temporarily decreased GH 
response to secretagogues. Thus, IGF-I determinations are not 
infallible in the diagnosis of GH deficiency. They must be inter-
preted with regard to nutrition, psychosocial status, and skeletal 
ages. IGFBP-3 is GH-dependent, and if its concentration is also 
low, it provides stronger evidence of GH deficiency than does the 
IGF-I determination alone. 
150    CHAPTER 6 Growth
 The Growth Hormone Research Society produced criteria that 
attempt to deal with the diagnosis of GH deficiency in childhood 
in spite of the uncertainty of the methods. These criteria use clini-
cal findings of various conditions associated with GH deficiency, 
the severity of short stature, and the degree and duration of 
decreased growth velocity to identify individuals that may have 
GH deficiency. The guidelines and diagnostic considerations in 
this chapter include most of the GH Society criteria. (See 
“Consensus guidelines” reference in the Short Stature section at the 
end of this chapter for details of the Growth Hormone Research 
Society statement.) A 3- to 6-month therapeutic trial of GH ther-
apy may be necessary to determine growth response; if growth 
increases more than 2 cm/y, it is likely that the child will benefit 
from GH treatment, no matter what the tests originally showed. 
 Treatment of GH Deficiency 
 A. GH replacement 
 Before 1986, the only available method 
of treatment for GH deficiency was replacement therapy with 
hGH derived from cadaver donors. In 1985 and thereafter, 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, a degenerative neurologic disease rare in 
patients so young, was diagnosed in some patients who had 
received natural hGH up to 10 to 15 years before. Because of the 
possibility that prions contaminating donor pituitary glands were 
transmitted to the GH-deficient patients, causing their deaths, 
natural GH from all sources was removed from distribution. 
Recombinant hGH now accounts for the world’s current supply. 
 Commercial GH has the 191-amino acid natural sequence. 
GH is now available in virtually unlimited amounts, allowing 
innovative treatment regimens not previously possible owing to 
scarce supplies. The potential for abuse of GH in athletes or in 
children of normal size whose parents wish them to be taller than 
average, however, must now be addressed. 
 Growth disturbances due to disorders of GH release or action 
are shown in  Table 6–2 . GH-deficient children require biosynthetic 
somatropin (natural sequence GH) at a dose of 0.3 mg/kg/wk 
administered in one subcutaneous dose per day 6 or 7 times per 
week during the period of active growth before epiphyseal fusion. 
The increase in growth rate ( Figures 6–9 ,  6–10 , and  6–11 ) is 
most marked during the first year of therapy. Older children do 
not respond as well and may require larger doses. Higher doses, 
up to double the standard starting dose, are approved by the FDA 
for use in puberty, but there are varying reports of the effect of 
such higher doses on adult height as by far, most of the effect of 
GH on adult height is exerted in the years before puberty. GH 
does not increase growth rate without adequate nutrition and 
euthyroid status. During the roughly 50 years since the first use 
of GH in children, long-term effects are reported in several series. 
If only the children most recently treated with recombinant 
GH are considered, the mean adult height was 1.4 SD below 
the mean, a significant improvement over the −2.9 SD mean 
height at the start of therapy but not a true normalization of 
height in most patients. With earlier diagnosis and treatment, 
using new pubertal dosing schedules, adult height can reach 
genetic  potential. 
 Monitoring of GH replacement is mainly accomplished by 
measuring growth rate and annually assessing bone age advance-
ment. Serum IGF-I and IGFBP-3 will rise with successful therapy 
while GHBP will not change appreciably. Controlled clinical 
studies reported the utility of titrating the dose of GH to restore 
serum IGF-I to the high-normal range, monitoring serum IGF-I 
levels during clinical treatment. Serum bone-specific alkaline 
phosphatase rises with successful therapy. Urinary hydroxyproline, 
deoxypyridinoline, and galactosyl-hydroxylysine reflect growth 
rate and are used in clinical studies to reflect increased growth rate 
with therapy. 
 Antibodies to GH may be present in measurable quantities in 
the serum of children receiving GH. However, a high titer of 
blocking antibodies with significant binding capacity is rare 
except in patients with absence or abnormality of  GH genes. 
Only a few patients are reported to have temporarily ceased grow-
ing because of antibody formation. GH exerts anti-insulin effects. 
Although clinical diabetes is not a likely result of GH therapy, the 
long-term effects of a small rise in glucose in an otherwise healthy 
child are unknown. If a tendency toward diabetes is already pres-
ent, GH may cause the onset of clinical manifestations more 
quickly. Another potential risk is the rare tendency to develop 
slipped capital femoral epiphyses in children receiving GH ther-
apy. Recent data have weakened the link between slipped capital 
femoral epiphyses and GH therapy, but the final import of the 
relationship is not yet clear. Slipped capital femoral epiphyses, if 
associated with endocrinopathies, are most common in treated 
hypothyroid patients (50% one series of 80 episodes of slipped 
capital femoral epiphyses), followed by treated GH-deficient 
patients (25% of the series). This condition may occur bilaterally, 
and prophylactic treatment of the nonaffected side is recom-
mended by several authorities. Pseudotumor cerebri may rarely 
occur with GH therapy and is usually associated with severe 
headache and may be more common in obese individuals receiv-
ing GH treatment. It is reported to reverse after cessation of GH 
therapy, but if allowed to continue, it may impair vision and 
TABLE 6–2 Level of defect in growth.
Site of Defect
Clinical Condition
Hypothalamus
Idiopathic GH deficiency due to decreased GHRH 
secretion; hypothalamic tumors or congenital defects
Pituitary gland
Dysplasia, trauma, surgery, or tumor of the 
pituitary gland; defect in GH gene or in pituitary 
transcription factors
Sites of IGF 
 production
Primary IGF1 deficiency: GH receptor defect 
(Laron dwarfism with high GH and low IGF 
concentrations)
ALS deficiency
Growth hormone/JAK-STAT axis signal-
transduction defect
Pygmies with normal GH, low IGF-1, and normal 
IGF-2 concentrations
Cartilage
Glucocorticoid-induced growth failure
Resistance to IGF-1
CHAPTER 6 Growth     151
cause severe complications. Organomegaly and skeletal changes 
like those found in acromegaly are other theoretical side effects of 
excessive GH therapy but do not occur with standard doses. 
Furthermore, a few cases of prepubertal gynecomastia are 
reported with GH therapy. 
 The discovery of leukemia in young adults previously treated 
with GH was worrisome, but no cause and effect relationship has 
been established, and GH treatment is not considered a cause of 
leukemia. GH does not increase the recurrence rate of tumors exist-
ing before therapy. Thus, patients with craniopharyngiomas, for 
example, may receive GH, if indicated, after the disease is clinically 
stable without significant worry that the GH will precipitate a 
recurrence. Clinicians usually wait 1 year after completion of tumor 
therapy before starting patients on GH therapy, but doing so is not 
a requirement. There are reports of a small increase in risk of colonic 
carcinoma decades after natural GH treatment in GH-deficient 
children but no such information on long-term follow-up of chil-
dren treated with recombinant derived GH is available. 
 GH deficiency is associated with an adverse lipid profile with 
elevated LDL cholesterol and decreased HDL cholesterol in addi-
tion to an increased BMI; GH-deficient adolescents treated with 
GH develop these findings within a few years after discontinua-
tion of GH therapy. Low-dose GH therapy is now approved for 
use in adults with childhood-onset GH deficiency and is said to 
forestall these metabolic changes. Further, adult GH therapy 
maintains muscle strength and bone density in GH-deficient 
adults. One can, therefore, inform the parents of a child with GH 
deficiency that the patient may still benefit from GH therapy even 
after he or she stops growing, if profound GH deficiency remains 
after repeat testing. 
 GH has been combined with other substances to increase its 
impact on height. In patients who were diagnosed late, have 
60 –
59 –
58 –
57 –
56 –
55 –
54 –
53 –
52 –
51 –
50 –
49 –
48 –
47 –
46 –
45 –
44 –
43 –
42 –
41 –
40 –
39 –
38 –
37 –
36 –
35 –
34 –
33 –
32 –
31 –
30 –
29 –
28 –
27 –
in
cm
95
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
Age (y)
Physical growth (NCHS)
Boys 2-18 y
Stature
+ 3
+ 2
+ 1
 0
– 1
– 2
– 3
18
70
75
80
85
150
145
140
135
130
125
120
115
110
105
100
90
– 4
– 5
cm
in
cm
cm
70
75
80
85
150
145
140
135
130
125
120
115
110
105
100
90
95
 FIGURE 6–9  Examples of abnormal growth charts. Squares represent the growth pattern of a child (such as patient  A in  Figure 6–11 ) with 
precocious sexual development and early excessive growth leading to premature closure of the epiphyses and cessation of growth. Circles rep-
resent growth of a boy (such as patient  B in  Figure 6–11 ) with GH deficiency who showed progressively poorer growth until 6 years of age, 
when he was treated with hGH (arrow), after which catch-up growth occurred. The curves describe standard deviations from the mean. 
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
−1
Age (y)
Stature
boys
Increment (cm/6 months)
A
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
−1
Age (y)
Stature
boys
Increment (cm/6 months)
B
3
10
25
50
75
90
97
3
10
25
50
75
90
97
 FIGURE 6–10  Two examples of abnormal growth plotted on a height velocity chart.  A. The plot is taken from the data recorded as squares in  Figure 6–9 , describing a patient with pre-
cocious puberty such as patient  A in  Figure 6–11 , with premature epiphysial closure, and cessation of growth.  B. The plot is taken from the data recorded as circles in  Figure 6–9 , describing 
a patient with GH deficiency (such as patient  B in  Figure 6–11 ) who was treated with hGH (arrow) at age 6. Initial catch-up growth is noted for 2 years, with a lower (but normal) velocity of 
growth following. These charts display growth rate over 6 month growth intervals rather than 12-month intervals as shown on  Figures 6–3 and  6–4 . 
152
entered puberty, and appear to have limited time to respond to 
GH before epiphyseal fusion causes the cessation of growth, a 
GnRH agonist has been used to delay epiphyseal fusion in clinical 
trials with varying success, but this was not recommended by a 
consensus conference on the use of GnRH agonist therapy due to 
lack of strong evidence of effectiveness. While clinical trials con-
tinue, this off label use is not yet established as safe and effective. 
Aromatase inhibitors have been combined with GH in some stud-
ies and while this is not yet regular clinical practice, there appears 
to be an effect of decreasing bone age advancement while allowing 
increased growth and height obtained. 
 There are other conditions for which the FDA has approved 
the use of GH. GH therapy will increase adult height in Turner 
syndrome to an average of 5.1 cm if started early enough; the 
addition of low-dose oxandrolone is reported to further increase 
growth rate. Estrogen is used to promote feminization and main-
tain bone mineral density; the optimal time to initiate treatment 
with estrogen should be individualized based on bone age, height, 
and psychological factors. Usually estrogen is administered during 
the adolescent years in low doses and only after the normal age of 
onset of puberty is reached to preserve maximal adult height, 
although earlier initiation of therapy is gaining credence (see 
Chapter 15). 
 In the most successful series of children with SGA treated with 
GH, the agent increased adult height between 2.0 SD and 2.7 SD. 
Girls with Turner syndrome treated with GH reach adult height 
of more than 150 cm, an improvement from the average untreated 
height which is about 144 cm. When treatment starts at or before 
4 years, an adult height is achieved in the normal range. 
 Treatment with GH is approved for chronic renal disease in 
childhood. GH increases growth rate above the untreated state 
without excessive advancement in bone age. Prader-Willi syn-
drome may also be treated with GH to increase growth rate and 
lean tissue mass and bone density. A recent study indicated that 
parental education exerted the most significant effect on body 
composition in these children. However, there are reports that 
patients with Prader-Willi syndrome have died of obstructive sleep 
apnea following GH treatment, demonstrating a need for sleep 
studies to exclude sleep apnea before initiating treatment and 
constant surveillance. The treatment of Noonan syndrome is 
described earlier. In general, males are more often treated with GH 
than females in the United States, but this is not the case in other 
developed countries. 
 The FDA has approved the use of GH in otherwise normal 
children, whose stature is below 2.25 standard deviations for age 
and who are predicted to fall short of reaching normal adult height 
 FIGURE 6–11  Two boys demonstrating extremes of growth. The boy at left in each photograph  (A) has precocious puberty due to a central 
nervous system lesion. At 4½ years, he was 125.1 cm tall, which is 4.5 standard deviations (SDs) above the mean. (The mean height for a 4-year-
old is 101.5 cm.) His testes measured 2 × 3.5 cm each, his penis 9.8 × 2.8 cm (all pubertal measurements). He was muscular and had acne and a 
deep voice. His bone age was 10 years, the testosterone level was 480 ng/dL, and the LH rose after 100 μg of GnRH (gonadorelin) to a pubertal 
response. His brain CT scan revealed a hamartoma of the tuber cinereum. The boy at right  (B) at 6 years of age was 85 cm tall, which is more 
than 5 SD below the mean. He had the classic physical and historical characteristics of idiopathic GH deficiency, including early growth failure 
and a cherubic appearance. His plasma GH values were nondetectable and did not rise after provocative testing. 
CHAPTER 6 Growth     153
154    CHAPTER 6 Growth
(<1 percentile of adult height). There may be pressure for treat-
ment of children predicted to be taller than these guidelines from 
parents, but the FDA approval is for specific indications. While 
GH may increase the height of such severely affected children, it 
should not be used for a child whose predicted adult height is in 
the normal range. Treatment costs $30,000 to $40,000 per year or 
about $35,000 per cm gained. In the United States males are 
treated more often than females while the ratio is more equal in 
other countries, presumably due to social/cultural issues. 
GHRH has been isolated, sequenced, and synthesized. It is 
available for use in diagnosis and treatment. GH-deficient patients 
demonstrate lower or absent GH secretion after administration of 
GHRH. However, episodic doses of GHRH can restore GH 
secretion, IGF-I production, and growth in children with idio-
pathic GH deficiency. The ability of GHRH administration to 
stimulate pituitary GH secretion further supports the concept that 
idiopathic GH deficiency is primarily a disease of the hypothala-
mus, not of the pituitary gland. 
 IGF-I is now produced by recombinant DNA technology. 
IGF-I is useful in the treatment of certain types of short stature, 
particularly Laron dwarfism (and perhaps for African pygmies, 
should treatment be desired) where neither GH nor any other 
treatment is effective. IGF-I has been studied clinically for more 
than 12 years. Side effects such as hypoglycemia (observed in 49% 
of treated subjects), injection site lipohypertrophy (32%), and 
tonsillar/adenoidal hypertrophy (22%) are common but not said 
to be severe. However, there is concern among some authorities as to 
the safety of this therapy. 
 B. Psychologic management and outcome 
 Research 
into the psychologic outcome of patients with short stature is 
flawed by lack of consistent methods of investigation and lack of 
controlled studies, but some results are of interest. Aromatase 
inhibitors have been combined with GH therapy in clinical stud-
ies to decrease the advancement of bone age and maximize adult 
height. This has not yet been introduced into common practice 
and is considered experimental. 
 Studies vary in their conclusions, as to whether short stature is 
harmful to a child’s psychologic development or not, and 
whether, by inference, GH is helpful in improving the child’s 
psychologic functioning. Children with GH deficiency are the 
most extensively studied; earlier investigations suggested that 
they have more passive personality traits than do healthy chil-
dren, may have delayed emotional maturity, and suffer from 
infantilization from parents, teachers, and peers. Many of these 
children have been held back in school because of their size with-
out regard to their academic abilities. Some patients retain a body 
image of short stature even after normal height has been achieved 
with treatment. More recent studies challenge these views and 
suggest that self-image in children with height below the fifth 
percentile, who do not have GH deficiency, is closely comparable 
to a population of children with normal height. These findings 
may not be representative of the patient population discussed 
above in that a normal ambulatory population of  short children 
may differ from the selected group that seeks medical attention. 
The data suggest that short stature itself is not cause for grave 
psychologic concern, and such concerns should not be used to 
justify GH therapy. We cannot avoid the fact that our  heightist 
society values physical stature and equates it with the potential 
for success, a perception that is not lost on the children with short 
stature and their parents. A supportive environment in which 
they are not allowed to act younger than their age, nor to occupy 
a  privileged place in the family is recommended for children with 
short stature. Psychologic help is indicated in severe cases of 
depression or maladjustment. 
 2. PSYCHOSOCIAL DWARFISM 
( FIGURE 6–12 ) 
 Children with psychosocial dwarfism present with poor growth, a 
 pot-bellied and immature appearance. They often display bizarre eat-
ing and drinking habits. Parents may report that the affected child 
begs for food from neighbors, forages in garbage cans, and drinks 
from toilet bowls. As a rule, this tragic condition occurs in only one 
of several children in a family. Careful questioning and observation 
reveal a disordered family structure in which the child is either 
ignored or severely disciplined. Caloric deprivation or physical batter-
ing may or may not be a feature of the history. These children have 
functional hypopituitarism. Testing often reveals GH deficiency at 
first, but after the child is removed from the home, GH function 
quickly returns to normal. Diagnosis rests on improvement in behav-
ior or catch-up growth in the hospital or in a foster home. Separation 
from the family is therapeutic, but the prognosis is guarded. Family 
psychotherapy may be beneficial, but long-term follow-up is lacking. 
 Growth disorder due to abnormal parent–child interaction in 
a younger infant is  maternal deprivation. Caloric deprivation due 
to parental neglect may be of greater significance in this younger 
age group. Even in the absence of nutritional restriction or full-
blown psychosocial dwarfism, constant negative interactions 
within a family may inhibit the growth of a child. 
 It is essential to consider family dynamics in the evaluation of 
a child with poor growth. It is not appropriate to recommend GH 
therapy for emotional disorders. 
 3. HYPOTHYROIDISM 
 Thyroid hormone deficiency decreases postnatal growth rate and 
skeletal development if onset is at or before birth. It leads to severe 
developmental delay unless treatment is rapidly provided after 
birth. Screening programs for the diagnosis of congenital hypo-
thyroidism have been instituted all over the world. Early treatment 
following diagnosis in the neonatal period markedly reduces 
growth failure and has virtually eliminated mental retardation 
caused by this disorder. Indeed, early treatment of congenital 
hypothyroidism results in normal growth. Acquired hypothyroid-
ism in older children (eg, due to lymphocytic thyroiditis) may lead 
to growth failure. Characteristics of hypothyroidism are decreased 
growth rate and short stature, retarded bone age, and an increased 
US-LS ratio for chronologic age due to poor growth of the 
extremities. Patients are apathetic and sluggish and have constipa-
tion, bradycardia, coarsening of features and hair, hoarseness, and 
delayed pubertal development if the condition is untreated. 
CHAPTER 6 Growth     155
Intelligence is unaffected in late-onset hypothyroidism, but the 
apathy and lethargy may make it seem otherwise. Although weight 
gain is possible with hypothyroidism, in contrast to common 
wisdom, it is not extreme. 
 The diagnosis of congenital hypothyroidism is usually made on 
the basis of neonatal screening studies. In this standard procedure, 
currently in use throughout the world, a sample of blood is taken 
from the heel or from the umbilical cord at birth and analyzed for 
total T 4 or TSH. A total T 4 of less than 6 µg/dL or a TSH more 
than 25 mU/L is usually indicative of congenital hypothyroidism, 
but values differ by state and laboratory. A low total T 4 alone may 
be associated with low circulating thyroxine-binding globulin 
(TBG), but the significantly elevated TSH is diagnostic of pri-
mary hypothyroidism. The diagnosis may be accompanied by 
radiologic evidence of retarded bone age or epiphyseal dysgenesis 
in severe congenital hypothyroidism. 
 In older children, serum TSH is the most reliable diagnostic 
test. Elevated TSH with decreased free T 4 may eliminate the 
potential confusion resulting from the use of total T 4 , which may 
vary with the level of TBG or other thyroxine-binding proteins. 
A positive test for serum thyroglobulin antibodies or thyroperoxi-
dase antibodies would lead to the diagnosis of autoimmune thy-
roid disease (Hashimoto thyroiditis) as an explanation for the 
development of hypothyroidism (see Chapter 7). If both FT 4 and 
TSH are low, the possibility of central hypothyroidism (pituitary 
or hypothalamic insufficiency) must be considered (this would 
not be determined in the newborn screening programs that use 
primarily TSH screening). This should lead to a search for other 
hypothalamic-pituitary endocrine deficiencies such as GH defi-
ciency and central nervous system disease (see Chapter 4). 
 Treatment is accomplished by thyroxine replacement. The dose 
varies from a range of 10 to 15 µg/kg in infancy to 2 to 3 µg/kg 
in older children and teenagers. Suppression of TSH to normal 
values for age is a useful method for assessing the adequacy of 
replacement in acquired primary hypothyroidism. However, there 
are additional considerations in treatment of neonates, and con-
56 -
55 -
54 -
53 -
52 -
51 -
50 -
49 -
48 -
47 -
46 -
45 -
44 -
43 -
42 -
41 -
40 -
39 -
38 -
37 -
36 -
35 -
34 -
33 -
32 -
31 -
30 -
29 -
28 -
27 -
in
cm
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
105
110
115
120
125
130
135
140
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
Age (y)
Physical growth (NCHS)
Boys:  2-12 y
Stature
+ 3
+ 2
+ 1
 0
– 1
– 2
– 3
– 4
– 5
12
 FIGURE 6–12  Photograph and growth chart of a 9½-year-old boy with psychosocial dwarfism. He had a long history of poor growth (<3 cm/y). 
The social history revealed that he was given less attention and punished more frequently than his seven siblings. He ate from garbage cans 
and begged for food, though he was not apparently deprived of food at home. When the photograph was taken, he was 99 cm tall (−7 standard 
deviation [SD]) and weighed 14.7 kg (−3 SD). His bone age was 5 years, with growth arrest lines visible. Serum thyroxine was 7.8 μg/dL. Peak 
serum GH varied from nondetectable to 8 ng/mL on different provocative tests between age 6 years and 8½ years. He was placed in a hospital 
chronic care facility (arrow) for a 6-month period and grew 9 cm, which projects to a yearly growth velocity of 18 cm. On repeat testing, the 
peak serum GH was 28 ng/mL. 
156    CHAPTER 6 Growth
sultation with a pediatric endocrinologist is essential in this age 
group to ensure optimal central nervous system development. 
Suppression of TSH is not necessarily appropriate in all affected 
newborns. 
 4. CUSHING SYNDROME 
 Excess glucocorticoids (either exogenous or endogenous) lead to 
decreased growth before obesity and other signs of Cushing syn-
drome develop. The underlying disease may be bilateral adrenal 
hyperplasia due to abnormal ACTH-cortisol regulation in Cushing 
disease, autonomous adrenal adenomas, or adrenal carcinoma. 
The appropriate diagnosis may be missed if urinary cortisol and 
17-hydroxycorticosteroid determinations are not interpreted on 
the basis of the child’s body size or if inappropriate doses of dex-
amethasone are used for testing (appropriate doses are 20 µg/kg/d 
for the low-dose and 80 µg/kg/d for the high-dose dexamethasone 
suppression test) (see Chapter 9). Furthermore, daily variations in 
cortisol production necessitate several urinary or plasma cortisol 
determinations before Cushing disease can be appropriately diag-
nosed or ruled out. The high-dose dexamethasone test was posi-
tive in 68% of a recent series of children with Cushing disease. 
The corticotropin-releasing hormone test was positive in 80% of 
affected patients, whereas MRI of the pituitary was positive in 
only 52%. Inferior petrosal sampling (see Chapters 4 and 9) was 
100% accurate in the diagnosis of Cushing disease although tech-
nically difficult in children. The development of salivary cortisol 
assays makes the sampling of early morning cortisol after late-
night dexamethasone doses an easier method to diagnose Cushing 
disease in children. Transsphenoidal microadenomectomy is the 
treatment of choice for Cushing disease. 
 Exogenous glucocorticoids used to treat asthma or even over-
zealous use of topical corticosteroid ointments or creams may 
suppress growth. These iatrogenic causes of Cushing syndrome, if 
resolved early, may allow catch-up growth and so may not affect 
final height. Thus, an accurate history of prior medications is 
important in diagnosis. Treatment of the underlying disorder (eg, 
transsphenoidal microadenomectomy for Cushing disease) will 
restore growth rate to normal (catch-up growth may occur ini-
tially) if epiphyseal fusion has not occurred, but adult height will 
depend on the length of the period of growth suppression. 
 5. PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM 
 Pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1A (OMIM #103580) is a rare 
disorder consisting of a characteristic phenotype and biochemical 
signs of hypoparathyroidism (low serum calcium and high serum 
phosphate) in its classic form. Phosphate is elevated in states of 
parathyroid hormone (PTH) deficiency, while phosphate is low in 
vitamin D deficiency. Circulating PTH levels are elevated, and 
target tissues fail to respond to exogenous PTH administration. 
Children with classic pseudohypoparathyroidism are short and 
overweight, with characteristic round facies and short fourth and 
fifth metacarpals. This constellation of physical findings is called 
Albright hereditary osteodystrophy, which may be expressed sepa-
rately from the biochemical disorders (see later). Developmental 
delay is common. The condition is due to heterozygous loss of 
function in the alpha subunit of the G s protein transducer 
( GNAS1 gene). When imprinted paternally, this results in a defect 
in the G-protein that couples PTH receptors to adenylyl cyclase. 
Thus, patients with pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1A have a 
blunted rise of urinary cAMP in response to administration of 
PTH. Remarkably, a defect occurs in the same regulatory protein 
system affected in McCune-Albright syndrome, in which hyperac-
tive endocrine events result (see Chapters 1 and 8). A rarer variant 
of this disorder (pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1B; OMIM 
#603233) appears to be due to mutations in noncoding regions of 
the  GNAS1 gene. Treatment with high-dose vitamin D or 
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (calcitriol) and exogenous calcium as 
well as phosphate-binding agents (if needed) will help correct the 
biochemical defects and control hypocalcemic seizures in patients 
with pseudohypoparathyroidism. 
 Two remarkable cousins are reported with pseudohypoparathy-
roidism and premature Leydig cell maturation, both due to abnor-
malities in the same G protein. The defective protein was shown 
to be inactive at normal body temperature, leading to defective 
PTH activity at the level of the kidney and bone. However, it was 
hyperactive at the cooler temperatures in the scrotum, leading to 
ligand-independent activation of Leydig cell function. 
 Children with the phenotype of Albright hereditary osteo-
dystrophy but with normal circulating levels of calcium, phos-
phate, and PTH have pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism (OMIM 
#612463). They require no calcium or vitamin D therapy 
(see Chapter 8). 
 6. DISORDERS OF VITAMIN D 
METABOLISM 
 Short stature and poor growth are features of rickets in its obvious 
or more subtle forms. The cause may be vitamin D deficiency due 
to inadequate oral intake, fat malabsorption, inadequate sunlight 
exposure, anticonvulsant therapy, and/or renal or hepatic disease. 
Classic findings of vitamin D-deficient rickets include bowing of 
the legs, chest deformities (rachitic rosary), and characteristic 
radiographic findings of the extremities associated with decreased 
serum calcium and phosphate levels and elevated serum alkaline 
phosphatase levels. There are two forms of hereditary vitamin 
D-dependent rickets. Autosomal recessive type 1 hypophos-
phatemic rickets (OMIM #241520) involves a renal 25 OHD 
1-hydroxylase deficiency, and type 2 (OMIM #613312) involves 
an absent or defective vitamin D receptor. However, the most 
common type of rickets in the United States is X-linked hypo-
phosphatemic rickets, a dominant genetic disorder affecting renal 
reabsorption of phosphate. It is associated with short stature, 
severe and progressive bowing of the legs (but no changes in the 
wrists or chest), normal or slightly elevated serum calcium, very 
low serum phosphate, and urinary phosphate wasting. Short stat-
ure is linked with rickets in other renal disorders associated with 
renal phosphate wasting. Examples include Fanconi syndrome 
(including cystinosis and other inborn errors of metabolism) and 
renal tubular acidosis. 
CHAPTER 6 Growth     157
 When treatment is effective in these disorders (eg, vitamin D 
for vitamin D deficiency or alkali therapy for appropriate types of 
RTA), growth rates will improve. Replacement of vitamin D and 
phosphate is appropriate therapy for vitamin D-resistant rickets. It 
improves the bowing of the legs and leads to improved growth, 
although there is a risk of nephrocalcinosis. This necessitates 
annual renal ultrasound examinations when patients are receiving 
vitamin D therapy. 
 In the Williams syndrome of elfin facies, supravalvular aortic 
stenosis, and mental retardation with gregarious personality, 
patients have SGA and greatly reduced height in childhood and as 
adults; this disorder may include infantile hypercalcemia but is no 
longer considered a disorder of vitamin D metabolism because a 
genetic defect in the  elastin gene at 7q11.23 occurs in most 
affected patients (see Chapters 8 and 15). 
 7. DIABETES MELLITUS 
 Growth in type 1 diabetes mellitus depends on the efficacy of 
therapy. Well-controlled diabetes mellitus is compatible with 
normal growth, whereas poorly controlled diabetes often causes 
slow growth. Liver and spleen enlargement in a poorly controlled 
short diabetic child is known as Mauriac syndrome, rarely seen 
now owing to improved diabetic care. Another factor that may 
decrease growth rate in children with type 1 diabetes mellitus is 
the increased incidence of Hashimoto thyroiditis in this popula-
tion. Yearly thyroid function screening is advisable, especially as 
the peripubertal period approaches. GH concentrations are 
higher in children with diabetes, and this factor may play a role 
in the development of diabetic complications. IGF-I concentra-
tions tend to be normal or low, depending on glucose control, 
but judging from the elevated GH noted above, the stimulation 
of IGF-I production by GH appears to be partially blocked in 
these children. 
 8. DIABETES INSIPIDUS 
 Polyuria and polydipsia due to inadequate vasopressin (central or 
neurogenic diabetes insipidus) or inability of the kidney in the 
classic case to respond to vasopressin (nephrogenic diabetes 
insipidus) leads to poor caloric intake and decreased growth. With 
appropriate treatment (see Chapter 5), the growth rate should 
return to normal. Acquired neurogenic or central diabetes insipi-
dus may herald a hypothalamic-pituitary tumor, and growth 
failure may be due to associated GH deficiency. 
 DIAGNOSIS OF SHORT STATURE 
( TABLE 6–3 ) 
 Evaluation of Short Stature 
 An initial decision must determine whether a child is pathologi-
cally short or simply distressed because height is not as close to the 
50th percentile as desired by the patient or the parents. Performing 
unnecessary tests is expensive and may be a source of long-term 
concern to the parents—a concern that could be avoided by 
TABLE 6–3 Basic diagnosis of short stature.
Medical History
Birth weight and gestational age
Prenatal substance abuse
Birth trauma or complications
Family heights
Age of puberty or menarche in family
Family history of or symptoms of chronic diseases
Dietary history
Physical Examination
Measured and charted height
Measured and charted weight and BMI
Signs of syndromes
Midline defects
Neurological examination
Findings of chronic disease
Laboratory Examination
Chemistry panel
 Electrolytes to rule out RTA
 Liver and kidney function to rule out chronic conditions
CBC to rule out anemia or hematological disease
Urinalysis to rule out RTA and renal disease
Free T4 and TSH to rule out hypothyroidism
IGF-1 (Don’t misinterpret low values in constitutional delay or 
 malnutrition)
IGFBP-3 to confirm low IGF-1 in GH deficiency
Serum prolactin to evaluate potential hypothalamic/pituitary disease
Celiac panel
Karyotype in any girl without other diagnosis
Consider dexamethasone suppression in a short child who is gaining 
 excessive weight (quite rare)
Radiographic Examination
Skeletal age to determine constitutional delay
Bone age determination will not make a diagnosis but may assist in 
 making a diagnosis
Bone age determinations must be interpreted in terms of standard 
 deviations from the mean
Bone age determinations must be read by an experienced evaluator
MRI with contrast is usually the best way to determine the presence 
 of a CNS tumor
Growth Hormone Testing
Growth hormone testing is last and only performed if no other 
 diagnosis is found
Never get basal serum GH unless you suspect gigantism!
Stimulated tests:
 
L-Dopa
 Clonidine
 Arginine
 Glucagon
 Insulin-induced hypoglycemia (very dangerous)
 GHRH
 Growth hormone–releasing peptides (GRP)
appropriate reassurance. Alternatively, missing a diagnosis of 
pathologic poor growth may cause the patient to lose inches of 
final height or may allow progression of disease. 
 If a patient’s stature, growth rate, or height adjusted for mid-
parental height is sufficiently decreased to warrant evaluation, an 
orderly approach to diagnosis will eliminate unnecessary labora-
tory testing. The medical history will provide invaluable informa-
158    CHAPTER 6 Growth
tion. Birthweight and gestational age is used to determine 
whether the child is SGA or appropriate for gestational age 
(AGA), the intrauterine course and toxin exposure and the pos-
sibility of birth trauma. Evaluation for dietary abnormalities and 
for symptoms of any chronic disease is important since almost 
any systemic disease or nutritional compromise can decrease 
growth rate (see Table 6–1). Review of past growth charts is 
important, but in this modern era, children often change doctors 
frequently, and these data may not be available. Asking whether 
the child has changed clothing sizes or shoe sizes is useful in the 
absence of any other data that may allow determination of 
growth rate. Heights of parents and age of puberty of parents are 
recorded although usually only a mother will recall her age of 
menarche while the father will not remember anything about his 
pubertal development (unless the father continued to grow after 
he left high school which might indicate constitutional delay in 
puberty). The height of siblings and specifically their percentile 
of height and whether they entered puberty at an appropriate 
time is important. Chronic disease in the family is also found in 
the history. Evaluation of psychosocial factors affecting the family 
and the relationship of parents and child can be carried out dur-
ing the history-taking encounter. Often the diagnosis can be 
made at this point. 
 It goes without stating that accurate measurement of growth is 
essential. The physical examination requires determination of 
height as described earlier, and comparison is carried out with any 
previous data available. Measurement of weight and the calcula-
tion of BMI is performed so that neither obesity nor malnutrition 
is missed. If past heights are not available, a history of lack of 
change in clothing and shoe sizes or failure to lengthen skirts or 
pants may reflect poor growth. Questions about how the child’s 
stature compares with that of his or her peers and whether the 
child’s height has always had the same relationship to that of class-
mates are useful. One of the most important features of the evalu-
ation process is to determine height velocity and compare the 
child’s growth rate with the normal growth rate for age. Adjustment 
for midparental height is calculated and nutritional status deter-
mined. Arm span, head circumference, and US-LS ratio are mea-
sured. Physical examination is directed to uncover signs of chronic 
disease or a midline defect of the central nervous system that may 
be related to hypothalamic pituitary dysfunction. Physical stigmas 
of syndromes or systemic diseases are evaluated. Neurologic 
examination is essential. 
 Any clues to a diagnosis in the history or physical examination 
should be pursued. However, if no historical or physical features 
lead to the etiology, laboratory examinations are performed. 
Complete blood count, urinalysis, and serum chemistry screening 
with electrolyte measurements may reveal anemia, abnormalities 
of hepatic or renal disease (including concentration defects), glu-
cose intolerance, acidosis, calcium disorder, or other electrolyte 
disturbances. Age-adjusted values must be used, because, eg., the 
normal ranges of serum alkaline phosphatase and phosphorus 
values are higher in children than in adults. An elevated sedimen-
tation rate, low serum carotene, or a positive antinuclear, antiglia-
din, antiendomysial, antireticulin, or antitissue transglutaminase 
antibody determination (with IgA determination) may indicate 
connective tissue disease, Crohn disease, celiac disease, or malab-
sorption syndrome. Serum TSH and free T 4 are important 
 measurements to exclude existing thyroid disease. Skeletal age 
evaluation does not alone provide a diagnosis; however, if the 
study shows delayed bone age, the possibility of constitutional 
delay in growth, hypothyroidism, or GH deficiency must be con-
sidered. The tests used for the diagnosis of GH deficiency are 
detailed above. If serum IGF-I is normal for age, classic GH defi-
ciency or malnutrition is unlikely; if serum IGF-I is low, it must 
be considered in relation to skeletal age, nutritional status, and 
general health status before interpretation of the value can be 
made. Since IGF-I values are low under 2 or 3 years of age, the 
simultaneous measurement of IGFBP-3 is useful in infants. If 
either or both IGF-I and IGFBP-3 are low, the diagnosis may be 
GH deficiency if poor nutrition is ruled out. If GH deficiency or 
impairment is found or if there is another hypothalamic-pituitary 
defect, an MRI is indicated with particular attention to the 
hypothalamic-pituitary area to rule out a congenital defect or 
neoplasm in the area. Ectopic location of the posterior pituitary 
on MRI is relatively frequent in congenital GH deficiency, as is a 
decreased pituitary volume or apparent interruption of the pitu-
itary stalk. Serum gonadotropin and sex steroid determinations 
are performed in pediatric assays if puberty is delayed (see 
Chapter 15). Serum prolactin may be elevated in the presence of 
a hypothalamic disorder. 
 Celiac disease is quite common as a cause of gastrointestinal 
distress and/or short stature. Serum IgA levels and antitissue trans-
glutaminase antibody measurements are indicated in the evalua-
tion of growth disorders. A karyotype is obtained in any short girl 
without another diagnosis to rule out Turner syndrome, especially 
if puberty is delayed or gonadotropins are elevated. If Turner syn-
drome is diagnosed, evaluation of thyroid function and determi-
nation of thyroid antibodies is also important. 
 Elevated urinary free cortisol (normal: <60 µg/m 2 /24 h 
[<18.7 µmol/m 2 /24 h]), elevated late night salivary cortisol, or abnor-
mal dexamethasone suppression testing signifies Cushing syndrome. 
 If no diagnosis is apparent after all of the above have been 
considered and evaluated, more detailed procedures, such as pro-
vocative testing for GH deficiency, are indicated. It must be 
emphasized that a long and expensive evaluation is not necessary 
until it is demonstrated that psychologic or nutritional factors are 
not at fault. Likewise, if a healthy-appearing child presents with 
borderline short stature, normal growth rate, and short familial 
stature, a period of observation may be more appropriate than 
laboratory tests. 
 TALL STATURE DUE TO NONENDOCRINE 
CAUSES 
 1. CONSTITUTIONAL TALL STATURE 
 A subject who has been taller than his or her peers through most 
of childhood, is growing at a velocity within the normal range 
with a moderately advanced bone age, and has no signs of the 
disorders listed below may be considered to be constitutionally 
CHAPTER 6 Growth     159
advanced. Predicted final height will usually be in the normal 
adult range for the family. 
 Obesity in an otherwise healthy child will often, especially in 
the presence of a melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) mutation, 
leads to moderate advancement of bone age, slightly increased 
growth rate, and tall stature in childhood. Puberty will begin in 
the early range of normal, and adult stature will conform to 
genetic influences. Thus, an obese child without endocrine disease 
should be tall; short stature and obesity are worrisome. 
 2. FAMILIAL/GENETIC TALL STATURE 
 Children with exceptionally tall parents have a genetic tendency 
to reach a height above the normal range. The child will be tall 
for age and will grow at a high normal rate. Bone age will be 
close to chronologic age, leading to a tall height prediction. 
Occasionally, children will be concerned about being too tall as 
adults. These worries are more common in girls and will often be 
of greater concern to the parents than to the patient. Adult 
height was limited in the past by promoting early epiphyseal 
closure with estrogen in girls or testosterone in boys, but such 
therapy is no longer considered appropriate. Testosterone ther-
apy decreases HDL cholesterol levels. Acne fulminans may be 
caused by testosterone therapy and progression may occur, even 
after therapy has been withdrawn. Estrogen carries the theoreti-
cal risk of thrombosis, ovarian cysts, and galactorrhea, even if 
few of these complications are reported. High-dose estrogen 
therapy is estimated to decrease predicted final height by as 
much as 4.5 to 7 cm but only if started 3 to 4 years before epi-
physeal fusion. Height-limiting therapy is extremely rare in the 
present era although, recently, long-acting somatostatin agonists 
have been used in an attempt to limit height. Counseling and 
reassurance are more appropriate. 
 3. SYNDROMES OF TALL STATURE 
 Cerebral Gigantism 
 The sporadic syndrome of rapid growth in infancy, prominent 
forehead, high-arched palate, sharp chin, and hypertelorism 
[Sotos syndrome (OMIM #117550)] is caused by mutation in the 
 nuclear receptor–binding SET domain protein 1 ( NSD1 ) gene and 
is not associated with GH excess. Mentation is usually impaired. 
The growth rate decreases to normal in later childhood, but stat-
ure remains tall. 
 Marfan Syndrome 
 Marfan syndrome (OMIM #154700) is an autosomal dominant 
abnormality of connective tissue exhibiting variable penetrance. 
The disorder is due to mutation of the  fibrillin1 gene located on 
15q21.1. This condition may be diagnosed by characteristic 
physical manifestations of tall stature, long thin fingers (arachno-
dactyly), hyperextension of joints, and superior lens subluxation. 
Pectus excavatum and scoliosis may be noted. Furthermore, aortic 
or mitral regurgitation or aortic root dilation may be present, and 
aortic dissection or rupture may ultimately occur. In patients with 
this syndrome, arm span exceeds height, and the US-LS ratio is 
quite low owing to long legs. Aortic root ultrasound and slit lamp 
ophthalmologic examinations are indicated. 
 Homocystinuria 
 Patients with homocystinuria (OMIM #236200) have an auto-
somal recessive deficiency of cystathionine beta-synthase (gene 
locus 21q22.3) and phenotypes similar to those of patients with 
Marfan syndrome. Additional features of homocystinuria include 
developmental delay, increased incidence of seizures, osteoporosis, 
inferior lens dislocation, and increased urinary excretion of homo-
cystine with increased plasma homocystine and methionine but 
low plasma cystine. Thromboembolic phenomena may precipitate 
a fatal complication. This disease is treated by restricting dietary 
methionine and, in responsive patients, administering  pyridoxine. 
 Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome 
 Patients with Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (OMIM #130650) 
demonstrate macrosomia (birth weight >90th percentile) in 88% of 
cases, increased postnatal growth, omphalocele in 80%, macroglossia 
in 97%, and hypoglycemia due to the hyperinsulinism of pancreatic 
hyperplasia in 63%. Other reported features include fetal adrenocor-
tical cytomegaly and large kidneys with medullary dysplasia. The 
majority of patients occur in a sporadic pattern due to a mutation at 
11p15.5, but analysis of some pedigrees suggests the possibility of 
familial patterns. There is a risk of Wilms tumor, hepatoblastoma, 
adrenal carcinoma, and gonadoblastoma in this condition. 
 XYY Syndrome 
 Patients with one (47,XYY) or more (48,XYYY) extra Y chromo-
somes achieve greater than average adult heights. They have nor-
mal birth lengths but higher than normal growth rates. Excess GH 
secretion has not been documented (see Chapter 14). 
 Klinefelter Syndrome 
 Patients with Klinefelter syndrome (see Chapters 12 and 14) tend 
toward tall stature, but this is not a constant feature. 
 TALL STATURE DUE TO ENDOCRINE 
DISORDERS 
 1. PITUITARY GIGANTISM 
 Pituitary gigantism is caused by excess GH secretion before the 
age of epiphyseal fusion. The increased GH secretion may be due 
to somatotroph-secreting tumors or constitutive activation of GH 
secretion as is sometimes found in the McCune-Albright syn-
drome. Alternatively, it may result from excess secretion of 
GHRH. Patients—besides growing excessively rapidly—have 
coarse features, large hands and feet with thick fingers and toes, 
and often frontal bossing and large jaws. 
160    CHAPTER 6 Growth
 Although this condition is quite rare, the findings appear 
similar to those observed in the more frequent acromegaly 
(which occurs with GH excess after epiphyseal fusion). Thus, 
glucose intolerance or frank diabetes mellitus, hypogonadism, 
and thyromegaly are predicted. Treatment is accomplished by 
surgery (the transsphenoidal approach is used if the tumor is 
small enough), radiation therapy, or by therapy with a 
 somatostatin analog. 
 2. SEXUAL PRECOCITY 
 Early onset of estrogen or androgen secretion leads to abnormally 
increased height velocity. Because bone age is advanced, there is 
the paradox of the tall child who, because of early epiphyseal clo-
sure, is short as an adult. The conditions include complete and 
incomplete sexual precocity (including virilizing congenital adre-
nal hyperplasia) (see Chapter 14). 
 3. THYROTOXICOSIS 
 Excessive thyroid hormone, due to endogenous overproduction or 
overtreatment with exogenous thyroxine, leads to increased 
growth, advanced bone age, and, if occurring in early life, cranio-
synostosis. If the condition remains untreated, final height will be 
reduced. 
 4. INFANTS OF DIABETIC MOTHERS 
 Birth weight and size in infants of moderately diabetic mothers are 
quite high, although severely diabetic women who have poor control 
may have infants with IUGR due to placental vascular insufficiency. 
Severe hypoglycemia and hypocalcemia are evident in the infants 
soon after birth. The appearance and size of such infants is so striking 
that women have been diagnosed with gestational diabetes as a result 
of giving birth to affected infants. By 10 years of age, infants of dia-
betic mothers have an increased prevalence of obesity as well as 
insulin resistance and all of the comorbidities of the condition. 
 REFERENCES 
 Normal Growth 
 Himes JH. Minimum time intervals for serial measurements of growth in recum-
bent length or stature of individual children.  Acta Paediatr . 1999;88:120. 
[PMID: 10102141] 
 Lofqvist C, Andersson E, Gelander L, Rosberg S, Blum WF, Albertsson Wikland K. 
Reference values for IGF-I throughout childhood and adolescence: 
a model that accounts simultaneously for the effect of gender, age, and 
puberty.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2001;86:5870. [PMID: 11739455] 
 Reiter EO, Rosenfeld RG. Normal and aberrant growth. In: Wilson JD, Foster 
DW, Kronenberg HM, Larsen PR, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 
11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 2007. 
 Silventoinen K, Haukka J, Dunkel L, Tynelius P, Rasmussen F. Genetics of puber-
tal timing and its associations with relative weight in childhood and adult 
height: the Swedish Young Male Twins Study.  Pediatrics . 2008;121:e885. 
[PMID: 18381517] 
 Styne DM. Growth. In:  Handbook of Pediatric Endocrinology. Philadelphia, PA: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2004. 
 Towne B, Williams KD, Blangero J. Presentation, heritability, and genome-wide 
linkage analysis of the midchildhood growth spurt in healthy children from 
the Fels Longitudinal Study.  Hum Biol . 2008;80:623. [PMID: 19728540]. 
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhanes/growthcharts/set1/all.pdf. 
 Short Stature 
 Ahmad T, Garcia-Filion P, Borchert M, Kaufman F, Burkett L, Geffner M. 
Endocrinological and auxological abnormalities in young children with optic 
nerve hypoplasia: a prospective study.  J Pediatr . 2006;148:78. [PMID: 
16423602] 
 Albertsson-Wikland K, Aronson AS, Gustafsson J, et al. Dose-dependent effect of 
growth hormone on final height in children with short stature without 
growth hormone deficiency.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2008;93:4342. 
[PMID: 18728172] 
 Bullinger M, Kołtowska-Häggström M, Sandberg D, et al. Health-related quality 
of life of children and adolescents with growth hormone deficiency or idio-
pathic short stature—part 2: available results and future directions.  Horm 
Res . 2009;72:74. [PMID: 19690424] 
 Chernausek SD, Backeljauw PF, Frane J, et al. Long-term treatment with recom-
binant insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I in children with severe IGF-I 
deficiency due to growth hormone insensitivity.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2007;92:902. [PMID: 17192294] 
 Clayton PE, Cianfarani S, Czernichow P, Johannsson G, Rapaport R, Rogol A. 
Management of the child born small for gestational age through to adult-
hood: a consensus statement of the International Societies of Pediatric 
Endocrinology and the Growth Hormone Research Society.  J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab . 2007;92:804. [PMID: 17200164] 
 Cohen P, Rogol AD, Deal CL, et al. Consensus statement on the diagnosis and 
treatment of children with idiopathic short stature: a summary of the 
Growth Hormone Research Society, the Lawson Wilkins Pediatric Endocrine 
Society, and the European Society for Paediatric Endocrinology Workshop. 
 J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2008;93:4210. [PMID: 18782877] 
 Collett-Solberg PF, Misra M. The role of recombinant human insulin-like growth 
factor-I in treating children with short stature.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2008;93:10. [PMID: 18165284] 
 Davenport ML, Crowe BJ, Travers SH, et al. Growth hormone treatment of early 
growth failure in toddlers with Turner syndrome: a randomized, controlled, 
multicenter trial.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2007;92:3406. [PMID: 17595258] 
 de Graaff LC, Argente J, Veenma DC, et al. Genetic screening of a Dutch popula-
tion with isolated GH deficiency (IGHD).  Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) . 
2009;70:742. [PMID: 18785993] 
 Donaldson MD, Gault EJ, Tan KW, Dunger DB. Optimising management in 
Turner syndrome: from infancy to adult transfer.  Arch Dis Child . 2006;91:513. 
[PMID: 16714725] 
 GH Research Society. Consensus guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of 
growth hormone (GH) deficiency in childhood and adolescence: summary 
statement of the GH Research Society.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2000;85:3990. 
[PMID: 11095419] 
 Gonc EN, Yordam N, Ozon A, Alikasifoglu A, Kandemir N. Endocrinological 
outcome of different treatment options in children with craniopharyngioma: 
a retrospective analysis of 66 cases.  Pediatr Neurosurg . 2004;40:112. [PMID: 
15367800] 
 Grote FK, van Dommelen P, Oostdijk W, et al. Developing evidence-based guidelines 
for referral for short stature.  Arch Dis Child . 2008;93:212. [PMID: 17908714] 
 Hardin DS. GH improves growth and clinical status in children with cystic 
fibrosis—a review of published studies.  Eur J Endocrinol . 2004;151(suppl 1):
S81. [PMID: 15339250] 
 Huguenin M, Trivin C, Zerah M, Doz F, Brugieres L, Brauner R. Adult height 
after cranial irradiation for optic pathway tumors: relationship with neurofi-
bromatosis.  J Pediatr . 2003;142:699. [PMID: 12838200] 
 Keil MF, Stratakis CA. Pituitary tumors in childhood: update of diagnosis, treat-
ment and molecular genetics.  Expert Rev Neurother . 2008;8:563. [PMID: 
18416659] 
 Kelly BP, Paterson WF, Donaldson MD. Final height outcome and value of height 
prediction in boys with constitutional delay in growth and adolescence 
treated with intramuscular testosterone 125 mg per month for 3 months. 
 Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) . 2003;58:267. [PMID: 12608930] 
 Laron Z. The essential role of IGF-I: lessons from the long-term study and treat-
ment of children and adults with Laron syndrome.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
1999;84:4397. [PMID: 10599694] 
 Leschek EW, Rose SR, Yanovski JA, et al. Effect of growth hormone treatment on 
adult height in peripubertal children with idiopathic short stature: a ran-
domized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2004;89:3140. [PMID: 15240584] 
CHAPTER 6 Growth     161
 Mauras N. Strategies for maximizing growth in puberty in children with short 
stature.  Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am . 2009;38:613. [PMID: 
19717007] 
 Mullis PE. Genetics of growth hormone deficiency.  Endocrinol Metab Clin North 
Am . 2007;36:17. [PMID: 17336732] 
 Oberfield SE, Sklar CA. Endocrine sequelae in survivors of childhood cancer. 
 Adolesc Med . 2002;13:161. [PMID: 11841962] 
 Phillip M, Lebenthal Y, Lebl J, et al. European multicentre study in children born 
small for gestational age with persistent short stature: comparison of con-
tinuous and discontinuous growth hormone treatment regimens.  Horm Res . 
2009;71:52. [PMID: 19039237] 
 Ranke MB, Schweizer R, Lindberg A, et al. Insulin-like growth factors as diag-
nostic tools in growth hormone deficiency during childhood and adoles-
cence: the KIGS experience.  Horm Res . 2004;62(suppl 1):17. [PMID: 
15761228] 
 Saenger P, et al. Small for gestational age: short stature and beyond.  Endocr Rev . 
2007;28:219. [PMID: 17322454] 
 Simon D, Leger J, Carel JC. Optimal use of growth hormone therapy for maximiz-
ing adult height in children born small for gestational age.  Best Prac Res Clin 
Endocrinol Metab . 2008;22:525. [PMID: 18538291] 
 Stanley TL, Levitsky LL, Grinspoon SK, Misra M. Effect of body mass index on 
peak growth hormone response to provocative testing in children with short 
stature.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2009;94:4875. [PMID: 19890023] 
 Styne DM, Grumbach MM, Kaplan SL, Wilson CB, Conte FA. Treatment of 
Cushing’s disease in childhood and adolescence by transsphenoidal microad-
enomectomy.  N Engl J Med . 1984;310:889. [PMID: 6321987] 
 Tanner JM, Davies PS. Clinical longitudinal standards for height and height veloc-
ity for North American children.  J Pediatr . 1985;107:317. [PMID: 
3875704] 
 van Dijk M, Bannink EM, van Pareren YK, Mulder PG, Hokken-Koelega AC. 
Risk factors for diabetes mellitus type 2 and metabolic syndrome are compa-
rable for previously growth hormone-treated young adults born small for 
gestational age (SGA) and untreated short SGA controls.  J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab . 2007;92:160. [PMID: 17062774] 
 Wickman S, Kajantie E, Dunkel L. Effects of suppression of estrogen action by the 
p450 aromatase inhibitor letrozole on bone mineral density and bone turn-
over in pubertal boys.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2003;88:3785. [PMID: 
11888840] 
 Yanovski JA, Rose SR, Municchi G, et al. Treatment with a luteinizing hormone-
releasing hormone agonist in adolescents with short stature.  N Engl J Med . 
2003;348:908. [PMID: 12621135] 
 Tall Stature 
 Eugster EA, Peskovitz OH. Gigantism.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 1999;84:4379. 
[PMID: 10599691] 
 Leventopoulos G, Kitsiou-Tzeli S, Kritikos K, et al. A clinical study of Sotos syn-
drome patients with review of the literature.  Pediatr Neurol. 2009;40:357. 
[PMID: 19380072] 
 Thomsett MJ. Referrals for tall stature in children: a 25-year personal experience. 
 J Paediatr Child Health . 2009;45:58. [PMID: 19208068] 
 
This page intentionally left blank
163
7
 The Thyroid Gland 
 David S. Cooper, MD, and  
 Paul W. Ladenson, MA (Oxon.), MD 
 The thyroid gland is the body’s largest single organ specialized for 
endocrine hormone production. Its function is to secrete an 
appropriate amount of the thyroid hormones, primarily 3,5,3′,5′-
l-tetraiodothyronine (thyroxine, T 4 ), and a lesser quantity of 
3,5,3′-l-triiodothyronine (T 3 ), which arises mainly from the sub-
sequent extrathyroidal deiodination of T 4 . In target tissues, T 3 
interacts with nuclear T 3 receptors that are, in turn, bound to 
special nucleotide sequences in the promoter regions of genes that 
are positively or negatively regulated by thyroid hormone. Among 
their life-sustaining actions, the thyroid hormones promote nor-
mal fetal and childhood growth and central nervous system devel-
opment; regulate heart rate and myocardial contraction and 
relaxation; affect gastrointestinal motility and renal water clear-
ance; and modulate the body’s energy expenditure, heat genera-
tion, weight, and lipid metabolism. In addition, the thyroid 
contains parafollicular or C cells that produce calcitonin, a 
32-amino-acid polypeptide that inhibits bone resorption, but has 
no apparent physiologic role in humans. However, calcitonin is 
clinically important as a tumor marker produced by medullary 
thyroid cancers that arise from these cells (Chapter 8). 
 EMBRYOLOGY, ANATOMY, AND 
HISTOLOGY 
 The thyroid gland originates in the embryo as a mesodermal 
invagination in the pharyngeal floor at the foramen cecum, 
from which it descends anterior to the trachea and bifurcates, 
forming two lateral lobes, each measuring approximately 4 cm 
in length, 2 cm in width, and 1 cm in thickness in adulthood. 
Ectopic thyroid tissue can be present anywhere along or beyond 
this thyroglossal duct, from the tongue base (lingual thyroid) to 
the mediastinum. The thyroglossal duct may also give rise to 
midline cysts lined with squamous epithelium, which can 
remain asymptomatic, or become infected or give rise to thyroid 
tumors. The caudal end of the thyroglossal duct forms the pyra-
midal lobe of the thyroid, which can become palpable in condi-
tions causing diffuse thyroid inflammation or stimulation 
( Figure 7–1 ). 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 Upward growth of the thyroid gland is limited by the attach-
ment of the sternothyroid muscle to the thyroid cartilage. 
However, posterior and downward growth is unimpeded, so that 
thyroid enlargement, or goiter, frequently extends posteriorly 
and inferiorly, even into the superior mediastinum (substernal 
goiter). 
 The thyroid gland has clinically important anatomical relation-
ships to the recurrent laryngeal nerves, which course behind the 
gland, and two pairs of parathyroid glands that usually lie behind 
the upper and middle portions of the thyroid lobes. The thyroid 
is also draped around the trachea and the posterior margins of its 
lobes abut the esophagus. All of these structures can be com-
pressed by gland enlargement, invaded by thyroid malignancies, 
or injured in the course of thyroid surgery ( Figure 7–2 ). Because 
the posterior thyroid capsule is bound to the pretracheal fascia, the 
gland normally rises and falls with deglutition, facilitating its 
inspection and palpation. 
 The thyroid gland has a rich blood supply ( Figure 7–3 ), which 
can be increased in hyperthyroidism, giving rise to an audible 
whooshing sound (bruit) or even a palpable vibration (thrill). 
Microscopically, thyrocytes form hollow spheres (follicles) that 
surround a central lumen containing an aggregation of iodinated 
thyroglobulin (colloid) that represents the gland’s hormone stores 
( Figure 7–4 ). 
 PHYSIOLOGY 
 STRUCTURE AND SYNTHESIS OF 
THYROID HORMONES 
 The thyroid hormones are iodinated thyronines, which comprise 
of two tyrosine moieties joined by an ether linkage 
( Figure 7–5 ). The follicular cells of the thyroid gland are special-
ized in their ability to synthesize the large hormonal precursor 
protein thyroglobulin, concentrate iodide intracellularly from the 
circulation, and express a receptor that binds thyroid-stimulating 
hormone (thyrotropin, TSH), which promotes thyrocytes’ growth 
and biosynthetic functions. 
164    CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland
 IODINE METABOLISM 
 Iodine 1 is a key structural component of thyroid hormones. 
Consequently, it is an essential micronutrient consumed in food 
or water as iodide or iodate, which is converted to iodide in the 
stomach. The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends a 
daily dietary iodine intake of 150 μg for adults, 200 μg for preg-
nant and lactating women, and 50 to 250 μg for children. Because 
most iodide is excreted by the kidneys, urinary iodide excretion is 
an excellent index of dietary intake. 
 Over millennia, iodine has been leached from the soil in many 
mountainous and inland regions of the world. Consequently, 
according to WHO, dietary iodine deficiency, defined as a daily 
iodine intake less than 100 μg/d, affects an estimated two billion 
people, which is about one-third of the world’s population. When 
iodide intake is less than 50 μg/d, a normal-sized thyroid cannot 
sustain adequate hormone production, with resulting gland 
enlargement (goiter) and, ultimately, hypothyroidism. The conse-
quences of endemic dietary iodine deficiency are especially devas-
tating for the developing fetus and children, who require thyroid 
hormone for normal neurologic development and growth. In the 
North American diet, iodine is principally derived from iodized 
salt, iodate preservatives in baked goods, dairy products contain-
ing traces of iodophore antibacterial agents used in milk collec-
tion, food coloring, and seafood. 
 Thyrocytes abundantly express the sodium-iodide symporter 
(Na-I − symporter; NIS), which spans the cells’ basal membranes 
and actively transports iodide from the blood. The thyroid gland 
concentrates and uses only a fraction of the iodide supplied to it 
for hormone synthesis, and the remainder returns to the extracel-
lular fluid pool. Consequently, the normal fractional uptake of 
iodide, which can be quantified with a radioactive iodine tracer, is 
approximately 10% to 30% after 24 hours. Because of this active 
concentrating mechanism and the subsequent organification of 
intracellular iodide, the intrathyroidal pool of iodine is very large, 
8 to 10 mg in the form of stored thyroid hormones and iodinated 
tyrosines. This iodine provides a buffer in the event of temporary 
dietary iodine deficiency. 
 THYROID HORMONE SYNTHESIS AND 
SECRETION 
 Synthesis of T 4 and T 3 by the thyroid gland involves six major 
steps: (1) active transport of iodide across the basement membrane 
into the thyroid cell (trapping); (2) oxidation of iodide and iodi-
nation of tyrosyl residues in thyroglobulin (organification); 
(3) linking pairs of iodotyrosine molecules within thyroglobulin 
to form the iodothyronines T 3 and T 4 (coupling); (4) pinocytosis 
and then proteolysis of thyroglobulin with release of free iodothy-
ronines and iodotyrosines into the circulation; (5) deiodination of 
iodotyrosines within the thyroid cell, with conservation and reuse 
of the liberated iodide; and (6) intrathyroidal 5′-deiodination of 
T 4 to T 3 . 
 Thyroid hormone synthesis requires that NIS, thyroglobulin, 
and the enzyme thyroid peroxidase (TPO) all be present, func-
tional, and uninhibited. This process is summarized in 
 Figures 7–6 and  7–7 . 
Omohyoid muscle 
Sternohyoid muscle 
Sternocleidomastoid muscle
Sternothyroid muscle
Hyoid bone
Thyroid cartilage
Pyramidal lobe
Cricothyroid muscle
Thyroid gland
Trachea
 FIGURE 7–1 Gross anatomy of the human thyroid gland (anterior view). 
 1 In this chapter, the words “iodine,” referring to the uncharged element, and 
“iodide,” referring to its negatively charged anion form, are used interchangeably.
CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland     165
 Thyroglobulin 
 Thyroglobulin is a large glycoprotein molecule (MW 660,000 kD), 
composed of two subunits, each containing 5496 amino acids. 
Thyroglobulin includes approximately 140 tyrosyl residues, but 
only four tyrosyl sites are sterically oriented for effective 
 hormonogenesis in each molecule. The iodine content of 
 thyroglobulin can vary from 0.1% to 1% by weight. In thyro-
globulin containing 0.5% iodine, for example, there are approxi-
mately three molecules of T 4 and one molecule of T 3 . 
 The  thyroglobulin gene, which resides on the long arm of chro-
mosome 8, contains approximately 8500 nucleotides, which 
encode the prethyroglobulin protein monomer, including a 
Common carotid artery
Vagus nerve
Internal jugular 
vein
Parathyroid gland
Left lobe of thyroid gland
Esophagus
Isthmus of thyroid gland
Trachea
Recurrent laryngeal
nerve
Longus colli muscle
Right lobe of thyroid gland
Prevertebral fascia
 FIGURE 7–2  Cross-section of the neck at the level of T 1 , showing thyroid relationships.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Lindner HH. 
 Clinical Anatomy . McGraw-Hill; 1989.) 
Internal jugular vein
Superior thyroid vein
Superior thyroid artery
Middle thyroid vein
Inferior thyroid artery
Common carotid artery
Subclavian artery
and vein
Vagus nerve
Thyroid ima artery
Inferior thyroid vein
 FIGURE 7–3  Arteries and veins related to the thyroid gland.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Lindner HH.  Clinical Anatomy . 
McGraw-Hill; 1989.) 
166    CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland
19-amino acid signal peptide. TSH regulates expression of the  thy-
roglobulin gene. After thyroglobulin mRNA is translated in the 
rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER), the protein is glycosylated 
during transport through the Golgi apparatus (see  Figure 7–7 ), where 
thyroglobulin dimers are incorporated into exocytic vesicles. These 
vesicles then fuse with the cell’s apical basement membrane, from 
which they are released into the follicular lumen. There, at the api-
cal-colloid border, tyrosine residues in thyroglobulin are iodinated. 
 FIGURE 7–4  A. Normal rat thyroid. A single layer of cuboidal epithelial cells surrounds PAS-positive material in the follicular space (colloid). 
The larger, lighter-staining cells indicated by the arrows (I) are C cells that produce calcitonin. The follicular cells form an epithelial layer that sur-
rounds the colloid (F).  B. Inactive rat thyroid several weeks after hypophysectomy. The follicular lumens are larger and the follicular cells flatter. 
 C. Rat thyroid under intensive TSH stimulation. The animal was fed an iodine-deficient diet and injected with propylthiouracil for several weeks. 
Little colloid is visible. The follicular cells are tall and columnar. Several mitoses (m) are visible.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Halmi NS. In: 
Greep RO, Weiss L, eds.  Histology . McGraw-Hill; 1973.) 
3-Monoiodotyrosine (MIT)
3,5-Diiodotyrosine (DIT)
3,5,3′,5′-Tetraiodothyronine (thyroxine [T4])
3,5,3′-Triiodothyronine (T3)
3,3′,5′-Triiodothyronine (reverse T3 [rT3])
HO
I
CH2CH
NH2
COOH
HO
I
I
CH2CH
O
I
I
HO
I
I
CH2CH
NH2
COOH
NH2
COOH
O
I
I
HO
I
CH2CH
NH2
COOH
O
I
HO
I
I
CH2CH
NH2
COOH
 FIGURE 7–5 Structure of thyroid hormones and related com-
pounds.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Murray RK, et al. 
 Harper’s Biochemistry . 24th ed. McGraw-Hill; 1996.) 
Antithyroid drugs block
iodination of thyroglobulin
Apical microvilli
(Pendrin I−, Cl− transporter)
Basement membrane
(Na+/I− symporter)
Colloid
CIO4−, SCN− block
 active transport of I−
I−
I−
Organification:
synthesis T3 + T4
and storage in
thyroglobulin
Thyroid cell
Serum
Na+
Na+
I−
Na+
Na+
K+
K+
TPO
 FIGURE 7–6  The iodide transporter in the thyroid cell. The large 
solid circle represents the Na + /I − symporter actively transporting I − 
into the cell; the large blue circle represents Na + -K + ATPase supplying 
the ion gradient which drives the reaction. I − is transported across 
the apical membrane by pendrin. Hormone synthesis takes place in 
the colloid at the colloid-apical membrane, catalyzed by thyroperoxi-
dase (TPO). 
CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland     167
 Iodide Transport 
 Iodide (I − ) is transported across thyrocytes’ basal membrane by the 
NIS. Membrane-bound NIS, which derives its energy from a 
Na + -K + ATPase, allows the human thyroid gland to maintain a 
concentration of free iodide 30 to 40 times higher than that in 
plasma. NIS action is stimulated physiologically by TSH and 
pathophysiologically by the TSH receptor–stimulating antibody 
of Graves disease. Although salivary, gastric, and breast tissues 
express NIS and concentrate iodide to a lesser extent than the 
thyroid, these other tissues do not organify or store iodide, and 
their NIS activities are not stimulated by TSH. Large amounts of 
iodide suppress both NIS activity and  NIS gene expression, repre-
senting mechanisms of iodine autoregulation (see later). The per-
chlorate ion (ClO 4 − ) competes with iodide for NIS; perchlorate 
has been used to treat hyperthyroidism and has the potential to be 
an environmental inhibitor of thyroid function. NIS can also 
concentrate pertechnetate (TcO 4 − ) into thyroid cells, facilitating 
use of the radionuclide sodium pertechnetate (Tc 99m O 4 − ) for visu-
alization of the thyroid gland and quantification of its trapping 
activity. 
 At the thyrocyte’s apical border, a second iodide transport pro-
tein, pendrin, transports iodide to the membrane–colloid inter-
face, where it becomes a substrate for thyroid hormonogenesis (see 
 Figures 7–6 and  7–7 ). Mutations in the  pendrin (PDS or 
SLC26A4) gene impairing its function cause a syndrome of goiter 
and hearing loss acquired in infancy or early childhood (Pendred 
syndrome). 
 Thyroid Peroxidase 
 Thyroid peroxidase (TPO), a membrane-bound glycoprotein 
(MW 102 kD) containing a heme moiety, catalyzes both iodide 
oxidation and covalent linkage of iodine to the tyrosine residues of 
thyroglobulin.  TPO gene expression is stimulated by TSH. After 
TPO is synthesized in the RER, it is inserted into the RER’s cis-
ternal membranes, from which it is transferred to the apical cell 
surface through Golgi elements and exocytic vesicles. Here, at the 
cell–colloid interface, TPO facilitates both iodination and cou-
pling of the tyrosine residues within thyroglobulin. 
 Iodination of Thyroglobulin 
 Within the thyroid cell, at the apical–colloid interface, iodide is 
rapidly oxidized by locally produced hydrogen peroxide in a reac-
tion catalyzed by TPO; the resulting active iodide intermediate is 
bound to tyrosyl residues in thyroglobulin. The required hydrogen 
peroxide is probably generated by an NADPH oxidase in the pres-
ence of calcium cations, a process that is also stimulated by TSH. 
TPO can also catalyze iodination of tyrosyl molecules in proteins 
T3, T4
Synthesis of
lysosomal
enzymes
T3
T4
Digestion by
lysosomal
enzymes
Lysosomes
Iodide
oxidation
Iodide
transporter
Galactose
incorporation
Protein
synthesis
Mannose
incorporation
Amino acids
Iodide
Capillary lumen
Thyroglobulin reabsorption
Colloid
Thyroglobulin iodination
 FIGURE 7–7 Processes of synthesis and iodination of thyroglobulin (left) and its reabsorption and digestion (right). These events occur in 
the same cell.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Junqueira LC, Carneiro J, Kelley R.  Basic Histology . 7th ed. McGraw-Hill; 1992.) 
168    CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland
other than thyroglobulin, such as albumin or thyroglobulin frag-
ments; but no active hormones arise from these proteins. 
 Coupling of Iodotyrosyl Residues in 
Thyroglobulin 
 The coupling of iodotyrosyl residues in thyroglobulin is also cata-
lyzed by TPO. This is believed to be an intramolecular process 
involving oxidation of two iodotyrosyl residues brought into prox-
imity by the tertiary and quaternary structures of thyroglobulin, 
their linkage as a quinol ether intermediate, and splitting of the 
quinol ether to form an iodothyronine ( Figure 7–8 ). Within the 
thyroglobulin molecule, two molecules of diiodotyrosine (DIT) 
couple to form T 4 , and monoiodotyrosine (MIT) and DIT mol-
ecules couple to form T 3 . 
 The thiocarbamide drugs, including methimazole, carbim-
azole, and propylthiouracil (PTU), are competitive inhibitors 
of TPO. Their resulting ability to block thyroid hormone 
synthesis ( Figure 7–9 ) makes them useful in treatment of 
hyperthyroidism. 
 Proteolysis of Thyroglobulin and Thyroid 
Hormone Secretion 
 The processes of thyroglobulin proteolysis and secretion in thy-
roid hormonogenesis are illustrated in  Figure 7–7 . At the thyro-
cyte’s apical membrane, colloid is engulfed in vesicles by 
pinocytosis and absorbed into the cell. Lysosomes containing pro-
teolytic enzymes then fuse with the colloid vesicle. This releases T 4 
and T 3 , as well as inactive iodotyrosines, peptides, and individual 
amino acids. The biologically active thyroid hormones T 4 and T 3 
enter the circulation; DIT and MIT are deiodinated and their 
iodide conserved. Thyroid hormone secretion is stimulated by 
TSH and inhibited by excess iodide (see later) and lithium. A 
small amount of intact thyroglobulin is normally released from 
thyroid cell and circulates in blood. The serum thyroglobulin 
concentration is markedly increased in a number of thyroid condi-
tions, including thyroiditis, nodular goiter, and Graves disease. 
Because thyroglobulin is also synthesized by most malignancies 
arising from thyroid epithelium, such as papillary and follicular 
thyroid cancers, it is a useful circulating tumor marker. 
 Intrathyroidal Deiodination 
 MIT and DIT formed during the synthesis of thyroid hormone 
are deiodinated by intrathyroidal deiodinase, an NADPH-
dependent flavoprotein found in mitochondria and microsomes 
that acts on the iodotyrosines MIT and DIT, but not on T 3 and 
T 4 . Most of the iodide released is reused for hormone synthesis, 
and only a small amount normally leaks out of the thyroid gland 
( Figure 7–10 ). 
 The 5′-deiodinase that converts T 4 to T 3 in peripheral tissues is 
also found in the thyroid gland. When there is iodide deficiency 
and in various hyperthyroid states, the activity of this enzyme 
increases the amount of T 3 secreted by the gland, increasing the 
metabolic efficiency of hormone synthesis. 
 ABNORMALITIES IN THYROID HORMONE 
SYNTHESIS AND RELEASE 
 Dietary Iodine Deficiency and Inherited 
Defects 
 A very low iodine diet and inherited defects in genes encoding the 
proteins required for thyroid hormone biosynthesis (dyshormono-
genesis) can both result in insufficient hormone production. In 
Tg
HO
I
HO
I
I
I
CH2
CH
CH2
NH2
CH
CO
COOH
NH
NH
CO
1. TPO + H2O2
Tg
O
I
O
I
I
I
CH2
CH
CH2
NH2
CH
CO
COOH
NH
NH
CO
2. NONENZYMATIC
Tg
O
I
O
I
I
I
CH2
CH
CH2
NH2
C   H
CO
COOH
NH
NH
CO
3. REARRANGEMENT
Quinol ether
intermediate
Tg
HO
I
O
I
I
I
CH2
CH
CH2
NH2
C   
CO
COOH
NH
NH
CO
Dehydroalanine
T4
 FIGURE 7–8 Hypothetical coupling scheme for intramolecular 
formation of T 4 within the thyroglobulin molecule. The major hormo-
nogenic site at tyrosyl residue 5 is indicated.  (Reproduced, with per-
mission, from Taurog A. Thyroid hormone synthesis. Thyroid iodine 
metabolism. In Braverman LE, Utiger RD, eds.  Werner and Ingbar’s The 
Thyroid . 7th ed. Lippincott; 1996.) 
CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland     169
response to limited intrathyroidal iodine content or hormone 
production, the gland increases the ratios of MIT-to-DIT within 
thyroglobulin as well as the proportion of secreted T 3 relative to 
T 4 . The hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis also responds to thy-
roid hormone deficiency by increasing TSH secretion. 
Consequently, affected individuals typically present with thyroid 
gland enlargement (goiter), which may be sufficient to compen-
sate for inefficient thyroid hormone production; but if not, they 
develop hypothyroidism. Severely affected neonates and infants 
can suffer the irreversible effects of thyroid hormone deficiency on 
development that result in cretinism. Specific inherited disorders 
are described in more detail in the section on nontoxic goiter, 
below. 
 Effects of Iodine Excess on Hormone 
Biosynthesis 
 Although iodide is an essential substrate for thyroid hormone 
production, excess iodide actually inhibits three steps in thyroid 
hormone production: iodide trapping, thyroglobulin iodination 
(the Wolff-Chaikoff effect), and thyroid hormone release from the 
gland. These inhibitory actions are transient, and the normal thy-
roid gland  escapes after 10 to 14 days from these effects of excess 
iodide. These autoregulatory effects of iodide insulate physiologic 
thyroid function from short-term fluctuations in iodine intake. 
 These actions of excess iodide also have important clinical 
implications, sometimes causing iodine-induced thyroid dysfunc-
tion and permitting iodide treatment of certain thyroid condi-
tions. If the thyroid is affected by autoimmune thyroiditis or 
certain inherited forms of dyshormonogenesis, it may be incapable 
of escaping from iodide-induced inhibition of gland function, and 
hypothyroidism can develop. Conversely, an iodide load can 
induce hyperthyroidism (Jod-Basedow effect 2 ) in some patients 
with multinodular goiter, latent Graves disease, and rarely in indi-
viduals with thyroid glands that appear otherwise normal. 
 THYROID HORMONE TRANSPORT 
 Both thyroid hormones circulate in blood bound to plasma pro-
teins; only 0.04% of T 4 and 0.4% of T 3 are unbound or free, and 
consequently, available for entry and action in target tissues 
( Figure 7–11 ). There are three major thyroid hormone transport 
proteins: thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG); transthyretin, for-
merly called thyroxine-binding prealbumin (TBPA), and albumin 
( Figure 7–12 ). The plasma protein binding permits blood delivery 
of the iodothyronines, which are otherwise poorly soluble in 
water. It also creates a large circulating thyroid hormone pool with 
a stable 7-day plasma half-life and ensures the homogeneous dis-
tribution of thyroid hormones in target tissues. 
 Thyroxine-Binding Globulin 
 Thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG) is a liver-derived glycoprotein 
member of the SERPIN family of serine antiproteases composed 
of a single 54-kDa polypeptide chain, to which are attached 4 
carbohydrate chains normally containing approximately 10 sialic 
acid residues. Each TBG molecule has a single binding site for T 4 
or T 3 . The serum concentration of TBG is 15 to 30 μg/mL (280-
560 nmol/L), and its high binding affinity for T 4 and T 3 allows it 
to carry about 70% of circulating thyroid hormones. 
 TBG and its binding of the thyroid hormones can be altered 
by congenital TBG derangements, certain physiologic and 
pathophysiologic circumstances, and several drugs. TBG defi-
ciency occurs with a frequency of 1:5000 live births, with a 
number of variants described in several ethnic and racial 
groups. It is an X-linked recessive trait that, consequently, is 
much more commonly expressed in males. Despite low circu-
lating total T 4 and T 3 levels in affected individuals, free hor-
mone levels are normal, and these patients remain euthyroid. 
Congenital TBG deficiency is often associated with congenital 
corticosteroid-binding globulin deficiency (Chapter 9). 
Conversely, congenital TBG excess, which is rare, is character-
ized by elevated total T 4 and T 3 concentrations in blood, but 
normal free hormone levels and a euthyroid clinical state. 
Pregnancy, estrogen-secreting tumors, and estrogen therapy all 
increase the sialic acid content of the TBG molecule, resulting 
in decreased metabolic clearance and elevated serum TBG levels. 
TBG levels can decrease in major systemic illness, and due to 
cleavage by leukocyte proteases, its binding affinity for the 
thyroid hormones can also be reduced. Both effects lower the 
serum total thyroid hormone concentrations in sick patients 
( Table 7–1 ). Certain drugs can also decrease (androgenic ste-
roids, glucocorticoids, danazol, L-asparaginase) or increase 
(estrogens, 5-fluourouracil) the plasma TBG concentration. 
Other drugs (eg, salicylates, high-dose phenytoin, and intrave-
nous furosemide) can bind to TBG, displacing T 4 and T 3 . In 
this circumstance, the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis 
(discussed later) preserves normal, free hormone  concentrations 
CH3CH2CH2
N
S
NH
O
Thiouracil
N
H
H
S
NH
O
Propylthiouracil
N
CH3
S
NH
Methimazole
N
CH3
S
N   COOC2H5
Carbimazole
 FIGURE 7–9 Thiocarbamide inhibitors of thyroidal iodide organification. 
 2 Jod is German for iodine; Carl Adolph von Basedow was one of the first physi-
cians to describe hyperthyroidism.
170    CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland
by lowering serum total thyroid hormone levels. Similarly, 
heparin stimulation of lipoprotein lipase releases free fatty 
acids that displace thyroid hormones from TBG. In vivo, this 
can result in lower total thyroid hormone concentrations, 
whereas in vitro (eg, in blood drawn through a heparin lock), 
heparin increases measured levels of free T 4 and T 3 . 
 Transthyretin (Thyroxine-Binding 
Prealbumin) 
 Transthyretin, a 55-kDa globular polypeptide composed of four 
identical 127-amino acid subunits, binds 10% of circulating T 4 . 
Its affinity for T 4 is 10-fold greater than for T 3 . The dissociation 
of T 4 and T 3 from transthyretin is rapid, so that transthyretin is a 
source of readily available T 4 . Increased affinity of transthyretin 
binding for T 4 can occur as a heritable condition. Affected indi-
viduals have an elevated total T 4 but a normal free T 4 . Ectopic 
production of transthyretin, which has been reported to occur in 
patients with pancreatic and hepatic tumors, also causes euthyroid 
hyperthyroxinemia. 
 Albumin 
 Albumin binds to T 4 and T 3 with lesser affinity than TBG or 
transthyretin, but its high plasma concentration results in its 
Iodide pool
(ECF)
(150 μg I)
Hormone pool
(T3 + T4)
(600 μg I)
Thyroid pool
(8000 μg I)
Tissues
(liver, muscle, etc)
GI
tract
500 μg I
500 μg I
60 μg I
75 μg I
(T4 + T3)
75 μg I
(T4 + T3)
40 μg I
115 μg I
15 μg I
(bile)
15 μg I
(feces)
485 μg I
(urine)
 FIGURE 7–10 Iodine metabolism. The values indicated are representative of those that might be found in a healthy subject ingesting 
500 μg of iodine a day. The actual iodine intake varies considerably among different individuals. 
Thyroid
secretion
Feedback control
Tissue action
Hormone 
metabolism
Fecal excretion
Free T4
Protein-
bound
T4
(99.96%)
 FIGURE 7–11 Representation of free T 4 (and free T 3 ) as the bio-
logically active hormones at the level of the pituitary and the periph-
eral tissues. Most of the thyroid hormones circulating in plasma are 
protein-bound and have no biologic activity. This pool of bound hor-
mone is in equilibrium with the free hormone pool.  (Reproduced, 
with permission, from DeGroot LJ, Stanbury JB.  The Thyroid and Its 
Diseases . 4th ed. Wiley; 1975.) 
CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland     171
transport of 15% of circulating T 4 and T 3 . Rapid thyroid hormone 
dissociation rates from albumin make it a major source of free 
hormone to tissues. Hypoalbuminemia, as occurs in nephrosis or 
cirrhosis, is associated with a low total T 4 and T 3 , but the free 
hormone levels are normal. 
 Familial dysalbuminemic hyperthyroxinemia is an auto-
somal dominant inherited disorder in which 25% of the albu-
min exhibits a higher than normal T 4 -binding affinity. This 
results in an elevated total T 4 level but a normal free T 4 concen-
tration and euthyroidism. In most affected kindreds, the T 3 -
binding affinity is normal. Because these albumin variants do 
not bind the thyroxine analogs used in many free T 4 immuno-
assays, they may falsely report elevation of the free T 4 in 
affected individuals. 
 METABOLISM OF THYROID HORMONES 
 The normal thyroid gland secretes about 100 nmol of T 4 and only 
5 nmol of T 3 daily; less than 5 nmol of metabolically inactive 
reverse T 3 (rT 3 ) is produced ( Figure 7–13 ). Most of the plasma 
pool of T 3 (80%) is derived from peripheral outer ring- or 
5′-monodeiodination of T 4 in tissues outside of the thyroid gland, 
particularly the liver, kidney, and skeletal muscle ( Table 7–2 ). 
Because T 3 has a higher binding affinity for the nuclear T 3 recep-
tors that affect thyroid hormone action, this 5′-monodeiodination 
generates a more biologically active iodothyronine. On the other 
hand, deiodination of the  inner ring of T 4 (5-deiodination) pro-
duces 3,3′,5′-triiodothyronine or reverse T 3 (rT 3 ), which is meta-
bolically inert. 
 The three deiodinase enzymes that catalyze these reactions dif-
fer in tissue localization, substrate specificity, and physiologic and 
pathophysiologic modulation, as summarized in  Table 7–2 . Type 
1 5′-deiodinase, the most abundant form, is found predominantly 
−
+
Serum proteins
T4    % bound
70-75
5-10
15-20
γ
β 
Albumin 
α2
α1
−
+
Albumin TBPA
TBG
T3    % bound
70-75
25-30
−
+
Albumin
TBG
 FIGURE 7–12 Diagrammatic representation of the distribution 
of radioactive T 4 and T 3 among serum thyroid hormone–binding 
proteins.  Top: Paper electrophoretic pattern of serum proteins. 
 Middle: Radioactive T 4 was added to serum and was then sub-
jected to paper electrophoresis. The peaks represent the mobility of 
radioactive T 4 bound to different serum proteins. (TBG, thyroid 
hormone–binding globulin; TBPA, thyroxine-binding prealbumin.) 
 Bottom: Radioactive T 3 was added to serum and subjected to 
paper electrophoresis. The peaks indicate the relative distribution 
of protein-bound radioactive T 3 . The figures above each peak indi-
cate the relative hormone distribution among the binding proteins 
in a normal adult.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Rosenfield 
RL, et al.  Pediatric Nuclear Medicine . James AE Jr, Wagner HN Jr, 
Cooke RE, ed. Saunders; 1974.) 
TABLE 7–1  Causes of abnormal serum thyroxine 
determinations in euthyroid individuals. 
Euthyroid Hyperthyroxinemia 
↑ Plasma protein binding 
  ↑ Thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG) 
  Inherited 
  Estrogen effect (pregnancy, estrogen therapy) 
  Hepatitis 
  Drugs: tamoxifen, 5-fluorouracil, clofibrate, methadone, 
  heroin 
  ↑ Transthyretin binding 
  Inherited 
  Paraneoplastic production by hepatic and pancreatic tumors 
  ↑ Albumin binding 
  Inherited (familial dysalbuminemic hyperthyroxinemia) 
↓ T4-to-T3 conversiona 
  Systemic illness 
  Medications: amiodarone, radiocontrast agents, glucocor-ticoids, 
  propranolol 
Thyroxine therapy in hypothyroidisma 
Generalized resistance to thyroid hormonea 
 Anti-T4 antibody (assay interference) 
Euthyroid Hypothyroxinemia 
↓ Thyroxine-binding globulin 
  ↓ TBG production 
  Inherited 
  Androgens 
  Drugs: danazol, L-asparaginase 
  ↑ TBG clearance 
  Nephrotic syndrome 
  Severe liver disease 
  Protein-losing gastroenteropathy 
Systemic illnessb 
Medications 
  Exogenous thyromimetic compounds (T3 [Cytomel])b 
  Phenytoin and carbamazepineb
  Iodine deficiency (with normal serum T3)b 
aBoth total and free T4 elevated. 
bBoth total and free T4 low. 
172    CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland
in liver and kidney, and in lesser quantities in the thyroid gland, 
skeletal and heart muscle, and other tissues. The type 1 5′-deiodinase 
contains a selenocysteine moiety that is probably at the active 
deiodinating site. The major function of type 1 5′-deiodinase is to 
provide T 3 to the circulation. Its activity is increased in hyperthy-
roidism and decreased in hypothyroidism. This partially accounts 
for the relatively higher circulating T 3 levels compared to T 4 levels 
seen in hyperthyroid patients. The enzyme is inhibited by the 
thionamide antithyroid drug PTU, but not methimazole, and by 
the antiarrhythmic drug amiodarone and iodinated radiocontrast 
dyes, such as sodium ipodate. Dietary selenium deficiency can also 
impair T 4 to T 3 conversion. 
 Type 2 5′-deiodinase is predominantly expressed in the brain 
and pituitary gland, where it maintains a constant level of intracel-
lular T 3 in the central nervous system. This deiodinase is very 
sensitive to circulating T 4 , so a lower circulating T 4 rapidly 
increases enzyme concentration in brain and pituitary, by altering 
the rate of T 4 degradation and inactivation. In doing so, it main-
tains the level of intracellular T 3 and its neuronal cellular func-
tions. Conversely, elevated plasma T 4 reduces the type 2 
5′-deiodinase level, protecting brain cells from excessive T 3 . 
Consequently, this deiodinase represents a mechanism by which 
the hypothalamus and pituitary can respond to the level of circu-
lating T 4 . rT 3 can also modify the activity of type 2 5′-deiodinase 
in the brain and the pituitary gland, and α-adrenergic compounds 
stimulate type 2 5′-deiodinase in brown fat, but the physiologic 
significance of these effects is not clear. Type 3 5-deiodinase is 
found in chorionic membranes of the placenta and glial cells in 
the central nervous system, where it inactivates T 4 by converting 
it to rT 3 and it inactivates T 3 by converting it to 3,3′-diiodothyronine 
(3,3′-T 2 ) ( Figure 7–14 ). Type 3 deiodinase levels are elevated in 
hyperthyroidism and decreased in hypothyroidism and, therefore, 
may help insulate the fetus and the brain from T 4 excess or defi-
ciency. Placental type 3 deiodinase accelerates thyroxine disposal 
in pregnant women, which partly explains the increased thyroxine 
dose requirements in treated hypothyroid women. 
 Overall, the functions of the deiodinases are physiologically 
important in three ways. First, they permit local tissue and cellular 
modulation of thyroid hormone actions. Second, they help the 
organism adapt to changing states, including iodine deficiency or 
chronic illness. Third, they regulate thyroid hormone actions in 
the early development of many vertebrates, including amphibia 
and mammals. 
 About 80% of T 4 is metabolized by deiodination, 35% to T 3 
and 45% to rT 3 (see  Figure 7–13 ). The remainder is inactivated 
mainly by glucuronidation in the liver and biliary secretion, and to 
a lesser extent, by sulfation in the liver or kidney. Other metabolic 
reactions include deamination of the alanine side chain, forming 
thyroacetic acid derivatives of low biologic activity; or decarboxyla-
tion or cleavage of the ether link, forming inactive compounds. 
 As a result of these metabolic pathways, approximately 10% of 
the total 1000 nmol extrathyroidal T 4 pool is cleared each day, and 
the plasma half-life of T 4 is 7 days. Due to T 3 ’s lower binding 
affinity for plasma proteins, the turnover of its much smaller 
extrathyroidal pool is more rapid, with a plasma half-life of 1 day. 
The total body pool of rT 3 is about the same size as that of T 3 , but 
rT 3 has an even more rapid turnover, with a plasma half-life of 
only 0.2 day. 
TABLE 7–2 Iodothyronine deiodinase types and characteristics.
Deiodinase Type 
D1 
D2 
D3 
Substrates 
rT3 > T4 > T3 
T4 > rT3 
T3 > T4 
Tissue distribution 
Liver, kidney, skeletal muscle, thyroid 
Brain, pituitary 
Brain, placenta, fetal tissues 
Function 
Plasma T3 production 
Local T3 production 
T3 degradation 
PTU inhibition (IC50, μM) 
5 
> 1000 
> 1000 
Hypothyroidism 
Decrease 
Increase 
Decrease 
Hyperthyroidism 
Increase 
Decrease 
Increase 
100 nmol/d
T4
T3
rT3
35
nmol
45
nmol
20 nmol
(TETRAC, etc)
< 5 nmol
 5 nmol
 FIGURE 7–13 Major pathways of thyroxine metabolism in nor-
mal adult humans. Rates are expressed in nmol/24 h and are approxi-
mations based upon available data. 100 nmol of T 4 is equivalent to 
approximately 75 μg. (rT 3 , reverse T 3 ; TETRAC, tetraiodothyroacetic 
acid.)  (Reproduced, with permission, from Cavalieri RR, Rapoport B. 
Impaired peripheral conversion of thyroxine to triiodothyronine.  Ann 
Rev Med . 1977;28:5765.) 
CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland     173
 CONTROL OF THYROID FUNCTION AND 
HORMONE ACTION 
 Growth and function of the thyroid gland are controlled by the 
hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis ( Figure 7–15 ) and, as previ-
ously discussed, by iodide through the elements of autoregulation. 
Hypothalamic thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) stimulates 
thyrotrophic cells in the anterior pituitary to produce TSH, which 
in turn promotes thyroid gland growth and hormone secretion. In 
addition, deiodinases in the pituitary and peripheral tissues modu-
late thyroid hormone effects by their tissue-specific conversion of T 4 
to the more active iodothyronine T 3 . Finally, the molecular effects 
of T 3 in individual tissues are modulated by the subtype of T 3 recep-
tor with which it interacts; the specific gene activation or repression 
response that it induces; and in a realm just now being revealed, the 
T 3 receptor’s interaction with other ligands, closely related receptors 
(eg, retinoid X receptor; RXR), and coactivators and corepressors 
that interact with it in modulating gene  expression. 
 Thyrotropin-Releasing Hormone 
 Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) is a tripeptide, pyroglu-
tamyl-histidyl-proline amide (pyro-Glu-His-Pro-NH 2 ), synthe-
sized by neurons in the supraoptic and supraventricular nuclei of 
the hypothalamus ( Figure 7–16 ). TRH is stored in the median 
eminence of the hypothalamus and then transported via the pitu-
itary portal venous system down the pituitary stalk to the anterior 
pituitary, where it controls synthesis and release of TSH. TRH is 
HO
O
R
I
I
I
I
HO
O
R
HO
O
R
I
HO
O
R
I
HO
O
R
I
I
HO
O
R
I
I
HO
O
R
I
I
HO
O
R
I
I
I
HO
O
R
I
I
I
T4
T3
Reverse T3
3,3'-T2
3-T1
3'-T1
T0
3',5'-T2
"Step down"
"Step up"
3,5-T2
?
?
R = CH2   CH   COOH
NH2
 FIGURE 7–14 The deiodinative pathway of thyroxine metabolism. The monodeiodination of T 4 to T 3 represents a step-up in biologic 
potency, whereas the monodeiodination of T 4 to reverse T 3 has the opposite effect. Further deiodination of T 3 essentially abolishes hormonal 
activity. 
Portal system
TRH
Hypothalamus
T3
T4
T3
T4
T4
T3
“Free”
Tissue
TSH
Thyroid
I
I
Anterior
pituitary
+
+
−
−
 FIGURE 7–15 The hypothalamic-hypophysial-thyroidal axis. TRH 
produced in the hypothalamus reaches the thyrotrophs in the ante-
rior pituitary by the hypothalamo-hypophysial portal system and 
stimulates the synthesis and release of TSH. In both the hypothala-
mus and the pituitary, it is primarily T 3 that inhibits TRH and TSH 
secretion, respectively. T 4 undergoes monodeiodination to T 3 in neu-
ral and pituitary as well as in peripheral tissues. 
174    CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland
also found in other portions of the hypothalamus, brain, and 
spinal cord, where it may have distinct functions as a neurotrans-
mitter. The pre-pro- TRH gene, which encodes a large molecule 
with five copies of the TRH progenitor sequence Glu-His-Pro-
Gly, is located on chromosome 3.  TRH gene expression is nega-
tively regulated by thyroid hormone—both the T 3 delivered by 
the circulation and that arising from T 4 deiodination in peptider-
gic neurons themselves (see  Table 7–2 ). 
 In the anterior pituitary, TRH binds to a specific membrane 
receptor located on TSH- and prolactin-secreting cells, stimulating 
synthesis and release of their respective hormones. The TRH 
receptor is a member of the 7-transmembrane-spanning, G pro-
tein–coupled receptor family ( Table 1–1 ;  Figure 1–4 ). TRH binds 
to the receptor’s third transmembrane helix, activating both its 
cyclic guanosine monophosphate-producing complex and the 
inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP 3 ) signaling cascade that releases 
intracellular Ca 2+ and generates 1,2-diacylglycerol, thereby acti-
vating protein kinase C. These pathways are responsible for stimu-
lating TSH release. They coordinate transcription of the genes 
encoding the TSH subunits and posttranslational glycosylation of 
TSH, which is necessary for full biologic activity. 
 TRH-stimulated TSH secretion is pulsatile ( Figure 7–17 ), 
with a mean TSH pulse amplitude of 0.6 mU/L every 2 hours. 
Normal individuals have a circadian rhythm in TSH release, with 
a peak circulating level between midnight and 4 AM, which is 
presumably controlled by a hypothalamic neuronal pulse genera-
tor driving TRH synthesis. 
 Thyroid hormones exert additional negative feedback on TSH 
production at the level of the pituitary by downregulating the 
number of TRH receptors on pituitary thyrotropes. Consequently, 
in patients with hyperthyroidism, both TSH pulses and its noctur-
nal surge are markedly suppressed; whereas in hypothyroid 
patients, the TSH pulse amplitude and nocturnal surge are much 
N
N
N
H
NH2
H
CH2
O
O
C
NH
CH
C
O
C
O
N
(pyro)Glu-His-Pro-(NH2)
 FIGURE 7–16 Chemical structure of thyrotropin-releasing hor-
mone (TRH). 
0
240
480
720
960
1200
1440
Time (minutes)
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
TSH (mU/mL)
0
240
480
720
960
1200
1440
Time (minutes)
4
3
2
1
0
TSH (mU/mL)
= Periods of sleep
 FIGURE 7–17 Serum TSH in two normal subjects demonstrating spontaneous pulses and the circadian rhythm of TSH secretion. (0 time is 
0900; stars indicate significant pulses.)  (Reproduced, with permission, from Greenspan SL, et al. Pulsatile secretion of TSH in man.  J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab . 1986;63:664. Copyright 1986 by The Endocrine Society.) 
CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland     175
greater. In experimental animals and newborn humans, exposure 
to cold temperature increases TRH and TSH secretion. Certain 
other hormones and drugs (eg, vasopressin and α-adrenergic ago-
nists), stimulate TRH synthesis and release. 
 When synthetic TRH is administered intravenously to 
humans as a 200 to 500 μg bolus, it generates a prompt three- 
to fivefold rise in the serum TSH concentration, peaking at 
about 30 minutes and lasting for 2 to 3 hours (see Figure 4–14). 
In patients with primary hypothyroidism, in whom basal 
TSH is elevated, there is an exaggerated TSH response to exog-
enous TRH; and this response is suppressed in patients with 
hyperthyroidism, high-dose thyroxine therapy, and central 
hypothyroidism. 
 TRH is also found in the islet cells of the pancreas, gastrointes-
tinal tract, placenta, heart, prostate, testes, and ovaries. TRH 
production in these peripheral tissues is not inhibited by T 3 ; the 
role of TRH in these tissues remains unknown. 
 Thyrotropin (Thyroid-Stimulating 
Hormone) 
 Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) is 28-kD glycoprotein com-
posed of α and β subunits that are noncovalently linked. The α 
subunit is common to the two other pituitary glycoproteins, follicle-
stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH), and 
the placental hormone human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), 
whereas the β subunit is unique for each glycoprotein hormone, 
conferring specific binding properties and biologic activity. The 
genes for the TSH α and β subunits are located on chromosomes 
6 and 1, respectively. The human α subunit has an apoprotein 
core of 92 amino acids and contains two oligosaccharide chains; 
the TSH β subunit has an apoprotein core of 112 amino acids and 
contains one oligosaccharide chain. The α and β subunit amino 
acid chains of TSH each form three loops that are intertwined into 
a cystine knot ( Figure 7–18 ). Glycosylation takes place in the RER 
 FIGURE 7–18 Schematic configuration of the TSH-TSHR complex. The central portion of the figure represents the ribbon-like structure 
of TSH within the TSH receptor. The dark blue line represents the β subunit and the light blue line the α subunit. See also Figure 7–19. 
 (Reproduced, with permission, from Szkudlinski MW, et al. Thyroid-stimulating hormone and thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor 
structure-function relationships.  Physiol Rev . 2002;82:473.) 
176    CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland
and the Golgi, where glucose, mannose, and fucose residues and 
terminal sulfate or sialic acid residues are linked to the apoprotein 
core. These carbohydrate residues prolong its plasma half-life and 
enhance it ability to induce TSH receptor activation. 
 TSH controls thyroid cell growth and hormone production by 
binding to a specific TSH receptor, one of approximately 1000 
located on the basolateral cell membrane of each thyroid cell. TSH 
binding activates both the cyclic adenosine monophosphate 
(cAMP) and the phosphoinositol pathways for signal transduc-
tion. The TSH receptor gene is located on chromosome 14; the 
product is a single-chain glycoprotein composed of 764 amino 
acids. The TSH receptor is a member of the 7-membrane span-
ning, G protein–coupled receptor family, with an ectodomain 
involved in ligand binding and an intramembrane and intracel-
lular portion responsible for activation of the signaling pathways 
that promote thyroid cell growth and hormone synthesis and 
release (see  Figure 7–19 ). 
 The TSH receptor is involved in the pathogenesis of numerous 
congenital and acquired forms of hypothyroidism and hyperthy-
roidism. Heritable defects resulting in impaired TSH synthesis or 
action have been described, including mutant genes for transcrip-
tion factors required for pituitary thyrotrope differentiation 
( POU1F1, PROP1, LHX3, HESX1 ), TRH receptor, TSH β-chain, 
TSH receptor, and G sα , which transduces TSH receptor binding 
to adenylate cyclase activation. Acquired TSH receptor blocking 
antibodies can also cause hypothyroidism. 
 The most common TSH receptor–related disorder causing 
hyperthyroidism is Graves disease, in which autoantibodies bind 
and stimulate the TSH receptor. However, the TSH receptor is 
involved in the etiology of several other forms of hyperthyroidism. 
Germline mutations activating the TSH receptor can cause famil-
ial hyperthyroidism, and somatic activating mutations result in 
toxic adenomas. Other mutations can lead to aberrant TSH recep-
tor activation by hCG, the placental glycoprotein hormone that 
is structurally similar to TSH, in familial gestational 
 hyperthyroidism. 
 Effects of TSH on the Thyroid Cell 
 TSH has many actions on the thyroid cell. Most of its actions are 
mediated through the G protein-adenylyl cyclase-cAMP system, 
but activation of the phosphatidylinositol (PIP 3 ) system with a 
resulting increase in intracellular calcium is also involved. The 
major actions of TSH include the following: 
 A. Changes in thyroid cell morphology 
 TSH rapidly 
induces pseudopods at the follicular cell-colloid border, accelerating 
thyroglobulin resorption. Colloid content is diminished as intrac-
ellular colloid droplets are formed and lysosome formation is 
stimulated, increasing thyroglobulin hydrolysis and thyroid 
hormone release. 
 B. Cell growth 
 Individual thyroid cells increase in size; vascu-
larity is increased; and, over a period of time, thyroid enlargement, 
or goiter, develops. 
 C. Iodine metabolism 
 TSH stimulates all phases of iodide 
metabolism, from increased iodide uptake and transport to 
increased iodination of thyroglobulin and increased secretion of 
thyroid hormones and thyroglobulin itself. Increased NIS expres-
sion and the stimulation of cAMP production mediate increased 
iodide transport, and PIP 3 hydrolysis and increased intracellular 
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
1
2
Cleavage
sites
C peptide
B subunit
A subunit
“Immunogenic peptide”
(AA 352-366)
α helix
β sheet
Nine leucine-rich repeat
(AA 58-277)
N-glycan
COOH 704
NH7
 FIGURE 7–19 Schematic representation of the TSH receptor. The A subunit is the ligand-binding portion of the receptor and the B subunit 
is the activation portion. The ligands which bind to the receptor include TSH, TSH-stimulating antibody, and TSH-blocking antibody. There are 
two cleavage sites which allow breakage of the receptor and loss of the A subunit into the serum.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Rapoport B, 
et al. The thyrotropin (TSH)-receptor: interaction with TSH and autoantibodies.  Endocr Rev . 1998;19:673.) 
CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland     177
Ca 2+ stimulate the iodination of thyroglobulin. The TSH effect on 
iodide transport across the cell is biphasic: initially, it is depressed 
(iodide efflux), and then, after a lag of several hours, iodide uptake 
is increased. The efflux of iodide may be due to the rapid increase 
in hydrolysis of thyroglobulin with release of hormone and leakage 
of iodide out of the gland. The TSH-mediated stimulation of thy-
rocyte iodine uptake and thyroglobulin secretion also occur after 
administration of recombinant TSH for radioiodine treatment and 
monitoring of patients with well-differentiated thyroid cancers. 
 D. Other effects of TSH 
 Other effects include increased 
transcription of the mRNAs for thyroglobulin and TPO; increased 
incorporation of iodide into MIT, DIT, T 3 , and T 4 ; and increased 
lysosomal activity, with increased secretion of T 4 and T 3 from the 
gland. There is also increased activity of type 1 5′-deiodinase, 
which helps conserve intrathyroidal iodine. 
 TSH has additional effects on the thyroid gland, including 
stimulation of glucose uptake, oxygen consumption, and glucose 
oxidation. There is accelerated turnover of phospholipids and 
stimulation of synthesis of purine and pyrimidine precursors, with 
increased synthesis of DNA and RNA. 
 Serum TSH 
 Intact TSH and isolated α subunit are both present in circulating 
blood and detectable by immunoassay in concentrations that are 
normally 0.5 to 4.0 mU/L and 0.5 to 2 μg/L, respectively. The 
serum TSH level is increased in primary hypothyroidism and 
decreased in thyrotoxicosis, whether endogenous or from excessive 
oral intake of thyroid hormones. The plasma half-life of TSH is 
about 30 minutes, and the daily production rate is about 40 to 
150 mU/d. 
 The glycoprotein α subunit is often disproportionately elevated 
in patients with TSH-secreting pituitary tumors (see later); it is also 
increased in normal postmenopausal women due to increased syn-
thesis and secretion related to increased gonadotropin production. 
 Control of Pituitary TSH Secretion 
 Two major factors control synthesis and release of TSH: (1) T 3 
level within thyrotrophic cells, which regulates mRNA expression, 
TSH translation, and the hormone’s release; and (2) TRH, which 
controls posttranslational glycosylation and also release. 
 TSH synthesis and release are inhibited by high serum levels of 
T 4 and T 3 (hyperthyroidism) and stimulated by low levels of thy-
roid hormone (hypothyroidism). In addition, certain hormones 
and drugs inhibit TSH secretion. These include somatostatin, 
dopamine, dopamine agonists such as bromocriptine, and high 
doses of glucocorticoids. Severe disease may cause inhibition of 
TSH secretion, and there may be a rebound increase in TSH as the 
patient recovers. The magnitude of these effects varies; the drugs 
mentioned above usually only partially suppress serum TSH, but 
it remains detectable. In contrast, overt hyperthyroidism can sup-
press the TSH concentration to beneath the detection limits of 
even the most sensitive TSH immunoassays. 
 Tumors and other disorders of the hypothalamus or anterior 
pituitary gland can impair TRH and TSH secretion, respectively. 
Pituitary disorders causing hypothyroidism are termed  secondary , 
whereas hypothalamic disease resulting in hypothyroidism is 
called  tertiary . Differential diagnosis of these lesions is discussed 
later (see Thyroid Tests). 
 Other Thyroid Stimulators and Inhibitors 
 The thyroid follicle has a rich supply of capillaries that carry nora-
drenergic nerve fibers from the superior cervical ganglion and 
acetylcholine esterase-positive nerve fibers derived from the vagus 
nerve and thyroid ganglia. The parafollicular C cells secrete both 
calcitonin and calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP). In experi-
mental animals, these and other neuropeptides modify thyroid 
blood flow and hormone secretion. In addition, growth factors 
such as insulin, insulin-like growth factor-1, insulin-like growth 
factor binding proteins, epidermal growth factor, transforming 
growth factor β1, and fibroblast growth factors and their recep-
tors, as well as autocrine factors such as prostaglandins and cytok-
ines, modify thyroid cell growth and hormone production. 
However, it is not yet clear how clinically important these 
effects are. 
 Role of Pituitary and Peripheral 
Deiodinases 
 Pituitary type 2 5′-deiodinase converts T 4 to T 3 in the brain and 
pituitary, providing the main source of T 3 within thyrotropes. Its 
activity increases in hypothyroidism, initially maintaining a nor-
mal intracellular T 3 level in the cerebrum despite a falling plasma 
T 4 concentration. In hyperthyroidism, a decrease in its activity 
moderates exposure of pituitary and neural cells to thyroid hor-
mone excess. In contrast, type 1 5′-deiodinase is decreased in 
hypothyroidism, conserving T 4 , and increased in hyperthyroid-
ism, accelerating T 4 metabolism but also leading to increased 
serum levels of T3 (see  Table 7–2 ). 
 Thyroidal Autoregulation 
 Autoregulation may be defined as the capacity of the thyroid 
gland to modify its function to adapt to changes in the availability 
of iodine, independent of pituitary TSH. Thus, humans can 
maintain normal thyroid hormone secretion with iodide intakes 
varying from 50 μg to several milligrams per day. Some of the 
effects of iodide deficiency or excess are discussed earlier. The 
major adaptation to low iodide intake is the preferential synthesis 
of T 3 rather than T 4 , increasing the metabolic effectiveness of the 
secreted hormone. Iodide excess, on the other hand, inhibits many 
thyroidal functions, including iodide transport, cAMP formation, 
hydrogen peroxide generation, and hormone synthesis and secre-
tion. Some of these effects may be mediated by the formation of 
intrathyroidal iodinated fatty acids. The ability of the normal 
thyroid to  escape from these inhibitory effects (Wolff-Chaikoff 
effect) allows the gland to continue to secrete hormone despite a 
high dietary iodide intake. It is important to note that this is dif-
ferent from the therapeutic effect of iodide in the treatment of 
178    CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland
Graves disease. Here, the high levels of iodide persistently inhibit 
thyroglobulin endocytosis and lysosomal activity, decreasing thy-
roid hormone release and lowering circulating hormone levels. In 
addition, pharmacologic amounts of iodide reduce the vascularity 
of the gland, which may be beneficial during thyroid surgery for 
Graves disease. However, this effect is also transient, lasting 10 to 
14 days. 
 The Actions of Thyroid Hormones 
 1. THE THYROID HORMONE RECEPTORS 
AND MECHANISMS OF ACTION 
 The thyroid hormones exert their actions through two general 
mechanisms: (1) genomic actions effected through T 3 interactions 
with its nuclear receptors, regulating gene activity; and (2) nonge-
nomic actions mediated by T 3 and T 4 interactions with certain 
enzymes (eg, calcium ATPase, adenylate cyclase, monomeric pyru-
vate kinase), glucose transporters, and mitochondrial proteins. 
 Thyroid hormones, that are unbound in plasma, are trans-
ported intracellularly, by either specific carriers including mono-
carboxylate transporter 8 (MCT8), MCT10, and organic anion 
transporting polypeptide (OATP1C1). OATP1C1 is expressed 
predominantly in brain capillaries and the choroid plexus, and 
transports T 4 preferentially, while MCT8 and MCT10 are 
expressed in many tissues and transport both T 4 and T 3 . Thyroid 
hormones are transported through the cell membrane into the 
cytoplasm, and subsequently into the nucleus, where T 3 binds to 
its specific receptor. Clinical syndromes associated with mutations 
in these transporters have recently been recognized, such as the 
Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome in which affected male children 
develop mental retardation, myopathy, a movement disorder in 
association with elevated serum T 3 and low serum T 4 levels. 
 The T 3 nuclear receptor is member of a nuclear receptor super-
family that includes nuclear receptors for glucocorticoids, 
 mineralocorticoids, estrogens, progestins, vitamin D 3 , and retin-
oids (see Figure 1–16). There are two thyroid hormone receptor 
( TR ) genes in humans:  TR α located on chromosome 17 and  TR β 
on chromosome 3. Each gene yields at least two differentially 
spliced products, TRα 1 and 2 and TRβ 1 and 2, although TRα 
2 is believed to be biologically inactive (see  Figure 7–20 ). Each of 
these receptors has a carboxyl terminal ligand-binding domain 
and a centrally located DNA-binding domain with two cysteine 
zinc fingers that facilitate their specific attachment to thyroid 
hormone response elements (TREs) in the promoters of target 
genes and regulate their transcription (see  Figures 1–16 and  1–17 ). 
The concentration of these receptors in tissue varies among tissues 
and with their stage of development. For example, the brain con-
tains predominantly TRα, the liver mostly TRβ, and cardiac 
muscle contains both. Point mutations in the ligand-binding 
domain of the  TR β gene have been shown to be responsible for 
the syndrome of generalized resistance to thyroid hormone 
(GRTH). The TRs bind to TREs, which are typically paired, spe-
cific oligonucleotide sequences (eg, AGGTCA) ( Figure 7–21 ). 
The TRs can also function as heterodimers with receptors for 
other transcription factors, such as the retinoid X and retinoic acid 
receptors. TREs are generally located upstream of the transcrip-
tion start site for the coding regions of thyroid hormone–respon-
sive genes. In positively regulated genes, unbound TRs interact 
with corepressors (eg, nuclear receptor corepressor [NCoR] and 
silencing mediator for retinoic and thyroid hormone receptors 
[SMRT]) to repress basal transcription by recruiting histone 
deacetylases that alter the nearby chromatin structure. When TRs 
are bound by T 3 , these corepressor complexes are released, and the 
T 3 -bound TRs associate with coactivator complexes that promote 
local histone acetylation; they also associate with another protein 
complex (vitamin D receptor-interacting protein/TR-associated 
proteins) that recruits RNA polymerase II and starts gene tran-
scription. Some genes are negatively regulated by T 3 -bound TRs, 
such as pre-pro- TRH and  TSH -α and -β subunit genes, but the 
NH2
1
52
120
410
COOH
        +              + +
        +              + +
        +              + +
        −              +
DNA
NH2
1
52
120
490
370
COOH
DNA
TR α1
TR α2
NH2
1
106
174
461
COOH
DNA
TR β1
NH2
1
159
227
514
COOH
DNA
TR β2
T3 binding   DNA binding
 FIGURE 7–20 Deduced protein structure of the thyroid hormone receptor α and β gene products. The receptor protein has three 
domains: a DNA-binding domain with a high degree of similarity among the different types of receptors, a carboxyl terminal triiodothyronine 
(T 3 )–binding domain, and an amino terminal domain that is not required for full function. The numbers above the structures represent amino 
acid numbers. The properties of the receptors with respect to their ability to bind T 3 and bind to a T 3 -response element of DNA are shown on 
the right. Identical shading of receptor domains indicates identical amino acid sequences. (TR, thyroid hormone receptor.)  (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Brent GA. The molecular basis of thyroid hormone action.  N Engl J Med . 1994;331:847.) 
CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland     179
molecular mechanisms involved are currently less well understood. 
Thyroid hormone’s actions to alter expression levels of specific 
mRNAs and their translated proteins generate a constellation of 
specific tissue responses (see  Figure 7–21 ). 
 The nongenomic actions of thyroid hormones have long been 
suspected based on certain rapid tissue responses that take place 
before RNA transcription could occur and by recognition of 
T 3 - and T 4 -binding sites outside of the nucleus. For example, it 
has recently been shown that thyroid hormones bind the mem-
brane protein integrin αVβ3, which is involved in thyroid 
 hormone–mediated activation of the MAP kinase cascade and 
stimulation of angiogenesis. 
 2. PHYSIOLOGIC EFFECTS OF THYROID 
HORMONES 
 The transcriptional effects of T 3 characteristically demonstrate a 
lag time of hours or days to achieve full effect. These genomic 
actions have a number of vital effects, including tissue growth, 
brain maturation, increased calorigenesis and oxygen consump-
tion, as well as other specific effects on the heart, liver, kidneys, 
skeletal muscle, and skin. However, some actions of T 3 are 
believed not to be genomic, including its reduction of pituitary 
type 2 5′-deiodinase activity and the increased glucose and amino 
acid transport that it can induce in some tissues. Some specific 
effects of thyroid hormones are summarized below. 
 Effects on Fetal Development 
 Iodide concentration by thyroid tissue and pituitary TSH both 
appear in the human fetus at about 11 weeks’ gestation. Because 
of the high placental content of type 3 5-deiodinase, most mater-
nal T 3 and T 4 are inactivated, and very little free hormone reaches 
the fetal circulation. However, this small amount of free hormone 
from the mother may be important for early fetal brain develop-
ment. After 15 to 18 weeks of gestation, the fetus is largely depen-
dent on its own thyroidal secretion. Although some fetal growth 
occurs in the absence of fetal thyroid hormone secretion, brain 
development and skeletal maturation are markedly impaired if 
congenital hypothyroidism is undiagnosed and thyroid hormone 
therapy is not begun promptly after birth. Congenital hypothy-
roidism results in cretinism, the features of which include mental 
retardation and dwarfism. 
 Effects on Oxygen Consumption, Heat 
Production, and Free Radical Formation 
 T 3 increases O 2 consumption and heat production in part by 
stimulation of Na + -K + ATPase in all tissues except the brain, 
spleen, and testis. This contributes to the increased basal meta-
bolic rate (total somatic O 2 consumption at rest) and the 
increased sensitivity to heat in hyperthyroidism—and the oppo-
site in hypothyroidism. Thyroid hormones stimulate mitochon-
driogenesis, augmenting the cell’s oxidative capacity. They also 
induce changes in the mitochondrial inner membrane protein 
and lipid composition that increase oxidative metabolism by 
both genomic and nongenomic effects. The reduced efficiency of 
oxidative metabolism caused by thyroid hormone is also reflected 
in the increased futile cycling of intermediary carbohydrate 
metabolites. 
 Cardiovascular Effects ( Figure 7–22 ) 
 T 3 stimulates transcription of sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca 2+ ATPase, 
increasing the rate of myocardial diastolic relaxation. It also 
increases expression of the more rapidly contractile isoforms of 
myosin heavy chain, the α isoforms, which contributes to 
TR-LBD
TR-LBD
TR-DBD
TR-DBD
TRE
Corepressor
Coactivator
Nucleus
Cytoplasm
A
RXR LBD
5'DI
TR-LBD
RXR DBD
TR LBD
TR DBD
TR DBD
TRE
Corepressor
Coactivator
Transcription
T3
T3
T3
T4
T4
T4
T3
TBPs
B
 FIGURE 7–21  Model of the interaction of T 3 with the T 3 receptor. 
 Panel A, Inactive Phase: The unliganded T 3 receptor dimer bound to 
the TRE along with corepressors acts as a suppressor of gene tran-
scription.  Panel B, Active Phase: T 3 and T 4 circulate bound to 
thyroid-binding proteins (TBPs). The free hormones are transported 
into the cell by a specific transport system. Within the cytoplasm, T 4 
is converted to T 3 by 5′-deiodinase and T 3 moves into the nucleus. 
There it binds to the ligand-binding domain of the TR monomer. This 
promotes disruption of the TR homodimer and heterodimerization 
with RXR on the TRE, displacement of corepressors, and binding of 
coactivators. The TR-coactivator complex activates gene transcrip-
tion, which leads to alteration in protein synthesis and cellular phe-
notype. (TR-LBD, T 3 receptor ligand-binding domain; TRDBD, T 3 
receptor DNA–binding domain; RXR-LBD, retinoid X receptor ligand–
binding domain; RXR-DBD, retinoid X receptor DNA–binding domain; 
TRE, thyroid hormone response element; TBPs, thyroxine-binding 
proteins; T 3 , triiodothyronine; T 4 , tetraiodothyronine, L-thyroxine; 
5′DI, 5′-deiodinase.) 
180    CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland
enhanced systolic function. In myocardium, T 3 also alters 
 expression of different isoforms of the Na + -K + ATPase genes, 
increases expression of α-adrenergic receptors, and decreases the 
concentration of the inhibitory G protein Gi α. T 3 also increases 
the rates of both depolarization and repolarization of the sinoatrial 
node, increasing heart rate. Consequently, thyroid hormones have 
positive inotropic and chronotropic effects on the heart, which, 
along with the heightened adrenergic sensitivity (see later), 
accounts for the increased heart rate and contractility in hyperthy-
roidism and the reverse in hypothyroidism. Thyroid hormones 
also affect diastolic ventricular function, lower peripheral vascular 
resistance, and increase intravascular volume, which contributes 
further to the increase in cardiac output associated with thyroid 
hormone action. 
 Sympathetic Effects 
 Thyroid hormones increase the number of β-adrenergic receptors 
in heart and skeletal muscle, adipose tissue, and lymphocytes. They 
may also amplify catecholamine action at a postreceptor site. Many 
of the clinical manifestations of thyrotoxicosis appear to reflect 
increased sensitivity to catecholamines. Furthermore, therapy with 
β-adrenergic blocking agents is often helpful in controlling these 
sympathomimetic manifestations of thyroid hormone excess. 
 Pulmonary Effects 
 Thyroid hormones maintain ventilatory responses to hypoxia and 
hypercapnia in the brain stem respiratory center. Consequently, in 
patients with severe hypothyroidism, hypoventilation can occur. 
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Na+
Na+
K+
K+
Na+/Ca2+
exchanger
Na+/K+-
ATPase
Voltage-
gated K+
channel
Ca2+
ATPase
Myosin
Actin
Cyclic AMP
Sarcoplasmic
reticulum
Cell
membrane
Triiodothyronine
Triiodothyronine
Triiodothyronine
nuclear
receptor
Adenylyl
cyclase
Protein
synthesis
mRNA
Thyroid
hormone
response
element
Guanine-nucleotide-
binding protein
β-Adrenergic
receptor
Nucleus
Phospholamban
 FIGURE 7–22  Sites of action of triiodothyronine on cardiac myocytes. Triiodothyronine enters the cell, possibly by a specific transport 
mechanism, and binds to nuclear triiodothyronine receptors. The complex then binds to thyroid hormone response elements of target genes 
and regulates transcription of these genes. Nonnuclear thyroid hormone effects on ion channels also occur.  (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Klein I, Ojamaa K. Thyroid hormone and the cardiovascular system.  N Engl J Med . 2001;344:501.) 
CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland     181
Respiratory muscle functions are also regulated by thyroid hor-
mone, and can be weakened in hyperthyroidism, leading to a 
sense of breathlessness. 
 Hematopoietic Effects 
 The increased cellular demand for O 2 in hyperthyroidism leads 
to increased production of erythropoietin and increased eryth-
ropoiesis. However, blood volume is usually not increased 
because of hemodilution and increased red cell turnover. 
Thyroid hormones increase the 2,3-diphosphoglycerate content 
of erythrocytes, allowing increased O 2 dissociation from hemo-
globin and increasing O 2 availability to tissues. The reverse 
occurs in hypothyroidism. 
 Gastrointestinal Effects 
 Thyroid hormones promote gut motility, which can result in 
increased motility and hyperdefecation (ie, increased frequency of 
formed bowel movements) in hyperthyroidism. Conversely, slowed 
bowel transit and constipation occurs in hypothyroidism. 
 Skeletal Effects 
 Thyroid hormones stimulate bone turnover, increasing bone 
resorption and, to a lesser degree, bone formation. Consequently, 
hyperthyroidism can be associated with hypercalciuria, and less 
often, hypercalcemia. Furthermore, chronic thyroid hormone 
excess can cause clinically significant bone mineral loss. 
 Neuromuscular Effects 
 In hyperthyroidism, there is increased protein turnover and loss in 
skeletal muscle, which can lead to a characteristic proximal myo-
pathy. There is also an increase in the speed of muscle contraction 
and relaxation, noted clinically as the hyperreflexia of hyperthy-
roidism and the delayed deep tendon reflex relaxation phase in 
hypothyroidism. A fine distal hand tremor is also typical in hyper-
thyroidism. As noted above, thyroid hormones are essential for 
normal development and function of the central nervous system, 
and failure of fetal thyroid function results in severe mental retar-
dation. In the adult, hyperactivity in hyperthyroidism and slug-
gishness in hypothyroidism can be striking. Similarly, hyperthyroid 
patients can be anxious or agitated, while hypothyroidism is typi-
cally associated with a depressed mood. 
 Effects on Lipid and Carbohydrate 
Metabolism 
 Hyperthyroidism increases hepatic gluconeogenesis and glycog-
enolysis, as well as intestinal glucose absorption, and there may 
also be thyroid hormone–mediated decreases in insulin sensitivity. 
Thus, hyperthyroidism can worsen glycemic control in patients 
who also have diabetes mellitus. Cholesterol synthesis and degra-
dation are both increased by thyroid hormones. The latter effect is 
due largely to an increase in hepatic low-density lipoprotein 
(LDL) receptor number, accelerating LDL clearance. Consequently, 
total and LDL cholesterol levels are typically elevated in patients 
with hypothyroidism. Lipolysis is also increased, releasing fatty 
acids and glycerol into circulating plasma. 
 Endocrine Effects 
 Thyroid hormones alter the production, responsiveness, and 
metabolic clearance of a number of hormones. In hypothyroid 
children, impaired growth hormone release slows longitudinal 
growth. Hypothyroidism can cause delayed puberty by impairing 
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) and gonadotropin 
secretion. Conversely, primary hypothyroidism can also cause 
precocious puberty, perhaps as an effect of very high TSH levels 
on gonadotropin receptors. In adults, hypothyroidism causes 
hyperprolactinemia in a minority of affected women. Menorrhagia 
(prolonged and heavier menses) and anovulation are common in 
hypothyroid women, the latter resulting in infertility. The respon-
siveness of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis to stress is 
blunted in hypothyroid patients. A slowing of the cortisol meta-
bolic clearance rate compensates for this in the hypothyroid state. 
Conversely, however, restoration of euthyroidism can rarely pro-
voke adrenal insufficiency as cortisol metabolism is accelerated in 
patients with diminished cortisol reserve due to concomitant dis-
ease affecting the adrenal axis. 
 In hyperthyroidism, accelerated aromatization of androgens to 
estrogens and increased sex hormone–binding globulin levels con-
tribute to the gynecomastia and elevated total testosterone levels 
seen in affected men. Hyperthyroidism can also impair normal 
GnRH and gonadotropin regulation of ovulation and menses, 
causing infertility and amenorrhea, respectively. All of the endo-
crine derangements occurring with thyroid dysfunction are 
reversed by appropriate treatment to restore euthyroidism. 
 PHYSIOLOGIC CHANGES IN THYROID 
FUNCTION 
 Thyroid Function in the Fetus 
 Before the fetus develops its own independent thyroid function, it 
depends on maternal thyroid hormones for early neural develop-
ment. By the 11th week of gestation, however, the hypophysial 
portal system has developed, and measurable TSH and TRH are 
present. At about the same time, the fetal thyroid begins to trap 
iodine. The secretion of thyroid hormone probably begins in mid 
gestation (18-20 weeks). TSH increases rapidly to peak levels at 24 
to 28 weeks, and T 4 levels peak at 35 to 40 weeks. T 3 levels remain 
low during gestation; T 4 is converted to rT 3 by type 3 5′-deiodinase 
during fetal development. At birth, there is a sudden marked rise 
in TSH stimulated by exposure to the colder extrauterine environ-
ment, with a rise in T 4 , a rise in T 3 , and a fall in rT 3 . These param-
eters gradually stabilize over the first month of life. 
 Thyroid Function in Pregnancy 
 A number of thyroid parameters change during pregnancy. There is 
an increase in urinary iodide clearance; in areas of low dietary iodine 
182    CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland
intake, this can cause maternal goiter, or when severe, hypothyroid-
ism. During pregnancy, there is a rise in TBG due to an estrogen-
induced increase in hepatic glycosylation of TBG, prolonging its 
metabolic clearance rate. Consequently, serum total T 4 , and to a 
lesser extent, total T 3 concentrations rise. Rising levels of hCG, which 
has weak TSH receptor agonist activity, contributes to minimal thy-
roid enlargement. Maternal hCG levels peak at approximately 
12 weeks resulting in a transient high-normal or even modestly ele-
vated serum-free T 4 level and a physiologic suppression of serum TSH 
to the low-normal or even subnormal range. Pathologically elevated 
hCG levels, found in women with a molar pregnancy or choriocarci-
noma, can cause overt hyperthyroidism. Women with severe vomit-
ing in pregnancy, called hyperemesis gravidarum, may also have 
higher levels of hCG, and can develop a transient gestational thyro-
toxicosis. As noted earlier, placental type 3 deiodinase accelerates 
thyroxine clearance during pregnancy, which partly accounts for the 
increased thyroxine dose requirement in treated hypothyroid women, 
and occasionally causes mild hypothyroidism in women with auto-
immune thyroiditis and decreased thyroid gland reserve. 
 Transplacental delivery of thyroid-related substances can have 
consequences for the fetus. Maternal iodide crossing the placenta 
is essential for fetal thyroid hormone production; however, large 
amounts of iodide can actually inhibit fetal thyroid function and 
cause a goiter substantial enough to obstruct delivery. In women 
with autoimmune thyroid disease, maternal immunoglobulins 
that stimulate or block the TSH receptor can cross the placenta 
and cause thyroid dysfunction in the fetus. The antithyroid drugs 
methimazole and PTU cross the placenta, and in large doses will 
impair fetal thyroid function (see Chapter 16). 
 Changes in Thyroid Function with Aging 
 T 4 turnover is highest in infants and children, and gradually falls 
to adult levels after puberty. The T 4 turnover rate is then stable 
until after age 60, when it again begins to decline. In the elderly, 
the metabolic clearance of T 4 can decrease by as much as 50%, 
necessitating a reduction in T 4 dose for treated patients. 
 Effects of Acute and Chronic Illness on 
Thyroid Function (Euthyroid Sick Syndrome) 
 Acute or chronic illness has several striking effects on thyroid 
function and hormone economy. The most common and earliest 
effect is inhibition of T 4 -to-T 3 conversion, with a resulting 
decrease in the circulating T 3 level. This change is accompanied by 
a rise in the serum reverse T 3 level, due to both its decreased con-
version to 3,3′-T 2 and some acceleration of its production from 
T 4 . These changes occur physiologically in the fetus and patho-
logically in circumstances of caloric restriction, as in malnutrition, 
starvation, and anorexia nervosa, and in patients with a variety of 
acute or chronic systemic illnesses ( Table 7–3 ). The pathogenesis 
of this  low T 3 syndrome is thought to involve cytokines, such as 
tumor necrosis factor, secreted by inflammatory cells, which 
inhibit type 1 5′-deiodinase. Drugs can also inhibit type 1 
5′-deiodinase and lower the serum T 3 levels in treated patients; 
these agents include corticosteroids, amiodarone, iodinated chole-
cystographic dyes, PTU, and high-dose propranolol. Initially, low 
serum T 3 levels are typically accompanied by total and free T 4 
levels that are normal or, less commonly, slightly elevated 
( Figure 7–23 ). As illness becomes more severe, however, there is a 
TABLE 7–3 Conditions or factors associated with 
decreased conversion of T4 or T3.
1. Fetal life 
2. Caloric restriction 
3. Hepatic disease 
4. Major systemic illness 
5. Drugs: 
  Propylthiouracil 
  Glucocorticoids 
  Propranolol (mild effect) 
  Iodinated x-ray contrast agents (iopanoic acid, ipodate sodium) 
  Amiodarone 
6. Selenium deficiency 
Euthyroid
Low T3-T4
Low T3
+
−
+
−
Normal range
Normal range
Mortality
Severity of illness
TT4
T3
FT4
rT3
 FIGURE 7–23 A schematic representation of the changes in serum thyroid hormone values with increasing severity of nonthyroidal illness. 
A rapidly rising mortality rate accompanies the fall in serum total T 4 (TT 4 ) and free T 4 (FT 4 ) values.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Nicoloff JT. 
Abnormal measurements in nonendocrine illness. In:  Medicine for the Practicing Physician . 2nd ed. Hurst JW, ed. Butterworth-Heinemann; 1991.) 
CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland     183
decline in serum total and free T 4 as well. This hypothyroxinemia 
can have several causes. In certain illnesses (eg, nephrosis and 
severe liver disease), there can be a decline in the circulating TBG 
concentration. A rise in plasma free fatty acids can interfere with 
T 4 binding to TBG, liberating more free T 4 that, in turn, feeds 
back on the hypothalamus and pituitary to reduce TSH and estab-
lish a new equilibrium with a lower total T 4 . TSH can also be 
suppressed by cytokines circulating in severely ill patients and by 
the dopamine or corticosteroids often used to treat critically ill 
patients. Finally, T 4 clearance is accelerated in illness. All of these 
factors can contribute to the lower serum levels of T 4 and free T 4 , 
as measured by free hormone immunoassays and estimated T 3 
resin-uptake procedures. However, the free T 4 level measured by 
equilibrium dialysis has been reported to be normal in most, but 
not all patients. This suggests that the low serum free T 4 levels 
reported by most commercially available free T 4 assays may be a 
measurement artifact that is unique to critically ill patients. 
 Two clinical questions arise in sick patients with this constella-
tion of thyroid function test abnormalities. First, it can be chal-
lenging to distinguish the euthyroid sick syndrome from central 
hypothyroidism; in both conditions, the T 4 and TSH levels can be 
low. Clinical information can be helpful, including a history of 
known pituitary or thyroid disease, head trauma or surgery, or 
manifestations of other elements of hypopituitarism (eg, small 
testes in a man). Additional laboratory testing can sometimes be 
informative. The serum free T 4 level determined by equilibrium 
dialysis is typically normal in the euthyroid sick syndrome. In 
postmenopausal women, an elevated serum FSH attests to at least 
one intact pituitary function, although gonadotropin levels can be 
low in severe illness as well. Measurement of serum cortisol may 
be particularly helpful, because it should be normal or elevated in 
any patient with significant systemic illness. If it is normal or ele-
vated, hypothalamic or pituitary disease is most unlikely. 
Sometimes, however, it is necessary to obtain emergent imaging of 
the hypothalamus or pituitary to resolve the question. These thy-
roid function test abnormalities normalize when the patient recov-
ers. However, recovery can be accompanied by transient rebound 
elevation of the serum TSH that may be misinterpreted as hypo-
thyroidism. In this setting, in the absence of clinically apparent 
hypothyroidism, it is best to avoid thyroid hormone therapy and 
to reevaluate a few weeks following recovery. 
 The second clinical question is whether the euthyroid sick 
syndrome itself should be treated with thyroid hormone. Certainly, 
many critically ill patients have clinical problems that are reminis-
cent of hypothyroidism, such as hypothermia, altered sensorium, 
ventilatory and myocardial dysfunction, and hyponatremia. It has 
been postulated that intracellular hypothyroidism may exist in 
these patients and that thyroid hormone therapy might be benefi-
cial. Conversely, it has been proposed that these changes in thy-
roid status are, in fact, compensatory mechanisms for reducing 
rates of oxygen consumption and protein catabolism and that 
thyroid hormone therapy might actually be harmful. Furthermore, 
two randomized trials, small clinical series, and animal models of 
systemic illness all have failed to demonstrate any benefit of thy-
roid hormone therapy in this setting. Although the issue remains 
unresolved, current practice is generally to withhold thyroid 
 hormone therapy unless there is convincing clinical and biochem-
ical evidence of true hypothyroidism. 
 THYROID AUTOIMMUNITY 
 Autoimmunity is involved in the pathogenesis of many thyroid 
diseases, including hyperthyroid Graves disease, hypothyroidism 
with autoimmune or Hashimoto thyroiditis, silent and postpar-
tum thyroiditis, and certain forms of neonatal thyroid dysfunc-
tion. Immunologic defense against foreign substances and 
neoplastic cells involves macrophages that ingest and digest the 
foreign material and present peptide fragments on the cell surface 
in association with a class II protein encoded by the HLA-DR 
region of the  MHC gene complex. This complex is recognized by 
a T-cell receptor on a CD4 helper T cell, which stimulates the 
release of cytokines such as interleukin-2 (IL-2). These cytokines 
amplify the response by inducing T-cell activation and prolifera-
tion, induction of killer cell activity in CD8 suppressor cells, and 
stimulation of antibody formation against the foreign antigen by 
B lymphocytes. Eventually, the activation process is muted by the 
action of the CD8 suppressor cells (see Chapter 2). 
 Early observations suggested the possibility that immunologic 
reactions could affect the thyroid gland. Thyroiditis was induced 
by immunization of mice with thyroid tissue and Freund adju-
vant. Thyroglobulin antibodies were identified in the sera from 
patients with thyroiditis, and a long-acting thyroid stimulator, 
later shown to be an antibody to the TSH receptor, was found in 
the sera of patients with Graves disease. 
 There are three major thyroidal autoantigens: thyroglobulin, 
TPO, and the TSH receptor. Circulating autoantibodies to these 
antigens are useful markers for thyroid autoimmunity, but T-cell-
mediated immune mechanisms are central to the pathogenesis of 
thyroid diseases. Thyroid cells have the capacity to ingest antigen 
(eg, thyroglobulin) and, when stimulated by cytokines such as 
gamma interferon, express cell surface class II molecules (eg, HLA-
DR4) that present these antigens to T lymphocytes. In addition to 
the antigen and the class II molecule, other factors such as costim-
ulatory signals from antigen-presenting cells, are doubtless required 
to initiate autoimmune thyroid disease. One hypothesis is that the 
process is initiated or promoted by external antigens (eg, infec-
tious agents) that lead to antibody and cellular immune responses 
through cross-reactivity. In addition, genetic factors clearly predis-
pose individuals to thyroid autoimmunity. HLA typing in patients 
with Graves disease reveals a high frequency of HLA-B8 and 
HLA-DR3 in Caucasians, HLA-Bw46 and HLA-B5 in Chinese, 
and HLA-B17 in blacks. In Caucasians, atrophic thyroiditis has 
been associated with HLA-B8 and goitrous Hashimoto thyroiditis 
with HLA-DR5. It has been suggested that a genetically induced 
antigen-specific defect in suppressor T lymphocytes may be the 
basis for autoimmune thyroid disease. 
 The increased incidence of autoimmune thyroid disease in 
postpubertal and premenopausal women, as well as the occurrence 
of postpartum thyroiditis, implies a role for female sex hormones 
in the pathogenesis of autoimmune thyroid disease. A high iodine 
intake may result in more highly iodinated thyroglobulin that is 
184    CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland
more immunogenic and would favor the development of autoim-
mune thyroid disease. Therapeutic doses of lithium, used for the 
treatment of bipolar disorder, can interfere with suppressor cell 
function and may precipitate autoimmune thyroid disease. 
 TESTS OF THYROID FUNCTION 
 The high prevalence of thyroid dysfunction and neoplasia make 
testing for thyroid disease a daily necessity in virtually every field 
of medical practice—whether a pediatrician screening a neonate 
for congenital hypothyroidism, an internist considering possible 
thyroid dysfunction in a patient with nonspecific complaints, an 
obstetrician-gynecologist evaluating a woman with infertility, a 
surgeon assessing a thyroid nodule, or virtually any type of special-
ist considering thyroid disease as the potential cause for a com-
plaint or test abnormality in the field of interest (eg, cardiologist, 
gastroenterologist, neurologist, psychiatrist, ophthalmologist). 
 Several levels of laboratory and radiologic investigation for 
thyroid diseases should be considered. First, it is common for cli-
nicians with a relatively low index of suspicion for thyroid dys-
function in a particular patient to want to exclude its presence 
with greater certainty. For this purpose, a test with high sensitivity 
(ie, few false-negative results), wide availability, and low cost is 
most appropriate. The serum TSH concentration often plays this 
role in clinical consideration of hypothyroidism and hyperthy-
roidism. Second, when suspicion of thyroid disease is moderate to 
high, based on clinical or other routine laboratory results, testing 
with even greater sensitivity to detect rare thyroid disorders is 
required, as is a test that can begin to define the severity and 
underlying cause of thyroid dysfunction. For example, in a patient 
with hypothermia, confusion, periorbital edema, and hypercholes-
terolemia, measurement of both the serum TSH and free T 4 con-
centrations would permit exclusion of both primary and central 
forms of hypothyroidism; furthermore, if hypothyroidism is con-
firmed, the site of responsible disease would be implicated. Third, 
when thyroid dysfunction is clinically obvious or already bio-
chemically confirmed by first-line testing, then more sophisticated 
studies are sometimes indicated to identify the underlying cause 
and plan appropriate therapy. For example, in a postpartum 
woman with thyrotoxicosis, an additional serum T 3 , thyroid-
stimulating immunoglobulin titer, and radionuclide thyroid 
uptake may be needed to differentiate Graves disease and postpar-
tum thyroiditis—for which there are distinct therapeutic 
approaches. 
 TESTS OF THYROID HORMONES 
IN BLOOD 
 Serum TSH Measurement 
 Because thyroid dysfunction usually arises from primary disorders 
of the thyroid gland, serum TSH measurement is the most widely 
employed test to determine whether thyroid dysfunction exists. 
The sensitivity of the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis ensures 
that both primary hypothyroidism and thyrotoxicosis, due to 
either primary thyroid disorders or exogenous thyroid hormones, 
are detected. Furthermore, even mild degrees of thyroid dysfunc-
tion, in which the serum thyroid hormone concentrations have 
fallen or risen significantly but remain within the broad reference 
range (ie, subclinical or mild thyroid dysfunction) are identified. 
The inverse logarithmic relationship between serum TSH and free 
T 4 concentration in various situations is shown in  Figures 7–24 A 
and  7–24 B. TSH assays must be sensitive (ie, able to distinguish 
low from very low and undetectable TSH levels) to be used for 
diagnosis of thyrotoxicosis. A National Academy of Clinical 
Biochemistry guideline specifies that sensitivity, or lower limit of 
detection, for TSH assays should be less than 0.02 mU/L. It is 
better to assess and compare TSH assays by this quantitative crite-
rion rather than marketing terms such as  third generation or  ultra-
sensitive . 
 There are, in general, two sorts of immunoassays used to mea-
sure TSH (and T 4 and T 3 ) in serum samples: immunometric assays 
(IMA) and radioimmunoassay (RIA). In an IMA or  sandwich 
assay , an antibody—usually a mouse monoclonal antibody—
directed against one epitope on the TSH molecule is fixed to a 
solid matrix, and a second monoclonal TSH antibody that binds 
another TSH epitope is labeled with a detectable marker, which 
can be a radioisotope, a colorimetrically quantifiable enzyme, or a 
fluorescent or chemiluminescent tag. In such IMAs, the concen-
tration of TSH, which links the solid state and labeled antibodies, 
is proportionate to the intensity of signal emitted by the marker 
once unbound second antibody has been separated off. In con-
trast, in conventional RIAs, a small amount of a TSH tracer, to 
which a radioactive molecule has been linked, competes for bind-
ing to first antibody (eg, a rabbit antihuman TSH polyclonal 
antibody). Then antibody-bound TSH, both in the sample and 
the tracer, is separated from the free tracer in the supernatant 
using one of several techniques: a second antibody directed against 
the first (eg, goat antirabbit immunoglobulin antibody), polyeth-
ylene glycol, or staphylococcal protein A. In RIAs, the concentra-
tion of TSH in the sample is inversely proportionate to tracer 
activity. In general, TSH RIAs are less sensitive and less widely 
employed than IMAs. 
 There are infrequent but important limitations of the serum 
TSH assay alone for diagnosis of thyroid dysfunction when clini-
cal suspicion of hypothyroidism is high and in certain other spe-
cial circumstances ( Table 7–4 ). First, central hypothyroidism can 
be overlooked. In patients with hypothyroidism due to a pituitary 
tumor, for example, the serum TSH is typically not elevated, but 
rather low or inappropriately normal. Consequently, simultaneous 
measurements of both the serum free T 4 and TSH would be 
required to further substantiate or exclude this diagnosis. Central 
hypothyroidism can also be confirmed by assessing the serum 
TSH response to an injection of TRH. To perform this test, serum 
samples for TSH are obtained before and 30 to 60 minutes after 
200 μg of TRH is administered intravenously. The absence of a 
significant rise in serum TSH concentration (eg, to a peak value 
>7 mU/L) indicates pituitary or hypothalamic disease or suppres-
sion by exogenous thyroid hormone. A modest and delayed 
rise may be seen in patients with hypothalamic disease and 
tertiary hypothyroidism. Currently, TRH is not available in the 
CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland     185
United States. Another cause of a misleadingly low serum TSH con-
centration is drug treatment with either high-dose corticosteroids or 
dopamine, both of which inhibit TSH secretion (see  Table 7–4 ). 
 A second limitation of TSH testing alone is that there are other 
nonthyroidal causes of an elevated serum TSH concentration, as 
described in  Table 7–4 . 
 Serum T 4 and T 3 Measurements 
 The concentrations of total and free (unbound) T 4 and T 3 are 
measurable by a variety of automated assay techniques. Serum 
total thyroid hormone concentrations are widely available and 
accurate for assessment of most patients with overt thyroid dys-
function. However, a limitation of these assays is they can provide 
false-positive and false-negative results when changes in the con-
centration or binding affinity of the thyroid hormone–binding 
plasma proteins are altered. For example, a pregnant woman with 
an estrogen-induced increase in the concentration of TBG could 
be misdiagnosed as being hyperthyroid if only a total T 4 assay was 
employed. Conversely, a pregnant patient with primary hypothy-
roidism might be overlooked if the elevated TBG concentration 
produced total T 4 within the reference range. Despite these reser-
vations, diagnostic accuracy is high when total T 4 assay results are 
interpreted along with TSH assay findings. 
 These problems are circumvented by measuring the free thy-
roxine (FT 4 ) concentration by free T 4 IMAs or equilibrium dialy-
sis or estimating it using the free thyroxine index (FT 4 I), also 
called the  thyroid hormone–binding ratio (THBR). Free T 4 
assays employ strategies to measure only the unbound fraction of 
T 4 in serum samples. One approach is to employ a competing 
thyroxine analog tracer that binds to the assay antibody but not to 
plasma proteins. Such free T 4 assays are quite accurate in distin-
guishing straightforward TBG derangements from true FT 4 
abnormalities. However, they may be influenced to some extent 
by variations in total T 4 , and they can yield misleadingly high 
readings in dysalbuminemic hyperthyroxinemia. Because they are 
Levothyroxine suppressed (euthyroid) (n = 20)
Hypothyroid (primary) (n = 49)
Hyperthyroid (nonpituitary) (n = 56)
Euthyroid (n = 194)
1000
100
10
1
0.1
0.01
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
30
TSH (mU/L)
A
FT4 (ng/dL)
 FIGURE 7–24  A. Relationship between serum-free thyroxine by dialysis (FT 4 ) ng/dL and log 10 TSH in euthyroid, hyperthyroid, hypothyroid, 
and T 4 -suppressed euthyroid individuals. Note that for each unit change in T 4 there is a logarithmic change in TSH.  B. Relationship between FT 4 
by dialysis and log 10 TSH in normal subjects and subjects with various illnesses including primary hypothyroidism, central hypothyroidism and 
non–levothyroxine-suppressed TSH, levothyroxine-treated congenital hypothyroidism, TSH-secreting tumors, thyroid hormone resistance, non-
thyroidal illness, and nonpituitary hyperthyroidism.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Kaptein EM. Clinical applications of free thyroxine 
determinations.  Clin Lab Med . 1993;13:654.) 
186    CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland
sufficiently accurate in most settings, automatable, and inexpen-
sive, they are currently the most widely used method for free T 4 
determination. 
 Equilibrium dialysis entails equilibrating a serum sample with 
buffer across a membrane with pores that permit passage only of 
unbound T 4 ; then the dialysate is assayed for its T 4 concentration, 
from which the serum concentration can be derived. Although 
equilibrium dialysis is considered the gold standard for free T 4 
determination, it is cumbersome, relatively expensive, and not 
widely available. Consequently, it is not the optimal first-line 
method for free T 4 measurement, and it is best reserved for special 
circumstances. 
 Free T 4 estimation by free T 4 index entails measuring the total 
T 4 in a conventional IMA and then estimating the partition of a 
tracer iodothyronine between plasma proteins and a matrix with a 
virtually limitless binding capacity for small molecules (resin, 
charcoal, or talc). Radiolabeled T 3 is often the tracer employed, 
although T 4 tracer can be used as well. The free T 4 index is then 
calculated as the product of the total T 4 multiplied by the percent-
age of iodothyronine tracer taken up by the matrix, the so-called 
 T 3 uptake . It is important to note that this refers to the T 3 tracer 
used in the assay, not the T 3 level in the serum sample. 
1000
100
10
1
0.1
0.01
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
30
TSH (mU/L)
B
FT4 (ng/dL)
Overt nonpituitary
hyperthyroidism
Nonthyroidal illness
Thyroid hormone
resistance
TSH-secreting
tumors
Levothyroxine-treated congenital hypothyroidism
Primary hypothyroidism
Central
hypothyroidism or
nonlevothyroxine-
suppressed TSH
Normal
range
FIGURE 7–24 
(Continued )
TABLE 7–4  Causes of inappropriate serum TSH 
concentration.a
Clinical hyperthyroidism 
TSH-secreting pituitary adenoma 
Isolated pituitary resistance to thyroid hormone 
Clinical hypothyroidism 
Central (pituitary or hypothalamic) hypothyroidism 
Preceding TSH suppression (eg, recently treated hyperthyroidism) 
Clinical euthyroidism 
Systemic illnesses (↓ during acute phase, ↑ during recovery) 
Generalized resistance to thyroid hormone (compensated) 
Assay interference 
 Anti-TSH antibodies 
 Anti-mouse immunoglobulin antibodies 
Drugs: dopamine, dobutamine, glucocorticoids 
a“Inappropriate” refers to disruption of the usual reciprocal relationship between 
serum TSH and free thyroid hormone concentrations. 
CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland     187
 When the free T 4 concentration alone is used to diagnose thyroid 
dysfunction, there are a number of conditions from which true 
hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism must be distinguished. First, 
there are several conditions in which euthyroid individuals can 
develop hyperthyroxinemia (see  Table 7–1 ). These include rare 
patients with nonthyroidal illnesses; unusual plasma-binding pro-
teins abnormalities, such as familial dysalbuminemic hyperthyrox-
inemia (see later); and drugs that block T 4 -to-T 3 conversion (eg, 
iodinated contrast media, amiodarone, glucocorticoids, and propra-
nolol). In these conditions, true hyperthyroidism is excluded by the 
normal serum TSH level. Conversely, there are also conditions in 
which the serum-free thyroxine can be subnormal in euthyroid indi-
viduals. Antiepileptic drugs, such as phenytoin and carbamazepine, 
have multiple actions that lower total and free T 4 levels, including 
inhibition of TSH secretion and accelerating T 4 catabolism. However, 
the normal accompanying serum TSH and equilibrium dialysis T 4 
levels implies that these patients are, in fact, euthyroid. 
 Total and free T 3 concentrations can also be quantitated in 
specific IMAs. Measurement of serum T 3 is used (1) to recognize 
patients who have T 3 toxicosis, a milder degree of hyperthyroidism 
in which the serum T 3 level is elevated with a normal serum T 4 ; 
(2) to fully define the severity of hyperthyroidism and monitor the 
response to therapy; and (3) to help in the differential diagnosis of 
patients with hyperthyroidism. Because T 3 is preferentially secreted 
in most patients with Graves disease, and some with toxic nodular 
goiter, the ratios of serum T 3 :T 4 (expressed in ng/dL:μg/dL) are 
typically greater than 20 in patients with these conditions. 
 The serum T 3 concentration is not accurate for diagnosis of 
hypothyroidism because a normal T 3 level is often maintained in 
patients with mild to moderate primary hypothyroidism; TSH 
stimulation increases the relative secretion of T 3 . Because T 3 is 
bound to TBG, the total serum T 3 concentration varies with the 
TBG level, although less than the serum total T 4 ( Table 7–5 ). 
Serum-free T 3 can be measured by IMA or more precisely by equi-
librium dialysis. 
 Reverse T 3 (rT 3 ) can be measured by RIA; its serum concentra-
tion in adults is about one-third of the total T 3 concentration. 
However, there is little or no clinical indication for rT 3 measurement. 
Previous claims that it is useful to differentiate hypothyroidism from 
the thyroid function test changes of nonthyroidal illness have not 
shown that rT 3 levels are sufficiently accurate for that purpose. 
 Thyroglobulin can be measured in serum by either IMA or 
RIA, which now have sensitivities as low as 0.1 ng/mL. There are 
two indications for thyroglobulin measurement: (1) detection of 
residual or recurrent epithelial thyroid cancers (papillary, follicu-
lar, and Hürthle cell carcinomas) after thyroidectomy (see section 
on Management of Thyroid Cancer); and (2) differentiation of 
thyrotoxicosis due to exogenous thyroid hormone, in which the 
thyroglobulin level is suppressed, from all forms of endogenous 
hyperthyroidism, including various forms of thyroiditis, in which 
it is elevated or normal. 
 There are several potential limitations of current thyroglobulin 
IMAs. The most important is interference caused by the presence 
of circulating antithyroglobulin antibodies. This typically leads to 
spuriously low values in thyroglobulin IMAs and elevated values 
in RIAs. Serum thyroglobulin determinations are not useful to 
differentiate malignant from benign thyroid nodules. 
 ASSESSMENT OF THYROID IODINE 
METABOLISM AND BIOSYNTHETIC 
ACTIVITY 
 Radionuclide uptake measurements can be useful to differentiate 
among the causes of thyrotoxicosis, particularly when used in 
conjunction with imaging. Radioiodine uptake determinations 
permit in vivo assessment of fractional iodine uptake and turnover 
by the thyroid gland. Iodine-123 is the ideal isotope for this pur-
pose, with 13-hour half-life and emitting quantifiable 28-keV 
x-rays and 159-keV gamma photons but no tissue damage by beta 
particles.  123 I—or when it is unavailable, a low dose of  131 I—is 
given orally, and radioactivity over the thyroid is quantified with 
a scintillation counter at 4 or 6 hours and again at 24 hours 
( Figure 7–25 ). The fractional radioactive iodine uptake (RAIU) by 
TABLE 7–5  Representative iodothyronine kinetic 
values in a euthyroid human.
T4 
T3 
rT3 
Serum levels 
 Total, μg/dL (nmol/L) 
 Free, ng/dL (pmol/L) 
8 (103) 
1.5 (19) 
0.12 (1.84) 
0.28 (4.3) 
0.04 (0.51) 
0.24 (3.69) 
Body pool, μg (nmol) 
800 (1023) 
46 (70.7) 
40 (61.5) 
Distribution volume (L) 
10 
38 
98 
Metabolic clearance 
 rate (MCR) (L/d) 
1 
22 
90 
Production (disposal) 
 rate. MCR X serum 
 concentration, μg/d 
 (nmol/d) 
80 (103) 
26 (34) 
36 (46) 
Half-life in plasma (t1/2) 
 (days) 
7 
1 
0.2 
(Note: T4 μg/dL × 12.87 = nmol/L; T3 μg/dL × 15.38 = nmol/L). 
80
60
40
20
0
0
6
12
18
24
Hours after tracer dose 123I
Hyperthyroid
High turnover
Normal
Hypothyroid
Percent of thyroid uptake 123I
 FIGURE 7–25  Typical curves of 24-hour radioiodine uptake in 
normal subjects and in patients with thyroid disease. A high-turnover 
curve may be seen in patients taking an iodine-deficient diet or with 
a defect in hormone synthesis. 
188    CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland
the thyroid varies with recent dietary iodide intake. In countries 
with a relatively high iodide intake (eg, Chile, Brazil), the normal 
RAIU is 5% to 15% at 6 hours and 8% to 30% at 24 hours, 
whereas in areas of low iodide intake and endemic goiter (eg, some 
parts of Europe and sub-Saharan Africa), the 24-hour RAIU can 
be as high as 60% to 90%. 
 In hyperthyroid Graves disease, the 24-hour RAIU is markedly 
elevated (eg, 40%-95%), although if iodide turnover is very rapid, 
the 5-hour uptake may be even higher than the 24-hour uptake 
( Figure 7–25 ). Similarly, the 24-hour RAIU is increased to a lesser 
extent in toxic nodular goiter (eg, 30%-70%). Thyrotoxicosis with 
a low thyroidal RAIU occurs in patients with several conditions: 
(1) subacute and lymphocytic (postpartum, silent) thyroiditis with 
inflammatory release of preformed hormone causing spontane-
ously resolving thyrotoxicosis; (2) in iatrogenic or factitious thyro-
toxicosis resulting from excessive thyroid hormone medication; 
and (3) following excess oral or intravenous iodide intake, as 
occurs, for example, with amiodarone therapy or after radiocon-
trast agents. There can also be low RAIU over the anterior neck 
when there is excessive thyroid hormone production elsewhere in 
the body, as occurs with ectopic thyroid tissue at the tongue base 
(lingual thyroid); in the mediastinum; with struma ovarii, an ovar-
ian teratoma with functioning thyroid tissue; and with function-
ing metastases from thyroid carcinoma after total thyroidectomy. 
 The T 3 suppression test is a permutation of the RAIU that is 
rarely used to ascertain whether thyroid function is autonomous. 
When one gives T 3 to normal individuals (75-100 μg in divided 
doses daily for 5 days) it reduces the 24-hour RAIU by more than 
50% from baseline. Failure of the radioiodine uptake to suppress 
indicates autonomous thyroid function, such as occurs in Graves 
disease or with an autonomously functioning thyroid nodule. 
 A rare use of RAIU is in determining whether a goitrous thy-
roid gland has an iodide organification defect. The perchlorate 
discharge test assesses efficiency of iodide organification by the 
gland. Perchlorate (KClO 4) acutely blocks the NIS, halting further 
influx of iodide into the gland and permitting leakage of trapped 
but nonorganified iodide out of the cell. Specifically, after 
administering a radioiodine tracer dose and measuring an initial 
RAIU at 4 hours, 0.5 g KClO 4 is administered to block further 
radioiodine uptake. If a second RAIU 1 hour later shows that the 
measured RAIU has been diminished by 5% or more, this indi-
cates an organification defect. 
 Positive perchlorate discharge tests are seen in some patients 
with congenital iodide organification defects, as well as in autoim-
mune thyroiditis, in Graves disease, especially after  131 I therapy, 
and in patients receiving antithyroid drug inhibitors of iodide 
organification. The perchlorate discharge test is rarely used clini-
cally, and perchlorate is not available in the United States. 
 THYROID IMAGING 
 1. RADIONUCLIDE IMAGING 
 123 I and technetium  99m Tc pertechnetate ( 99m TcO 4 ) are useful for 
determining the functional activity and morphology of the thy-
roid gland.  123 I (200-300 μCi) is administered orally, and an 
image of the thyroid is obtained 8 to 24 hours later.  99m TcO 4 
(1-10 mCi), which is trapped by the NIS, but not organified and 
retained in the gland, is administered intravenously, and the scan 
image is obtained earlier than usual—at 30-60 minutes. Images 
can be obtained with either a rectilinear scanner or a gamma 
camera. The rectilinear scanner moves back and forth over the 
area of interest and produces a life-size picture, on which regions 
of interest, such as nodules, can be marked ( Figure 7–26 A). The 
gamma camera has a pinhole collimator, and the scan is obtained 
on a fluorescent screen and recorded on film or a computer 
monitor. The camera has greater resolution, but regions of inter-
est must be identified with a radioactive marker for clinical cor-
relation ( Figure 7–26 B). 
 Radionuclide scans provide information about the size and 
shape of the thyroid gland and the distribution of tracer activity 
within the gland. This is useful in differentiating among the causes 
of thyrotoxicosis; an enlarged gland with intense and homogenous 
concentration of tracer is typical of Graves disease. In contrast, 
 FIGURE 7–26  A. Rectilinear sodium  123 I scan performed 6 hours after the ingestion of 100 μCi of sodium  123 I.  B. Scintiphoto (pinhole colli-
mator) thyroid scan performed 6 hours after the ingestion of 100 μCi of sodium  123 I.  (Both scans courtesy of Dr. R.R. Cavalieri.) 
CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland     189
one or more discrete regions of tracer activity, especially corre-
sponding to a palpable nodule or nodules, with suppression of 
extranodular tissue are characteristic of toxic nodular goiter. 
 Radionuclide imaging has a limited role in differentiation of 
benign from malignant thyroid nodules. When a patient with a 
thyroid nodule has a suppressed serum TSH concentration, a 
radionuclide scan is often appropriate to determine if the nodule 
is  hot (ie, functioning with suppression of extranodular thyroid 
tissue). If this is the case, the nodule can generally be considered 
benign. Because both most benign and malignant thyroid nodules 
are  cold , or hypofunctioning, documenting this is not particularly 
helpful, and cytologic evaluation must be performed in any case. 
 Radionuclide whole body scanning is useful in follow-up of 
patients with treated thyroid cancer and for confirmation that a 
mass on the tongue (lingual thyroid), in the midline of the neck 
(thyroglossal duct), or in the mediastinum (substernal goiter) 
represents ectopic thyroid tissue. 
 THYROID ULTRASONOGRAPHY AND 
OTHER IMAGING TECHNIQUES 
 The size of the thyroid gland and characteristics of nodular lesions 
within it are best ascertained by high-resolution ultrasonography 
( Figure 7–27 ). Sonography can differentiate solid nodules from cys-
tic lesions and characterize complex cysts that have both solid and 
cystic components. Certain features of nodules are more common in 
malignant lesions (eg, irregular nodule capsule and microcalcifica-
tions), and other features are typical of benign lesions (eg, a  spongi-
form appearance and cystic change), but none of these features can 
be considered definitive. Sonography can be used to serially monitor 
the size of thyroid nodules over time, to guide fine-needle aspiration 
of thyroid nodules, and to assess regional lymph nodes in thyroid 
cancer patients both preoperatively and in long-term follow-up. 
 Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) are useful in patients with thyroid disease in special set-
tings. They may be required to define the posterior cervical and 
substernal extent of large goiters, and whether there is tracheal 
deviation or compression. In thyroid cancer patients, they can be 
helpful in identifying metastatic disease outside of the neck (eg, in 
the lungs, liver). It should be remembered that administration of 
iodine-containing radiocontrast dye for CT imaging interferes 
with subsequent radioiodine imaging and therapy for up to several 
months. Positron emission tomography (PET) scanning has a role 
in localization of metastatic disease in treated thyroid cancer 
patients who have a serum thyroglobulin concentration greater 
than 10 ng/mL. 
 When any of the above-described techniques are used for other 
indications to image structures in the cervical region, thyroid 
nodules are commonly detected incidentally. Studies indicate that 
the prevalence of thyroid cancer in such thyroid incidentalomas is 
the same as in palpable nodules, so they should usually be biopsied 
if greater than 1.0 to 1.5 cm in diameter, and monitored by serial 
ultrasound if smaller. PET incidentalomas, in particular, should be 
thoroughly evaluated; as some studies have shown that as many as 
two-thirds of these hypermetabolic lesions have been found to be 
cancers. 
 THYROID BIOPSY 
 Fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) of a thyroid nodule is the 
best method for differentiating benign from malignant thyroid 
nodules and diffuse goiters. FNAB is a minor outpatient proce-
dure performed in awake, nonfasting patients with appropriate 
aseptic technique; local anesthesia may or may not be required. 
The procedure is typically performed with a 27- or 25-gauge 
needle, which is inserted into the nodule or goiter, and moved in 
JV
CA
RL
STM
Is
Tr
STM
LL
JV
CA
 FIGURE 7–27  Ultrasound of the normal thyroid gland. (Tr, trachea; LL, left lobe of thyroid; RL, right lobe of thyroid; Is, isthmus; CA, carotid 
artery; JV, jugular vein; STM, sternothyroid muscle.)  (Courtesy of Dr. R.A. Filly) 
190    CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland
and out until a small amount of bloody material is seen in the hub 
of the needle. The aspirated material is then expressed onto a glass 
slide and prepared as a thin smear, which is either air-dried for 
immediate staining and preliminarily assessed, or placed in fixative 
for definitive staining and cytopathologic assessment. FNAB can 
also be useful to evacuate cystic lesions, although the fluid will 
recollect in one-half of these cysts. 
 Cytologic diagnosis of malignancy in thyroid nodules is highly 
accurate. The sensitivity (true-positive diagnoses divided by total 
number of nodules proven to be cancer by surgery) is 95% to 
98%, and the specificity (true-negative results divided by total 
number of cases without disease) is also 95%. 
 TEST OF PERIPHERAL THYROID 
HORMONE ACTIONS 
 Theoretically, the most definitive test of thyroid function would 
be a method of quantifying thyroid hormone responses in periph-
eral tissues. In practice, however, these tests have limited accuracy 
because the response parameters may be imprecisely quantified 
(eg, ankle reflex relaxation time) or because they are also modu-
lated by nonthyroidal factors (eg, serum cholesterol and echocar-
diographic systolic time intervals). Nonetheless, these techniques 
are useful in clinical research and in assessment of rare patients 
suspected of having resistance to thyroid hormone action. 
 Basal oxygen consumption reflects thyroid hormones’ effects 
on oxygen consumption and calorigenesis in most body tissues, 
especially the liver. There is considerable overlap between the 
measured levels in hypothyroidism, euthyroidism, and hyperthy-
roidism. Echocardiography can be used to assess systolic and dia-
stolic functions, both of which are altered with thyroid dysfunction; 
but this is exclusively a research technique. 
 Thyroid hormones influence the concentrations of a number 
of analytes in blood. For example, serum total and LDL choles-
terol is usually elevated in hypothyroidism and lowered in hyper-
thyroidism. In hyperthyroidism, sex hormone–binding globulin, 
ferritin, and angiotensin-converting enzyme concentrations are 
often higher, as are markers of bone formation and degradation. 
However, none of these test results is sensitive or specific enough 
for routine diagnostic use. 
 MEASUREMENT OF THYROID 
AUTOANTIBODIES 
 Detection of thyroid autoantibodies can be helpful in establishing 
the diagnosis of autoimmune thyroid disease. To establish the diag-
nosis of autoimmune (Hashimoto) thyroiditis in a patient with 
diffuse goiter or hypothyroidism, serum anti-TPO or the less sensi-
tive antithyroglobulin antibodies can be employed. An older test, 
antimicrosomal antibodies has intermediate sensitivity. Anti-TPO 
and antithyroglobulin antibodies can be measured by hemaggluti-
nation, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), or RIA; 
RIA is more sensitive, precisely quantifiable, and generally pre-
ferred. Although these antibodies are most typical of autoimmune 
thyroiditis, they are also detected in significant proportions of 
patients with Graves disease. Due to their high prevalence in the 
population, especially in women, a positive result does not rule out 
presence of a second thyroid disorder (eg, cancer in an asymmetri-
cal goiter). 
 TSH receptor stimulating, binding, and blocking antibodies 
can all be detected. Thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin (TSI) is 
present in approximately 90% of patients with Graves disease and 
is almost never detected in unaffected patients or those with other 
autoimmune thyroid diseases. The test is performed by isolating the 
patient’s immunoglobulins from a serum sample, exposing cul-
tured thyroid cells to these antibodies, and then measuring their 
cAMP response in comparison with reference TSI and TSH stan-
dards. TSI testing is used in a few special settings: (1) pregnant 
women to define risk of subsequent neonatal hyperthyroidism in 
their fetus and neonate; (2) to differentiate Graves disease from 
postpartum thyroiditis in women who are breast feeding and can-
not have a radionuclide thyroid uptake; and (3) to make the 
diagnosis of Graves disease in euthyroid patients with apparent 
thyroid-related ophthalmopathy. Some have advocated use of TSI 
to predict whether antithyroid drug-treated Graves patients will 
relapse when drug is later discontinued; however, its prognostic 
accuracy for this purpose is limited. TSH receptor–binding 
immunoglobulins can also be detected by in vitro demonstration 
that circulating immunoglobulins compete with radiolabeled 
TSH in binding to recombinant TSH receptors. It is a simpler and 
more sensitive alternative for the TSI indications described earlier, 
but does not distinguish between stimulating and blocking anti-
TSH receptor antibodies. TSH receptor blocking antibodies have 
been implicated as the cause of hypothyroidism in a minority of 
hypothyroid patients in certain populations; they can also be 
transmitted transplacentally to the fetus and inhibit thyroid func-
tion during pregnancy and in the neonatal period. 
 DISORDERS OF THE THYROID 
 Patients with thyroid disease usually complain of one or more of 
the following: (1) thyroid enlargement, which may be diffuse or 
nodular; (2) symptoms of thyroid hormone deficiency, or hypo-
thyroidism; (3) symptoms of thyroid hormone excess, or hyper-
thyroidism; or (4) complications of a specific form of 
hyperthyroidism—Graves disease—that may present with striking 
prominence of the eyes (exophthalmos) and, rarely, thickening of 
the skin over the lower legs (thyroid dermopathy or pretibial 
myxedema). Patients with thyroid nodules, whether benign or 
malignant, often have no symptoms, as do persons with mild 
perturbations of thyroid function. 
 History 
 The history should include evaluation of symptoms related to the 
above complaints, discussed in more detail later. Exposure to ion-
izing radiation in childhood has been associated with an increased 
incidence of thyroid disease, including cancer. Iodide ingestion in 
the form of amiodarone, an iodine-containing antiarrhythmic 
CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland     191
drug, or intravenous iodide-containing contrast media used in 
angiography or CT scanning may induce hypothyroidism or 
hyperthyroidism. Lithium carbonate, used in the treatment of 
bipolar disorder, can also induce hypothyroidism and goiter and 
possibly hyperthyroidism. Residence in an area of low dietary 
iodide is associated with iodine deficiency goiter (endemic goiter). 
Although dietary iodide is generally adequate in developed coun-
tries, there are still over 2 billion people with iodine-deficient diets 
in developing countries in Africa, Asia, South America, and inland 
mountainous areas in Europe. Finally, the family history should be 
explored with particular reference to goiter, hyperthyroidism, 
hypothyroidism, or thyroid cancer as well as immunologic disor-
ders such as Type 1 diabetes, rheumatoid disease, pernicious ane-
mia, alopecia, vitiligo, or myasthenia gravis, which may be 
associated with an increased incidence of autoimmune thyroid 
disease. Multiple endocrine neoplasia types 2A (Sipple syndrome) 
and 2B with medullary carcinoma of the thyroid gland are auto-
somal dominant conditions. 
 Physical Examination 
 Physical examination of the thyroid gland is illustrated in 
 Figure 7–28 . The thyroid is firmly attached to the anterior trachea 
midway between the sternal notch and the thyroid cartilage; it is 
often easy to see and to palpate. The patient should have a glass of 
water for comfortable swallowing. There are three maneuvers: 
 (1)  With a good light coming from behind the examiner, the 
patient is instructed to swallow a sip of water. Observe the 
gland as it moves up and down. Enlargement and nodularity 
can often be noted. 
 (2)  Palpate the gland anteriorly with swallowing. The thumb 
placed anteriorly along the trachea allows localization of the 
isthmus and connected lobes, as well as the pyramidal lobe, 
which extends superiorly from the isthmus and is often pal-
pable in patients with autoimmune thyroid disease. 
 (3)  Then, the examiner’s right hand is placed on the patient’s left 
shoulder, and the examiner’s right thumb is used to palpate the 
left lobe, as the patient swallows. This permits a full apprecia-
tion of the size, texture, and contour of the lobe. Then, using 
the left hand, the right lobe can be palpated. The examiner’s 
thumbs should be medial to the sternocleidomastoid muscles 
to avoid mistaking them for the thyroid lobes. Some experts 
recommend palpation from behind using three fingers to pal-
pate each lobe while the patient swallows, but this technique 
has the disadvantage of not being able to see the gland during 
palpation. 
 Normally, the thyroid is just barely palpable, has a smooth 
surface, and has a soft to rubbery consistency. The palpable bul-
bous portion of each lobe of the normal thyroid gland measures 
about 2 cm in vertical dimension and about 1 cm in horizontal 
dimension above the isthmus. An enlarged thyroid gland is called 
a  goiter . Generalized enlargement is termed  diffuse goiter ; 
irregular or lumpy enlargement is called  nodular goiter . In 
Hashimoto thyroiditis, the gland is often symmetrically enlarged, 
firm, and has a bosselated (cobblestone) or finely nodular surface. 
In the atrophic form of Hashimoto thyroiditis, the gland may not 
be palpable at all. In patients with Graves disease, the gland is usu-
ally, but not always, symmetrically enlarged and smooth and rub-
bery in consistency. Multinodular goiters have one or more 
distinct nodules palpable, although both small and large and nod-
ules are often not palpable because of their location or consistency. 
Tenderness of the gland should be noted. In patients with Graves 
disease, the presence of a bruit by auscultation should be sought, 
and a thrill may be palpable over the gland. Tracheal deviation by 
a goiter, cervical lymphadenopathy possibly related to thyroid 
cancer, and jugular venous distention and facial erythema from 
thoracic inlet obstruction by a large goiter should be noted as well. 
An outline of the gland can be traced on the skin of the neck and 
measured ( Figure 7–28 D). Nodules can be measured in a similar 
way. Thus, changes in the size of the gland or in nodules can easily 
be followed. 
 HYPOTHYROIDISM 
 Hypothyroidism is a clinical syndrome resulting from a deficiency 
of thyroid hormones, which in turn results in a generalized slow-
ing down of metabolic processes. Hypothyroidism in infants and 
children results in marked slowing of growth and development, 
with serious permanent consequences, including mental retarda-
tion, when it occurs in infancy. Hypothyroidism with onset in 
adulthood causes a generalized decrease in metabolism, with 
slowed heart rate, diminished oxygen consumption, and deposi-
tion of glycosaminoglycans in intracellular spaces, particularly in 
skin and muscle, producing in extreme cases the clinical picture of 
 myxedema. The symptoms and signs of hypothyroidism in adults 
are reversible with therapy. 
 Etiology and Incidence ( Table 7–6 ) 
 Hypothyroidism may be classified as (1) primary (thyroid failure) 
(by far the most common), (2) secondary (due to pituitary TSH 
deficiency), or (3) tertiary (due to hypothalamic deficiency of 
TRH)—or may be due to (4) peripheral resistance to the action of 
thyroid hormones. Hypothyroidism can also be classified as goi-
trous or nongoitrous, but this classification is probably unsatisfac-
tory, because Hashimoto thyroiditis (autoimmune thyroiditis) 
may produce hypothyroidism with or without goiter. 
 The incidence of various causes of hypothyroidism varies 
depending on geographic and environmental factors, such as 
dietary iodide and goitrogen intake, the genetic characteristics of 
the population, and the age distribution of the population (pedi-
atric or adult). The causes of hypothyroidism, listed in approxi-
mate order of frequency in the United States, are presented in 
 Table 7–6 . Hashimoto thyroiditis is by far the most common 
cause of hypothyroidism in the developed world. In younger 
patients, it is more likely to be associated with goiter; in older 
patients, the gland may be totally destroyed by the immunologic 
process, and the only trace of the disease is a persistently positive 
test for TPO antibodies. Similarly, the end-stage of Graves disease 
may be hypothyroidism, occurring spontaneously or following 
destructive therapy with radioactive iodine or thyroidectomy. 
192    CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland
Thyroid glands involved in autoimmune disease are particularly 
susceptible to excessive iodide intake (eg, ingestion of kelp tablets, 
iodide-containing cough preparations, or the antiarrhythmic drug 
amiodarone) or intravenous administration of iodide-containing 
radiographic contrast media. Large amounts of iodide block thy-
roid hormone synthesis via the Wolff-Chaikoff effect (see earlier), 
producing iodine-induced hypothyroidism with goiter in the 
patient with an abnormal thyroid gland; the normal gland  escapes 
from the Wolff-Chaikoff effect or iodide block, but for unclear 
reasons autoimmunity renders the gland more sensitive to the 
inhibitory effects of iodine. Hypothyroidism may occur during 
the late phase of subacute thyroiditis or silent thyroiditis; this is 
usually transient, but it may be permanent especially in silent 
thyroiditis, where permanent hypothyroidism occurs in about 
25% of patients. Iodine deficiency is not a cause of hypothyroid-
ism in the United States, but it is still frequently seen in develop-
ing countries, and is the most common cause of hypothyroidism 
world wide. Certain drugs can block hormone synthesis and pro-
duce hypothyroidism with goiter; at present, the most common 
pharmacologic causes of hypothyroidism (other than iodide) are 
lithium carbonate, used for the treatment of bipolar disease, and 
 FIGURE 7–28 Examination of the thyroid gland.  A. Observe the neck, especially as the patient swallows.  B. Examine from the front, rotat-
ing the gland slightly with one thumb while palpating the other lobe with the other thumb.  C. Examine from behind, using three fingers and 
the same technique.  D. The size of each lobe or of thyroid nodules can be measured by first drawing an outline on the skin. 
TABLE 7–6 Etiology of hypothyroidism.
Primary: 
 1. Hashimoto thyroiditis: 
  a. With goiter 
  b.  “Idiopathic” thyroid atrophy, presumably end-stage 
  autoimmune thyroid disease, following either Hashimoto 
  thyroiditis or Graves disease
  c. Neonatal hypothyroidism due to placental transmission of 
   TSH-R blocking antibodies
 2. Radioactive iodine therapy for Graves disease 
 3. Subtotal thyroidectomy for Graves disease, nodular goiter, or 
 thyroid cancer 
 4. Excessive iodide intake (kelp, radiocontrast dyes) 
 5. Subacute thyroiditis (usually transient) 
 6. Iodide deficiency (rare in North America) 
 7. Inborn errors of thyroid hormone synthesis
 8. Drugs 
  a. Lithium 
  b. Interferon-alfa 
  c. Amiodarone 
Secondary: Hypopituitarism due to pituitary adenoma, pituitary 
  ablative therapy, or pituitary destruction
Tertiary: Hypothalamic dysfunction (rare)
Peripheral resistance to the action of thyroid hormone
CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland     193
amiodarone. Chronic therapy of hyperthyroidism with the anti-
thyroid drugs PTU and methimazole have the same effects. 
Interferon alfa, used to treat hepatitis C and other conditions, can 
cause altered immunity that can result in hypothyroidism due to 
Hashimoto thyroiditis. Inborn errors of thyroid hormone synthe-
sis, called thyroid dyshormonogenesis, result from genetic defi-
ciencies in enzymes necessary for hormone biosynthesis. These 
effects may be complete, resulting in a syndrome of severe con-
genital hypothyroidism (cretinism) with goiter; or partial, result-
ing in goiter with milder hypothyroidism. At least five separate 
biosynthetic abnormalities have been reported: (1) impaired trans-
port of iodine; (2) deficient thyroid peroxidase with impaired 
oxidation of iodide to iodine and failure to incorporate iodine into 
thyroglobulin; (3) impaired coupling of iodinated tyrosines to 
triiodothyronine or tetraiodothyronine; (4) absence or deficiency 
of iodotyrosine deiodinase, so that iodine is not conserved within 
the gland; and (5) excessive production of metabolically inactive 
iodoprotein by the thyroid gland ( see Figure 7–6 ). The latter may 
involve impaired or abnormal thyroglobulin synthesis. 
 Pituitary and hypothalamic deficiencies as causes of hypothy-
roidism are quite rare and are usually associated with other symp-
toms and signs of pituitary insufficiency (Chapter 4). Peripheral 
resistance to thyroid hormones is discussed later. 
 Pathogenesis 
 Thyroid hormone deficiency affects virtually every tissue in the 
body, so that the symptoms are multiple. Pathologically, the most 
characteristic finding is the accumulation of glycosaminoglycans—
mostly hyaluronic acid—in interstitial tissues. Accumulation of 
this hydrophilic substance and increased capillary permeability to 
albumin account for the interstitial nonpitting edema that is par-
ticularly evident in the skin, heart muscle, and striated muscle. 
The accumulation is due not to excessive synthesis but to decreased 
metabolism of glycosaminoglycans. 
 Clinical Presentations and Findings 
 A. Newborn infants (cretinism) 
 The term cretinism was 
originally applied to infants born in areas of severe iodine defi-
ciency with mental retardation, short stature, a characteristic puffy 
appearance of the face and hands, and (frequently) deaf mutism 
and neurologic signs of pyramidal and extrapyramidal tract abnor-
malities. In the United States, neonatal screening programs have 
revealed that in the Caucasian population the prevalence of spo-
radic neonatal hypothyroidism is 1:5000, whereas in the African 
American population the prevalence is only 1:32,000. In areas of 
iodine sufficiency, neonatal hypothyroidism typically results from 
failure of the thyroid to descend during embryonic development 
from its origin at the base of the tongue to its usual site in the 
lower anterior neck, resulting in an absent or  ectopic thyroid gland 
that functions poorly. Placental transfer to the embryo of blocking 
anti-TSH receptor antibodies from a mother with Hashimoto 
thyroiditis may result in agenesis of the thyroid gland and athy-
reotic cretinism, but usually it only causes transient hypothyroid-
ism. Inherited defects in thyroid hormone biosynthesis may also 
cause neonatal hypothyroidism and goiter. Other possible causes 
of neonatal hypothyroidism include exposure during pregnancy to 
iodides, antithyroid drugs given to the mother, or inadvertent 
administration of radioactive iodine for thyrotoxicosis or thyroid 
cancer. 
 The signs of hypothyroidism in newborns include respiratory 
difficulty, cyanosis, jaundice, poor feeding, hoarse cry, umbilical 
hernia, and marked retardation of bone maturation. The proximal 
tibial epiphysis and distal femoral epiphysis are present in almost 
all full-term infants with a body weight over 2500 g. Absence of 
these epiphyses strongly suggests hypothyroidism. The introduc-
tion of routine screening of newborns for TSH or T 4 in the devel-
oped world has been a major public health achievement, because 
early diagnosis can prevent permanent mental retardation. A drop 
of blood obtained by heel stick 24 to 48 hours after birth is placed 
on filter paper and sent to a central laboratory. A serum T 4 under 
6 μg/dL or a serum TSH over 25 mU/L is suggestive of neonatal 
hypothyroidism. The diagnosis can then be confirmed by repeat 
testing and radiologic evidence of retarded bone age. Note that 
euthyroid infants born to hypothyroid mothers who have been 
inadequately treated with levothyroxine during pregnancy are not 
hypothyroid, but may have diminished intellectual potential later 
in childhood—emphasizing the importance of maintaining the 
mother in a euthyroid state throughout pregnancy. 
 B. Children and adolescents 
 Hypothyroidism in children 
and adolescents is characterized by retarded growth and short 
stature, the typical signs and symptoms of hypothyroidism seen in 
adults (see later), and variable but usually declining school perfor-
mance. Precocious puberty may occur, and there may be enlarge-
ment of the sella turcica due to pituitary thyrotrope hyperplasia 
associated with augmented TSH production. 
 C. Adults 
 In adults, the common features of moderate to 
severe hypothyroidism include easy fatigability; cold sensitivity; 
weight gain (generally <10-20 lb); constipation; menstrual abnor-
malities, especially menorrhagia; and muscle cramps. Physical 
findings may include a cool, rough, dry skin; puffy face and 
hands; a hoarse, husky voice; and slow reflexes. Reduced conver-
sion of carotene to vitamin A and increased blood levels of caro-
tene may give the skin a yellowish color. However, many or all of 
the symptoms and signs are diminished or absent in patients with 
milder degrees of thyroid failure. 
 1. Cardiovascular signs— Hypothyroidism is manifested by 
impaired ventricular contraction, bradycardia, and increased 
peripheral resistance, resulting in diminished cardiac output. 
The electrocardiogram (ECG) may reveal low voltage of QRS 
complexes and P and T waves, with improvement in response 
to therapy. Cardiac enlargement may occur, due in part to inter-
stitial edema, nonspecific myofibrillary swelling, and left ven-
tricular dilation, as well as nonhemodynamically significant 
pericardial effusion ( Figure 7–29 ). The degree of pericardial 
effusion can easily be determined by echocardiography. Although 
cardiac output is reduced, congestive heart failure and pulmo-
nary edema are rarely noted. There is controversy about whether 
194    CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland
hypothyroidism induces coronary artery disease, but coronary 
artery disease is more common in patients with hypothyroid-
ism, likely related to increased levels of total cholesterol, LDL 
cholesterol, and possibly other nontraditional atherogenic fac-
tors such as lipoprotein A and homocysteine. In patients with 
angina pectoris, hypothyroidism may protect the heart from 
ischemic stress, and replacement therapy may aggravate the 
angina by increasing myocardial oxygen consumption. 
 2. Pulmonary function— In the adult, hypothyroidism is char-
acterized by shallow, slow respirations and impaired ventilatory 
responses to hypercapnia or hypoxia. Respiratory failure is a 
major problem in patients with myxedema coma (see later). 
 3. Intestinal peristalsis— Peristalsis is markedly slowed, resulting 
in chronic constipation and occasionally severe fecal impaction 
or ileus. 
 4. Renal function— Renal function is impaired, with decreased 
glomerular filtration rate and impaired ability to excrete a 
water load. This predisposes the hypothyroid patient to 
hyponatremia from water intoxication if excessive free water is 
administered. 
 5. Anemia— There are at least four mechanisms that may con-
tribute to anemia in patients with hypothyroidism: 
(1) impaired hemoglobin synthesis as a result of thyroxine 
deficiency; (2) iron deficiency from increased iron loss with 
menorrhagia, as well as impaired intestinal absorption of iron; 
(3) folate deficiency from impaired intestinal absorption 
of folic acid; and (4) pernicious anemia, with vitamin 
B 12 -deficient megaloblastic anemia. Pernicious anemia is often 
part of a cluster of autoimmune diseases, including hypothy-
roidism due to Hashimoto or autoimmune thyroiditis  associated 
 FIGURE 7–29  Top. Chest radiograph studies of patient with hypothyroid cardiomyopathy.  Left. Before therapy, showing pronounced car-
diomegaly.  Right. Six months after institution of thyroxine therapy, the heart size has returned to normal. (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Reza MJ, Abbasi AS. Congestive cardiomyopathy in hypothyroidism.  West J Med . 1975;123:228.) 
 Bottom. Echocardiogram of a 29-year-old woman with hypothyroidism  (A) before and  (B) after 2 months of therapy with levothyroxine sodium. 
Note disappearance of pericardial effusion following levothyroxine therapy. (CW, chest wall; RVW, right ventricular wall; RVC, right ventricular 
cavity; IVS, inter-ventricular septum; LVC, left ventricular cavity; PWLV, posterior wall left ventricle.) Reproduced, with permission, from Sokolow M, 
McIlroy MB.  Clinical Cardiology . 4th ed. McGraw-Hill; 1986. 
CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland     195
with  thyroid autoantibodies, pernicious anemia associated with 
parietal cell autoantibodies, diabetes mellitus associated with 
islet cell autoantibodies, and adrenal insufficiency associated 
with adrenal autoantibodies (Schmidt syndrome; see Chapter 2). 
These conditions are part of what has been termed the  polyg-
landular failure syndrome . 
 6. Neuromuscular system— Many patients complain of symp-
toms referable to the neuromuscular system, including severe 
muscle cramps, paresthesias, and muscle weakness. 
 7. Central nervous system— Symptoms may include chronic 
fatigue, lethargy, and inability to concentrate. Patients with 
hypothyroidism are usually quite placid but can be severely 
depressed or even extremely agitated (myxedema madness). 
 8. Reproductive system— Hypothyroidism impairs the conver-
sion of estrogen precursors to estrogens, resulting in altered 
FSH and LH secretion and in anovulatory cycles and infertil-
ity. This may be associated with menorrhagia, which may also 
be due, in part, to altered platelet function. Men may have 
decreased libido and erectile dysfunction. 
 Diagnosis 
 The combination of a low serum FT 4 and an elevated serum TSH 
is diagnostic of primary hypothyroidism ( Figure 7–30 ). Serum T 3 
levels are variable and may be within the normal range. Commonly, 
the serum FT 4 is normal or low-normal, and the serum TSH is 
elevated slightly, a situation termed  subclinical hypothyroidism . 
This represents the mildest form of hypothyroidism and is a con-
sequence of the very sensitive feedback relationship between the 
thyroid and the pituitary gland. In this situation, a small decre-
ment in thyroid hormone output by the thyroid gland, in which 
serum T 4 levels are still within the normal range, results in a serum 
TSH level that is elevated, albeit usually less than 10 mU/L. 
Subclinical hypothyroidism is usually due to underlying Hashimoto 
thyroiditis, which can be confirmed by assessing anti-TPO anti-
body titers. In patients with secondary or central hypothyroidism, 
the serum FT 4 will be low and serum TSH will be low or normal, 
rather than elevated. 
 The patient may be taking thyroid hormone (T 4 tablets) when 
first seen. A palpable or enlarged thyroid gland and a positive test 
for thyroid autoantibodies would suggest underlying Hashimoto 
thyroiditis, in which case the medication should be continued. If 
antithyroid antibodies are absent and the indication for therapy 
uncertain, the medication could be withdrawn for 6 weeks and 
determination made for FT 4 and TSH. The 6-week period of 
withdrawal is necessary because of the long half-life of T 4 (7 days) 
and to allow the pituitary gland to recover after a long period of 
suppression. The pattern of recovery of thyroid function after 
withdrawal of T 4 is noted in  Figure 7–31 . In hypothyroid indi-
viduals, serum TSH becomes elevated at 5 to 6 weeks and FT 4 
remains subnormal, whereas both are normal after 6 weeks in 
euthyroid individuals. 
 The clinical picture of fully developed myxedema is usually 
quite clear, but the symptoms and signs of mild or subclinical 
hypothyroidism may be very subtle or absent. This has led to the 
recommendation by some professional organizations that screening 
for hypothyroidism be undertaken, especially in high-risk groups, 
such as older women where the prevalence is high (up to 20% in 
women >age 65), and in pregnant women, where untreated hypo-
thyroidism may cause adverse outcomes in the child. 
 At times, patients with hypothyroidism present with unusual 
features: neurasthenia with symptoms of muscle cramps, par-
esthesias, and weakness; refractory anemia; disturbances in repro-
ductive function, including infertility, delayed or precocious 
puberty, or menorrhagia; idiopathic edema or pleuropericardial 
effusions; retarded growth; obstipation; chronic rhinitis or 
hoarseness due to edema of nasal mucosa or vocal cords; and 
severe depression progressing to emotional instability or even 
frank paranoid psychosis. In the elderly, hypothyroidism may 
present with apathy and withdrawal, often attributed to senility 
(Chapter 23). In such cases, assessing thyroid function with 
serum FT 4 and TSH measurements confirms or rules out hypo-
thyroidism as a contributing factor. 
 Complications 
 A. Myxedema coma 
 Myxedema coma, an extremely rare 
condition, is the end stage of untreated hypothyroidism (see also 
Chapter 24). It is characterized by progressive weakness, stupor, 
hypothermia, hypoventilation, hypoglycemia, and hyponatremia, 
and it may ultimately result in shock and death. It occurs most 
frequently in the winter in older female patients with underlying 
pulmonary and vascular disease, and the mortality rate may be 
greater than 50%. 
Patient takes
thyroid hormone
Patient takes no
thyroid hormone
Serum FT4 and
serum TSH
FT4 low,
TSH high
FT4 low,
TSH normal or low
PRIMARY
HYPOTHYROIDISM
SECONDARY
HYPOTHYROIDISM
Stop medication
6 weeks
FT4 normal
TSH normal
EUTHYROID
 FIGURE 7–30  Diagnosis of hypothyroidism. 
196    CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland
 The patient (or a family member if the patient is comatose) 
may recall previous thyroid disease, radioiodine or radiation 
therapy to the neck area, or thyroidectomy. The medical history is 
one of gradual onset of lethargy progressing to stupor or coma. 
Examination reveals bradycardia and marked hypothermia, with 
body temperature as low as 24°C (75°F). The patient is usually an 
obese elderly woman with yellowish skin, a hoarse voice, a large 
tongue, thin hair, puffy eyes, ileus, and slow reflexes. There may 
be signs of other illnesses such as pneumonia, myocardial 
 infarction, cerebral thrombosis, or gastrointestinal bleeding. 
Seizures, bleeding episodes, hypocalcemia, or hypercalcemia may 
occur. Laboratory clues to the diagnosis of myxedema coma 
include lactescent serum, high serum carotene, elevated serum 
cholesterol, and increased cerebrospinal fluid protein. Pleural, 
pericardial, or abdominal effusions with high protein content may 
be present. Serum tests reveal a low FT 4 and a markedly elevated 
TSH. Thyroid autoantibodies are usually strongly positive, indi-
cating underlying Hashimoto thyroiditis. The ECG shows sinus 
bradycardia and low voltage. If laboratory studies are not immedi-
ately available, which is frequently the case, the diagnosis must be 
made clinically. 
 The pathophysiology of myxedema coma involves three major 
features: (1) CO 2 retention and hypoxia, (2) fluid and electrolyte 
imbalance, and (3) hypothermia. CO 2 retention and hypoxia are 
probably due in large part to a marked depression in the ventila-
tory responses to hypoxia and hypercapnia, although factors such 
as obesity, heart failure, ileus, immobilization, pneumonia, pleural 
or peritoneal effusions, central nervous system depression, and 
weak chest muscles may also contribute. Impairment of ventila-
tory drive is often severe, and assisted respiration is almost always 
necessary in patients with myxedema coma. Thyroid hormone 
therapy in patients with myxedema corrects the hypothermia and 
improves the ventilatory response to hypoxia. Water intoxication, 
due to reduced renal perfusion and impaired free water clearance, 
is the major fluid and electrolyte disturbance. This causes hypona-
tremia and is best managed by free water restriction. Hypothermia 
is frequently not recognized, because the ordinary clinical ther-
mometer only goes down to about 34°C (93°F); a thermometer 
that registers a broader scale must be used to obtain accurate body 
temperature readings. Active rewarming of the body is contraindi-
cated, because it may induce vasodilation and vascular collapse. A 
rise in body temperature is a useful indication of therapeutic effec-
tiveness of T 4 therapy. 
 Disorders that may precipitate myxedema coma include heart 
failure, pneumonia, or administration of sedative or narcotic 
drugs to a patient with severe hypothyroidism. Adrenal insuffi-
ciency may occur occasionally in association with myxedema 
coma, either due to functional pituitary impairment or concurrent 
autoimmune adrenal insufficiency (Schmidt syndrome). 
Concomitant glucocorticoid therapy is recommended until nor-
mal adrenal function can be documented by laboratory testing. It 
is important to differentiate myxedema coma due to primary thy-
roid gland failure from that due to pituitary failure (central hypo-
thyroidism). In the latter situation, glucocorticoid replacement is 
essential. Clinical clues to the presence of pituitary disease include 
the following: a history of amenorrhea or impotence, scanty pubic 
or axillary hair, and normal serum cholesterol and normal or low 
serum TSH levels. CT or MRI may reveal an enlarged sella tur-
cica. The treatment of myxedema coma is discussed later. 
 B. Hypothyroidism and heart disease 
 In the past, treat-
ment of patients with severe hypothyroidism and heart disease, 
particularly coronary artery disease, was very difficult, because 
levothyroxine replacement was sometimes associated with exacer-
bation of angina, heart failure, or myocardial infarction. Now that 
12
8
4
0
0
10
20
40
0
30
90
150
SEM
LLN
ULN
LLN
Euthyroid (n=6)
Hypothyroid
T4 (μg/dL)
Basal TSH (μU/mL)
T3 (ng/dL)
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
10
20
40
160
240
Weeks
TSH (μU/mL) after TRH
Δ
 FIGURE 7–31 Changes in T 4 , T 3 , TSH, and TRH response follow-
ing abrupt withdrawal of suppressive thyroxine therapy. Note that in 
euthyroid individuals, the T 4 may not return to normal until 6 weeks 
after withdrawal of therapy and that serum TSH is never elevated. In 
hypothyroid patients, TSH may be elevated as early as 2 weeks after 
withdrawal of therapy, and TRH response is exaggerated. (LLN, lower 
limit of normal; ULN, upper limit of normal).  (Reproduced, with per-
mission, from Wood LC. Controversial questions in thyroid disease. 
Workshop in the Thyroid, American Thyroid Association, Nov 1979, as 
adapted from Vagenakis AG, et al. Recovery of pituitary thyrotropic 
function after withdrawal of prolonged thyroid suppression therapy. 
 N Engl J Med . 1975;293:681.) 
CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland     197
β-adrenergic blocking agents, coronary angioplasty, and coronary 
artery bypass surgery are available, hypothyroid patients with 
coronary artery disease can be treated medically or surgically first, 
and thyroxine replacement therapy is then better tolerated. 
 C. Hypothyroidism and neuropsychiatric disease 
 Hypothyroidism is often associated with depression, which may 
be quite severe. More rarely, severely hypothyroid patients may 
become confused, paranoid, or even manic (myxedema madness). 
Screening of psychiatric admissions with serum FT 4 and TSH is 
an efficient way to identify these patients, who frequently respond 
to T 4 therapy alone or in combination with psychopharmacologic 
agents. The effectiveness of T 4 therapy in depressed hypothyroid 
patients has given rise to the hypothesis that the addition of T 3 or 
T 4 to psychotherapeutic regimens for depression may be helpful in 
patients without demonstrable thyroid disease, but this concept 
has been difficult to prove. 
 Treatment 
 A. Treatment of hypothyroidism 
 Hypothyroidism is treated 
with T 4 , which is available in pure form and is stable and inexpen-
sive. Because T 4 is converted to T 3 in peripheral tissues, both 
hormones become available, even though only one is adminis-
tered. Desiccated thyroid is now considered obsolete because it 
contains both T 4 and T 3 , and triiodothyronine (as liothyronine) is 
unsatisfactory because of its rapid absorption, short half-life, and 
transient effects. The half-life of T 4 is about 7 days, so it needs to 
be given only once daily. It is well absorbed, and blood levels are 
easily monitored by following FT 4 and serum TSH levels. T 4 and 
T 3 levels are stable throughout the day, although there is a slight 
increase in free T 4 levels several hours after the medication is 
taken; this is not clinically significant. 
 B. Dosage of levothyroxine 
 Replacement doses of T 4 in 
adults range from 0.05 to 0.2 mg/d, with a mean of about 
0.125 mg/d. The dose of T 4 varies according to the patient’s age 
and body weight ( Table 7–7 ). Because of more rapid T 4 metabo-
lism, infants and young children require a surprisingly high dose 
of T 4 compared with adults. In adults, the mean replacement dose 
of T 4 is about 1.7 μg/kg/d, or about 0.8 μg/lb/d. In older adults, 
the replacement dose is usually lower, about 1.6 μg/kg/d, or about 
0.7 μg/lb/d. For TSH suppression in patients post-thyroidectomy 
for thyroid cancer, the average dose of T 4 is about 2.2 μg/kg/d 
(1 μg/lb/d). In most patients with hypothyroidism, one can begin 
treatment with the full estimated dose requirement. After 4 to 
6 weeks, the final dose is adjusted based on the serum TSH level. 
The goal is to normalize the serum TSH, which is typically 
between 0.5 and 4 mU/L. In older patients or patients with 
underlying heart disease, it is best to start with a low dose of T 4 
(eg, 0.025 mg daily) and increase the dose at 4- to 6-week intervals 
based on serum TSH measurements. Malabsorptive states or con-
current administration of soy products, aluminum hydroxide 
antacids, bile acid–binding resins such as cholestyramine and 
colestipol, calcium supplements, sucralfate, or iron compounds 
decrease T 4 absorption. In these patients, T 4 should be given 
before breakfast, when the stomach is empty, and the other com-
pounds taken 4 hours later. Other drugs, such as the antiseizure 
medication carbamazepine, may increase thyroid hormone require-
ments by increasing T 4 metabolism. Proton pump inhibitors such 
as omeprazole may also impair T 4 absorption, possibly by decreas-
ing gastric acid, but data on this point are conflicting. Estrogen 
replacement may increase T 4 requirements by increased binding of 
free T 4 to TBG, whereas androgen therapy has the opposite effect. 
T 4 has a sufficiently long half-life (7 days), so that if the patient is 
unable to take medications by mouth for a few days, omitting T 4 
therapy will not be detrimental. If a hospitalized patient is being 
managed by sustained parenteral therapy, the parenteral dose of T 4 
is about 75% to 80% of the usual oral dose. 
 C. Treatment of myxedema coma 
 Myxedema coma is an 
acute medical emergency and should be treated in the intensive 
care unit. Blood gases must be monitored regularly, and the 
patient usually requires intubation and mechanical ventilation. 
Associated illnesses such as infections or heart failure must be 
sought for and appropriately treated. Intravenous fluids should be 
administered with caution, and excessive free water intake must 
be avoided. Because patients with myxedema coma may absorb 
drugs poorly, it is imperative to give T 4 intravenously. These 
patients have marked total body depletion, and they should 
receive an initial loading dose of 300 to 400 μg of T 4 intrave-
nously followed by 80% of the calculated full replacement dose 
intravenously daily. Management of patients with known or sus-
pected heart disease is described later. If, after a few days, the 
clinical response has been suboptimal, some experts recommend 
adding intravenous T 3 to the regimen at a dose of 5 μg every 
6 hours. The clinical guides to improvement are a rise in body tem-
perature and the return of normal cerebral and respiratory func-
tion. The possibility of concomitant adrenal insufficiency (due to 
autoimmune adrenal disease or pituitary insufficiency) needs to be 
considered and ruled out with a cosyntropin stimulation test (see 
Chapter 9). Full adrenal support should then be administered (eg, 
hydrocortisone hemisuccinate) 100 mg intravenously, followed by 
50 mg intravenously every 6 hours, tapering the dose over 7 days. 
Adrenal support can be withdrawn if the pretreatment plasma 
cortisol is 20 μg/dL or greater or if results of a cosyntropin stimu-
lation test are within normal limits. When giving T 4 intravenously 
TABLE 7–7 Replacement doses of levothyroxine.
Age 
Dose of Levothyroxine (μg/kg/d) 
0-6 mo 
10-15 
7-11 mo 
6-8 
1-5 y 
5-6 
6-10 y 
4-5 
11-20 y 
1-3 
Adult 
1-2 
Adapted and modified, with permission, from Foley TP Jr. Congenital hypothyroidism. 
In Braverman LE, Utiger RD: Werner and Ingbar’s The Thyroid. 7th ed. Lippincott; 1996. 
198    CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland
in large doses, there is an inherent risk of precipitating angina, 
heart failure, or arrhythmias in older patients with underlying 
coronary artery disease. 
 At one time, the mortality rate of myxedema coma was about 
80%. The prognosis has been vastly improved as a result of recog-
nition of the importance of mechanically assisted respiration and 
the use of intravenous T 4 . At present, the outcome probably 
depends on how well the underlying comorbidities and conse-
quences of severe hypothyroidism can be managed. 
 D. Myxedema with heart disease 
 In older patients—
particularly those with known cardiovascular disease—it is wise to 
start treatment slowly. T 4 is given in a dosage of 0.025 mg/d for 2 
to 4 weeks, increasing by 0.025 mg every 2 to 4 weeks until a daily 
dose of 0.075 mg is reached. This dose is continued for about 6 
weeks. Serum TSH is then measured and the dosage adjusted 
accordingly. It typically takes 2 to 4 months for a patient to come 
into equilibrium on full dosage. In some patients, the heart is very 
sensitive to the level of circulating T 4 , and if angina pectoris or 
cardiac arrhythmia develops, it is essential to reduce the dose of T 4 
immediately. 
 Adverse Effects of T 4 Therapy 
 There are no reported instances of allergy to pure T 4 , although it 
is possible that a patient may develop an allergy to the coloring 
dye or some component of the tablet. The major toxic effects of 
T 4 overdosage are symptoms and signs of hyperthyroidism. 
Palpitations are the most common thyrotoxic cardiac symptom, 
and arrhythmias, particularly paroxysmal atrial tachycardia or 
fibrillation, may occur. Insomnia, tremor, restlessness, and exces-
sive warmth may also be troublesome. Simply omitting the daily 
dose of T 4 for 3 days and then reducing the dosage will correct the 
problem. 
 Increased bone resorption and osteoporosis have been associated 
with long-standing hyperthyroidism and will also develop in post-
menopausal women chronically overtreated with T 4 . This can be 
prevented by regular monitoring and by maintaining normal serum 
TSH levels in patients receiving long-term replacement therapy. In 
patients receiving TSH-suppressive therapy for thyroid cancer, if 
serum FT 4 levels are kept in the upper range of normal—even if 
TSH is suppressed—the adverse effects of T 4 therapy on bone will 
be minimal (Chapter 23). In addition, concomitant administration 
of estrogen or bisphosphonates to postmenopausal women receiving 
high-dose T 4 therapy minimizes bone  resorption. 
 Course and Prognosis 
 The course of untreated hypothyroidism is one of slow deteriora-
tion, potentially leading eventually to myxedema coma and death. 
With appropriate treatment, however, the long-term prognosis is 
excellent. Because of the long half-life (7 days) of T 4 , it takes time 
to establish equilibrium on a fixed dose. Therefore, it is important 
to monitor the serum FT 4 and TSH every 4 to 6 weeks until equi-
librium is reached. Thereafter, FT 4 and TSH can be monitored 
once in every 6 to 12 months. The dose of T 4 is increased by about 
50% in most women during pregnancy with the greatest dosage 
increases in those women with the least thyroid reserve (ie, in 
women who have had a thyroidectomy or who have received 
radioactive iodine therapy). Older patients metabolize T 4 more 
slowly, and the dose likely gradually decreases with age (see 
Chapter 23). 
 HYPERTHYROIDISM AND 
THYROTOXICOSIS 
 Thyrotoxicosis is the clinical syndrome that results when tissues 
are exposed to high levels of circulating thyroid hormones. It 
results in a generalized acceleration of metabolic processes. In 
most instances, thyrotoxicosis is due to hyperactivity of the thy-
roid gland, or hyperthyroidism. Occasionally, thyrotoxicosis may 
be due to other causes such as excessive ingestion of thyroid hor-
mone or, very rarely, excessive secretion of thyroid hormones from 
an ovarian tumor (struma ovarii). The various forms of thyrotoxi-
cosis are listed in  Table 7–8 . These syndromes will be discussed 
individually below. 
 1. DIFFUSE TOXIC GOITER (GRAVES 
DISEASE) 
 Graves disease is the most common form of thyrotoxicosis. 
Females are involved about five times more commonly than males. 
The disease may occur at any age, with a peak incidence in the 
20- to 40-year age group (see section on Thyroid Autoimmunity, 
above). The syndrome consists of one or more of the following 
features: (1) thyrotoxicosis, (2) goiter, (3) ophthalmopathy 
(exophthalmos), and (4) dermopathy (pretibial myxedema). 
 Etiology 
 Graves disease is currently viewed as an autoimmune disease of 
unknown cause. There is a strong familial predisposition, in that 
about 15% of patients with Graves disease have a close relative 
with the same disorder, and about 50% of relatives of patients 
with Graves disease have circulating thyroid autoantibodies. There 
is a much higher concordance of Graves disease in monozygotic 
twins compared to dizygotic twins, but because the concordance 
rate in monozygotic twins is far less than 100%, there must be 
environmental factors that come into play as well. Proposed 
TABLE 7–8 Conditions associated with thyrotoxicosis. 
1. Diffuse toxic goiter (Graves disease) 
2. Toxic adenoma (Plummer disease) 
3. Toxic multinodular goiter 
4. Subacute thyroiditis 
5. “Silent” thyroiditis 
6. Thyrotoxicosis factitia 
7. Rare forms of thyrotoxicosis: ovarian struma, metastatic thyroid 
 carcinoma (follicular), hydatidiform mole, hamburger thyrotoxicosis 
 TSH-secreting pituitary tumor, pituitary resistance to T3 and T4 
CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland     199
environmental triggers include stress, tobacco use, infection, and 
iodine exposure. The postpartum state, which may be associated 
with heightened immune function, also may trigger the develop-
ment of Graves disease in genetically susceptible women. 
 Pathogenesis 
 In Graves disease, T lymphocytes become sensitized to antigens 
within the thyroid gland and stimulate B lymphocytes to synthe-
size antibodies to these antigens (see Chapter 2; see also the 
section on Thyroid Autoimmunity above and  Figure 7–32 ). One 
such antibody is directed against the TSH receptor in the thy-
roid cell membrane, stimulating thyroid gland growth and func-
tion. The antibody is called a thyroid-stimulating antibody 
(TSAb), or thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin (TSI). The 
presence of this circulating antibody is positively correlated with 
active disease and with relapse of the disease following therapy 
with antithyroid drugs. There is an underlying genetic predispo-
sition, but it is not clear what triggers the initial onset of hyper-
thyroidism. Some factors that may incite the immune response 
of Graves disease are (1) pregnancy, particularly the postpartum 
period; (2) iodide excess, particularly in geographic areas of 
iodide deficiency, where the lack of iodide may hold latent 
Graves disease in check; (3) interferon alfa, perhaps by modify-
ing immune responsiveness; (4) viral or bacterial infections; and 
(5) psychological stress. The pathogenesis of ophthalmopathy 
may involve cytotoxic lymphocytes (killer cells) and cytotoxic 
antibodies sensitized to a common antigen such as the TSH 
receptor that is found in orbital fibroblasts, orbital muscle, and 
thyroid tissue (see  Figure 7–32 ). Cytokines from these sensitized 
lymphocytes may cause activation and proliferation of orbital 
fibroblasts and preadipocytes, resulting in increased amounts of 
retro-orbital fat and glycosaminoglycans, as well as swollen 
extraocular muscles; this results in proptosis (protrusion) of the 
globes and diplopia, as well as redness, congestion, and conjunc-
tival and periorbital edema (thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy 
or orbitopathy). For unclear reasons, smoking cigarettes is a 
potent risk factor for the development of thyroid-associated 
ophthalmopathy. 
 The pathogenesis of thyroid dermopathy (pretibial myxedema) 
( Figure 7–33 ) and the rare subperiosteal inflammation on the 
phalanges of the hands and feet (thyroid osteopathy or acropachy) 
( Figure 7–34 ) may also involve lymphocyte cytokine stimulation 
of fibroblasts in these locations. Many symptoms of thyrotoxicosis 
suggest a state of catecholamine excess, including tachycardia, 
tremor, sweating, lid lag, and stare. However, circulating levels of 
epinephrine and norepinephrine are normal or low; thus, in 
Graves disease, the body appears to have an increased sensitivity to 
Common orbital fibroblast-
thyroid antigen (TSH-R)
Orbit
Cytotoxic Ab
Orbital antigens
TSI, Tg Ab, TPO Ab
B
TH
TC
TS
Thyroid Ag
Thyroid
 
 FIGURE 7–32 One theory of the pathogenesis of Graves disease. 
There is a defect in suppressor T lymphocytes (T s ) that allows helper 
T lymphocytes (T H ) to stimulate B lymphocytes (B) to synthesize thy-
roid auto-antibodies. The thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin (TSI) 
is the driving force for thyrotoxicosis. The inflammatory process in 
the orbital muscles may be due to sensitization of cytotoxic T lym-
phocytes (T c ), or killer cells, to orbital antigens in association with 
cytotoxic antibodies. The thyroid and the eye are linked by a com-
mon antigen, the TSH-R, found in thyroid follicular cells and orbital 
fibroblasts. It is not yet clear what triggers this immunologic cascade. 
(Tg Ab, thyroglobulin antibody; TPO Ab, thyroperoxidase or 
microsomal antibody; Ag, antigen; Ab, antibody). 
 FIGURE 7–33 Dermopathy of Graves disease. Marked thicken-
ing of the skin is noted, usually over the pretibial area. Thickening 
occasionally extends downward over the ankle and the dorsal aspect 
of the foot but almost never above the knee. 
200    CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland
catecholamines. This may be due in part to a thyroid hormone–
mediated increase in membrane-bound β-adrenergic receptors in 
various tissues. 
 Clinical Features 
 A. Symptoms and signs 
 In younger individuals, common 
manifestations include palpitations, nervousness, easy fatigability, 
hyperkinesia, diarrhea, excessive sweating, intolerance to heat, and 
preference for cold. There is often marked weight loss without loss 
of appetite. Thyroid enlargement, thyrotoxic eye signs (see later), 
and mild tachycardia commonly occur. Muscle weakness and loss 
of muscle mass may be so severe that the patient cannot rise from 
a chair without assistance. In children, rapid growth with acceler-
ated bone maturation occurs. In patients over age 60, cardiovascu-
lar and myopathic manifestations predominate; the most common 
presenting complaints are palpitations, dyspnea on exertion, 
tremor, nervousness, and weight loss (see Chapter 23). 
 The eye signs of Graves disease have been classified by Werner 
as set forth in  Table 7–9 . This classification is useful in describing 
the extent of the eye involvement. However, it is not helpful in 
following the progress of the illness, because one class does not 
necessarily progress into the next. The first letters of each class 
form the mnemonic  NO SPECS . Class 1 involves retraction of the 
upper lids associated with active thyrotoxicosis and usually resolves 
spontaneously when the thyrotoxicosis is adequately controlled. 
Lid retraction can be seen in any form of thyrotoxicosis, because 
it is due to adrenergic stimulation of the upper eyelid. Classes 2 to 
6 represent true infiltrative disease involving orbital muscles and 
orbital tissues and are specific to Graves disease. Class 2 is charac-
terized by soft tissue involvement with periorbital edema, conges-
tion or redness of the conjunctiva, and edema of the conjunctiva 
(chemosis). Class 3 consists of proptosis as measured by the Hertel 
exophthalmometer. This instrument consists of two prisms with a 
scale mounted on a bar. The prisms are placed on the lateral 
orbital ridges, and the distance from the orbital ridge to the ante-
rior cornea is measured on the scale ( Figure 7–35 ). The upper 
limits of normal according to race are listed in the footnote to 
 Table 7–9 . Class 4 consists of extraocular muscle involvement, 
which typically is due to fibrosis and failure of muscle relaxation, 
limiting the function of the antagonist muscle. The inferior rectus 
is the muscle most commonly involved in the infiltrative process. 
By failing to relax normally, upward gaze limitation is the most 
common physical finding in patients with eye muscle involve-
ment. The muscle next most commonly involved is the medial 
rectus, impairing lateral gaze. Class 5 is characterized by corneal 
involvement (keratitis) due to inability to close the eyes com-
pletely. Class 6 is a loss of vision from optic nerve involvement, 
likely due to ischemia of the nerve from compression of the sur-
rounding enlarged extraocular muscles. As noted earlier, thyroid 
ophthalmopathy is due to infiltration of orbital fibroblasts and the 
extraocular muscles with lymphocytes and edema fluid due to an 
inflammatory reaction. The orbit is a cone enclosed by bone, and 
swelling of the extraocular muscles within this closed space causes 
proptosis of the globe and impaired muscle movement, resulting 
in diplopia. Ocular muscle enlargement can be demonstrated by 
orbital ultrasound, orbital CT scanning, or MRI ( Figure 7–36 ). 
 FIGURE 7–34 Radiograph of hand of a patient with thyroid oste-
opathy. Note marked periosteal thickening of the proximal phalanges. 
TABLE 7–9  Classification of eye changes in Graves’ 
disease.
Class 
Definition 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
No signs or symptoms
Only signs, no symptoms. (signs limited to upper lid 
 retraction, stare, lid lag)
Soft tissue involvement (symptoms and signs)
Proptosis (measured with Hertel exophthalmometer)a 
Extraocular muscle involvement
Corneal involvement
Sight loss (optic nerve involvement)
aUpper limits of normal according to race: white, Asian, 20 mm; black, 22 mm. 
Increase in proptosis of 3-4 mm is mild involvement; 5-7 mm, moderate involvement; 
and over 8 mm, severe involvement. Other classes can be similarly graded as mild, 
moderate, or severe. 
Reproduced, with permission, from Werner SC. Classification of the eye changes of 
Graves’ disease. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1969; 29:782 and 1977;44:203. 
 FIGURE 7–35 Hertel exophthalmometer. 
CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland     201
Although only about one-third of patients have eye involvement 
clinically, enlarged muscles can be detected by imaging in over 
90% of patients. 
 Thyroid dermopathy consists of thickening of the skin, particu-
larly over the lower tibia, due to accumulation of glycosaminoglycans 
(see  Figure 7–33 ). It is relatively rare, occurring in about 2% to 3% 
of patients with Graves disease. It is usually associated with significant 
ophthalmopathy and with a very high serum titer of TSAb. The skin 
is markedly thickened with a  peau d’orange surface, and cannot be 
picked up between the fingers. Sometimes the dermopathy involves 
the entire lower leg and may extend onto the feet. Finally, bony 
involvement (osteopathy or thyroid acropachy), with subperiosteal 
bone formation and swelling, is particularly evident in the metacarpal 
bones (see  Figure 7–34 ) and as clubbing of the digits. This too is a 
relatively rare finding. A more common finding in Graves disease is 
separation of the fingernails from their beds (onycholysis or Plummer 
nails), likely caused by rapid growth of the nails ( Figure 7–37 ). 
 B. Laboratory findings 
 The laboratory findings in hyper-
thyroidism are summarized in  Figure 7–38 . The combination of 
an elevated FT 4 and a suppressed TSH makes the diagnosis of 
hyperthyroidism. Approximately 5% of patients have normal FT 4 
levels but elevated serum T 3 levels, a situation termed  T 3 thyro-
toxicosis . Also, very mild Graves disease may result in FT 4 and T 3 
serum levels that are within the range of normal but are high 
enough to lead to suppressed serum TSH levels, a situation termed 
 subclinical hyperthyroidism . If both FT 4 and TSH are elevated, 
and the RAIU is also elevated, consider a TSH-secreting pituitary 
tumor or generalized or pituitary-resistance syndromes. Patients 
who are severely ill may have low serum TSH levels but also have 
low serum FT 4 and T 3 levels (the so-called  sick euthyroid 
syndrome ). 
 In the condition called  familial dysalbuminemic hyperthyrox-
inemia , an abnormal albumin is present in serum that preferen-
tially binds T 4 but not T 3 . This results in elevation of serum T 4 and 
FT 4 I, and often the free T 4 when measured by usual clinical ana-
logue free T 4 assays, but free T 4 is usually normal by equilibrium 
dialysis methods, as are serum T 3 and TSH. It is important to dif-
ferentiate this euthyroid state from true hyperthyroidism. In addi-
tion to the absence of clinical features of hyperthyroidism, a normal 
serum T 3 and a normal TSH level rule out hyperthyroidism. 
 If eye signs are present, the diagnosis of Graves disease can be 
made without further tests. If eye signs are absent and the patient 
is hyperthyroid with or without a goiter, a RAIU test should be 
done. An elevated uptake is typical of Graves disease. In contrast, 
a low uptake is seen in patients with several forms of spontane-
ously resolving hyperthyroidism, as in subacute thyroiditis or 
 silent thyroiditis also termed  postpartum thyroiditis , (see dis-
cussed later). A low radioiodine uptake is also found in patients 
who are iodine-loaded or who are taking T 4 therapy—or, rarely, in 
association with a struma ovarii, where ectopic thyroid tissue is 
located within an ovarian teratoma. Thyroid autoantibodies—to 
thyroglobulin and TPO—are usually present in the serum in both 
Graves disease and  silent thyroiditis , a variant of Hashimoto thy-
roiditis, but TSAb is relatively specific for Graves disease. This 
may be a useful diagnostic test in the patient who presents with 
unilateral or bilateral exophthalmos without obvious signs or labo-
ratory manifestations of Graves disease (so called “euthyroid 
Graves disease”). The  123 I or technetium scan is useful to evaluate 
the size of the gland as well as the presence of hot or cold nodules. 
CT and MRI scans of the orbits reveal extraocular muscle enlarge-
ment in most patients with Graves disease even when there is no 
clinical evidence of ophthalmopathy. In patients with clinical 
ophthalmopathy, orbital muscle enlargement may be striking (see 
 Figure 7–36 ). 
 Other Presentations 
 Graves disease occasionally presents in an unusual or atypical 
fashion, in which case the diagnosis may not be obvious. Marked 
muscle atrophy may suggest severe myopathy that must be dif-
ferentiated from a primary neuromuscular disorder.  Thyrotoxic 
periodic paralysis usually occurs in Asian males and presents with a 
sudden attack of flaccid paralysis and hypokalemia due to a shift 
 FIGURE 7–36 Orbital CT scan in a patient with severe ophthal-
mopathy and visual failure. Note the marked enlargement of extraoc-
ular muscles posteriorly, with compression of the optic nerve at the 
apex of the orbital cone. 
 FIGURE 7–37  Onycholysis (separation of the nail from its bed) 
in Graves disease usually resolves spontaneously as the patient 
improves. 
202    CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland
of K + intracellularly. The paralysis usually subsides spontaneously 
and can be prevented by K + supplementation and β-adrenergic 
blockade. The illness is cured by appropriate treatment of the 
thyrotoxicosis (see Chapter 24). Patients with thyrocardiac dis-
ease, especially those over age 60, present primarily with symp-
toms of heart involvement—especially refractory atrial fibrillation 
insensitive to digoxin—or with high-output heart failure. About 
50% of these patients have no evidence of underlying heart dis-
ease, and cardiac problems are cured by treatment of the thyro-
toxicosis. Some older patients present with weight loss, small 
goiter, slow atrial fibrillation, and severe depression, with none of 
the clinical features of increased catecholamine reactivity. These 
placid patients have apathetic thyrotoxicosis. Finally, some young 
women may present with amenorrhea or infertility as the primary 
symptom. In all of these instances, the diagnosis of hyperthyroid-
ism can usually be made on the basis of the clinical and laboratory 
studies described earlier. 
 Complications 
 Thyrotoxic crisis (thyroid storm) is the acute exacerbation of all 
of the symptoms and signs of thyrotoxicosis, often presenting as a 
syndrome that may be of life-threatening severity (see Chapter 24). 
Occasionally, thyroid storm may be mild and present simply as an 
unexplained febrile reaction after thyroid surgery in a patient who 
has been inadequately prepared. More commonly, it occurs in a 
more severe form after surgery, radioactive iodine therapy, or par-
turition in a patient with inadequately controlled thyrotoxico-
sis—or during a severe, stressful illness or disorder such as 
uncontrolled diabetes, trauma, acute infection, severe drug reac-
tion, or myocardial infarction. The clinical manifestations of thy-
roid storm are marked hypermetabolism and excessive adrenergic 
response. Fever ranges from 38°C to 41°C and is associated with 
flushing and sweating. There is marked tachycardia, often with 
atrial fibrillation and high pulse pressure; occasionally heart failure 
occurs. Central nervous system symptoms include marked agita-
tion, restlessness, delirium, and coma. Gastrointestinal symptoms 
include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and jaundice. A fatal outcome 
is associated with heart failure and shock. 
 At one time it was thought that thyroid storm was due to sud-
den release or dumping of stored T 4 and T 3 from the thyrotoxic 
gland. Careful studies have revealed, however, that the serum lev-
els of T 4 and T 3 in patients with thyroid storm are not necessarily 
higher than in thyrotoxic patients without this condition. There is 
no evidence that thyroid storm is due to excessive production of 
T 3 . Also, in thyrotoxicosis, the number of adrenergic-binding sites 
FT4 and TSH
Hyperthyroidism
Eye signs
Goiter
No eye signs
No goiter or
small goiter
No eye signs
uni- or
multinodular
goiter
TSH-secreting
pituitary tumor
GRTH
PRTH
T3
Low
Normal
High
Low
High
Euthyroid-sick
  syndrome
Drugs:
  dopamine,
  corticosteroids
Early Graves
disease
Toxic nodular
goiter
Toxic adenoma
or toxic 
multinodular
goiter
Subclinical hyper-
thyroidism usually
due to levothyroxine
treatment, mild
Graves disease,
a mild toxic multinodular
goiter
Graves
disease
Graves
disease
Choriocarcinoma
Spontaneously resolving hyperthyroidism:
  Subacute thyroiditis
  “Silent” thyroiditis
Graves disease or toxic nodular goiter in iodine-loaded patient
Levothyroxine treatment
Rare: Struma ovarii
123I uptake
FT4   , TSH
FT4   , TSH
FT4  N, TSH
 FIGURE 7–38 Laboratory tests useful in the differential diagnosis of hyperthyroidism (see text for details). 
CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland     203
for  catecholamines increases, so that heart and nerve tissues have 
increased sensitivity to circulating catecholamines. In addition, 
there is decreased binding to TBG, with further elevation of free 
T 3 and T 4 . One theory is that in this setting, with increased bind-
ing sites available for catecholamines, an acute illness, infection, or 
surgical stress triggers an outpouring of catecholamines which, in 
association with high levels of free T 4 and T 3 , precipitates the acute 
problem. 
 The most striking clinical diagnostic feature of thyrotoxic crisis 
is hyperpyrexia out of proportion to other findings. Laboratory 
findings include elevated serum T 4 , FT 4 , and T 3 as well as a sup-
pressed TSH (see Chapter 24). 
 Treatment of Graves Disease 
 Although autoimmune mechanisms are responsible for the syn-
drome of Graves disease, management has been largely directed 
toward controlling the hyperthyroidism. Three good methods are 
available: (1) antithyroid drug therapy, (2) surgery, and (3) radio-
active iodine therapy. 
 A. Antithyroid drug therapy (Figure 7–9) 
 The antithy-
roid drugs methimazole, carbimazole, and PTU act by inhibiting 
TPO-mediated iodination of thyroglobulin to form T 4 and T 3 
within the thyroid gland. PTU but not methimazole blocks 
peripheral T 4 to T 3 conversion; however, this effect is not generally 
considered to be clinically important except possibly in patients 
with severe thyrotoxicosis or thyroid storm. Carbimazole, used in 
the United Kingdom and parts of the British Commonwealth, is 
a derivative of methimazole that is rapidly metabolized to methi-
mazole. Additionally, each of these drugs may have immunosup-
pressive effects that may be responsible for the remission from the 
disease that some patients have after 1 to 2 years of treatment. In 
general, antithyroid drug therapy as a first-line therapy is most 
useful in young patients with small glands and mild disease. The 
drug is given for 1 to 2 years and then it is tapered or discontinued 
to see whether the patient has achieved a remission. Remissions, 
defined as normal thyroid function for 1 year following discon-
tinuation of the antithyroid drug, occur in 20% to 50% of 
patients but may not be lifelong. Antithyroid drug therapy is gen-
erally started with larger doses. When the patient becomes bio-
chemically euthyroid after 4 to 12 weeks, maintenance therapy 
may be achieved with a lower dose. Because of the potential for 
severe and potentially fatal hepatotoxicity with PTU, methimazole 
is the antithyroid drug of choice in most patients. Methimazole 
has a longer duration of action and single daily dosing leads to 
improved compliance. A typical regimen starts with a 10 to 20-mg 
dose of methimazole each morning for 1 to 2 months; this dose 
would then be reduced to 5 to 10 mg each morning for mainte-
nance therapy. PTU could be considered in patients with mild 
allergic reactions to methimazole, and is preferred in pregnant 
women in the first trimester because of rare teratogenic effects of 
methimazole in the fetus. A common regimen consists of giving 
PTU, 100 mg every 8 hours initially, and then in 4 to 8 weeks, 
reducing the dose to 50 to 200 mg once or twice daily. The labora-
tory tests of most value in early monitoring the course of therapy 
are serum FT 4 and T 3 . TSH levels often remain suppressed for 
many weeks or even months, and hence are not a reliable index of 
thyroid function early in the course of treatment. 
 An alternative method of therapy utilizes the concept of a total 
block of thyroid activity. The patient is treated with methimazole 
until euthyroid (about 3-6 months), but instead of continuing to 
taper the dose of antithyroid drug, at this point T 4 is added in a 
dose of about 0.1 mg/d. The patient then continues to receive the 
combination of antithyroid drug and T 4 (0.1 mg/d) for another 12 
to 24 months. At the end of this time or when the size of the gland 
has returned to normal, the drugs are discontinued. This com-
bined therapy prevents the development of hypothyroidism due to 
excessive doses of antithyroid drugs, but the frequency of relapse 
is about the same as after treatment with antithyroid drugs alone. 
It is more expensive, because two drugs are needed, and there may 
be a greater frequency of side effects. Consequently, this strategy 
is not recommended for most patients. 
 1. Duration of therapy and other factors related to remis-
sions— The duration of therapy with antithyroid drugs in 
Graves disease is usually 12 to 24 months; some patients prefer 
to be treated, if necessary, for prolonged periods of time (eg, 
decades) but this is not typical. A sustained remission is most 
likely in the following circumstances: (1) if the thyroid gland 
returns to normal size, (2) if the disease can be controlled with 
a relatively small dose of antithyroid drugs, and (3) if TSAbs 
are no longer detectable in the serum at the end of the course 
of therapy. 
 2. Reactions to antithyroid drugs— Allergic reactions to antithy-
roid drugs can be minor, especially a rash (about 5% of 
patients) or major, especially agranulocytosis (about 0.5% of 
patients). The rash can often be managed by administering 
antihistamines, and unless it is severe, it is not an indication for 
discontinuing the medication. Agranulocytosis requires imme-
diate cessation of antithyroid drug therapy, institution of 
appropriate antibiotic therapy, and shifting to an alternative 
therapy, usually radioactive iodine. Agranulocytosis is usually 
heralded by a severe sore throat and fever. Thus, all patients 
receiving antithyroid drugs are instructed that if sore throat or 
fever develops, they should stop the drug, contact their physi-
cian, and obtain a white blood cell and differential count. If the 
white blood cell count is normal, the antithyroid drug can be 
resumed. Cholestatic jaundice with methimazole, hepatocel-
lular toxicity and vasculitis with PTU, and acute arthritis with 
either drug are serious but rare side effects that also require 
cessation of drug therapy. As noted earlier, the severity of hepa-
totoxicity from PTU has led to the warning by the FDA that 
PTU be used only in special circumstances: in patients who are 
allergic to methimazole who are not candidates for radioiodine 
or surgery and in the first trimester of pregnancy. PTU may 
also be preferred in patients with thyroid storm, where the 
inhibition of T 4 to T 3 conversion may be clinically important. 
 B. Radioactive iodine therapy 
 In the United States, 
sodium iodide  131 I is the preferred treatment for most patients 
over age 21. In many patients without underlying heart disease, 
radioactive iodine may be given immediately in a dosage of 80 to 
200 μCi/g of thyroid weight estimated on the basis of physical 
examination. The dosage is corrected for iodine uptake according 
to the following formula: 
204    CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland
 Dose =
80 200microcuries
Estimated gram thy
−
roid tissue
Estimated gram thyroid tissue
× fractional 24-hour radioiodine uptake
 Following the administration of radioactive iodine, which 
typically is given orally as a single capsule, the gland will shrink, 
and the patient will usually become euthyroid over a period of 2 
to 6 months. 
 In elderly patients and in those with underlying heart disease 
or other medical problems, severe thyrotoxicosis, or large glands 
(>100 g), it is desirable to achieve a euthyroid state prior to  131 I 
therapy, because there may be occasional exacerbations of thyroid 
function in the weeks following radioiodine therapy. For this pur-
pose, patients usually are treated with methimazole until they are 
euthyroid, medication is then stopped for 3 to 7 days, and the 
radioiodine therapy is given. Methimazole (or PTU) pretreatment 
have been associated with a diminished effectiveness of radioio-
dine therapy, which can be overcome by modestly increasing the 
dose of radioactive iodine. 
 Hypothyroidism is the almost inevitable complication of 
radioactive iodine therapy, ultimately developing in more than 
80% of patients who are adequately treated. Hypothyroidism usu-
ally occurs in the first 6 to 12 months after therapy and is the best 
assurance that the patient will not have a recurrence of hyperthy-
roidism. Serum FT 4 and TSH levels should be followed every 6 to 
8 weeks, and when hypothyroidism develops, prompt replacement 
therapy with T 4 , 0.05 to 0.2 mg daily, is instituted. Long-term 
follow-up studies have shown that radioiodine therapy does not 
cause infertility, birth defects, or cancer later in life. Severe Graves 
eye disease is a relative contraindication to radioiodine therapy; 
several prospective studies have shown that radioiodine can exac-
erbate eye problems when they are severe at baseline. Patients with 
severe underlying hyperthyroidism and those patients who smoke 
cigarettes are particularly prone to an exacerbation following 
radioiodine treatment. However, potential worsening can be pre-
vented by the administration of prednisone 30 to 60 mg daily for 
1 to 2 months following the radioiodine treatment. Prednisone is 
typically used in patients with moderate to severe Graves eye dis-
ease, especially in those who smoke cigarettes. 
 Hypothyroidism may also occur as a late development after an 
earlier course of antithyroid drug therapy for Graves disease; in 
such patients,  burned-out Graves disease is likely the end result of 
autoimmune thyroid destruction. Accordingly, all patients with 
Graves disease who have not become hypothyroid require lifetime 
follow-up to be certain that they remain euthyroid. 
 C. Surgical treatment 
 Total or near-total thyroidectomy is 
the treatment of choice for patients with very large glands or 
multinodular goiters, for patients with a concomitant suspicious 
or malignant thyroid nodule, for patients who are allergic to or 
noncompliant with antithyroid drugs, for patients who refuse 
radioactive iodine, and for pregnant women with severe Graves 
disease who are allergic or develop reactions to antithyroid drugs. 
The patient is prepared with antithyroid drugs until euthyroid 
(about 6 weeks). In addition, starting 2 weeks before the day of 
operation, the patient may be given saturated solution of potas-
sium iodide, five drops twice daily. This regimen is thought to 
diminish the vascularity of the gland and thereby decrease intra-
operative blood loss. 
 An experienced surgeon is required and total thyroidectomy is 
recommended, because if too much thyroid tissue is left behind, 
the disease may recur. Hypoparathyroidism and recurrent laryn-
geal nerve injury occur as complications of surgery in about 1% of 
cases, with lower rates in the hands of  high volume surgeons. 
 D. Other medical measures 
 During the acute phase of thy-
rotoxicosis, β-adrenergic blocking agents are extremely helpful. 
Propranolol, 10 to 40 mg every 6 hours, or longer acting beta-
blockers such as Inderal LA, nadolol, atenolol, or metoprolol 
control many adrenergic symptoms, tachycardia, hypertension, 
and atrial fibrillation. The drug is gradually withdrawn as serum 
FT 4 and T 3 levels return to normal. Adequate nutrition and rest 
are both essential. The oral cholecystographic dyes, sodium ipo-
date and iopanoic acid (no longer available in the United States), 
have been shown to inhibit both thyroid hormone synthesis and 
release as well as peripheral conversion of T 4 to T 3 . In a dosage of 
1 g daily, these drugs may help to rapidly restore the euthyroid 
state in very ill patients. They leave the gland saturated with 
iodide, so they should not be used immediately before  131 I therapy. 
Cholestyramine, 4 g orally three times daily, lowers serum T 4 by 
binding it in the gut, and may be useful in severely hyperthyroid 
patients. 
 Choice of Therapy 
 The choice of therapy varies with the nature and severity of the 
illness and prevailing customs. For example, in the United States, 
radioiodine therapy has been the preferred treatment for the aver-
age patient, whereas in Europe and Asia, primary antithyroid drug 
therapy is preferred. In general, antithyroid drugs are a reasonable 
initial therapy for children and adolescents and in adults with 
mild disease and small goiters. In all other patients, radioiodine is 
the treatment of choice. Nowadays, the role of surgery is limited 
to noncompliant patients who refuse radioiodine, patients with 
large goiters, and other unusual circumstances noted earlier. 
 Treatment of Complications 
 A. Thyrotoxic crisis 
 Thyrotoxic crisis (thyroid storm) requires 
vigorous management. Propranolol, 1 to 2 mg slowly intrave-
nously every 5 to 10 minutes for a total of 10 mg, or 40 to 80 mg 
every 6 hours orally, is helpful in controlling arrhythmias. Large 
doses of propranolol also have the ability to block T 4 to T 3 conver-
sion. Esmolol, a very rapidly acting beta blocker, is given at a dose 
of 250 to 500 mg/kg/min as a loading dose followed by 
50 μg/kg/min with cardiac monitoring. In the presence of severe 
heart failure or asthma and arrhythmia, where beta blockers may 
be contraindicated, cautious intravenous administration of 
CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland     205
 verapamil in a dose of 5 to 10 mg may be effective. Hormone 
synthesis is blocked by the administration of PTU, 250 mg every 
6 hours. In thyroid storm, PTU may be preferable to methimazole 
because PTU blocks T 4 to T 3 conversion. If the patient is unable 
to take medication by mouth, methimazole in a dose of 60 mg 
every 24 hours or PTU, 400 mg every 6 hours, can be given by 
rectal suppository or enema. 3 After administration of an antithy-
roid drug, hormone release is retarded by the oral administration 
of a saturated solution of potassium iodide, 10 drops twice daily. 
As noted above, the oral cholecystographic agents, sodium ipodate 
(Oragrafin) or iopanoic acid (Telepaque), provide a source of 
iodine and potently block T 4 to T 3 conversion, but these drugs are 
not available currently in the United States. The administration of 
hydrocortisone hemisuccinate, or its equivalent, 50 mg intrave-
nously every 6 hours, is usually recommended, but its role in 
thyroid storm management is uncertain. Supportive therapy 
includes a cooling blanket and acetaminophen to help control 
fever. Aspirin is contraindicated because of its tendency to bind to 
TBG and displace T 4 , rendering more T 4 available in the free state. 
Proper fluid, electrolyte, and nutritional support are important. 
For sedation, phenobarbital may be useful because it accelerates 
the peripheral metabolism and inactivation of T 4 and T 3 . Oxygen, 
diuretics, and digoxin are indicated for heart failure and/or atrial 
fibrillation. Finally, it is essential to treat the underlying disease 
process that may have precipitated the acute exacerbation. As an 
extreme measure (rarely needed) to control thyrotoxic crisis, plas-
mapheresis or peritoneal dialysis may be used to remove high 
levels of circulating free thyroid hormones (see Chapter 24). 
 B. Ophthalmopathy 
 For mild disease, keeping the patient’s 
head elevated at night and the administration of diuretics may 
help diminish periorbital edema. As noted above, prednisone 
begun immediately after radioiodine in a dose of 30 to 60 mg/d, 
reducing the dose by 10 mg every 2 weeks, protects against exac-
erbation of ophthalmopathy following  131 I therapy. Management 
of severe ophthalmopathy due to Graves disease involves close 
cooperation between the endocrinologist and the ophthalmolo-
gist. For severe acute inflammatory reactions, a short course of 
high-dose corticosteroid therapy is frequently effective (eg, pred-
nisone, 100 mg daily orally in divided doses for 7-14 days, then 
every other day in gradually diminishing dosage for 6-12 weeks). 
Alternatively, pulse therapy with high doses of intravenous meth-
ylprednisolone can be used. If corticosteroid therapy is not effec-
tive or if there is recurrence after the drug is tapered, external x-ray 
therapy to the retrobulbar area may be helpful. The dose is usually 
2000 cGy in 10 fractions given over a period of 2 weeks. The lens 
and anterior chamber structures must be shielded. 
 In very severe cases where vision is threatened, orbital decom-
pression can be used. One operation involves a transantral 
approach through the maxillary sinus, removing the floor and 
the lateral walls of the orbit. In the alternative anterior approach, 
the orbit is entered under the globe, and portions of the floor 
and the walls of the orbit are removed. Both approaches are 
effective, and exophthalmos can be reduced by 5 to 7 mm in 
each eye by these techniques. After the acute process has sub-
sided, the patient is frequently left with double vision or lid 
abnormalities owing to muscle fibrosis and contracture or the 
postoperative position of the globe. These problems can be cor-
rected by cosmetic lid surgery or eye muscle surgery. 
 C. Thyrotoxicosis and pregnancy 
 Thyrotoxicosis during 
pregnancy presents a special problem. It is unusual, affecting 
approximately 0.1% of pregnancies. It is important to recall that 
serum TSH levels may be subnormal at the end of the first trimes-
ter in up to 20% of normal women. This is due to the effects of 
serum hCG, the levels of which normally peak at the end of the 
first trimester; hCG activates the TSH receptor. This is a transient 
phenomenon and is physiologic, not pathologic. Hyperemesis 
gravidarum may cause mild hyperthyroidism (so-called  gestational 
thyrotoxicosis ), which is likely due to extremely high serum levels of 
hCG, present in this condition, that stimulates the TSH receptor. 
However, no treatment is indicated, because the hyperthyroid state 
resolves when the hyperemesis resolves, usually by midgestation. 
 In pregnant patients with Graves disease, the patient is treated 
with antithyroid drugs throughout most of the pregnancy, post-
poning the decision regarding long-term management until after 
delivery. Radioactive iodine is absolutely contraindicated because 
it crosses the placenta freely and may injure the fetal thyroid. The 
dosage of antithyroid drugs must be kept to the minimum neces-
sary to control symptoms, because both PTU and methimazole 
cross the placenta and may affect the function of the fetal thyroid 
gland. PTU is preferred over methimazole because methimazole 
has rare teratogenic effects (aplasia cutis and methimazole embry-
opathy [choanal atresia, tracheoespophageal fistulae, and other 
defects]). Current recommendations advise limiting PTU use to 
the first trimester, and then switching to methimazole. However, 
methimazole can be used when PTU allergy or a poor clinical 
response to PTU is present. If the disease can be controlled by 
initial doses of PTU of 250 mg/d (in divided doses) or less and 
maintenance doses of 25 to 100 mg/d, the likelihood of fetal 
hypothyroidism is extremely small. The FT 4 I or FT 4 should be 
maintained in the upper range of normal for nonpregnant women 
by appropriately reducing the antithyroid drug dosage. In a sig-
nificant minority of patients, the drug can be discontinued in the 
latter part of pregnancy because of spontaneous disappearance of 
TSAb. Serum levels of TSAb should be measured in the third tri-
mester; high titers can be associated with neonatal Graves disease 
(see later). Breastfeeding is permissible with either antithyroid 
drug, because the low levels found in breast milk do not affect 
thyroid function in the neonate. 
 Graves disease may occur in the newborn infant ( neonatal 
Graves disease ) due to transplacental passage of TSAb . Although 
 3 Preparation of rectal methimazole : Dissolve 1200 mg methimazole in 12 mL of 
water to which a mixture of two drops of Span 80 in 52 mL of cocoa butter 
warmed to 37°C has been added. Stir the mixture to form a water-oil emulsion, 
pour into 2.6 mL suppository molds, and cool. Each suppository supplies approx-
imately 60 mg methimazole-absorbed dose (Nabil et al, 1982).
 Preparation of rectal PTU: Dissolve 400 mg PTU in 60 mL of Fleet Mineral Oil 
for the first dose and then dissolve 400 mg PTU in 60 mL of Fleet Phospho-Soda 
for subsequent enemas.
206    CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland
most infants with this rare syndrome are born to mothers with 
active Graves disease, it occasionally can occur in infants born to 
hypothyroid mothers who have been treated for Graves disease 
with radioiodine in the past but who still retain circulating TSAb. 
The disease may not be evident at birth, because the antithyroid 
drugs used to treat the mother can cross the placenta and affect the 
infant’s thyroid as well. The child is born small, with weak mus-
cles, tachycardia, fever, and frequently with distress or neonatal 
jaundice. Examination reveals an enlarged thyroid gland and occa-
sionally prominent, puffy eyes. The heart rate is rapid, tempera-
ture is elevated, and heart failure may ensue. Laboratory studies 
reveal an elevated FT 4 I or FT 4 , a markedly elevated T 3 , and usually 
a low TSH—in contrast to normal infants, who have elevated 
TSH at birth. Bone age may be accelerated. TSAb is usually found 
in the serum of both the infant and the mother. The pathogenesis 
of this syndrome is thought to involve transplacental transfer of 
TSAb from mother to fetus, with subsequent development of 
thyrotoxicosis. The disease is self-limited and subsides over a 
period of 4 to 12 weeks, coinciding with the fall in the child’s 
serum TSAb levels. Therapy for the infant includes PTU in a dose 
of 5 to 10 mg/kg/d (in divided doses at 8-hour intervals); Lugol 
solution, one drop (8 mg potassium iodide) every 8 hours; and 
propranolol, 2 mg/kg/d in divided doses. In addition, adequate 
nutrition, antibiotics for infection if present, sedatives if necessary, 
and supportive therapy are indicated. If the child is very thyro-
toxic, corticosteroid therapy (prednisone, 2 mg/kg/d) partially 
blocks conversion of T 4 to T 3 and may be helpful in the acute 
phase. The above medications are gradually reduced as the child 
improves and can usually be discontinued by 6 to 12 weeks. 
 Maternal sera may also contain TSAb that functions as block-
ing antibodies that can cross the placenta to produce transient 
hypothyroidism in the infant. This condition may need to be 
treated with T 4 supplementation for a short time. 
 Course and Prognosis 
 In general, the course of Graves disease treated with antithyroid 
drugs is one of remissions and exacerbations over a protracted 
period of time, unless the gland is destroyed by surgery or radioac-
tive iodine. Although some patients may remain euthyroid for 
long periods after antithyroid drug treatment, at least 25% even-
tually develop hypothyroidism. Lifetime follow-up is therefore 
indicated for all patients with Graves disease. 
 2. OTHER FORMS OF THYROTOXICOSIS 
 Toxic Adenoma 
 A functioning adenoma hypersecreting T 3 and T 4 causes hyper-
thyroidism. These lesions start out as a small autonomously 
functioning nodule that slowly increases in size to produce exces-
sive quantities of thyroid hormones. This gradually suppresses 
endogenous TSH secretion, which results in reduced function of 
the contralateral lobe of the gland ( Figure 7–39 ). The typical 
patient is an older individual (usually >40) who has noted recent 
growth of a long-standing thyroid nodule. Symptoms of weight 
loss, weakness, shortness of breath, palpitations, tachycardia, and 
heat intolerance are noted. Infiltrative ophthalmopathy is never 
present. 
 Physical examination reveals a definite nodule on one side, 
with very little thyroid tissue on the other side. Laboratory studies 
usually reveal suppressed TSH and elevation in serum T 3 levels, 
often with only borderline elevation of FT 4 levels. A radionuclide 
scan reveals that the nodule is hot, with diminished or absent 
function of the contralateral lobe. Toxic adenomas are usually 
benign follicular adenomas and almost never malignant. 
 Treatment with radioactive iodine is generally effective and is 
attractive because the contralateral lobe can be spared the destruc-
tive effects of the radiation, and the patient should therefore 
remain euthyroid. Radioiodine therapy in doses of 20 to 30 mCi 
is usually required to destroy the benign neoplasm. If antithyroid 
drugs are used to pretreat the patient, it is important that the 
serum TSH remain low, so that the contralateral lobe will not be 
stimulated to take up the radioiodine. Surgery is an option, if the 
nodule is very large and causing obstructive symptoms such as 
dysphagia, neck pressure, or difficulty breathing. Antithyroid 
drugs may be used to normalize thyroid function prior to radioio-
dine or surgery but are not a good long-term solution, because, 
unlike the situation with Graves disease, remissions do not occur. 
 Toxic Multinodular Goiter (Plummer 
Disease) 
 This disorder usually occurs in older patients with long-standing 
euthyroid multinodular goiter. The patient presents with tachycar-
dia, heart failure, or arrhythmia and sometimes weight loss, ner-
vousness, weakness, tremors, and sweats. Physical examination 
reveals a multinodular goiter that may be small or quite large and 
may even extend substernally. Laboratory studies reveal a sup-
pressed TSH and elevation in serum T 3 levels, with less striking 
elevation of serum T 4 . Radioiodine scan reveals multiple 
 FIGURE 7–39 Solitary toxic nodule as it appears on  99m Tc 
pertechnetate scan. Note suppression of contralateral lobe (left) by 
toxic nodule (right). 
CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland     207
 functioning nodules in the gland or occasionally an irregular, 
patchy distribution of radioactive iodine ( Figure 7–40 ). 
 Hyperthyroidism in patients with long-standing multinodular 
goiters can be precipitated by the administration of pharmacologic 
doses of iodide-containing drugs (called the Jod-Basedow phe-
nomenon or iodide-induced hyperthyroidism). The pathophysiol-
ogy of iodine-induced hyperthyroidism is unknown but likely 
involves the inability of some thyroid nodules to adapt to an 
iodide load, with resulting excess hormone production. This is one 
mechanism for the development of hyperthyroidism after admin-
istration of the iodine-containing antiarrhythmic drug amio-
darone (see later). 
 The management of toxic nodular goiter may be difficult, 
because patients are often elderly with other comorbidities. 
Control of the hyperthyroid state with antithyroid drugs followed 
by radioiodine is the therapy of choice. If the goiter is very large, 
thyroidectomy can be contemplated if the patient is a good surgi-
cal candidate. 
 Amiodarone-Induced Thyrotoxicosis 
 Amiodarone is an antiarrhythmic drug that contains 37.3% 
iodine by weight. In the body, it is stored in fat, myocardium, 
liver, and lung and has a half-life of about 50 days. In the United 
States, about 2% of patients treated with amiodarone develop 
amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis. In some patients, the thyro-
toxicosis is due to the excess iodine; in others, it is due to an 
amiodarone-induced thyroiditis, with inflammation and release of 
stored hormone into the bloodstream as the result of thyroidal 
inflammation. Thyroid ultrasound with Doppler examination of 
the thyroid circulation may be helpful in differentiating the two 
syndromes: the thyroidal blood flow is increased in iodide-induced 
hyperthyroidism and diminished in thyroiditis. Treatment is often 
difficult. Iodide-induced thyrotoxicosis can be controlled with 
methimazole, 40 to 60 mg/d, and β-adrenergic blockade. Although 
potassium perchlorate (250 mg every 6 hours) could be added to 
block further iodide uptake, long-term, high-dose treatment with 
this agent has been associated with aplastic anemia and requires 
careful monitoring. Also, this drug is no longer available in the 
United States. The drug-induced thyroiditis responds to predni-
sone therapy, which may need to be continued for several months. 
Some patients have what appears to be a mixed form of disease 
and respond to a combination of antithyroid drugs and predni-
sone. Total thyroidectomy is curative and may be needed in 
patients who are nonresponsive to pharmacologic therapy. Of 
course, surgery is feasible only if the patient can withstand the 
stress of surgery (see Chapter 24). 
 Subacute and Silent Thyroiditis 
 These entities will be discussed in a separate section, but it should 
be mentioned here that thyroiditis, either subacute or silent, may 
present with symptoms of mild to severe thyrotoxicosis following 
an acute release of T 4 and T 3 into the circulation. These illnesses 
can be differentiated from other forms of thyrotoxicosis in that the 
RAIU is markedly suppressed and the symptoms usually subside 
spontaneously over a period of weeks or months. 
 Thyrotoxicosis Factitia 
 This is a psychoneurotic disturbance in which the patient surrepti-
tiously ingests excessive amounts of T 4 or thyroid hormone prepa-
rations, usually for purposes of weight control. The individual, 
usually a woman, is often someone connected with the health-care 
field who can easily obtain thyroid medication. Features of thyro-
toxicosis, including weight loss, nervousness, palpitation, tachy-
cardia, and tremor, may be present, but goiter and eye signs are 
absent. Characteristically, TSH is suppressed, serum FT 4 and T 3 
levels are elevated, serum thyroglobulin is low, and RAIU is nil. 
Management requires careful discussion of the hazards of long-
term thyroid hormone therapy, particularly cardiovascular dam-
age, muscle wasting, and osteoporosis. Formal psychotherapy may 
be necessary. 
 Rare Forms of Thyrotoxicosis 
 A. Struma ovarii 
 In this syndrome, a teratoma of the ovary 
contains thyroid tissue that becomes hyperactive. Mild features of 
thyrotoxicosis result, such as weight loss and tachycardia, but there 
is no evidence of goiter or eye signs. Serum FT 4 and T 3 are mildly 
elevated, serum TSH is suppressed, and RAIU over the neck is 
low. Total body scan reveals uptake of radioiodine in the pelvis, 
rather than in the neck. The disease is curable by removal of the 
teratoma. 
 B. Thyroid carcinoma 
 Follicular carcinoma of the thyroid 
may concentrate radioactive iodine, but only rarely does it retain 
the ability to convert this iodide into active hormone. Only a few 
cases of metastatic thyroid cancer are described in which patients 
have presented with hyperthyroidism. The clinical picture consists 
 FIGURE 7–40  Toxic multinodular goiter as it appears on  99m Tc 
pertechnetate scan. Note multiple functioning thyroid nodules. 
 (Courtesy of Dr. J.M. Lowenstein.) 
208    CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland
of weakness, weight loss, palpitations, and a thyroid nodule but no 
ophthalmopathy. Body scan with  131 I reveals areas of uptake usu-
ally distant from the thyroid (eg, bone or lung). Treatment with 
large doses of radioactive iodine may destroy the metastatic depos-
its and treat the hyperthyroidism. 
 C. Hydatidiform mole and choriocarcinoma  Hydatidi-
form moles and choriocarcinomas produce high levels of chorionic 
gonadotropin, which has intrinsic TSH-like activity. This may 
induce thyroid hyperplasia, increased radioiodine uptake, sup-
pressed TSH, and mild elevation of serum T 4 and T 3 levels. It is 
rarely associated with overt thyrotoxicosis and is curable by removal 
of the mole or treatment of the tumor. 
 D. Hamburger thyrotoxicosis 
 In the 1970s an epidemic of 
thyrotoxicosis in the midwestern United States was traced to ham-
burger made from  neck trim , the strap muscles from the necks of 
slaughtered cattle that contained beef thyroid tissue. The United 
States Department of Agriculture has now prohibited the use of 
this material for human consumption. 
 E. Syndrome of inappropriate TSH secretion 
 A group of 
patients have been reported with elevated serum FT 4 concentra-
tions in association with elevated or inappropriately normal serum 
immunoreactive TSH levels. This has been called the  syndrome 
of inappropriate TSH secretion . Two conditions may explain 
this unusual combination of laboratory values: (1) TSH-secreting 
pituitary adenoma, and (2) non-neoplastic pituitary hypersecre-
tion of TSH. 
 Patients with TSH-secreting pituitary adenomas usually pres-
ent with mild thyrotoxicosis and goiter and may have a concurrent 
pituitary hormonal deficiency, such as central hypogonadism 
causing amenorrhea or impotence. Rarely, a TSH-secreting tumor 
may cosecrete other pituitary hormones such as growth hormone 
or prolactin. There are no eye signs of Graves disease. Laboratory 
evaluation reveals elevated FT 4 and T 3 , whereas serum TSH, usu-
ally undetectable in Graves disease, is within the normal range or 
even elevated. The TSH α subunit secretion from these tumors is 
markedly elevated; a molar ratio of α subunit:TSH greater than 
5.7 is usually diagnostic of the presence of a TSH-secreting 
pituitary adenoma. 4 
 In addition, the increased serum TSH is not suppressible with 
high doses of exogenous thyroid hormones. Visual field examina-
tion may reveal a bitemporal defect, and CT or MRI of the sella 
usually reveals a pituitary tumor. Management usually involves 
control of the thyrotoxicosis with antithyroid drugs and removal 
of the pituitary tumor via transsphenoidal hypophysectomy. These 
tumors are often quite aggressive and may extend widely out of the 
sella. If the tumor cannot be completely removed, it may be neces-
sary to treat residual tumor with radiation therapy and to control 
thyrotoxicosis with radioactive iodine. Long-acting somatostatin 
analog (octreotide) suppresses TSH secretion in many of these 
patients and may even inhibit tumor growth in some. 
 Non-neoplastic pituitary hypersecretion of TSH is essentially a 
form of tissue resistance to T 3 and T 4 . This is discussed in the fol-
lowing section. 
 Thyroid Hormone Resistance
Syndromes 
 Two forms of resistance to thyroid hormones are recognized: 
(1) generalized resistance to thyroid hormones (GRTH), (2) selec-
tive pituitary resistance to thyroid hormones (PRTH). 
 GRTH was first described in 1967 as a familial syndrome of deaf 
mutism, stippled epiphyses, goiter, and abnormally high thyroid 
hormone levels with normal TSH. The clinical presentation in more 
than 500 cases that have been reported has been variable; although 
most patients are clinically euthyroid, some present with goiter, 
stunted growth, delayed maturation, attention deficits, hyperactiv-
ity disorders, and resting tachycardia. Seventy-five percent of 
reported cases are familial. Inheritance is autosomal dominant. 
Laboratory tests reveal elevated T 4 , FT 4 , T 3 , and normal or elevated 
TSH. Dynamic tests to distinguish generalized resistance to thyroid 
hormones from TSH-secreting adenomas usually reveal a fall in 
TSH with T 3 administration, and a molar ratio of α subunit-TSH 
of less than 1. In addition, in patients with GRTH, pituitary MRI 
fails to demonstrate a pituitary tumor. Molecular studies have 
revealed point mutations in the carboxyl terminal ligand-binding 
portion of the human  TR β, which produces a defective TR that fails 
to bind T 3 but retains the ability to bind to DNA. In addition, the 
mutant TR occupies the TRE as an inactive dimer or heterodimer, 
perhaps inducing sustained gene repression (see  Figures 7–20 and 
 7–21 ). Individual point mutations in different families may account 
in part for the differences in clinical expression of the syndrome. 
Furthermore, identification of the mutation in affected individuals 
may allow the use of molecular screening methods for the diagnosis 
of the syndrome in some families. 
 In most patients with GRTH, the increased levels of T 3 and T 4 
compensate in part for the receptor defect, and treatment is not 
necessary. In fact, some patients are erroneously thought to have 
Graves disease and undergo inappropriate therapy with radioio-
dine or surgery. In some children, administration of thyroid hor-
mones may be necessary to correct defects in growth or mental 
development. 
 Selective PRTH is less common and usually presents with 
symptoms of mild hyperthyroidism, goiter, elevated serum T 4 and 
T 3 , and normal or elevated serum TSH. It is currently thought 
that selective PRTH is not a distinct syndrome, but rather the 
result of the poor sensitivity and specificity of the signs and symp-
toms of hyperthyroidism, and the fact that thyroid hormone 
resistance is not necessarily complete and may vary from tissue to 
tissue. In fact, identical mutations in the TRβ receptor have been 
found in patients with both variants of thyroid hormone resis-
tance. If the hyperthyroid state is causing significant symptoms, 
therapy with beta-blocking drugs, antithyroid drugs, or radioac-
tive iodine could be considered. 
 4 The α subunit-TSH molar ratio is calculated as follows: (α subunit in μg/L 
divided by TSH in mU/L) × 10. Normal range (for a patient with normal TSH 
and gonadotrophins) is less than 1.
CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland     209
 TSH Receptor Gene Mutations 
 Mutations in the  TSH receptor ( TSH-R ) gene can produce a vari-
ety of clinical syndromes. Somatic mutations in the seven-trans-
membrane loop of the TSH-R may activate the receptor, producing 
solitary or multiple hyperfunctioning adenomas, whereas ger-
mline mutations may result in congenital hyperthyroidism in the 
newborn that can mimic neonatal Graves disease. Mutations in 
the extracellular amino terminal portion of the TSH-R produce 
resistance to TSH with uncompensated or compensated hypothy-
roidism. Some patients may have normal serum FT 4 and T 3 levels 
and normal growth and development but persistently elevated 
serum TSH. Others may be severely hypothyroid (cretinoid), with 
low FT 4 levels, elevated TSH, and no response to exogenous TSH. 
In this group, the defect may be in the coupling of TSH-R and the 
G s protein necessary for activation of adenylyl cyclase. 
 NONTOXIC GOITER 
 Etiology 
 Nontoxic goiter (ie, goiter not associated with hyperthyroidism) 
can be diffuse or nodular. In some circumstances, it results from 
TSH stimulation, which in turn results from inadequate thyroid 
hormone synthesis. Some goiters are due to mutations in genes 
involved in thyroid growth and/or thyroid function. In many 
patients, however, the cause of the goiter is obscure, because serum 
TSH levels are normal. Worldwide, iodine deficiency remains the 
most common cause of nontoxic goiter or  endemic goiter . With the 
widespread use of iodized salt and the introduction of iodides into 
fertilizers, animal feeds, and food preservatives, iodide deficiency 
in developed countries has become relatively rare, and it probably 
does not exist in the United States. However, there are large areas 
such as central Africa, the mountainous areas of central Asia, the 
Andes of central South America, parts of central Europe, and 
Indonesia (particularly New Guinea), where iodine intake is still 
markedly deficient. Optimal iodine requirements for adults are in 
the range of 150 to 300 μg/d. In endemic goiter areas, the daily 
intake (and urinary excretion) of iodine falls below 50 μg/d; in 
areas where iodine is extremely scarce, excretion falls below 
20 μg/d. It is in these areas that 90% of the population has goiters, 
and 5% to 15% of infants are born with myxedematous or 
 neurologic changes of cretinism. The variability in the extent of 
goiter in these areas may be related to the presence of other, 
unidentified goitrogens such as goitrin, an organic compound 
found in certain roots and seeds; and cyanogenic glycosides, 
found in cassava and cabbage, that release thiocyanate that can 
exacerbate the effects of iodide deficiency. In addition, com-
pounds such as phenols, phthalates, pyridines, and polyaro-
matic hydrocarbons found in industrial waste water are weakly 
goitrogenic. 
 The most common cause of thyroid enlargement in developed 
countries is chronic thyroiditis (Hashimoto thyroiditis; see later). 
The cause of goiter not due to autoimmune thyroid disease or 
iodine sufficiency is uncertain. In some patients, mild defects in 
thyroid hormone synthesis (dyshormonogenesis) (discussed above 
in the section on Hypothyroidism) may result in goiter with rela-
tively normal thyroid function. Finally, thyroid enlargement can 
be due to gene mutations producing a benign lesion, such as 
adenoma, or to a malignant one, such as carcinoma. 
 Pathogenesis 
 The development of nontoxic goiter in patients with dyshor-
monogenesis or severe iodine deficiency involves impaired hor-
mone synthesis and, secondarily, an increase in TSH secretion. 
TSH induces diffuse thyroid hyperplasia, followed by focal hyper-
plasia with necrosis and hemorrhage, and finally the development 
of new areas of focal hyperplasia. Focal or nodular hyperplasia 
usually involves a clone of cells that may or may not be able to 
concentrate iodine or synthesize thyroglobulin. Thus, the nodules 
vary from hot nodules that can concentrate iodine to cold ones 
that cannot, and from colloid nodules that can synthesize thyro-
globulin to microfollicular ones that cannot. Initially, the hyper-
plasia is TSH dependent, but later the nodules become TSH 
independent, or autonomous. Thus, a diffuse nontoxic TSH-
dependent goiter may progress over an extended period of time to 
become a toxic multinodular TSH-independent goiter. 
 The mechanism for the development of autonomous growth 
and function of thyroid nodules may involve mutations that acti-
vate the G s protein in the cell membrane. Mutations of this gene, 
called the  gsp oncogene, have been found in a high proportion of 
nodules from patients with multinodular goiter. Chronic activa-
tion of the G s protein results in thyroid cell proliferation and 
hyperfunction even when TSH is suppressed. 
 In iodine-sufficient parts of the world such as the United 
States, euthyroid nontoxic goiter is a very common problem 
affecting up to 15% of women. The cause of goiter in the absence 
of iodine deficiency, autoimmunity, or obvious biosynthetic 
defects is unknown. In some kindreds with euthyroid multinodu-
lar goiter, mutations in the  thyroglobulin gene have been identi-
fied, suggesting the presence of subclinical or mild defects in 
thyroid hormone synthesis that do not cause overt hypothyroid-
ism or even elevation in serum TSH levels. 
 Clinical Features 
 A. Symptoms and signs 
 Patients with nontoxic goiter usu-
ally present with thyroid enlargement, which, as noted above, may 
be diffuse or multinodular. The gland may be relatively firm but 
is often soft or rubbery in consistency. Over a period of time, the 
gland may become progressively larger, so that in long-standing 
cases, huge goiters may develop and extend substernally to the 
level of the aortic arch. Facial flushing and dilation of cervical 
veins on lifting the arms over the head is a positive  Pemberton 
sign and indicates obstruction to jugular venous flow ( Figure 7–41 ). 
The patient may complain of pressure symptoms in the neck, 
particularly on moving the head upward or downward, and of 
difficulty in swallowing. Vocal cord paralysis due to recurrent 
laryngeal nerve involvement is rare. The vast majority of patients 
are euthyroid. Thyroid enlargement probably represents compen-
sated hypothyroidism. 
210    CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland
 B. Laboratory findings 
 Laboratory studies reveal a normal 
FT 4 and, usually, normal levels of TSH. The increased mass of 
thyroid tissue may compensate for inefficient synthesis of hor-
mone. RAIU may be high, normal, or low, depending on the 
iodide pool and the serum TSH level. 
 C. Imaging studies 
 Isotope scanning usually reveals a patchy 
up take, frequently with focal areas of increased uptake corresponding 
to hot nodules and areas of decreased uptake corresponding to 
cold nodules. RAIU of the hot nodules may not be suppressible 
following administration of thyroid hormones such as liothyro-
nine. Thyroid ultrasound is a simple way to follow the growth of 
the goiter and in addition may reveal cystic changes and coarse 
calcifications in one or more of the nodules, representing previous 
hemorrhage and necrosis. 
 Differential Diagnosis 
 The major problem in differential diagnosis is to rule out cancer. 
This will be discussed in the section on thyroid carcinoma. 
 FIGURE 7–41 Pemberton sign (facial plethora) when the arms are raised above the head due to obstruction of jugular venous flow as the 
thyroid is forced downward into the sternal notch. This patient has a large goiter shown on an MRI.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Basaria 
S, Salvatori R. Pemberton sign.  N Engl J Med . 2004;350:1338.) 
CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland     211
 Treatment 
 With the exception of those due to neoplasm, the current manage-
ment of nontoxic goiters consists simply of observation, without 
any specific therapy. Nontoxic goiters are very slow growing and 
usually never cause compressive symptoms or thyroid dysfunction. 
Thyroid hormone suppression therapy rarely results in clinically 
significant decrements in goiter size. Also, long-standing goiters 
may have areas of necrosis, hemorrhage, and scarring as well as 
autonomously functioning nodules that will not regress on T 4 
therapy. Furthermore, to suppress the serum TSH level, doses of 
T 4 are required that could cause harm, especially in elderly patients 
who are at risk of developing atrial fibrillation and osteoporosis. 
Also, many nontoxic goiters have areas of autonomy within them 
that do not depend on TSH for function, and therefore, will not 
decrease in size and may contribute to the iatrogenic hyperthy-
roidism. 
 Surgery is indicated for goiters that continue to grow or that 
produce obstructive symptoms. Substernal extension of a goiter is 
not, in and of itself, an indication for surgical removal. The gross 
appearance of a multinodular goiter at the time of surgery is pre-
sented in  Figure 7–42 . Note that the left lobe of the gland extends 
downward from the middle of the thyroid cartilage to just above 
the clavicle. The pressure of this enlargement has caused deviation 
of the trachea to the right. The surface of the gland is irregular, 
with many large and small nodules. Although multinodular goi-
ters are rarely malignant, the size of the mass with resulting pres-
sure symptoms may require subtotal thyroidectomy. 
 If the patient is not a suitable candidate for surgery, radioiodine 
ablation of functioning thyroid tissue may provide palliative relief 
of obstructive symptoms. An adequate dose of radioiodine reduces 
the size of the goiter about 30% to 50% and usually alleviates 
obstructive symptoms. 
 Course and Prognosis 
 Patients with nontoxic goiter should avoid pharmacologic doses of 
iodides, which may induce either hyperthyroidism or, in the pres-
ence of thyroidal autoimmunity, hypothyroidism. Occasionally, 
single adenomas or several adenomas become hyperfunctional, 
producing a toxic nodular goiter (discussed earlier). Nontoxic 
goiter is often familial and other members of the family should be 
examined and observed for the possible development of goiter. 
 THYROIDITIS 
 1. SUBACUTE THYROIDITIS 
 Subacute thyroiditis (De Quervain thyroiditis or granulomatous 
thyroiditis) is an acute inflammatory disorder of the thyroid gland 
most likely due to viral infection. A number of viruses, including 
mumps virus, coxsackievirus, and adenoviruses, have been impli-
cated, either by finding the virus in biopsy specimens taken from 
the gland or by demonstration of rising titers of viral antibodies in 
the blood during the course of the infection. Pathologic examina-
tion reveals moderate thyroid enlargement and a mild inflamma-
tory reaction involving the capsule. Histologic features include 
destruction of thyroid parenchyma and the presence of many large 
phagocytic cells, including giant cells. Subacute thyroiditis is more 
common in the summer months, in women, and in individuals 
who are HLA-Bw35 positive. 
 Clinical Features 
 A. Symptoms and signs 
 Subacute thyroiditis usually pres-
ents with fever, malaise, and soreness in the anterior neck, which 
may extend up to the angle of the jaw or toward the ear lobes on 
one or both sides of the neck. Initially, the patient may have symp-
toms of hyperthyroidism, with palpitations, nervousness, and 
sweats. There is no ophthalmopathy. On physical examination, 
the gland is exquisitely tender, so that the patient objects to pres-
sure on it. There are no signs of local redness or heat suggestive of 
abscess formation. Clinical signs of thyrotoxicosis, including 
tachycardia, tremor, and hyperreflexia, may be present. 
 B. Laboratory findings 
 Laboratory studies vary with the 
course of the disease ( Figure 7–43 ). Initially, FT 4 and T 3 are ele-
vated, whereas serum TSH and RAIU are extremely low. Because 
the thyroid hormone levels in the blood are a reflection of leakage 
of glandular hormonal stores, serum FT 4 levels are elevated dispro-
portionately to serum T 3 levels. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate 
is markedly elevated, sometimes greater than 100 mm/h by the 
Westergren scale. Thyroid autoantibodies are usually not detectable 
in serum. As the disease progresses, FT 4 and T 3 drop, TSH rises, 
and symptoms of hypothyroidism may be noted. Later, RAIU rises, 
reflecting recovery of the gland from the acute insult. 
 Differential Diagnosis 
 Subacute thyroiditis can be differentiated from other viral illnesses 
by the involvement of the thyroid gland. It is differentiated from 
 FIGURE 7–42 Multinodular goiter at the time of surgery. The 
asymmetric enlargement and the nodularity are apparent, as is the 
rightward deviation of the trachea resulting from marked enlarge-
ment of the lobe. 
212    CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland
Graves disease by the presence of thyroidal pain, low RAIU associ-
ated with elevated serum T 3 and FT 4 and suppressed serum TSH, 
and by the absence of thyroid antibodies. 
 Treatment 
 In many cases, only symptomatic treatment is necessary (eg, aspi-
rin or other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs). In severe cases 
or in patients who do not respond to nonsteroidal agents, a gluco-
corticoid such as prednisone, 20 mg three times daily for 7 to 
10 days, may be necessary to reduce the inflammation. 
β-Adrenergic–blocking agents can be employed during the hyper-
thyroid phase to treat bothersome symptoms of hyperthyroidism. 
 T 4 , 0.1 to 0.15 mg once daily, may be indicated during the 
hypothyroid phase of the illness if hypothyroid symptoms are 
present. T 4 therapy may also prevent exacerbations of inflamma-
tion due to elevated TSH levels. 
 Course and Prognosis 
 Subacute thyroiditis usually resolves completely and spontane-
ously over weeks or months. Occasionally, the disease may begin 
to resolve and then suddenly become worse, sometimes involving 
first one lobe of the thyroid gland and then the other (migrating 
or  creeping thyroiditis). Exacerbations may occur when the FT 4 
levels have fallen, the TSH level has risen, and the gland is starting 
to recover function. Rarely, the course may extend over several 
years, with repeated bouts of inflammatory disease. Ninety per-
cent of patients recover without any sequelae. In about 10% of 
patients, permanent hypothyroidism ensues, and long-term T 4 
therapy is necessary. 
 2. CHRONIC THYROIDITIS 
 Chronic thyroiditis (Hashimoto thyroiditis, lymphocytic thy-
roiditis) is the most common cause of hypothyroidism and 
goiter in the United States. It is certainly the major cause of 
goiter in children and young adults and is the cause of  idio-
pathic myxedema , which represents an end stage of Hashimoto 
thyroiditis, with total destruction of the gland.  Riedel thy-
roiditis may be a very rare variant of Hashimoto thyroiditis, 
with extensive fibrosis extending outside the gland and involv-
ing overlying muscle and surrounding tissues. Riedel struma 
(struma is an old term for the thyroid) presents as a stony-hard 
mass that must be differentiated from thyroid cancer. It is also 
associated with fibrosis in other parts of the body including the 
mediastinum and retroperitoneum. 
 Etiology and Pathogenesis 
 Hashimoto thyroiditis is an immunologic disorder in which lym-
phocytes become sensitized to thyroidal antigens and autoanti-
bodies are formed that react with these antigens (see thyroid 
autoimmunity, above). In Hashimoto thyroiditis, the three most 
important thyroid autoantibodies are thyroglobulin antibody, 
TPO Ab, and TSH-R–blocking antibody. During the early phases 
of Hashimoto thyroiditis, thyroglobulin antibody is markedly 
elevated, and TPO Ab is slightly elevated. Later, thyroglobulin 
antibody may disappear, but TPO Ab is present for many years. 
Blocking antibodies may be found in patients with atrophic thy-
roiditis and myxedema and, rarely, in mothers giving birth to 
infants with no detectable thyroid tissue ( athyreotic cretins ). The 
pathology of Hashimoto thyroiditis involves a heavy infiltration of 
lymphocytes totally destroying normal thyroidal architecture. 
Lymphoid follicles and germinal centers may be formed. The fol-
licular epithelial cells are frequently enlarged and contain an 
eosinophilic cytoplasm laden with mitochondria (Hürthle cells). 
Destruction of the gland results in a fall in serum T 3 and FT 4 and 
a rise in TSH. Initially, TSH may maintain adequate hormonal 
synthesis by the development of thyroid enlargement or goiter, 
but often the gland fails, and hypothyroidism with or without 
goiter ensues. 
 Hashimoto thyroiditis is part of a spectrum of thyroid diseases 
that includes Graves disease at one end and idiopathic myxedema 
at the other ( Figure 7–44 ). It is familial and may be associated 
with other autoimmune diseases, including pernicious anemia, 
adrenocortical insufficiency, idiopathic hypoparathyroidism, 
myasthenia gravis, and vitiligo.  Schmidt syndrome consists of 
Hashimoto thyroiditis, idiopathic adrenal insufficiency, and, com-
monly, type 1 diabetes mellitus. This phenomenon has also been 
called the autoimmune polyglandular syndrome (see Chapter 2). 
 Clinical Features 
 A. Symptoms and signs 
 Hashimoto thyroiditis usually 
presents with goiter in a patient who is euthyroid or has mild 
hypothyroidism. The female:male sex distribution is about 4:1. 
The process is painless, and the patient may be unaware of the 
goiter unless it becomes very large. Older patients may present 
24-hour
131I up-
take %
40
30
20
10
0
Eu
–
Hypo
11
Eu
4
Hyper
7
Phase:
Weeks:
0
5
10
15
20
T4
μg/dL
131 I
T4
 FIGURE 7–43 Changes in serum T 4 and radioactive iodine 
uptake in patients with subacute, silent, and postpartum thyroiditis. 
In the initial phase, serum T 4 is elevated and the patient may have 
symptoms of thyrotoxicosis, but radioactive iodine uptake is mark-
edly suppressed. The illness may pass through phases of euthyroid-
ism and hypothyroidism before remission.  (Data adapted, with 
permission, from Woolf PD, Daly R. Thyrotoxicosis with painless thy-
roiditis.  Am J Med . 1976;60:73.) 
CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland     213
with severe hypothyroidism with only a small, firm atrophic thy-
roid gland (idiopathic myxedema). 
 B. Laboratory findings 
 There are multiple defects in iodine 
metabolism. Peroxidase activity is decreased, so that organification 
of iodine is impaired. This can be demonstrated by a positive 
perchlorate discharge test. RAIU may be high, normal, or low. 
Circulating thyroid hormone levels are usually normal or low, and 
if low, TSH will be elevated. 
 The most striking laboratory finding is the high titer of 
autoantibodies to thyroidal antigens in the serum. Serum tests for 
either thyroglobulin antibody or TPO Ab are positive in most 
patients with Hashimoto thyroiditis. Another diagnostic test that 
may be helpful is FNAB, which reveals lymphocytic infiltration as 
well as the presence of Hürthle cells. 
 Differential Diagnosis 
 Hashimoto thyroiditis can be differentiated from other causes of 
nontoxic goiter by serum antibody studies and, if necessary, by 
FNAB. 
 Complications and Sequelae 
 The major complication of Hashimoto thyroiditis is progressive 
hypothyroidism. Most patients with Hashimoto thyroiditis ini-
tially have a small goiter and subclinical hypothyroidism, which is 
defined as normal serum levels of FT 4 and T 3 , but mildly elevated 
serum TSH levels, usually less than 10 mU/L. This is in contrast 
to overt hypothyroidism, in which FT 4 levels are subnormal. 
Whether subclinical hypothyroidism is a significant health prob-
lem that warrants therapy is a matter of debate. Some patients may 
have mild symptoms of hypothyroidism as well as increased lipid 
levels and other risk factors for atherosclerotic cardiovascular dis-
ease. There may be progression to overt hypothyroidism over 
time, especially if serum levels of antithyroid antibodies are high. 
On the other hand, most patients are asymptomatic, especially 
when TSH serum levels are less than 10 mU/L, and the link 
between atherosclerosis is still controversial. 
 One variant of Hashimoto thyroiditis has been termed  silent 
or painless thyroiditis . It has a predilection for occurring in the 
postpartum period, developing in about 5% of postpartum 
women. In this setting it is called  postpartum thyroiditis . Most 
patients have symptoms and signs of mild hyperthyroidism that 
may be difficult to distinguish from mild Graves disease. There are 
no eye findings, and unlike subacute thyroiditis, the thyroid is not 
tender to palpation. The serum FT 4 is elevated out of proportion 
to the serum T 3 , typical of most forms of thyroiditis, when there 
is leakage of stored hormone into the bloodstream. The erythro-
cyte sedimentation rate is normal, which distinguishes it from 
subacute thyroiditis, and TPO Ab titers are elevated. Importantly, 
the 24-hour RAIU is low, rather than elevated, which readily dis-
tinguishes this condition from postpartum Graves disease. Silent 
thyroiditis evolves with a triphasic course, similar to what is seen 
in subacute thyroiditis, with the hyperthyroid phase lasting 1 to 
3 months, followed by a hypothyroid phase lasting several months 
as well. In postpartum thyroiditis, the hyperthyroid phase gener-
ally begins 3 to 4 months after delivery. Although recovery is the 
rule, about 25% of patients have permanent mild or subclinical 
hypothyroidism, which can progress with time to overt hypothy-
roidism. Long-term follow-up is required because permanent 
hypothyroidism can eventually develop in patients after many 
years. Also, recurrent episodes of silent thyroiditis can occur, and 
postpartum thyroiditis often develops following subsequent 
pregnancies. 
 Rarely, a patient with Hashimoto thyroiditis may develop 
lymphoma of the thyroid gland. Although the etiology of thy-
roid lymphoma is unknown, Hashimoto thyroiditis is a definite 
risk factor. It is possible that thyroid lymphoma may be the 
result of the expansion of an abnormal clone of an immortalized 
population of intrathyroidal lymphocytes. Thyroid lymphoma is 
characterized by rapid growth of the gland despite continued T 4 
therapy; the diagnosis of lymphoma can be made by FNAB and 
immunocytochemical analysis, looking for a monoclonal popu-
lation of lymphocytes, but sometimes requires surgical biopsy 
(see later). 
 Whether adenocarcinoma of the thyroid gland occurs more 
frequently in patients with Hashimoto thyroiditis is controversial, 
but the two diseases—chronic thyroiditis and carcinoma—can 
coexist in the same gland. Recent studies have shown that the 
presence of thyroid cancer in thyroid nodules is more frequent in 
patients whose serum TSH is higher, even when it is within the 
normal range. Cancer must be suspected when a solitary nodule 
or thyroid mass grows or fails to regress while the patient is receiv-
ing doses of T 4 that normalize or suppress the serum TSH. FNAB 
is critical in the differential diagnosis in this situation. 
 Treatment 
 The indications for treatment of Hashimoto thyroiditis are goiter 
or overt hypothyroidism; a patient with a positive thyroid anti-
body test alone does not require therapy. Surgery is rarely indicated 
"Euthyroid
Graves disease"
Graves
disease
Hashimoto
thyroiditis
Idiopathic
myxedema
Euthyroid with or
without goiter
Hyperthyroid
with goiter
Hypothyroid or euthy-
roid with goiter
Hypothyroid
without goiter
 FIGURE 7–44 Spectrum of autoimmune disease of the thyroid gland. The clinical manifestations of autoimmune disease of the thyroid 
gland range from idiopathic myxedema, through nontoxic goiter, to diffuse toxic goiter, or Graves disease. Progression of autoimmune disease 
from one form to another in the same patient can occasionally occur. 
214    CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland
for Hashimoto thyroiditis but occasionally is performed if a goiter 
does not regress and continues to cause compressive symptoms. 
The treatment of subclinical hypothyroidism is a matter of debate 
but is often instituted because of (1) mild symptoms; 
(2) dyslipidemia which could be ameliorated by T 4 therapy; and 
(3) positive antithyroid antibody titers, which predicts a higher 
chance of progression to overt hypothyroidism over time. Sufficient 
T 4 is given to normalize TSH and allow regression of the goiter. 
 The treatment of silent or postpartum thyroiditis varies with 
the patient’s thyroid status. During the hyperthyroid phase, 
β-adrenergic–blocking drugs can be used to treat the symptoms of 
tremor, palpitations, and nervousness. T 4 can be used in the hypo-
thyroid phase, but it is usually not needed, because symptoms are 
usually mild. 
 Course and Prognosis 
 Without treatment, Hashimoto thyroiditis usually progresses 
from goiter and subclinical hypothyroidism to overt hypothyroid-
ism over many years. In severe cases, myxedema and myxedema 
coma may be the end result of untreated disease. With T 4 therapy, 
the goiter usually resolves, although not necessarily completely, 
and hypothyroid symptoms are reversed. 
 Because Hashimoto thyroiditis may be part of a syndrome of 
multiple autoimmune diseases (see Chapter 2), the patient should 
be monitored for other autoimmune diseases such as pernicious 
anemia, adrenal insufficiency, and type 1 diabetes mellitus. 
Patients with Hashimoto thyroiditis may also develop true Graves 
disease, occasionally with severe ophthalmopathy or dermopathy 
(see  Figure 7–44 ). The chronic thyroiditis may blunt the severity 
of the thyrotoxicosis, so that the patient may present with eye or 
skin complications of Graves disease without marked thyrotoxico-
sis, a syndrome often called  euthyroid Graves disease . The oph-
thalmopathy and dermopathy are treated as if thyrotoxic Graves 
disease were present. 
 3. OTHER FORMS OF THYROIDITIS 
 The thyroid gland may be subject to acute abscess formation in 
patients with septicemia or acute infective endocarditis or from local 
extension of a pharyngeal infection. Immunocompromised hosts 
may develop opportunistic thyroidal infections, with involvement 
of organisms such as aspergillus, mycobacteria, and pneumocystis. 
Abscesses cause symptoms of pyogenic infection, with local pain 
and tenderness, swelling, and warmth and redness of the overlying 
skin. Needle aspiration confirms the diagnosis and identifies the 
organism. Treatment includes antibiotic therapy and occasionally 
incision and drainage. A thyroglossal duct cyst may become infected 
and present as acute suppurative thyroiditis. This too responds to 
antibiotic therapy and occasionally incision and drainage. 
 EFFECTS OF IONIZING RADIATION ON 
THE THYROID GLAND 
 Ionizing radiation can induce both acute and chronic thyroiditis. 
Thyroiditis may occur acutely in patients treated with large doses 
of radioiodine and may be associated with release of thyroid hor-
mones and an acute thyrotoxic crisis. Such an occurrence is 
extremely rare, however, and pretreatment with antithyroid drugs 
to bring the patient to a euthyroid state prior to  131 I therapy should 
prevent this complication. Radioiodine therapy, which exposes the 
thyroid to a dosage of around 10,000 rads (cGy), is not associated 
with the development of thyroid cancer, presumably because the 
thyroid gland is largely destroyed by high doses of radiation. Thus, 
although the incidence of postradiation hypothyroidism is high, 
the incidence of thyroid cancer is extremely low. 
 External radiation was used many years ago for the treatment 
of respiratory problems in the newborn, thought to be due to 
thymic hyperplasia, and for the treatment of benign conditions 
such as severe acne and chronic tonsillitis or adenoiditis. This 
treatment has been associated with the later development of nodu-
lar goiter, hypothyroidism, or thyroid cancer. Fortunately, such 
therapy has not been used since the early 1960s. In addition, high 
doses of therapeutic radiation in children with Hodgkin disease or 
other cancers have also been associated with the development of 
thyroid cancer later in life. Almost all radiation-related thyroid 
cancers have been of the papillary type. In some parts of the world, 
radiation exposure from fallout from atomic bomb testing or a 
nuclear reactor accident has been associated with nodular thyroid 
disease and thyroid cancer. Although the overall frequency of thy-
roid carcinoma in irradiated patients is low, data from several large 
series suggest that the incidence of cancer in a patient who pres-
ents with a solitary cold nodule of the thyroid gland and a history 
of therapeutic radiation of the head, neck, or chest is about 50%. 
 The most recent episode of large-scale radiation-induced thy-
roid neoplasia was the Chernobyl disaster in April, 1986, at which 
time huge amounts of radioactive material, especially radioiodine, 
were released. As early as 4 years later, a striking increase in the 
incidence of thyroid nodules and thyroid cancer was noted in 
children in Gomel, an area in the Republic of Belarus that is close 
to Chernobyl and was heavily contaminated by the accident. A 
high proportion of the cancers arose in very young children and 
developed after a very short latency period. The sex distribution 
was equal. Most of the cancers have been papillary carcinomas and 
have been more aggressive than typical papillary cancer, with 
intraglandular, capsular, local, and lymph node invasion. 
 Patients who have been exposed to ionizing radiation should be 
followed carefully for life. Annual studies should include physical 
examination of the neck for goiter or nodules and FT 4 or TSH 
determinations to rule out hypothyroidism. Periodic thyroid 
ultrasound may detect nodules that are not palpable. If a nodule 
is found and is greater than 1 cm in diameter, FNAB should be 
performed. If the nodule is malignant, the patient should have 
total thyroidectomy. If it is benign, follow-up with periodic thy-
roid ultrasound is recommended. If the nodule enlarges, repeat 
biopsy or surgery should be considered. 
 THYROID NODULES AND THYROID CANCER 
 Thyroid nodules are extremely common, particularly among women. 
The prevalence of palpable thyroid nodules in the United States 
CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland     215
has been estimated to be about 4% of the adult population, with 
a female-male ratio of 4:1. In young children, the prevalence is less 
than 1%; in persons aged 11 to 18 years, about 1.5%; and in 
persons over age 60, about 5%. In contrast to the relatively low 
prevalence of palpable nodules, thyroid nodules are detected on 
thyroid ultrasound in up to 50% of healthy individuals, especially 
middle-aged and older women. 
 Although thyroid nodules are common, thyroid cancer is a 
relatively rare condition, with an annual incidence of approxi-
mately 8.7 per 100,000 population. In 2009, there are expected to 
be approximately 37,000 new cases in the United States. Thus, the 
vast majority (95%) of thyroid nodules are benign, and it is 
important to identify those that are likely to be malignant in the 
most rational and cost-effective manner. In 95% of cases, thyroid 
cancer presents as a nodule or lump in the thyroid. Occasionally, 
especially in children, enlarged cervical lymph nodes are the first 
sign of the disease, although on careful examination a small thyroid 
nodule can often be felt. Rarely, distant metastasis in lung or bone 
is the first sign of thyroid cancer. 
 1. BENIGN THYROID NODULES 
 Etiology 
 Benign conditions that can produce nodularity in the thyroid 
gland are listed in  Table 7–10 . They include focal areas of chronic 
thyroiditis; colloid-filled or hyperplastic cellular nodules within a 
multinodular goiter; a cyst involving thyroid tissue; rarely parathy-
roid tissue or thyroglossal duct remnants; and agenesis of one lobe 
of the thyroid, with hypertrophy of the other lobe presenting as a 
mass in the neck and mimicking a nodule. It is usually the left lobe 
of the thyroid that fails to develop, and the hypertrophy occurs in 
the right lobe. Finally, benign areas of hyperplasia and neoplasms 
in the thyroid, including follicular adenomas and Hürthle cell 
adenomas (also called oxyphil adenomas) present as thyroid nod-
ules. Rare benign thyroidal lesions include teratomas, lipomas, 
and hemangiomas. 
 Differentiation of Benign and Malignant 
Lesions 
 Risk factors that predispose to benign or malignant disease are set 
forth in  Table 7–11 and discussed below. 
 A. History 
 A family history of goiter suggests benign dis-
ease, as does residence in an area of endemic goiter. However, a 
family history of papillary or medullary carcinoma or a history 
of recent thyroid growth, hoarseness, dysphagia, or obstruction 
suggests cancer, as does exposure to ionizing radiation, as dis-
cussed earlier. 
 B. Clinical features 
 Clinical features associated with a lower 
risk of thyroid cancer include middle age, female sex, a soft 
TABLE 7–11 Risk factors useful in distinguishing benign from malignant thyroid lesions. 
More Likely Benign 
More Likely Malignant 
History 
Family history of benign goiter 
Residence in endemic goiter area 
Family history of medullary cancer of thyroid 
Previous therapeutic irradiation of head or neck 
Recent growth of nodule 
Hoarseness, dysphagia, or obstruction 
Physical characteristics 
Older woman 
Soft nodule 
Multinodular goiter 
Child, young adult, male 
Solitary, firm nodule clearly different from rest of gland (dominant nodule)
Vocal cord paralysis, firm lymph nodes, distant metastases 
Serum factors 
High titer of thyroid autoantibodies 
Elevated serum calcitonin 
Scanning techniques 
123I or 99mTcO4 
Hot nodule
Cold nodule
Sonogram 
Cyst (pure) 
Solid or complex 
Biopsy (needle) 
Benign appearance on cytologic 
examination 
Malignant or suggestion of malignancy 
Levothyroxine therapy 
 (TSH suppression 
 for 3-6 mo) 
Regression 
No regression 
TABLE 7–10 Etiology of benign thyroid nodules. 
1. Focal thyroiditis 
2. Dominant nodule in a multinodular goiter 
3. Benign adenomas: 
 a. Follicular 
 b. Hürthle cell 
4. Thyroid, parathyroid, or thyroglossal cysts 
5. Agenesis of a thyroid lobe 
6. Postsurgical remnant hyperplasia 
7. Postradioiodine remnant hyperplasia 
8. Rare: teratoma, lipoma, hemangioma 
216    CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland
thyroid nodule on physical examination, and the presence of a 
multinodular goiter. Individuals at higher risk of thyroid cancer 
include children, young adults, and older males. A solitary firm or 
dominant nodule that is clearly different from the rest of the gland 
signifies an increased risk of malignancy. Vocal cord paralysis, 
enlarged cervical lymph nodes, and suspected metastases are 
strongly suggestive of malignancy. 
 C. Serum factors 
 A serum TSH level should be the initial 
laboratory study in the evaluation of a thyroid nodule. If the serum 
TSH level is normal, which is the case for most patients, no further 
blood tests are needed. If the serum TSH is below normal, a radio-
nuclide thyroid scan should be considered to see whether the 
nodule is hot or autonomously functioning (see later). A high nor-
mal or elevated serum TSH has been associated with modestly 
higher risk of thyroid cancer. In the presence of a firm thyroid 
gland or other clinical features of Hashimoto thyroiditis (eg, posi-
tive family history of hypothyroidism), serum antithyroid antibod-
ies should be assessed. A high titer of thyroid autoantibodies in 
serum suggests chronic thyroiditis as the cause of thyroid enlarge-
ment and nodules, but does not rule out an associated malignancy. 
Measurement of serum calcitonin is not routinely advised. However, 
an elevated serum calcitonin in patients with a family history of 
medullary carcinoma strongly suggests the presence of medullary 
thyroid cancer. Elevated serum thyroglobulin following total thy-
roidectomy for papillary or follicular thyroid cancer usually indi-
cates residual or metastatic disease, but serum thyroglobulin is not 
helpful in determining the nature of a thyroid nodule. 
 D. Imaging studies 
 Thyroid ultrasound has become an 
important tool in the confirmation and differential diagnosis of 
thyroid nodules. Ultrasound is used to confirm that a cervical 
mass is within the thyroid; measure a nodule’s size precisely; detect 
other nonpalpable nodules elsewhere in the gland; and distinguish 
cystic from solid lesions, as a small pure cyst is almost never malig-
nant. Cystic lesions that have internal septa or solid lesions on 
ultrasound may be benign or malignant. Certain ultrasound char-
acteristics can suggest that a nodule is more likely to be malignant, 
including microcalcifications, irregular borders, and high internal 
blood flow on Doppler imaging. Other ultrasound characteristics, 
such as the so-called  comet tail artifact due to the presence of col-
loid within the nodule favor a benign nodule. 
 In patients with low serum TSH levels, radionuclide thyroid 
scanning with  123 Iodine or  99m Technetium pertechnetate can be 
used to identify a hot or cold nodule (ie, a nodule that takes up 
more or less radioactive iodine than surrounding tissue). Hot 
nodules are almost never malignant, and although 5% to 10% of 
cold nodules may be malignant, 90% to 95% of cold nodules are 
benign ( Figure 7–45 ). 
 E. Needle biopsy 
 Fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) of 
thyroid nodules to obtain cytological material for pathological 
examination is the principal test to distinguish benign from malig-
nant lesions. The technique of FNAB is relatively simple, safe, 
reliable, and well tolerated. FNAB is now generally performed 
under sonographic guidance and definitely should be done so if 
the nodule is nonpalpable, difficult to localize by palpation, or is 
cystic. FNAB separates thyroid nodules into three groups: 
 1. Cytologically benign thyroid nodules (70%-80% of all biopsy 
specimens), which exclude cancer with a negative predictive 
value of 95%-98%. 
 2. Cytologically malignant thyroid nodules (3%-5% of all biopsy 
specimens), which have a positive predictive value for cancer of 
95% for all types of thyroid malignancies. 
 3. Cytologically indeterminate or suspicious thyroid nodules 
(10%-15% of all biopsy specimens), among which 15% ulti-
mately prove to be malignant and 85% benign. 
 There are several subcategories of cytologically indeterminate 
lesions, including suspicions for malignancy (60%-75% risk of 
cancer) and follicular neoplasm (15%-30% risk of cancer). In the 
 FIGURE 7–45 Demonstration of resolution obtained utilizing different scanning techniques:  A.  123 I scintiscan with rectilinear scanner. 
 B. Fluorescent scan with rectilinear scanner.  C.  99m Tc pertechnetate scan with the pinhole collimated gamma camera. Note the presence of two 
cold nodules, one in each lobe of the thyroid, easily detected in  C but not clearly delineated in the other two scans. The lesion in the right lobe 
was palpable, about 1 cm in diameter, and was shown to be follicular carcinoma on needle biopsy. The lesion in the left lobe was either a meta-
static tumor or a second primary follicular carcinoma.  (Courtesy of Dr. M.D. Okerlund.) 
CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland     217
future, assessment of genetic and molecular markers of malig-
nancy (eg, BRAF mutational analysis, galectin-3 immunostaining) 
in FNAB specimens may assist in distinguishing benign from 
malignant indeterminate nodules. These markers of malignancy, 
and others, are currently being studied to see whether they may 
provide increased sensitivity and specificity for predicting malig-
nancy in suspicious nodules, beyond what can be ascertained by 
traditional cytopathology. 
 Management of Thyroid Nodules 
 A decision tree for management of a thyroid nodule is presented in 
 Figure 7–46 . A patient with a thyroid nodule should have a serum 
TSH performed. If TSH is low, thyroid scanning should be done 
to avoid performing FNAB in a patient with a hot nodule. If the 
serum TSH is normal or elevated, ultrasound should be performed 
to document the presence of the nodule and to see whether other 
nodules are present. If one or more nodules are confirmed, FNAB 
should be performed on those nodules that are larger than 1.0 to 
1.5 cm or that have suspicious ultrasound characteristics. If the 
nodule is cytologically malignant, the patient is generally referred 
for thyroid surgery unless there are other serious medical problems 
associated with high operative risk and/or a prognosis much graver 
than thyroid cancer. If the nodule is cytologically benign and nei-
ther local compressive symptoms nor hyperthyroidism are present, 
only reassessment of nodule size in 6 to 12 months by physical 
examination and/or ultrasound is required. If the nodule grows, 
defined as an increase of 20% or more in two of three dimensions, 
repeat FNAB and cytological examination are indicated to verify 
the benign diagnosis. 
 In patients with cytologically indeterminate nodules, those 
with lesions categorized as suspicious for malignancy are generally 
best referred for surgery. In those with a cytological follicular neo-
plasm, a radionuclide scan may be obtained. If the scan reveals the 
nodule to be hot (ie, functioning and suppressing the remainder 
of the gland), the patient can be observed to detect future overt 
hyperthyroidism. If the lesion is cold and >2 cm in diameter, has 
suspicious ultrasound features, or is present in a younger patient, 
surgery is usually preferable. On the other hand, if the nodule is 
<1 cm in diameter, soft, or present in an older patient, observation 
with serial sonography and surgery only if the lesion grows is an 
alternative. 
 2. THYROID CANCER 
 Pathology 
 The types and approximate frequency of malignant thyroid 
tumors are listed in  Table 7–12 . 
 A. Papillary carcinoma 
 Papillary carcinoma of the thyroid 
gland typically presents as a nodule that is firm and solid on thy-
roid ultrasound, sometimes with internal calcifications. In multi-
nodular goiter, the cancer is usually a dominant nodule—larger, 
firmer, and/or with ultrasound characteristics more suspicious 
than other nodules in the gland. About 10% of papillary carcino-
mas, especially in children, present with enlarged cervical nodes. 
Careful examination then often also reveals a nodule in the thy-
roid. Sometimes, there is hemorrhage, necrosis, and cyst forma-
tion in the malignant nodule, but on thyroid ultrasound of these 
lesions, a defined solid component is an indication for FNAB of 
this nodule component. Finally, papillary carcinoma may be 
found incidentally as a microscopic focus of cancer in a gland 
removed for other reasons, such as another indeterminate nodule, 
multinodular goiter, or Graves disease. Microscopically, papillary 
cancer typically consists of single layers of thyroid cells arranged in 
vascular stalks, with papillary projections extending into micro-
scopic cystlike spaces. The nuclei of the cells are large and pale and 
frequently contain clear, glassy intranuclear inclusion bodies. 
About 40% of papillary carcinomas form laminated calcified 
spheres—often at the tip of a papillary projection—called psam-
moma bodies. Most papillary thyroid cancers grow slowly and 
Thyroid nodule detected
Hot nodule
Cold nodule
TSH
Normal
FNA biopsy
Suspicious or
"follicular neoplasm"
Malignant
Surgery
Benign
Observe
High
Ultrasound
if nodule confirme
Low
123| or 99mTc scan
and evaluate for
hyperthyroidism
123| scan
 FIGURE 7–46 Decision matrix for workup of a thyroid nodule 
(see text for details). (FNAB, fine-needle aspiration biopsy.) 
TABLE 7–12  Approximate frequency of malignant 
thyroid tumors.
Papillary carcinoma (including mixed papillary and 
 follicular) 
Follicular carcinoma (including Hϋrthle cell carcinoma) 
Medullary carcinoma 
Undifferentiated (anaplastic) carcinomas 
Miscellaneous (including lymphoma, fibrosarcoma, 
 squamous cell carcinoma, malignant 
 hemangioendothelioma, teratomas, and metastatic 
 carcinomas) 
80% 
10% 
5% 
3% 
1% 
218    CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland
remain confined to the thyroid gland and local lymph nodes. 
However, these cancers can exhibit intraglandular metastasis and 
lymph node spread. In some children with papillary thyroid can-
cer, there are extensive lymph node and pulmonary micrometasta-
ses. In older patients, papillary cancer can be aggressive and invade 
locally into adjacent muscles, nerves, and trachea. In later stages, 
these tumors may spread to the lung, bone, brain, and other 
organs. Death is usually due to local disease, with invasion of deep 
tissues in the neck; less commonly, death may be due to extensive 
distant metastases. In some older patients, a long-standing, slowly 
growing papillary carcinoma begins to grow rapidly and converts 
to undifferentiated or anaplastic carcinoma. 
 Most papillary carcinomas secrete thyroglobulin, which can be 
used as a marker for recurrence or metastasis of the cancer. Some 
papillary cancers concentrate radioiodine, albeit less efficiently than 
normal thyroid tissue. In such patients, radioiodine is an effective 
tool for identification and treatment of extrathyroidal disease. 
 B. Follicular carcinoma 
 Follicular carcinoma is character-
ized histologically by the presence of small follicles with poor 
colloid formation. Follicular carcinoma is distinguished from 
benign follicular adenoma microscopically by the presence of the 
capsule and/or vascular invasion within the tumor capsule. When 
only the capsule is involved, follicular cancer is categorized as 
minimally invasive, a tumor that typically has an indolent course 
similar to low-grade papillary cancers. When capsular blood ves-
sels are also invaded, follicular cancers are categorized as invasive 
and have the potential for distant metastatic spread to bone, lung, 
and other sites. These tumors often retain the ability to concen-
trate radioactive iodine, form thyroglobulin, and, rarely, synthe-
size T 3 and T 4 . This may render these tumors responsive to 
radioactive iodine therapy. When death occurs, it is attributable to 
local extension or distant metastases with extensive involvement of 
bone, lungs, and viscera. 
 A variant of follicular carcinoma is the  Hürthle cell or oxyphil 
cell carcinoma , characterized by large individual cells with pink-
staining cytoplasm filled with mitochondria. They behave like 
follicular cancer except that they rarely take up radioiodine. 
 C. Medullary carcinoma  Medullary thyroid cancer is a disease 
of the C cells (parafollicular cells) derived from the ultimobranchial 
body. These cells are capable of secreting calcitonin, carcinoembry-
onic antigen (CEA), histaminase, prostaglandins, serotonin, and 
other peptides (see Chapters 8 and 22). Microscopically, these 
tumors consist of sheets of cells separated by a pink-staining sub-
stance that stains with Congo red, typical of amyloid. 
 Medullary thyroid carcinoma is typically more aggressive than 
papillary or follicular carcinoma, extending locally to cervical 
lymph nodes and into surrounding tissues. It may also invade 
lymphatics and blood vessels and metastasize to lungs, liver, and 
other viscera. The calcitonin and CEA secreted by the tumor are 
clinically useful markers for diagnosis and follow-up. 
 Eighty percent of medullary carcinomas are sporadic, and the 
remainder are familial. There are three familial patterns: 
(1)  familial medullary cancer without associated endocrine 
disease; (2) multiple endocrine neoplasia 2A (MEN 2A), consist-
ing of medullary thyroid carcinoma, pheochromocytoma, and 
hyperparathyroidism; and (3) MEN 2B, consisting of medullary 
thyroid cancer, pheochromocytoma, multiple mucosal neuromas, 
as well as intestinal ganglioneuromatosis simulating Hirschsprung 
disease. There is also a variant of MEN 2A with cutaneous lichen 
amyloidosis, a pruritic skin lesion located on the upper back. 
These familial syndromes are due to  ret protooncogene muta-
tions, most commonly in exons 10, 11, or 16 (see later and 
Chapter 22). 
 If medullary thyroid cancer is diagnosed by FNAB or at sur-
gery, it is essential that the patient be screened for one of the 
familial medullary thyroid carcinoma syndromes by DNA analysis 
for mutations in the  ret protooncogene. If screening is negative, 
the tumor is almost certainly sporadic, and no investigation of 
family members is required. If a mutation is found, family mem-
bers should then be screened. 
 D. Undifferentiated (anaplastic) carcinoma 
 Undiff-
erentiated thyroid gland cancer include small cell, giant cell, and 
spindle cell carcinomas. They usually occur in older patients, who 
often have a long history of goiter with sudden gland enlargement 
over weeks or months, causing pain, dysphagia, hoarseness, and/or 
dyspnea. Death from aggressive local extension and metastatic 
disease typically occurs within 6 to 36 months. These tumors are 
very resistant to all currently available therapies. 
 E. Miscellaneous types 
 1. Lymphoma— Thyroid lymphoma may develop as part of a 
generalized lymphoma or may be primary in the thyroid gland. 
Primary thyroid lymphoma usually develops in patients with 
long-standing Hashimoto thyroiditis. It may be difficult to 
distinguish from chronic thyroiditis histologically. There is a 
monoclonal lymphocyte population with invasion of thyroid 
follicles and blood vessel walls. If there is no systemic involve-
ment, the tumor may respond dramatically to combined radia-
tion and chemotherapy. 
 2. Cancer metastatic to the thyroid— Systemic cancers can 
metastasize to the thyroid gland. Common primary cancers 
responsible for these metastases include breast, kidney, lung 
carcinomas, and malignant melanoma. The primary site of 
involvement is usually obvious. Occasionally, the diagnosis is 
made by biopsy of an enlarging cold thyroid nodule. The prog-
nosis is that of the primary tumor. 
 F. Molecular biology of thyroid neoplasms 
 Extensive 
studies have revealed frequent gene mutations in both benign and 
malignant thyroid neoplasms ( Figure 7–47 ). Activating mutations 
in the  gsp oncogene, encoding Gsα or the TSH receptor in thyroid 
cells have been associated with increased growth and function in 
benign hot or toxic thyroid nodules. Activating mutations of the 
 ras oncogene and loss of function of  PTEN a tumor suppressor 
gene, are common in benign follicular adenomas. Progression to 
follicular carcinoma may occur after another genetic event involv-
ing a chromosomal translocation forming a fusion gene between 
the thyroid transcription factor  PAX8 gene and the  PPAR γ gene 
( PAX8-PPAR γ). Further loss of the suppressor gene  P53 may allow 
CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland     219
progression to an anaplastic carcinoma. Papillary cancer is likely 
caused by mutations in genes in the MAP kinase–signaling path-
way, especially  BRAF . Another common finding in papillary thy-
roid cancers, especially after radiation exposure, are gene 
rearrangements in which a portion of the  RET gene, a receptor 
tyrosine kinase not normally expressed in the thyroid, is linked to 
a portion of one of several unrelated genes at its 5′ end, producing 
a constitutively active chimeric RET receptor. Subsequent loss of 
 P53 suppressor gene may allow progression to anaplastic carci-
noma. As noted above, activating mutations of the  RET protoon-
cogene on chromosome 10 have been shown to be associated with 
MEN 2A, MEN 2B, and familial medullary thyroid cancer. About 
85% to 90% of the mutations found in MEN 2A and familial 
medullary thyroid cancer occur in exons 10 and 11, whereas about 
95% of the mutations associated with MEN 2B are found in 
codon 918 in exon 16 of the  RET oncogene. These mutations can 
be demonstrated in DNA from peripheral white blood cells utiliz-
ing the polymerase chain reaction and DNA sequencing. In 
patients with MEN 2 or familial medullary thyroid cancer who do 
not demonstrate a mutation in  RET , family unit linkage analysis 
may be used to identify gene carriers. Thus, families can be 
screened for the carrier state, and early diagnosis and treatment 
can be instituted ( Figure 7–48 ). Somatic mutations in the  ret 
oncogene occur in about 30% of sporadic medullary thyroid can-
cer cells, but this does not occur in white blood cells and does not 
represent a germline mutation (see also Chapter 22). 
 Management of Thyroid Cancer 
( Figure 7–49 ) 
 A. Papillary and follicular carcinoma: treatment 
 Because 
both papillary and follicular cancers arise from thyroid epithelial 
cells and sometimes respond to TSH and concentrate iodine, they 
are grouped together as  differentiated thyroid cancers . These 
patients may be classified loosely into low-risk and high-risk 
groups. The low-risk group includes patients under age 45 with 
primary lesions under 2 cm and no evidence of intra- or extraglan-
dular spread. For these patients, total thyroidectomy is generally 
recommended, although lobectomy is probably adequate therapy 
for small (<1 cm) tumors. All other patients should be considered 
high-risk, and for these, total thyroidectomy and—if there is pre-
operative evidence of lymphatic spread—central compartment 
neck dissection are indicated. In the absence of evidence of lym-
phatic spread, prophylactic neck dissection may not be necessary, 
but can be considered for larger tumors (>4 cm). 
 For many low-risk patients and all high-risk patients, postop-
erative radioiodine ablation of residual thyroid remnant is recom-
mended to decrease the likelihood of recurrent disease. To achieve 
maximal uptake of radioiodine into the remnant, an elevated 
serum TSH level is required. This can be achieved using injections 
of recombinant human TSH (rhTSH) given to patients in the 
euthyroid state. Alternatively, TSH stimulation can be achieved by 
withdrawing the patient from thyroxine therapy, which causes 
transient clinical hypothyroidism. If the latter method is employed, 
T 3 is often prescribed temporarily at a dose of 25 to 50 μg daily in 
divided doses for 2 to 4 weeks; the medication is then stopped for 
2 weeks, and, because of its 1-day half-life, patients quickly 
become hypothyroid prior to radioiodine therapy. In general, 
rhTSH is preferred, since clinical hypothyroidism is avoided and 
whole body radiation exposure is lower as the radioiodine is 
cleared from the body more rapidly because renal function is pre-
served. Regardless of how the patient achieves an elevated serum 
TSH level, a low-iodine diet is prescribed for 1 to 2 weeks to 
enhance uptake of the radioisotope. Following either rhTSH 
stimulation or thyroid hormone withdrawal, the serum thyro-
globulin level is determined, and the patient is scanned 24 to 
 FIGURE 7–47 Molecular defects associated with development and progression of human thyroid neoplasms. The hypothetical role of spe-
cific mutational events in thyroid tumorigenesis is inferred from their prevalence in the various thyroid tumor phenotypes (see text for details). 
 (Adapted, with permission, from Fagin JA. Genetic basis of endocrine disease 3: molecular defects in thyroid gland neoplasia.  J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab . 1992;75:1398.) 
Autohomously
functioning
adenoma
Follicular
adenoma
Thyroid
follicular
cell
ras
PAX8-PPARγ
TSH-R
Gsα
BRAF
Ret/PTC
-PTEN
-p53
-p53
Papillary
microcarcinoma
Anaplastic
carcinoma
Papillary
carcinoma
Radiation
Follicular
carcinoma
220    CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland
72 hours after a low dose of radioiodine (ie, 1-4 mCi of  131 I or 
1-2 mCi  123 I ). If there is evidence of residual radioactive iodine 
uptake in the neck or elsewhere, or if there is a rise in serum thy-
roglobulin to detectable levels, radioactive iodine ( 131 I) is admin-
istered in a dose of 30 to 200 mCi, depending on the size and 
invasiveness of the primary tumor. A whole body radioiodine scan 
is then repeated 4 to 7 days later (called a  posttherapy scan ) to be 
sure no additional areas of radioiodine uptake are revealed. Nine 
to 12 months later, rhTSH is administered or thyroid hormone 
therapy is withdrawn, and a radioiodine scan and serum thyro-
globulin are repeated to document ablation of all functioning 
thyroid tissue. An undetectable serum thyroglobulin level at a 
time when the serum TSH is elevated is the most sensitive evi-
dence that all thyroid tissue has been eradicated. Indeed, a repeat 
whole body radioiodine scan may not be needed in low-risk 
patients. For the first year, patients are typically maintained on 
doses of T 4 that are adequate to suppress serum TSH to levels that 
are less than 0.1 mU/L. Once it has been established that the 
patient is free of disease, the dose of T 4 can be increased to allow 
the serum TSH to rise into the low-normal range (0.3-2 mU/L). 
 rhTSH, rather than thyroid hormone withdrawal, is usually 
employed for follow-up evaluations. When using rhTSH, the patient 
continues to take his T 4 , avoiding the adverse effects of hypothyroid-
ism. If the patient’s TSH-stimulated serum thyroglobulin is less than 
1 ng/mL and the whole body radioiodine scan, if obtained, is negative, 
the patient is likely free of disease. On the other hand, if the serum 
thyroglobulin concentration rises above 2 ng/mL and/or if the radio-
iodine scan is positive, the patient is likely to have either persistent 
thyroid remnant tissue or residual thyroid cancer. Neck sonography, 
CT, or MRI should be considered in this circumstance to look for 
evidence of residual thyroid cancer. If disease is localized anatomically 
and proven to be thyroid cancer, additional surgery may be warranted. 
If the stimulated thyroglobulin is greater than 20 ng/mL and other 
anatomic imaging studies are negative, some experts recommend 
empiric radioiodine therapy because of the high suspicion of residual 
disease that might then be visualized on the posttreatment scan. 
 Follow-up at intervals of 6 to 12 months should include careful 
examination of the neck, sometimes including neck ultrasound, 
looking for recurrent masses, which typically develop in ipsilateral 
cervical nodes. If an abnormal lymph node is discovered, FNAB is 
FNAB positive for medullary carcinoma
(Confirm with serum calcitonin)
(Screen for pheochromocytoma
and hyperparathyroidism)
Total thyroidectomy and
additional surgery as indicated
Germline RET mutational analysis
Follow-up every 6 months: (on T4)
PE, calcitonin, CEA
RET positive
(Hereditary MCT)
RET nagative
Normal
Abnormal
Mutational analysis
in all first-degree relatives
Positive
Negative
Thyroidectomy
No further
evaluation
No further
evaluation
Reevaluate
every 6 months
CT, MRI, PET
or selective venous
catheterization
for localization
Lesion found
operable
Lesion found
not operable
No lesion
found
Surgery
? Radiation therapy
? Chemotherapy
Follow PE, calcitonin,
CEA, TSH every 6 months
 FIGURE 7–48  Decision matrix for the management of medullary thyroid carcinoma (see text for details). (FNAB, fine-needle aspiration 
biopsy; PE, physical examination.) 
CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland     221
indicated to confirm or rule out cancer. The patient’s serum TSH 
should be checked to be certain it is adequately suppressed. The 
serum thyroglobulin should be periodically assessed to be certain it 
is undetectable. A rise in serum thyroglobulin to detectable levels 
while TSH is suppressed suggests tumor recurrence, and imaging 
studies such as neck ultrasound, CT, and MRI are necessary. PET 
scanning may also be useful to localize residual disease, especially 
in patients with very high serum thyroglobulin levels (>50 ng/mL) 
when conventional imaging studies have been unrevealing. 
 Thyroglobulin autoantibodies present in 20% of patients 
interfere with accurate measurement of thyroglobulin in radioim-
munometric assays which are used in the majority of commercial 
laboratories and hospitals, causing falsely low values. Patients with 
thyroglobulin autoantibodies must be followed with periodic 
imaging studies, such as thyroid ultrasound or CT scan. 
 The patient with a rising thyroglobulin and a negative  131 I scan 
presents a common and difficult problem. Serial anatomic imaging, 
especially with cervical sonography, can sometimes identify the site 
of residual cervical disease. Administration of large empiric  131 I 
doses has not been shown to be of significant benefit. For patients 
with noniodine-avid metastatic disease that is progressive, recent 
studies have shown that several kinase–inhibiting drugs, including 
sorafenib and sunitinib, can be effective in halting further tumor 
growth for 1 to 2 years. The kinases involved include the vascular 
endothelial growth factor receptor family (VEGF), RET, and BRAF. 
For patients with bone or brain metastases, combined external 
radiation and  131 I therapy may be effective. 
 B. Differentiated thyroid cancer: course and prognosis 
 Staging of cancer usually relies on the tumor-nodes-metastases 
(TNM) system for staging thyroid cancer ( Table 7–13 ). Papillary 
and follicular thyroid carcinomas are grouped together, and stag-
ing is related to the age of the patient at the time of diagnosis. The 
cause-specific 5-year mortality rates are for stage 1, 0%; stage 2, 
1%; stage 3, 5%; and stage 4, 77%. The TNM system may under-
estimate the risk of recurrence and death in younger patients with 
Papillary/follicular
Anaplastic
Local removal to preserve
airway (palliative) + RT
Thyroxine for life
Under 1-1.5 cm
Age <45 years
>1-1.5 cm
Age >45 years
Lobectomy or
thyroidectomy
Total thyroidectomy
Thyroxine for life
Negative scan;
undetectable Tg
Positive scan;
detectable Tg
Give 30-100 mCi 131|**
Thyroxine for life; monitor
PE, Tg, ultrasound of neck,
rhTSH stimulated Tg periodically
Recurrence
Consider additional surgery,
radioiodine, radiotherapy
T3 (liothyronine (IcL)) 25-50 μg/d for
4 weeks, stop for 2 weeks
D/C thyroxine
or
administer rhTSH
Scan with 131I or 123I
Serum Tg
6-12 months
Low-iodine diet
*
FNAB positive for malignancy
 FIGURE 7–49  Decision matrix for the management of papillary, follicular, or anaplastic thyroid carcinoma.  * Some experts recommend 
radioiodine therapy following total thyroidectomy for tumors >1.0 cm and for multifocal disease.  ** Some patients have a negative scan but 
detectable serum Tg and require further evaluation. See text for details. (FNAB, fine-needle aspiration biopsy; PE, physical examination; RT, 
radiotherapy; rhTSH, recombinant human TSH [Thyrogen]; Tg, thyroglobulin.) 
TABLE 7–13 Tumor (T), lymph node (N), and distant metastasis (M) classification and staging of thyroid cancer.
DEFINITION of TNM
Primary Tumor (T)
All categories may be subdivided: (s) solitary tumor and (m) multifocal 
tumor (the largest determines the classification).
TX         Primary tumor cannot be assessed
T0         No evidence of primary tumor 
T1         Tumor 2 cm or less in greatest dimension limited to the thyroid
T1a       Tumor 1 cm or less, limited to the thyroid
T1b       Tumor more than 1 cm but not more than 2 cm in greatest
             dimension, limited to the thyroid
T2         Tumor more than 2 cm but not more than 4 cm in greatest
             dimension, limited to the thyroid
T3         Tumor more than 4 cm in greatest dimension limited to the
             thyroid, or any tumor with minimal extrathyroid extension
             (e.g., extension to sternothyroid muscle or perithyroid soft tissues)
T4a       Moderately advanced disease.
              Tumor of any size extending beyond the thyroid capsule to
             invade subcutaneous soft tissues, larynx, trachea, esophagus,
             or recurrent laryngeal nerve
T4b       Very advanced disease.
              Tumor invades prevertebral fascia or encases carotid artery
             or mediastinal vessels
All anaplastic carcinomas are considered T4 tumors
T4a  Intrathyroidal anaplastic carcinoma
T4b  Anaplastic carcinoma with gross extrathyroid extension
Regional Lymph Nodes (N) 
Regional lymph nodes are the central compartment, lateral cervical, and 
upper mediastinal lymph nodes.
NX  Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed.
N0  No regional lymph node metastasis
N1  Regional lymph node metastasis
N1a 
Metastasis to Level VI (pretracheal, paratracheal, and
 
 
 prelaryngeal/Delphian lymph nodes)
N1b 
Metastasis to unilateral, bilateral, or contralateral cervical
 
 
 (Levels I, II, III, IV or V) or retropharyngeal or superior
 
 
 mediastinal lymph nodes (Level VII)
Distant Metastasis (M) 
M0   No distant metastasis (no pathologic M0; use clinical M to
            complete stage group) 
M1   Distant metastasis
STAGE GROUPING 
                                                                   Clincal                                                                                                                               Pathologic
Separate stage groupings are recommended for papillary or follicular, medullary, and anaplastic (undifferentiated) carcinoma. 
Papillary or Follicular (Differentiated)
Under 45 y
Papillary or Follicular (Diff erentiated)
Stage I 
Stage II 
Any T 
Any T
Any N 
Any N
M0 
M1
Stage I
Stage II
Any T 
Any T
Any N 
Any N
M0 
M1
Papillary or Follicular  (Differentiated)
45 y and Older
Papillary or Follicular  (Differentiated)
45 y and Older
Stage I
Stage II
Stage III
Stage IVA
Stage IVB
Stage IVC
T1
T2
T3
T1
T2
T3
T4a
T4a
T1
T2
T3
T4a
T4b
Any T
N0
N0
N0
N1a
N1a
N1a
N0
N1a
N1b
N1b
N1b
N1b
Any N
Any N
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M1
Stage I
Stage II
Stage III
Stage IVA
Stage IVB
Stage IVC
T1
T2
T3
T1
T2
T3
T4a
T4a
T1
T2
T3
T4a
T4b
Any T
N0
N0
N0
N1a
N1a
N1a
N0
N1a
N1b
N1b
N1b
N1b
Any N
Any N
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M1
Medullary Carcinoma
Medullary Carcinoma (All age groups)
Stage I
Stage II
Stage III
Stage IVA
Stage IVB
Stage IVC
T1 
T2 
T3
T1
T2
T3
T4a
T4a
T1
T2
T3
T4a
T4b
Any T
N0 
N0 
N0
N1a
N1a
N1a
N0
N1a
N1b
N1b
N1b
N1b
Any N
Any N
M0 
M0 
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M1
Stage I
Stage II
Stage III
Stage IVA
Stage IVB
Stage IVC
T1 
T2 
T3
T1
T2
T3
T4a
T4a
T1
T2
T3
T4a
T4b
Any T
N0 
N0 
N0
N1a
N1a
N1a
N0
N1a
N1b
N1b
N1b
N1b
Any N
Any N
M0 
M0 
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M1
Anaplastic Carcinoma
Anaplastic Carcinoma
All anaplastic carcinomas are considered Stage IV
All anaplastic carcinomas are considered Stage IV
Stage IVA
Stage IVB
Stage IVC
T4a
T4b
Any T
Any N
Any N
Any N
M0
M0
M1
Stage IVA
Stage IVB
Stage IVC
T4a
T4b
Any T
Any N
Any N
Any N
M0
M0
M1
Reproduced with permission from: Edge SB et al. AJCC Cancer Staging Manual. 7th ed. New York: Springer; 2010. 
CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland     223
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
0
11
6
7
2
1
0
0
0
436
352
290
227
181
120
64
29
Less than
near-total
thyroidectomy
0
5
6
6
1
3
2
698
554
441
365
314
209
100
32
Near-total
or total
thyroidectomy
12
10
8
6
4
2
0°
Less than near-total
thyroidectomy
Near-total or total
thyroidectomy
P = 0.02
Cumulative death (%)
Years after initial therapy
 FIGURE 7–50 Improved survival in patients with papillary or follicular thyroid carcinoma following total or near-total thyroidectomy com-
pared to less than near-total thyroidectomy.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Mazzaferri EL, Jhiang SM. Long term impact of initial surgical 
and medical therapy on papillary and follicular thyroid cancer.  Am J Med . 1994;97:418.) 
aggressive disease. An optimal outcome is also dependent on ade-
quate therapy. There has been controversy over the extent of initial 
surgery for papillary and follicular thyroid cancer. As noted above, 
lesions under 1 cm with no evidence of local or distant metastases 
(T1, N0, M0) can probably be treated with lobectomy alone. 
However, in all other groups, total thyroidectomy and modified 
regional neck dissection (if gross evidence of spread is noted at the 
time of surgery) is indicated for two reasons: (1) it removes all 
local disease, and (2) it sets the stage for  131 I therapy and follow-up 
utilizing serum thyroglobulin measurements. Total or near-total 
thyroidectomy must be performed by an experienced thyroid 
surgeon to minimize the complications of surgery. The improve-
ment in outcome following total thyroidectomy is presented in 
 Figure 7–50 . 
 A second factor in survival is the use of radioiodine for ablation 
of residual thyroid tissue after thyroidectomy and the treatment of 
residual or recurrent disease. Low doses of 30 to 50 mCi  131 I are 
used to ablate residual thyroid tissue, but larger doses of 100 to 
200 mCi are necessary for the treatment of invasive or metastatic 
disease. Acute adverse effects of the larger doses include radiation 
sickness, sialadenitis, gastritis, and transient oligospermia. 
Cumulative doses of  131 I above 500 mCi may be associated with 
transient infertility in females and azoospermia in males, 
 pancytopenia in about 4% of patients, and leukemia in about 
0.3%. Radiation pneumonitis may occur in patients with diffuse 
pulmonary metastases, but this is minimized by utilization of high-
dose treatment no more than once a year. The effectiveness of  131 I 
therapy in reducing cancer mortality is presented in  Figure 7–51 . 
 A third factor in survival is the adequate use of TSH suppres-
sion therapy. T 4 in a dose of 2.2 μg/kg/d (1 μg/lb/d) usually 
suppresses TSH to 0.1 mU/L or less, which removes a major 
growth factor for papillary or follicular thyroid cancer (see 
 Figure 7–51 ). However, high-dose T 4 therapy is not without risk: 
there may be angina, tachycardia, or heart failure in older patients 
or tachycardia and nervousness in younger patients. In addition, 
there is an increased risk of osteoporosis in postmenopausal 
women. Estrogen or bisphosphonate therapy may prevent bone 
loss in these patients, but the treatment program must be indi-
vidualized. 
 C. Medullary carcinoma 
 Early and adequate initial thyroi-
dectomy and cervical node dissection is the best therapy for med-
ullary cancer. Once the disease has metastasized, it is very difficult 
to control, though the more favorable tumor types often progress 
very slowly. Patients with medullary cancer should be followed 
postoperatively with periodic measurement of serum markers (eg, 
calcitonin and CEA) that indicate residual disease. Family mem-
bers of patients with an  RET oncogene mutation should be 
screened for the mutation as noted above ( Figure 7–48 ). If a 
patient has a persistently elevated serum calcitonin concentration 
after total thyroidectomy and regional node dissection, neck ultra-
sound, CT, MRI, and/or selective venous catheterization and 
sampling for serum calcitonin may reveal the location of the 
metastases. Metastatic foci of medullary cancer may also be 
revealed by PET, indium-labeled somatostatin (octreotide), or 
sestamibi scans. If these studies fail to localize the lesion (as is 
often the case), the patient must be followed until the metastatic 
lesions become evident by physical examination or imaging stud-
ies. External x-ray therapy may be useful in the treatment of some 
metastatic lesions. Chemotherapy with tyrosine kinase inhibitors, 
224    CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland
especially the experimental  RET inhibitor vandetanib (ZD 6474), 
has recently been shown to be highly effective in preventing dis-
ease progression in many patients with medullary cancer. Metastatic 
medullary cancer cannot be treated with  131 I, and TSH-suppressive 
doses of T 4 are not required. 
 Medullary thyroid cancer is most aggressive in patients with 
MEN 2B, less aggressive in the sporadic type, and least aggressive 
in MEN 2A and familial medullary thyroid cancer. 
 D. Anaplastic carcinoma 
 Anaplastic carcinoma of the thy-
roid has a very poor prognosis. Treatment consists of minimal 
surgery to biopsy the tumor and establish the diagnosis, and some-
times to debulk the tumor and prevent tracheal compression. 
Standard treatment incorporates combined radiotherapy and che-
motherapy with doxorubicin, which is sometimes combined with 
other agents (see  Figure 7–49 ). Occasionally, patients have pro-
longed survival, but most succumb to their disease within 1 year. 
 REFERENCES 
 Anatomy 
 Gillam MP, Kopp P. Genetic regulation of thyroid development.  Curr Opin 
Pediatr . 2001;13:358. [PMID: 11717563] 
 Hegedus L. Thyroid ultrasound.  Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am . 2001;30:339. 
[PMID: 11444166] 
 Monfared A, Gorti G, Kim D. Microsurgical anatomy of the laryngeal nerves as 
related to thyroid surgery.  Laryngoscope . 2002;112:386. [PMID: 11889402] 
 Physiology 
 Baxter JD, Dillmann WH, Wes BL, et al. Selective modulation of thyroid hor-
mone receptor action.  J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol . 2001;76:31. [PMID: 
11384861] 
 Bianco AC, Salvatore D, Gereben B, Berry MJ, Larsen PR. Biochemistry, cellular 
and molecular biology, and physiological roles of the iodothyronine seleno-
deiodinases.  Endocr Rev . 2002;23:38. [PMID: 11844744] 
 Chiamolera MI, Wondisford FE. Minireview: thyrotropin-releasing hormone and 
the thyroid hormone feedback mechanism.  Endocrinology . 2009;150:1091. 
[PMID: 19179434] 
 Davies TF, Ando T, Lin RY, Tomer Y, Latif R. Thyrotropin receptor-associated 
diseases: from adenomata to Graves disease.  J Clin Invest . 2005;115:1972. 
[PMID: 16075037] 
 Dunn JT, Dunn AD. Update on intrathyroidal iodine metabolism.  Thyroid . 
2001;11:407. [PMID: 11396699] 
 Gershengorn MC, Osman R. Minireview: insights into G protein-coupled recep-
tor function.  Endocrinology . 2001;142:2. [PMID: 11145559] 
 Glinoer D. Pregnancy and iodine.  Thyroid . 2001;11:471. [PMID: 11396705] 
 Heuer H, Visser TJ. Pathophysiological importance of thyroid hormone transport-
ers.  Endocrinology . 2009;150:1078. [PMID: 19179441] 
 Klein I, Danzi S. Thyroid disease and the heart.  Circulation . 2007;116:1725. 
[PMID: 17923583] 
 Kohn LD, Suzuki K, Nakazato M, Royaux IE, Green ED. Effects of thyroglobulin 
and pendrin on iodide flux through the thyrocyte.  Trends Endocrinol Metab . 
2001;12:10. [PMID: 11137035] 
 Kopp P. The TSH receptor and its role in thyroid disease.  Cell Mol Life Sci . 
2001;58:1301. [PMID: 11577986] 
 Marino M, McCluskey RT. Role of thyroglobulin endocytic pathways in the con-
trol of thyroid hormone release.  Am J Physiol Cell Physiol . 2000;279:C1295. 
[PMID: 11029276] 
 Rose SR. Disorders of thyrotropin synthesis, secretion, and function.  Curr Opin 
Pediatr . 2000;12:375. [PMID: 10943820] 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
10
8
6
14
12
16
4
2
0 
Thyroid hormone only
131I remnant ablation
P < 0.05
P < 0.001
Cumulative death (%)
Years after initial therapy
No medical therapy
 FIGURE 7–51 Cancer death rates after thyroid remnant ablation, thyroid hormone therapy alone, or no postoperative medical therapy. 
 (Modified and reproduced, with permission, from Mazzaferri EL. Thyroid remnant  131 I ablation for papillary and follicular thyroid carcinoma. 
 Thyroid . 1997;7:265.) 
CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland     225
 Schussler GC. The thyroxine-binding proteins.  Thyroid . 2000;10:141. [PMID: 
10718550] 
 Shen DH, Kloos RT, Mazzaferri EL, Jhian SM. Sodium iodide symporter in health 
and disease.  Thyroid . 2001;11:415. [PMID: 11396700] 
 St Germain DL, Galton VA, Hernandez A. Minireview: defining the roles of the 
iodothyronine deiodinases: current concepts and challenges.  Endocrinology . 
2009;150:1097. [PMID: 19179439] 
 Szkudlinski MW, Fremont V, Ronin C, Weintraub BD. Thyroid-stimulating hor-
mone and thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor structure-function rela-
tionships.  Physiol Rev . 2002;82:473. [PMID: 11917095] 
 Wonerow P, Neumann S, Gudermann T, Paschke R. Thyrotropin receptor muta-
tions as a tool to understand thyrotropin receptor action.  J Mol Med . 
2001;79:707. [PMID: 11862314] 
 Wrutniak-Cabello C, et al. Thyroid hormone action in mitochondria.  J Mol 
Endocrinol . 2001;26:67. [PMID: 11174855] 
 Wu Y, Koenig RJ. Gene regulation by thyroid hormone.  Trends Endocrinol Metab . 
2000;11:207. [PMID: 10878749] 
 Yen PM. Physiological and molecular basis of thyroid hormone action.  Physiol Rev. 
2001;81:1097. [PMID: 11427693] 
 Zhang J, Lazar MA. The mechanism of action of thyroid hormones.  Annu Rev 
Physiol . 2000;62:439. [PMID: 10845098] 
 Zimmermann MB. Iodine deficiency.  Endocr Rev . 2009;30:376. [PMID: 19460960] 
 Tests of Thyroid Function 
 Adler SM, Wartofsky L. The nonthyroidal illness syndrome.  Endocrinol Metab Clin 
North Am . 2007;36:657. [PMID: 17673123] 
 Dayan CM. Interpretation of thyroid function tests.  Lancet. 2001;357:619. 
[PMID: 11558500] 
 Glinoer D. The regulation of thyroid function during normal pregnancy: impor-
tance of the iodine nutrition status.  Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2004;18(2):133. [PMID: 15157832] 
 Hollowell JG, Staehling NW, Flanders WD, et al. Serum TSH, T(4), and thyroid 
antibodies in the United States population (1988 to 1994): National Health 
and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES III).  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2002;87:489. [PMID: 11836274] 
 Klein I. Clinical, metabolic, and organ specific indices of thyroid function. 
 Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am . 2001;30:415. [PMID: 11444169] 
 Nayar R, Frost AR. Thyroid aspiration cytology: a “cell pattern” approach to inter-
pretation.  Semin Diagn Pathol . 2001;18:81. [PMID: 11403258] 
 Raymond J, LaFranchi SH. Fetal and neonatal thyroid function: review and sum-
mary of significant new findings.  Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes . 
2010;17(1):1. [PMID: 19901830] 
 Ross DS. Serum thyroid-stimulating hormone measurement for assessment of 
thyroid function and disease.  Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am . 2001;30:24. 
[PMID: 11444162] 
 Hypothyroidism 
 Cappola AR, Ladenson PW. Hypothyroidism and atherosclerosis.  J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab . 2003;88(6):2438. [PMID: 12788839] 
 Cooper DS. Clinical practice. Subclinical hypothyroidism.  N Engl J Med . 
2001;345:260. [PMID: 11474665] 
 Glinoer D. Potential consequences of maternal hypothyroidism on the offspring: 
evidence and implications.  Horm Res . 2001;55:109. [PMID: 11549871] 
 Haddow JE, Palomaki GE, Allan WC, et al. Maternal thyroid deficiency during 
pregnancy and subsequent neuropsychological development of the child. 
 N Engl J Med . 1999;341:549. [PMID: 1041459] 
 Kopp P. Pendred’s syndrome and genetic defects in thyroid hormone synthesis.  Rev 
Endocr Metab Disord . 2000;1:109. [PMID: 11704986] 
 McDermott MT. Hypothyroidism.  Ann Intern Med . 2009;151:61. [PMID: 
19949140] 
 Wiersinga WM. Thyroid hormone replacement therapy.  Horm Res . 2001;56
(suppl 1):74. [PMID: 11786691] 
 Hyperthyroidism 
 Alsanea O, Clark OH. Treatment of Graves’ disease: the advantages of surgery. 
 Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am . 2000;29: 321. [PMID:10874532] 
 Bahn RS. Graves’ ophthalmopathy.  N Engl J Med . 2010;362:726. [PMID: 
20181974] 
 Bartalena L, Tanda ML. Clinical practice. Graves’ ophthalmopathy.  N Engl J Med . 
2009;360:994. [PMID: 19264688] 
 Brent GA. Clinical practice. Graves’ disease.  N Engl J Med . 2008;358:2594. 
[PMID: 18550875] 
 Cooper DS. Antithyroid drugs.  N Engl J Med . 2005;352:905. [PMID: 15745981] 
 Fadel BM, Ellahham S, Ringel MD, Lindsay J Jr, Wartofsky L, Burman KD. 
Hyperthyroid heart disease.  Clin Cardiol . 2000;23:402. [PMID: 10875028] 
 Fontanilla JC, Schneider AB, Sarne DH. The use of oral radiographic contrast 
agents in the management of hyperthyroidism.  Thyroid . 2001;11:561. 
[PMID: 11442003] 
 Gough SC. The genetics of Graves’ disease.  Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am . 
2000;29:255. [PMID: 10874528] 
 Heufelder AE. Pathogenesis of ophthalmopathy in autoimmune thyroid disease. 
 Rev Endocr Metab Disord . 2000;1:87. [PMID: 11704996] 
 Kraiem Z, Newfield RS. Graves’ disease in childhood.  J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab . 
2001;229:43. [PMID: 11308041] 
 Kung AW. Clinical review: thyrotoxic periodic paralysis: a diagnostic challenge. 
 J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2006;91(7):2490. [PMID: 16608889] 
 Nabil N, Miner DJ, Amatruda JM. Methimazole: an alternative route of adminis-
tration.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 1982;54:180. [PMID: 7054215] 
 Pauwels EK, Smit JW, Slats A, Bourguignon M, Overbeek F. Health effects of 
therapeutic use of 131I in hyperthyroidism.  Q J Nucl Med . 2000;44:333. 
[PMID: 11302261] 
 Rapoport B, McLachlan SM. The thyrotropin receptor in Graves’ disease.  Thyroid . 
2007;17:911. [PMID: 17822379] 
 Stanbury JB, Ermans AE, Bourdoux P, et al. Iodine-induced hyperthyroidism: 
occurrence and epidemiology.  Thyroid . 1998;8:83. [PMID: 9492158] 
 Volpe R. The immunomodulatory effects of anti-thyroid drugs are mediated via 
actions on thyroid cells, affecting thyrocyte-immunocyte signalling: a review. 
 Curr Pharm Des . 2001;7:451. [PMID: 11281852] 
 Thyroid Hormone Resistance 
 Agrawal NK, Goyal R, Rastogi A, Naik D, Singh SK. Thyroid hormone resistance. 
 Postgrad Med J . 2008;84(995):473. [PMID: 18940949] 
 Refetoff S. Resistance to thyroid hormone.  Clin Lab Med . 1993;13:563. [PMID: 
8222575] 
 Syndrome of Inappropriate TSH Secretion 
 Beck-Peccoz P, Persani L, Mannavola D, Campi I. Pituitary tumours: TSH-
secreting adenomas.  Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2009;23:597-606. 
[PMID: 19945025] 
 Sanno N, Teramoto A, Osamura RY. Thyrotropin-secreting pituitary adenomas. 
Clinical and biological heterogeneity and current treatment.  J Neurooncol . 
2001;54:179. [PMID: 11761434] 
 Multinodular Goiter 
 Bononi M, de Cesare A, Atella F, et al. Surgical treatment of multinodular goiter: 
incidence of lesions of the recurrent nerves after total thyroidectomy.  Int 
Surg . 2000;85:190. [PMID: 11324993] 
 Derwahl M, Studer H. Nodular goiter and goiter nodules: where iodine deficiency 
falls short of explaining the facts.  Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes . 2001;109:250. 
[PMID: 11507648] 
 Freitas JE. Therapeutic options in the management of toxic and nontoxic nodular 
goiter.  Semin Nucl Med . 2000;30:88. [PMID: 10787189] 
 Hashmi SM, Premachandra DJ, Bennett AM, Parry W. Management of retros-
ternal goitres: results of early surgical intervention to prevent airway mor-
bidity, and a review of the English literature.  J Laryngol Otol . 
2006;120(8):644. [PMID: 16884549] 
 Thyroiditis 
 Barbesino G, Chiovato L. The genetics of Hashimoto’s disease.  Endocrinol Metab 
Clin North Am . 2000;29:357. [PMID: 10874534] 
226    CHAPTER 7 The Thyroid Gland
 Fatourechi V, Aniszewski JP, Fatourechi GZ, Atkinson EJ, Jacobsen SJ. Clinical 
features and outcome of subacute thyroiditis in an incidence cohort: 
Olmsted County, Minnesota.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2003;88:2100. 
[PMID: 12727961] 
 McLachlan SM, Rapoport B. Autoimmune response to the thyroid in humans: 
thyroid peroxidase—the common autoantigenic denominator.  Int Rev 
Immunol . 2000;19:587. [PMID: 11129117] 
 Michels AW, Eisenbarth GS. Immunologic endocrine disorders.  J Allergy Clin 
Immunol . 2010;125:S226. [PMID: 20176260] 
 Muller AF, Drexhage HA, Berghout A. Postpartum thyroiditis and autoimmune 
thyroiditis in women of childbearing age: recent insights and consequences 
for antenatal and postnatal care.  Endocr Rev . 2001; 22:605. [PMID: 
11588143] 
 Interferon-Induced Thyroiditis 
 Tomer Y, Menconi F. Interfereon induced thyroiditis.  Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol 
Metab . 2009;23:703. [PMID: 19942147] 
 Radiation Exposure 
 Gilbert ES, Land CE, Simon SL. Health effects from fallout.  Health Phys . 
2002;82:726. [PMID: 12003021] 
 Inskip PD. Thyroid cancer after radiotherapy for childhood cancer.  Med Pediatr 
Oncol . 2001;36:568. [PMID: 11340614] 
 Rubino C, Cailleux AF, De Vathaire F, Schlumberger M. Thyroid cancer after 
radiation exposure.  Eur J Cancer . 2002;38:645. [PMID: 11916545] 
 Williams D. Radiation carcinogenesis: lessons from Chernobyl.  Oncogene . 
2008;27(suppl 2):S9. [PMID: 19956182] 
 Thyroid Nodules and Thyroid Cancer 
 Alsanea O, Clark OH. Familial thyroid cancer.  Curr Opin Oncol . 2001;13:44. 
[PMID: 11148685] 
 Cibas ES, Ali SZ. The Bethesda System for Reporting Thyroid Cytopathology. 
 Thyroid . 2009;19:1159. [PMID: 19846805] 
 Cooper DS, Doherty GM, Haugen BR, et al. Revised American Thyroid 
Association management guidelines for patients with thyroid nodules and 
differentiated thyroid cancer.  Thyroid . 2009;19:1167. [PMID: 19860577] 
 Csako G, Csako G, Byrd D, Wesley RA, et al. Assessing the effects of thyroid sup-
pression on benign solitary thyroid nodules. A model for using quantitative 
research synthesis.  Medicine. (Baltimore) 2000;79:9. [PMID: 10670406] 
 Giuffrida D, Gharib H. Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma: current diagnosis and treat-
ment.  Ann Oncol . 2000;11:1083. [PMID: 11061600] 
 Haugen BR, Pacini F, Reiners C, et al. A comparison of recombinant thyrotropin 
and thyroid hormone withdrawal for the detection of thyroid remnant or 
cancer.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 1999;84:3877. [PMID: 10566623] 
 Kato MA, Fahey TJ, 3rd. Molecular markers in thyroid cancer diagnostics.  Surg 
Clin North Am . 2009;89:1139. [PMID: 19836489] 
 Kloos RT, Eng C, Evans DB, et al. Medullary thyroid cancer: management guide-
lines of the American Thyroid Association.  Thyroid. 2009;19:565. [PMID: 
19469690] 
 Krohn K, Paschke R. Somatic mutations in thyroid nodular disease.  Mol Genet 
Metab . 2002;75:202. [PMID: 11914031] 
 Leenhardt L, Aurengo A. Post-Chernobyl thyroid carcinoma in children. 
 Baillieres Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2000;14:667. [PMID: 
11289741] 
 Lind P, Kumnig G, Matschnig S, et al. The role of F-18FDG PET in thyroid 
cancer.  Acta Med Austriaca . 2000;27:38. [PMID: 10812462] 
 Pacini F, Ladenson PW, Schlumberger M, et al. Radioiodine ablation of thyroid 
remnants after preparation with recombinant human thyrotropin in differ-
entiated thyroid carcinoma: results of an international, randomized, con-
trolled study.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2006;91:926. [PMID: 16384850] 
 Ringel MD. Molecular diagnostic tests in the diagnosis and management of thy-
roid carcinoma.  Rev Endocr Metab Disord . 2000;1:173. [PMID: 11705003] 
 Robbins RJ, Larson SM. The value of positron emission tomography (PET) in the 
management of patients with thyroid cancer.  Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol 
Metab . 2008;22:1047. [PMID: 19041831] 
 Ruben Harach H. Familial nonmedullary thyroid neoplasia.  Endocr Pathol . 
2001;12:97. [PMID: 11579685] 
 Schlumberger M, Sherman SI. Clinical trials for progressive differentiated thyroid 
cancer: patient selection, study design, and recent advances.  Thyroid . 
2009;19:1393. [PMID: 20001721] 
 Weiss RE, Lado-Abeal J. Thyroid nodules: diagnosis and therapy.  Curr Opin Oncol . 
2002;14:46. [PMID: 11790980] 
 Wiersinga WM. Thyroid cancer in children and adolescents—consequences in later 
life.  J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab . 2001;14(suppl 5):1289. [PMID: 11964025] 
 
 
 
 
227
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
  Metabolic Bone Disease 
 Dolores Shoback, MD,  Deborah Sellmeyer, MD, 
and   Daniel D. Bikle, MD, PhD 
 ACTH 
Adrenocorticotropin 
 ADHR 
 Autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic 
      rickets 
 AHO 
Albright hereditary osteodystrophy 
 AIRE 
Autoimmune regulator 
 BMD 
Bone mineral density 
 CaSR 
Extracellular calcium-sensing receptor 
 CGRP 
Calcitonin gene–related peptide 
 DBP 
Vitamin D–binding protein 
 DXA 
Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry 
 FBHH 
Familial benign hypocalciuric hypercalcemia 
 FGF23 
Fibroblast-derived growth factor 23 
 GALNT3 
UDP- N -acetyl-α-D-galactosamine transferase 
 HPT-JT 
Hyperparathyroidism-jaw tumor 
 HT 
Hormone therapy 
 ICMA 
Immunochemiluminescent assay 
 IFN 
Interferon 
 IGF 
Insulin-like growth factor 
 IL 
Interleukin 
 IP 3 
Inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate 
 IRMA 
Immunoradiometric assay 
 LDL 
Low-density lipoprotein 
 MCT 
Medullary carcinoma of thyroid 
 MEN 
Multiple endocrine neoplasia 
 MEPE 
Matrix extracellular phosphoglycoprotein 
 NALP5 
NACHT leucine-rich-repeat protein 5 
 OPG 
Osteoprotegerin 
 PHP 
Pseudohypoparathyroidism 
 PIP 2 
Phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate 
 PPHP 
Pseudo pseudohypoparathyroidism 
 PTH 
Parathyroid hormone 
 PTHrP 
Parathyroid hormone–related protein 
 RANK 
Receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B 
 RANKL 
Receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B ligand 
 RAR 
Retinoic acid receptor 
 RBP 
Retinol-binding protein 
 RXR 
Retinoid X receptor 
 SERMs 
Selective estrogen response modulators 
 sFRP 
Secreted frizzled related protein 
 TNF 
Tumor necrosis factor 
 TPN 
Total parenteral nutrition 
 TRP 
Tubular reabsorption of phosphate 
 VDR 
Vitamin D receptor 
 VDRE 
Vitamin D response element 
 VIP 
Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide 
 WHI 
Women’s Health Initiative 
 WHO 
World Health Organization 
 XLH 
X-linked hypophosphatemia 
 CELLULAR AND EXTRACELLULAR 
CALCIUM METABOLISM 
 The calcium ion plays a critical role in intracellular and extracel-
lular events in human physiology. Extracellular calcium levels in 
humans are tightly regulated within a narrow physiologic range to 
provide for proper functioning of many tissues: excitation-contraction 
coupling in the heart and other muscles, synaptic transmission 
and other functions of the nervous system, platelet aggregation, 
coagulation, and secretion of hormones and other regulators by 
exocytosis. The level of intracellular calcium is also tightly con-
trolled, at levels about 10,000-fold lower than extracellular cal-
cium, in order for calcium to serve as an intracellular second 
messenger in the regulation of cell division, muscle contractility, 
cell motility, membrane trafficking, and secretion. 
8
228    CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease
 It is the concentration of ionized calcium ([Ca 2+ ]) that is regu-
lated in the extracellular fluid. The ionized calcium concentration 
averages 1.25 ± 0.07 mmol/L ( Table 8–1 ). However, only about 
50% of the total calcium in serum and other extracellular fluids is 
present in the ionized form. The remainder is bound to albumin 
(about 40%) or complexed with anions such as phosphate and 
citrate (about 10%). The protein-bound and complexed fractions 
of serum calcium are metabolically inert and are not regulated by 
hormones; only the ionized [Ca 2+ ] serves a regulatory role, and 
only this fraction is itself regulated by the calciotropic hormones 
parathyroid hormone (PTH) and 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D 
[1,25(OH) 2 D]. Large increases in the serum concentrations of 
phosphate or citrate can, however, by mass action, markedly 
increase the complexed fraction of calcium. For example, massive 
transfusions of blood, in which citrate is used as an anticoagulant, 
can reduce the ionized [Ca 2+ ] enough to produce tetany. In addi-
tion, because calcium and phosphate circulate at concentrations 
close to saturation, a substantial rise in the serum concentration of 
either calcium or phosphate can lead to the precipitation of cal-
cium phosphate salts in tissues. This is a source of major clinical 
problems in patients with severe hypercalcemia (eg, malignant 
tumors) and in those with severe hyperphosphatemia (eg, in renal 
failure or rhabdomyolysis). 
 What is remarkable about calcium metabolism is that the 
serum-ionized [Ca 2+ ], which represents a tiny fraction of the total 
body calcium, can be so tightly regulated in the face of the rapid 
fluxes of calcium through body compartments that take place dur-
ing the course of calcium metabolism ( Figure 8–1 ). The total 
calcium in extracellular fluid amounts to about 1% of total body 
calcium, with most of the remainder sequestered in bone. Yet from 
the extracellular fluid compartment, which contains about 900 mg 
of calcium, 10,000 mg/d is filtered at the glomerulus and 
500 mg/d is added to a labile pool in bone; and to the extracel-
lular fluid compartment are added about 200 mg absorbed from 
the diet, 9800 mg reabsorbed by the renal tubule, and 500 mg 
from bone. 
 The challenge of calcium homeostasis, then, is to maintain a 
constant level of ionized [Ca 2+ ] in the extracellular fluid, simulta-
neously providing adequate amounts of calcium to cells, to bone, 
and for renal excretion—and all the while compensating, on an 
hourly basis, for changes in daily intake of calcium, bone metabo-
lism, and renal function. It is scarcely surprising that this homeo-
static task requires two hormones, PTH and 1,25(OH) 2 D, or that 
the secretion of each hormone is exquisitely sensitive to small 
changes in the serum calcium, or that each hormone is able to 
regulate calcium exchange across all three interfaces of the extra-
cellular fluid: the gut, the bone, and the renal tubule. We will 
reexamine the integrated roles of PTH and 1,25(OH) 2 D in cal-
cium homeostasis after their actions and secretory control have 
been described. 
 The challenge of the cellular calcium economy is to maintain a 
cytosolic [Ca 2+ ], or [Ca 2+ ] i , of about 100 nmol/L, about 10,000-
fold less than what is present outside cells (~1.0 mmol/L), provid-
ing for rapid fluxes through the intracellular compartment as 
required for regulation while maintaining a large gradient across 
the cell membrane. The calcium gradient across the cell mem-
brane is maintained by ATP-dependent calcium pumps, Na + -Ca 2+ 
exchangers, and the storage of calcium within intracellular sites. 
Calcium can enter cells through several types of calcium channels, 
some of which are voltage operated or receptor operated, to pro-
vide for rapid influx in response to depolarization or receptor 
stimulation. The cell also maintains large stores of calcium in 
microsomal and mitochondrial pools and in some cells the Golgi 
apparatus. Calcium can be released from microsomal stores rap-
idly by cellular signals such as 1,4,5-inositol trisphosphate (IP 3 ). 
Reuptake mechanisms are also present, so that cytosolic calcium 
transients can be rapidly terminated by returning calcium to stor-
age pools or pumping it across the plasma membrane. 
 PARATHYROID HORMONE 
 Anatomy and Embryology of the 
Parathyroid Glands 
 PTH is secreted from four glands located adjacent to the thyroid 
gland in the neck. The glands weigh an average of 40 mg each. 
The two superior glands are usually found near the posterior 
aspect of the thyroid capsule; the inferior glands are most often 
located near the inferior thyroid margin. However, the exact loca-
tion of the glands is variable, and 12% to 15% of normal persons 
have a fifth parathyroid gland. The parathyroid glands arise from 
TABLE 8–1 Calcium concentrations in body fluids.
Total serum calcium
8.5-10.5 mg/dL (2.1-2.6 mmol/L)
Ionized calcium
4.4-5.2 mg/dL (1.1-1.3 mmol/L)
Protein-bound calcium
4.0-4.6 mg/dL (0.9-1.1 mmol/L)
Complexed calcium
0.7 mg/dL (0.18 mmol/L)
Intracellular free calcium
0.00018 mmol/L (180 nmol/L)
Diet
1000 mg
Gut
Feces
825 mg
300 mg
125 mg
175 mg
ECF Ca2+
900 mg
500 mg
500 mg
9825
mg
10,000
mg
175 mg
Urine
Bone
 FIGURE 8–1  Calcium fluxes in a normal individual in a state of 
zero external mineral balance. The blue arrows denote unidirectional 
calcium fluxes; the pink arrows denote net fluxes.  (Reproduced, with 
 permission, from Felig P, et al, ed.  Endocrinology and Metabolism . 2nd 
ed.  McGraw-Hill; 1987.) 
CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease     229
the third and fourth branchial pouches. The inferior glands are 
actually those derived from the third branchial pouches. Beginning 
cephalad to the other pair, they migrate further caudad, and one 
of them sometimes follows the thymus gland into the superior 
mediastinum. The small size of the parathyroids and the vagaries 
of their location and number make parathyroid surgery a challeng-
ing enterprise for all but the expert surgeon. 
 The parathyroid glands are composed of epithelial cells and 
stromal fat. The predominant epithelial cell is the  chief cell . The 
chief cell is distinguished by its clear cytoplasm from the  oxyphil 
cell , which is slightly larger and has eosinophilic granular cyto-
plasm. Both cell types contain PTH, and it is not known whether 
their secretory regulation differs in any fundamental way. 
 Secretion of Parathyroid Hormone 
 To regulate the extracellular calcium concentration [Ca 2+ ], PTH is 
under tight control by the serum calcium concentration. Thus, the 
negative feedback relationship of PTH with serum [Ca 2+ ] is 
steeply sigmoidal, with the steep portion of the curve correspond-
ing exactly to the normal range of serum calcium—precisely the 
relationship to create a high “gain” controller and ensure mainte-
nance of the normal serum-ionized [Ca 2+ ] by PTH ( Figure 8–2 ). 
 To sense the ionized [Ca 2+ ] and thereby regulate the secretion 
of PTH, the parathyroid cell relies on relatively high levels of 
expression of the extracellular calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR). 
CaSR is a 120-kDa G protein–coupled receptor belonging to fam-
ily C of this superfamily (see Chapter 1). The CaSR has sequence 
homologies to the metabotropic glutamate receptors of the central 
nervous system, the type B gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor, 
and a large family of pheromone receptors. The large extracellular 
domain of the CaSR mediates the sensing of calcium and other 
ions. Like other G protein–coupled receptors, the CaSR has seven 
membrane-spanning domains. The intracellular loops that con-
nect these domains are directly involved in coupling the receptor 
to G proteins. 
 Shortly after the identification of the CaSR, it was shown that 
mutations in this receptor were responsible for familial benign 
hypocalciuric hypercalcemia (FBHH), a disorder of calcium sens-
ing by the parathyroid glands and kidney. The CaSR is not unique 
to the parathyroid. CaSRs are widely distributed in the brain, 
skin, growth plate, intestine, stomach, C cells, and other tissues. 
This receptor regulates the responses to calcium in thyroid C cells, 
which secrete calcitonin in response to high extracellular [Ca 2+ ], 
and in the distal nephron of the kidney, where the receptor regu-
lates calcium excretion. The function of CaSRs in many other sites 
is still unclear. 
 The primary cellular signal by which an increased extracellular 
[Ca 2+ ] inhibits the secretion of PTH appears to be an increase in 
[Ca 2+ ] i . The CaSR is directly coupled by G q to the enzyme phos-
pholipase C, which hydrolyzes the phospholipid phosphatidylinos-
itol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP 2 ) to liberate the intracellular messengers 
IP 3 and diacylglycerol (see Chapter 1). IP 3 binds to a receptor in 
endoplasmic reticulum that releases calcium from membrane 
stores. The release of stored calcium raises the [Ca 2+ ] i rapidly and is 
followed by a sustained influx of extracellular calcium, through 
channels that produce a rise and sustained plateau in [Ca 2+ ] i . 
Increased [Ca 2+ ] i may be sufficient for inhibition of PTH release, 
but it is unclear whether calcium release from intracellular stores or 
sustained calcium influx from the cell exterior is more important. 
The other product of phospholipase C action is the lipid diacylg-
lycerol, an activator of the calcium- and phospholipid-sensitive 
protein kinases in the protein kinase C family. The effects of pro-
tein kinase C isoenzymes on the release of PTH from the gland are 
complex. CaSRs also couple to the inhibition of cyclic adenosine-
3′,5′-monophosphate (cAMP) generation, which also may play a 
role in setting the response of parathyroid cells to ambient calcium 
levels. 
 The initial effect of high extracellular calcium is to inhibit the 
secretion of preformed PTH from storage granules in the gland by 
blocking the fusion of storage granules with the cell membrane 
and release of their contents. In most cells, stimulation of exocy-
tosis ( stimulus-secretion coupling ) is a calcium-requiring process, 
which is inhibited by depletion of extracellular calcium. The para-
thyroid cell is necessarily an exception to this rule, because this cell 
must increase secretion of PTH when the ionized [Ca 2+ ] is low. In 
the parathyroids, intracellular magnesium may serve the role in 
stimulus-secretion coupling that calcium does in other cells. As 
discussed later in the section on hypoparathyroidism, depletion of 
magnesium stores can paralyze the secretion of PTH, leading to 
reversible hypoparathyroidism. 
 Besides calcium, there are several regulators of PTH secretion. 
Hypermagnesemia inhibits PTH, and during the treatment of 
premature labor with infusions of magnesium sulfate, reductions 
100
80
60
40
20
0
1.0
1.10 1.15 1.20
1.25
1.30 1.35 1.40 1.45
Ionized calcium (mmol/L)
Intact PTH (ng/L)
 FIGURE 8–2  The relationship between the serum-ionized cal-
cium level and the simultaneous serum concentration of intact 
PTH in normal humans. The serum calcium concentration was 
altered by the infusion of calcium (closed circles) or citrate (closed 
triangles). Parathyroid sensitivity to changes in serum calcium is 
maximal within the normal range (the shaded area). Low 
 concentrations of PTH persist in the face of hypercalcemia. 
 (Modified from Conlin PR, et al. Hysteresis in the relationship 
between serum ionized calcium and intact parathyroid hormone 
during recovery from induced hyper- and hypocalcemia in normal 
humans.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 1989;69:593. By permission of the 
 Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism .) 
230    CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease
in PTH levels and occasionally hypocalcemia are observed. 
Conversely, moderate hypomagnesemia can stimulate PTH secre-
tion, even though prolonged depletion of magnesium will paralyze 
it. On a molar basis, magnesium is less potent in controlling secre-
tion than calcium. Catecholamines, acting through β-adrenergic 
receptors and cAMP, stimulate the secretion of PTH. This effect 
does not appear to be clinically significant. The hypercalcemia 
sometimes observed in patients with pheochromocytoma usually 
has another basis—secretion of parathyroid hormone–related pro-
tein (PTHrP) by the tumor. 
 Not only do changes in serum calcium regulate the secretion of 
PTH—they also regulate the synthesis of PTH at the level of 
stabilizing preproPTH mRNA levels. It is estimated that glandular 
stores of PTH are sufficient to maintain maximal rates of secretion 
for no more than 1.5 hours, so increased synthesis is required to 
meet sustained hypocalcemic challenges. 
 Transcription of the  PTH gene is also regulated by vitamin D: 
high levels of 1,25(OH) 2 D inhibit  PTH gene transcription. This 
is one of many ways that the calciotropic hormones cooperatively 
regulate calcium homeostasis, and it has therapeutic implications. 
Vitamin D analogs are used to treat secondary hyperparathyroid-
ism in dialysis patients with renal osteodystrophy. 
 Synthesis and Processing of Parathyroid 
Hormone 
 PTH is an 84-amino-acid peptide with a molecular weight of 
9300. Its gene is located on chromosome 11. The gene encodes a 
precursor called preproPTH with a 29-amino-acid extension 
added at the amino terminus of the mature PTH peptide 
( Figure 8–3 ). This extension includes a 23-amino-acid signal 
sequence (the  pre sequence) and a 6-residue prohormone sequence. 
The signal sequence in preproPTH functions precisely as it does 
in most other secreted protein molecules, to allow recognition of 
the peptide by a signal recognition particle, which binds to 
nascent peptide chains as they emerge from the ribosome and 
guides them to the endoplasmic reticulum, where they are inserted 
through the membrane into the lumen ( Figure 8–4 ). 
 In the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum, a signal peptidase 
cleaves the signal sequence from preproPTH to leave proPTH, 
which exits the endoplasmic reticulum and travels to the Golgi 
apparatus, where the  pro sequence is cleaved from PTH by an 
enzyme called furin. Whereas preproPTH is evanescent, proPTH 
has a life span of about 15 minutes. The processing of proPTH 
is quite efficient, and proPTH, unlike other prohormones 
Gln
Ser
Lys
Ala
Lys
Thr
Lau
Val
Asp
Val
Asn
Ala
Lys
Asp
Ala
Glu
Gly
Leu
Ser
Lys
Glu
His
Ser
Glu
Val
60
Leu
Val
Asn
Asp
Glu Lys Lys Arg Pro Arg
50
70
80
40
Gln Ser Gly Ala Asp Arg Pro Ala Leu Pro Ala Gly Leu Ala Val
Phe
Asn
His
Val
Asp 30
Glu
Met
Ser
Asn
Leu
His
Lys
Gly
Leu
Asn
His
Met
Leu
Gln
Ile
Glu
Ser
Val
Ser
Arg
Lys
Lys
Val
Ser
Lys Gly Asp Ser Lys
−10
−20
−31
−NH2
−6
−1
1
Thr Leu Phe Cys Ile
Ala Leu Met Val
Ile
Met Val Lys Ala Met Asp Lys Ala Pro
Ile
Met
Arg
20
10
Val Glu Trp Leu Arg
Lys
Lys
Leu
Gln
C
O
OH
C
fragment sequence
Biologically active sequence
Leader (pre) sequence
Pro
sequence
 FIGURE 8–3  Primary structure of human preproparathyroid hormone. The arrows indicate sites of specific cleavages which occur in the 
sequence of biosynthesis and peripheral metabolism of the hormone. The biologically active sequence is enclosed in the center of the mole-
cule.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Felig P, Baxter JD, Frohman LA, ed.  Endocrinology and Metabolism . 3rd ed. McGraw-Hill; 1995.) 
CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease     231
(eg,  proinsulin), is not secreted. As it leaves the Golgi apparatus, 
PTH is repackaged into dense neuroendocrine-type secretory 
granules, where it is stored to await secretion. 
 Clearance and Metabolism of PTH 
 PTH secreted by the gland has a circulating half-life of 2 to 
4 minutes. Intact PTH(1-84) is predominantly cleared in the liver 
and kidney. There, PTH is cleaved at the 33 to 34 and 36 to 37 
positions to produce an amino terminal fragment and a carboxyl 
terminal fragment. Amino terminal fragments of PTH do not 
circulate to the same extent as carboxyl terminal fragments. The 
latter are cleared from blood by renal filtration, and they accumu-
late in chronic renal failure. Although the classic activities of PTH 
are encoded in the amino terminal portion of the molecule, mid 
region and carboxyl terminal fragments of the hormone may not 
be metabolically inert. Recent evidence suggests that they may 
have their own receptors and biologic actions. 
 Assays of PTH 
 Current assays of intact PTH(1-84) employ two-site immunora-
diometric assay (IRMA) or immunochemiluminescent assay 
(ICMA) techniques, in which the normal range for PTH is 
approximately 10 to 60 pg/mL (1-6 pmol/L). By utilizing anti-
bodies to two determinants, one near the amino terminal end of 
the PTH molecule and the other near the carboxyl terminal end 
of PTH, these assays are designed to measure the intact, biologi-
cally active hormone species ( Figure 8–5 ). In practice, such assays 
have sufficient sensitivity and specificity to detect not only 
increased levels of PTH in patients with hyperparathyroid disor-
ders but also suppressed levels of PTH in patients with nonpara-
thyroid hypercalcemia. The ability to detect suppression of PTH 
makes these assays powerful tools for the differential diagnosis of 
hypercalcemia. If hypercalcemia results from a form of hyperpara-
thyroidism, then the serum PTH level will be high; if hypercalce-
mia has a  nonparathyroid basis, then PTH will be suppressed. 
Nucleus
PTH gene
transcription
84
1
84
1
84
1
84
1
84
1
84
1
84
1
–1
–6
1
–1
–6
–29
mRNA
Plasma membrane
Parathyroid cell
↑ [Ca2+]i
Ca2+
CaR
−
Ribosome
Secretory
granule
PreproPTH
(115 amino acids)
−
−
84
Endoplasmic reticulum
Golgi
 FIGURE 8–4  Biosynthetic events in the production of PTH within the parathyroid cell.  PreproPTH gene is transcribed to its mRNA, which is 
translated on the ribosomes to preproPTH(amino acids −29 to +84). The presequence is removed within the endoplasmic reticulum, yielding 
proPTH(−6 to +84). Mature PTH(1-84) released from the Golgi is packaged in secretory granules and released into the circulation in the pres-
ence of hypocalcemia. The CaSR, or CaR, senses changes in extracellular calcium that affect both the release of PTH and the transcription of the 
 preproPTH gene. ( Reproduced, with permission, from McPhee SJ, et al, ed.  Pathophysiology of Disease: An Introduction to Clinical Medicine. 
Originally published by Appleton & Lange. Copyright 1995 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. ) 
232    CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease
 Recently, intact PTH assays have been further refined so that 
the amino-terminal antibody recognizes only the most amino 
terminal residues of PTH (essentially amino acids 1-6). This 
improvement was made because it became clear that antibodies 
used in first-generation, two-site intact PTH assays were detecting 
species of PTH that were not PTH (1-84). There are non-
PTH(1-84) amino-terminally truncated PTH fragments gener-
ated in vivo by peripheral metabolism that can accumulate in 
patients with chronic renal failure. About 50% of circulating PTH 
in patients with renal failure consists of large fragments of non-
(1-84)PTH. Assays specific for full-length PTH, in which the 
amino terminal antibodies truly detect residues at the extreme 
 N -terminus of the molecule (residues 1-6), are designated as 
 whole ,  bioactive , or  intact PTH. 
 Biologic Effects of PTH 
 The central function of PTH is to regulate ionized [Ca 2+ ] levels by 
concerted effects on three principal target organs: bone, intestinal 
mucosa, and kidney. The effect of PTH on intestinal calcium 
absorption is indirect, resulting from increased renal production 
of the intestinally active vitamin D metabolite 1,25(OH) 2 D. By 
its integrated effects on the kidney, gut, and bone, PTH acts to 
increase the inflow of calcium into the extracellular fluid and thus 
defend against hypocalcemia. Removal of the parathyroid glands 
results in profound hypocalcemia and ultimately in tetany and 
death. 
 In the kidney, PTH has direct effects on the tubular reabsorption 
of calcium, phosphate, and bicarbonate. Although the bulk of cal-
cium is resorbed from tubule fluid together with sodium in the 
proximal convoluted tubule, the fine tuning of calcium excretion 
occurs in the distal nephron. There, PTH markedly increases the 
reabsorption of calcium, predominantly in the distal convoluted 
tubule. Although calcium is actively transported against an electro-
chemical gradient, the precise nature of the calcium transport process 
that is regulated by PTH is controversial. However, from a physiologic 
standpoint, the ability to limit renal losses of calcium is one important 
means by which PTH defends the serum calcium level. 
 PTH inhibits the reabsorption of phosphate in the renal 
proximal tubule. In this nephron segment, phosphate is trans-
ported across the apical membrane of the tubule cell by specific 
sodium-phosphate cotransporters, with phosphate influx driven 
by the energy of the sodium gradient. PTH inhibits sodium-
phosphate reabsorption by reducing the rate of insertion of trans-
porters from a sequestered cytoplasmic pool into the apical 
membrane. The phosphaturic effect of PTH is profound. It is best 
quantified by calculating the tubular reabsorption of phosphate 
(TRP) from the clearances of phosphate and creatinine (TRP = 
1 − C P /C creat , normal range 80%-97%), or by calculating the renal 
phosphate threshold (TmP/GFR) from a standard nomogram. 
Because it is primarily the renal phosphate threshold that sets the 
level of serum phosphate, the phosphaturic effect of PTH is mir-
rored in the serum phosphorus level (eg, hypophosphatemia in 
hyperparathyroidism). Hyperparathyroid states may also be char-
acterized by impaired bicarbonate reabsorption and a mild hyper-
chloremic metabolic acidosis, because of inhibition of Na + -H + 
antiporter activity by PTH. 
 Although the hypocalciuric effect of PTH is readily under-
stood as part of the concerted actions of the hormone to defend 
the serum [Ca 2+ ], the utility of the phosphaturic effect of PTH is 
less obvious. One consideration is that the phosphaturic effect 
tends to prevent an increase in serum phosphate, which would 
otherwise result from the obligatory release of phosphate with 
calcium during bone resorption and would tend to dampen the 
homeostatic increase in serum calcium by complexing calcium in 
blood. An example is renal osteodystrophy. When phosphate 
clearance is impaired by renal failure, the hypocalcemic effect of 
phosphate released during bone remodeling is an important con-
tributor to progressive secondary hyperparathyroidism as part of a 
positive feedback loop—the more that bone resorption is stimu-
lated and phosphate released, the more hyperparathyroidism is 
induced. 
 Mechanism of Action of Parathyroid 
Hormone 
 There are two mammalian receptors for PTH. The first receptor 
to be identified recognizes PTH and PTHrP and is designated the 
PTH/PTHrP receptor, or the PTH-1 receptor (PTH-1R). The 
Solid
phase
Serum sample
containing
PTH
Ab1
PTH
Ab2
Ab1
Ab2
Label
N
C
N
C
Intact PTH
PTH fragments
Intact PTH molecule
+
and
 FIGURE 8–5  Schematic representation of the principle of the 
two-site assay for intact PTH. The label may be a luminescent probe 
or  125 I in the immunochemiluminescent or immunoradiometric assay, 
respectively. Two different region-specific antibodies are used (Ab 1 
and Ab 2 ). Only the hormone species containing both immunodeter-
minants is counted in the assay. Most recent whole or intact PTH 
immunoassays employ an Ab 1 directed against extreme  N -terminal 
PTH epitopes as shown.  (Reproduced and modified, with permission, 
from McPhee SJ, et al, ed.  Pathophysiology of Disease: An Introduction 
to Clinical Medicine. Originally published by Appleton & Lange. 
Copyright 1995 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.) 
CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease     233
PTH-2R is activated by PTH only. These receptors also differ in 
their tissue distribution. The PTH-1R in kidney and bone is an 
80,000-MW glycoprotein and member of the G protein receptor 
superfamily. It has the canonical architecture of such receptors, 
with a large first extracellular domain, seven consecutive 
 membrane-spanning domains, and a cytoplasmic tail (see 
Chapter 1). PTH binds to sites in the large extracellular domain 
of the receptor. The hormone-bound form of the receptor then 
activates associated G proteins via several determinants in the 
intracellular loops. PTH receptors are closely related to a small 
subfamily of peptide hormone receptors, which includes those for 
secretin, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP), adrenocorti-
cotropin (ACTH), and calcitonin. 
 PTH itself has a close structural resemblance to a sister protein, 
PTHrP, and also resembles the peptides secretin, VIP, calcitonin, 
and ACTH. As noted above, the receptors for these related ligands 
are themselves members of a special family. These peptide hor-
mones are characterized by an amino terminal alpha helical 
domain, thought to be directly involved in receptor activation, 
and an adjacent alpha helical domain that seems to be the primary 
receptor-binding domain. In the case of PTH, residues 1 to 6 are 
required for activation of the receptor; truncated analogs without 
these residues (eg, PTH[7-34]) can bind the receptor but cannot 
efficiently activate it and thus serve as competitive antagonists 
of PTH action. The primary receptor-binding domain consists 
of PTH(18-34). Although the intact form of PTH is an 84- 
amino-acid peptide, PTH(35-84) does not seem to have any 
important role in binding to the bone-kidney receptor. However, 
a separate PTH(35-84) receptor may exist; the carboxyl terminal 
PTH receptor could mediate an entirely different set of actions of 
PTH. 
 The PTH-1 receptor binds PTH and PTHrP with equal affin-
ity. Physiologic activation of the receptor by binding of either 
PTH or PTHrP induces the active, GTP-bound state of two 
receptor-associated G proteins. G s couples the receptor to the 
effector adenylyl cyclase and thereby to the generation of cAMP as 
a cellular second messenger. G q couples the receptor to a separate 
effector system, phospholipase C, and thereby to an increase in 
[Ca 2+ ] i and to activation of protein kinase C (see Chapter 1). 
Although it is not clear which of the cellular messengers, cAMP, 
intracellular calcium, or diacylglycerol is responsible for each of 
the various cellular effects of PTH, there is evidence from an 
experiment of nature that cAMP is the intracellular second mes-
senger for maintaining calcium homeostasis and renal phosphate 
excretion. The experiment is pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP), 
in which null mutations in one allele of the stimulatory G protein 
subunit G s alpha (GNAS1) cause hypocalcemia and unresponsive-
ness of renal phosphate excretion to PTH. 
 PTHrP 
 When secreted in abundance by malignant tumors, PTHrP pro-
duces severe hypercalcemia by activating the PTH-1 receptor. 
However, the physiologic roles of PTHrP are quite different from 
those of PTH. PTHrP is produced in many fetal and adult tissues. 
Based on gene knockout experiments and overexpression of 
PTHrP in individual tissues, we now know that PTHrP is 
required for normal development as a regulator of the prolifera-
tion and mineralization of chondrocytes and as a regulator of 
placental calcium transport. In postnatal life, PTHrP also appears to 
regulate epithelial-mesenchymal interactions that are critical for devel-
opment of the mammary gland, skin, and hair follicle. In most 
physiologic circumstances, PTHrP carries out local rather than sys-
temic actions. PTHrP is discussed fully in Chapter 21. 
 CALCITONIN 
 Calcitonin (CT) is a 32-amino-acid peptide whose principal func-
tion is to inhibit osteoclast-mediated bone resorption. CT is 
secreted by parafollicular C cells of the thyroid. These are neu-
roendocrine cells derived from the ultimobranchial body, which 
fuses with the posterior lobes of the thyroid to become the C cell 
mass (about 0.1% of the thyroid gland). 
 The secretion of CT is under the control of the ionized [Ca 2+ ]. 
The C cell uses the same CaSR as the parathyroid cell to sense 
changes in the ambient ionized [Ca 2+ ]. In contrast to parathyroid 
cells, C cells increase secretion of CT in response to hypercalcemia 
and shut off hormone secretion during hypocalcemia. 
 CT is a member of the  CT gene–related peptide (CGRP) 
superfamily that includes: CT, CGRP, CT-receptor–stimulating 
peptide (CRSP), adrenomedullin, and amylin. CT and CGRP are 
encoded by one gene, and the respective peptides are generated 
from alternative splicing of primary RNA transcripts in a tissue-
selective manner with CT made predominantly in the thyroid C 
cells. The genomic structure of the  CT/CGRP/CRSP gene family 
is shown in  Figure 8–6 . In humans, there are two genes ( CALCA 
and  CALCB ) that encode CGRPs and CT and one pseudogene 
CALCA
CALCB
CALCP
CGRP/CRSP
Signal peptide
Untranslated region
CT
Flanking peptide
Pseudo-exon
 FIGURE 8–6  Genomic structure of the human calcitonin (CT)/
calcitonin gene–related peptide (CGRP)/CT-receptor–stimulating 
peptide (CRSP) family of genes which includes CALCA and CALCB 
and the pseudogene CALCP. Alternative splicing generates the two 
gene products (CT in the thyroid C cells and CGRP in the nervous sys-
tem) with well-defined functions in humans. Straight lines indicate 
the introns while the coding sequences are shown by specifically 
designated boxes. ( Reproduced and modified, with permission from 
Katafuchi T, et al. Calcitonin receptor-stimulating peptide: its evolu-
tionary and functional relationship with calcitonin/calcitonin gene-
related peptide based on gene structure.  Peptides . 2009;30:1753. ) 
234    CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease
(CALCP). Transcription of CALCA produces CT and CGRP in a 
tissue-specific manner by alternative splicing. The  CALCB gene 
has a coding CGRP-beta exon and an exon that codes for CT but 
in which there is an in-frame stop codon. Thus, CALCB generates 
only CGRP-beta. In the thyroid C cell, mature CT ( Figure 8–7 ) is 
incorporated within a 141-amino-acid precursor. In neurons of 
the central nervous system, CGRP is produced from a 128-amino-
acid precursor. CGRP is a 37-amino-acid peptide with consider-
able homology to CT. The amino termini of both peptides 
incorporate a seven-member disulfide-bonded ring (see  Figure 8–7 ). 
Acting through its own receptor, CGRP is among the most potent 
vasodilator substances known. When administered intravenously, 
CT produces a rapid and dramatic decline in levels of serum cal-
cium and phosphate, primarily through actions on bone. The 
major effect of the hormone is to inhibit osteoclastic bone resorp-
tion. After exposure to CT, the morphology of the osteoclast 
changes rapidly. Within minutes, the cell withdraws its processes, 
shrinks in size, and retracts the ruffled border, the organelle of 
bone resorption, from the bone surface. Osteoclasts and cells of 
the proximal renal tubule express CT receptors. Like the PTH 
receptor, this is a G protein–coupled receptor with seven mem-
brane-spanning regions that is coupled by G s alpha to adenylyl 
cyclase and thereby to the generation of cAMP in target cells. CT 
also has renal effects. In the kidney, CT inhibits the reabsorption 
of phosphate, thus promoting renal phosphate excretion. CT also 
induces a mild natriuresis and increases the renal excretion of 
calcium. The renal effects of CT are not essential for its acute 
effect on serum calcium levels, which results from blockade of 
bone resorption. 
 Although its secretory control by calcium and its antiresorptive 
actions enable CT to counter PTH in the control of calcium 
homeostasis, thus engendering bihormonal regulation, it is actu-
ally unlikely that CT plays an essential physiologic role in humans 
and other terrestrial animals. This is supported by two lines of 
evidence. First, removal of the thyroid gland—the major if not the 
only source of CT in mammals—has no perceptible impact on 
calcium handling or bone metabolism in postnatal life. Second, 
secretion of extremely high CT levels by medullary carcinoma of 
the thyroid (MCT), a malignancy of the C cell, likewise has no 
apparent effect on mineral homeostasis. Thus, in humans, CT is a 
hormone in search of a function. It plays a much more obvious 
homeostatic role in saltwater fish, in which the major challenge is 
maintenance of blood calcium levels in the sea, where the ambient 
calcium concentration of sea water is very high. 
 CT is of clinical interest for two reasons. First, CT is important 
as a tumor marker in MCT. Second, CT has therapeutic uses as an 
inhibitor of osteoclastic bone resorption. CT can be administered 
either parenterally or as a nasal spray and is used in the treatment 
of Paget disease of bone, hypercalcemia, and osteoporosis. 
 VITAMIN D 
 Nomenclature 
 The term vitamin D (calciferol) refers to two secosteroids: vitamin 
D 2 (ergocalciferol) and vitamin D 3 (cholecalciferol) ( Figure 8–8 ). 
Both are produced by photolysis from naturally occurring sterol 
precursors. Vitamin D 2 is the principal form of vitamin D avail-
able for pharmaceutical purposes other than as dietary supple-
ments ( Table 8–2 ). Vitamin D 3 is produced from 
7-dehydrocholesterol, a precursor of cholesterol found in high 
concentration in the skin. Although vitamin D 2 is metabolized 
somewhat differently than vitamin D 3 , the active metabolites of 
vitamin D 2 and vitamin D 3 have equivalent biologic activity so the 
term vitamin D, unless otherwise qualified, will be understood 
here to denote both. Vitamins D 2 and D 3 differ in their side 
chains: vitamin D 2 has a methyl group at C24 and a double bond 
at C22 to C23. These features alter the metabolism of vitamin D 2 
compared with vitamin D 3 ; however, both are converted to 
25-hydroxyvitamin D (25[OH]D) and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D 
(1,25[OH] 2 D). 
 In the process of forming vitamins D 2 and D 3 , the B ring of 
the sterol precursor is cleaved, and the A ring is rotated around 
the C5 to C6 double bond so that the 3β-hydroxyl group is 
positioned below the plane of the A ring. By convention, this 
hydroxyl group retains its designation as 3β, and the one posi-
tion above the plane of the A ring is designated 1α. 
Hydroxylations in the side chain can lead to stereoisomers 
Leu
Asn Gly
Cys
Ser Thr Cys Met Leu Gly
10
Thr
Thr Gln Asp Phe Asn Lys Phe His Thr Phe Pro Gln Thr Ala
20
Tyr
Ile
Gly
Val
Gly
Ala
Pro
1
NH2
30
C
O
H2N
Human calcitonin
 FIGURE 8–7  Amino acid sequence of human calcitonin, demonstrating its biochemical features, including an amino terminal disulfide 
bridge and carboxyl terminal prolinamide.  (Reproduced, with permission, from McPhee SJ, et al, ed.  Pathophysiology of Disease: An Introduction 
to Clinical Medicine. Originally published by Appleton & Lange. Copyright 1995 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. )
CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease     235
designated R and S. The natural position for the C24 hydroxyl 
group is R. Both the R and the S positions can be hydroxylated 
at C25 in the formation of 25,26(OH) 2 D. 
 Because vitamin D can be formed in vivo (in the epidermis) in 
the presence of adequate amounts of ultraviolet light, it is more 
properly considered a hormone (or prohormone) than a vitamin. 
To be biologically active, vitamin D must be metabolized further. 
The liver is the major but not the only organ that can metabolize 
vitamin D to its principal circulating form, 25(OH)D. The 
 kidney and other tissues metabolize 25(OH)D to a variety of 
other metabolites, the most important of which are 1,25(OH) 2 D 
and, perhaps, 24,25(OH) 2 D. A large number of other metabolites 
have been identified, but their physiologic roles are unclear. They 
may represent products destined only for elimination. Normal 
circulating levels of the principal metabolites are listed in 
 Table 8–3 . The recommended daily allowance for vitamin D in 
adults is 400 units (1 unit = 0.025 μg vitamin D), although recent 
data indicate that is inadequate especially in older individuals. 
CH3
CH3
CH3
1
9
19
18 20
21
23
25
26
28
27
24
22
2
3
10
11
13
16
15
14
12
17
8
5
7
4
6
HO
OH
CH3
n
CH2
HO
CH3
Ergosterol
CH3
1
9
19
18 20
21
23
25
26
27
24
22
2
3
10
11
13
16
15
14
12
17
8
5
7
4
6
HO
Pre D2
Heat
CH3
OH
Pre D3
Heat
n
CH2
HO
7-Dehydrocholesterol
D3
D2
 FIGURE 8–8  The photolysis of ergosterol and 7-dehydrocholesterol to vitamin D 2 (ergocalciferol) and vitamin D 3 (cholecalciferol), respec-
tively. An intermediate is formed after photolysis, which undergoes a thermal-activated isomerization to the final form of vitamin D. The rotation 
of the A-ring puts the 3-beta-hydroxyl group into a different orientation with respect to the plane of the A-ring during production of vitamin D. 
TABLE 8–2 Commonly used vitamin D metabolites and analogs.
Cholecalciferol, 
Ergocalciferol
Paricalcitol
Doxercalciferol
Calcitriol
Abbreviation
D3, D2
19-nor calcitriol
1αOHD2
1,25(OH)2D
Physiologic dose
2.5-10 ug (1 ug = 40 units)
1-5 ug
0.25-0.5 ug
Pharmacologic dose
0.625-5 mg
1-4 μg po
2.5 μg/mL IV
20-200 ug
1-3 ug
Duration of action
1-3 mo
Hours to days
Hours to days
Hours to days
Clinical applications
Vitamin D deficiency 
Vitamin D malabsorption 
Hypoparathyroidism
Secondary 
hyperparathyroidism 
of chronic renal failure
Secondary hyperparathyroidism 
of chronic renal failure
Secondary 
hyperparathyroidism of 
chronic renal failure 
Hypoparathyroidism 
Hypophosphatemic rickets 
Acute hypocalcemia 
Vitamin D-dependent rickets 
types I and II
236    CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease
 Cutaneous Synthesis of Vitamin D 
 Vitamin D 3 is formed in the skin from 7-dehydrocholesterol, 
which is distributed throughout the epidermis and dermis but has 
its highest concentration in the lower layers of the epidermis, the 
stratum spinosum, and stratum basale. These epidermal layers also 
account for the highest production of vitamin D. The cleavage of the 
B ring of 7-dehydrocholesterol to form previtamin D 3 ( see 
Figure 8–8 ) requires ultraviolet light with a spectrum of 280 to 
320 nm (UVB). Following cleavage of the B ring, the previtamin 
D 3 undergoes thermal isomerization to vitamin D 3 but also to the 
biologically inactive compounds lumisterol and tachysterol. 
Formation of pre-D 3 is rapid and reaches a maximum within 
hours during exposure to solar or ultraviolet irradiation. The 
degree of epidermal pigmentation, the age of the skin, and the inten-
sity of exposure all affect the time required to reach the maximum 
pre-D 3 concentration but do not alter that maximum. Continued 
ultraviolet light exposure then results in continued formation of 
the inactive compounds from pre-D 3 . The formation of lumisterol 
is reversible, so lumisterol can be converted back to pre-D 3 as pre-
D 3 levels fall. Short exposure to sunlight causes prolonged release 
of vitamin D 3 from the exposed skin because of the slow conver-
sion of pre-D 3 to vitamin D 3 and the conversion of lumisterol to 
pre-D 3 . Prolonged exposure to sunlight does not produce toxic 
quantities of vitamin D 3 because of the photoconversion of pre-D 3 
to lumisterol and tachysterol. 
 Vitamin D 3 transport from the skin into the circulation has not 
been thoroughly studied. Vitamin D 3 is carried in the bloodstream 
primarily bound to vitamin D–binding protein (DBP), an 
α-globulin produced in the liver. DBP has a lower affinity for 
vitamin D 3 than other vitamin D metabolites such as 25(OH)D 
and 24,25(OH) 2 D. 7-Dehydrocholesterol, pre-D 3 , lumisterol, 
and tachysterol bind to DBP even less well. Therefore, vitamin D 3 
could be selectively removed from skin by the gradient established 
by selective binding to DBP. Because the deepest levels of the 
epidermis make the most vitamin D 3 when the skin is irradiated, 
the distance over which vitamin D 3 must diffuse to reach the cir-
culation is short. However, simple diffusion is an unlikely means 
for so hydrophobic a molecule to enter the bloodstream. Epidermal 
lipoproteins may play a role in transport, but this remains to be 
established. 
 Dietary Sources and Intestinal Absorption 
 Dietary sources of vitamin D are clinically important because expo-
sure to ultraviolet light may not be sufficient to maintain adequate 
production of vitamin D in the skin. The farther away from the 
equator one lives, the shorter the period of the year during which 
the intensity of sunlight is sufficient to produce vitamin D 3 . Most 
milk products in the United States are supplemented with vitamin 
D. Unfortified milk products contain little or no vitamin D. 
Although plants and mushrooms contain ergosterol, their content 
of vitamin D 2 is limited unless they are irradiated with ultraviolet 
light during processing. Vitamin D is found in moderate to high 
concentrations in fish oils and fish liver and in lesser concentrations 
in eggs. Vitamin D is absorbed from the diet in the small intestine 
with the help of bile salts. Drugs that bind bile salts such as coles-
tipol and various malabsorption syndromes reduce vitamin D 
absorption. Most of the vitamin D passes into the lymph in chylo-
microns, but a significant amount is absorbed directly into the 
portal system. The presence of fat in the lumen decreases vitamin D 
absorption. 25(OH)D and calcitriol are preferentially absorbed 
into the portal system and are less influenced by the amount of fat 
in the lumen. Biliary conjugates of the vitamin D metabolites have 
been identified, and an enterohepatic circulation of these metabo-
lites has been established. Vitamin D is taken up rapidly by the 
liver and is metabolized to 25(OH)D. 25(OH)D is also trans-
ported in the blood bound to DBP. Little vitamin D is stored in the 
liver. Excess vitamin D is stored in adipose tissue and muscle. 
 Binding Proteins for Vitamin D 
Metabolites 
 As noted above, vitamin D metabolites are transported in the 
blood bound principally to DBP (85%) and albumin (15%). DBP 
binds 25(OH)D and 24,25(OH) 2 D with approximately 30 times 
greater affinity than it binds 1,25(OH) 2 D and vitamin D. DBP 
circulates at a concentration (5 × 10 −6 mol/L) approximately 
TABLE 8–3 Vitamin D and its metabolites.
Name
Abbreviation
Generic Name
Serum Concentrationa
Vitamin D 
 Vitamin D3 
 Vitamin D2
D 
D3 
D2
Calciferol 
Cholecalciferol 
Ergocalciferol
1.6 ± 0.4 ng/mL
25-Hydroxyvitamin D
25(OH)D
Calcifediol
26.5 ± 5.3 ng/mL
1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D
1,25(OH)2D
Calcitriol
34.1 ± 0.4 pg/mL
24,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D
24,25(OH)2D
1.3 ± 0.4 ng/mL
25,26-Dihydroxyvitamin D
25,26(OH)2D
0.5 ± 0.1 ng/mL
aValues differ somewhat from laboratory to laboratory depending on the methodology used, sunlight exposure, and dietary intake of 
vitamin D in the population study. Children tend to have higher 1,25(OH)2D levels than do adults.
Data from Lambert PW et al. In: Bikle D, ed. Assay of Calcium Regulating Hormones. Springer; 1983.
CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease     237
50 times greater than the total concentrations of the vitamin D 
metabolites. DBP levels are reduced in liver disease and in the 
nephrotic syndrome and increased during pregnancy and with 
estrogen administration, but are not altered by states of vitamin D 
deficiency or excess. The high affinity of DBP for the vitamin D 
metabolites and the large excess-binding capacity maintain the 
free and presumed biologically active concentrations of the vita-
min D metabolites at very low levels—approximately 0.03% and 
0.4% of the total 25(OH)D and 1,25(OH) 2 D levels, respectively. 
Liver disease reduces the total level of the vitamin D metabolites 
commensurate with the reduction in DBP and albumin levels, but 
the free concentrations of the vitamin D metabolites remain nor-
mal in most subjects. This fact must be borne in mind when 
evaluating a patient with liver disease to determine whether such 
a patient is truly vitamin D deficient. Pregnancy, on the other 
hand, increases both the free and total concentrations by increas-
ing DBP levels, altering the binding of the metabolites to DBP, 
and increasing the production of 1,25(OH) 2 D. The binding of 
the vitamin D metabolites to DBP appears to occur at the same 
site, and saturation of this site by one metabolite can displace the 
other metabolites. This is an important consideration in vitamin 
D toxicity because the very high levels of 25(OH)D that charac-
terize this condition displace the often normal levels of 
1,25(OH) 2 D, leading to elevated free and biologically active 
 concentrations of 1,25(OH) 2 D. This phenomenon at least 
partially explains the hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria that mark 
vitamin D intoxication even in patients with normal total 
1,25(OH) 2 D levels. 
 At present, it is not clear whether DBP functions just to main-
tain a circulating reservoir of vitamin D metabolites or whether 
DBP participates in transporting the vitamin D metabolites to 
their target tissues. A different set of proteins related to heat shock 
proteins are found within the cell that bind the vitamin D metab-
olites and appear to facilitate their further metabolism. These 
proteins are distinct from DBP and the nuclear hormone receptors 
for calcitriol, which will be discussed subsequently. 
 Metabolism 
 The conversion of vitamin D to 25(OH)D occurs principally in 
the liver ( Figure 8–9 ). Both mitochondria and microsomes have 
the capacity to produce 25(OH)D but with different kinetics and 
with different enzymes. The mitochondrial enzyme has been iden-
tified as the 5βcholestane-3α,7α,12α-triol-27(26)-hydroxylase 
(CYP27A1), a cytochrome P450 mixed-function oxidase, and its 
cDNA has been isolated. A number of microsomal P450 enzymes 
have been shown to have 25-hydroxylase activity with variable 
preference for D 2 or D 3 and their 1-hydroxylated metabolites. The 
microsomal 25-hydroxylase that has received the most attention is 
CYP2R1. Like the mitochondrial enzyme, these are not specific 
CH2
CH2
24, 25(OH)2D3
1, 25(OH)2D3
25OHD3
HO
O
H
D3
HO
O
H
O
H
CH2
OH
O
H
CH2
HO
HO
Liver
Kidney
Serum calcium ⊕
1, 25(OH)2D ⊕
FGF23 ⊕
Serum calcium   
PTH ⊕
FGF23    
 FIGURE 8–9  The metabolism of vitamin D. The liver converts vitamin D to 25(OH)D. The kidney converts 25(OH)D to 1,25(OH) 2 D and 
24,25(OH) 2 D. Control of metabolism is exerted primarily at the level of the kidney where low serum phosphate, low serum calcium, and high 
parathyroid hormone (PTH) levels favor production of 1,25(OH) 2 D whereas FGF23; high serum calcium and phosphate, and 1,25(OH) 2 D inhibit 
1,25(OH) 2 D production while increasing 24,25(OH) 2 D production. Plus (+) and minus (−) signs denote the stimulatory and inhibitory enzymatic 
reactions, respectively, driving the metabolic steps indicated. 
238    CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease
for vitamin D. Regulation of 25(OH)D production is difficult to 
demonstrate. Drugs such as phenytoin and phenobarbital reduce 
serum 25(OH)D levels, primarily by increased catabolism of 
25(OH)D and vitamin D. Liver disease leads to reduced total (but 
not necessarily free) serum 25(OH)D levels, primarily because of 
reduced DBP and albumin synthesis and not reduced synthesis of 
25(OH)D. Vitamin D deficiency is marked by low blood levels of 
25(OH)D, primarily because of lack of substrate for the 25- 
hydroxylase. Vitamin D intoxication, on the other hand, leads to 
increased levels of 25(OH)D because of the lack of feedback inhi-
bition on the 25-hydroxylases. 
 Control of vitamin D metabolism is exerted principally in the 
kidney (see  Figure 8–9 ). 1,25(OH) 2 D and 24,25(OH) 2 D are pro-
duced by cytochrome mixed-function oxidases in mitochondria of 
the proximal tubules. cDNAs encoding these enzymes have both 
been identified and show substantial homology to each other and 
to the mitochondrial 25-hydroxylase (CYP27A1). Their homol-
ogy to other mitochondrial steroid hydroxylases is considerable 
but not as high. Although the 24-hydroxylase is widely distrib-
uted, the 1-hydroxylase is more limited, being found primarily in 
the epidermis, placenta, bone, macrophages, and prostate in addi-
tion to kidney, although low levels of expression have been 
observed in a number of other tissues such as breast, lung, testes, 
T and B lymphocytes, dendritic cells, heart, and brain. 
 The kidney remains the principal source of circulating 
1,25(OH) 2 D. Production of 1,25(OH) 2 D in the kidney is stimu-
lated by PTH and insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) and is 
inhibited by fibroblast-derived growth factor 23 (FGF23) and 
high blood levels of calcium and phosphate. Production of 
FGF23, a recently identified cytokine, occurs primarily in bone 
and is regulated by the levels of serum phosphate and 1,25(OH) 2 D 
( Figure 8–10 ). FGF23 inhibits 1,25(OH) 2 D production, blocks 
renal phosphate reabsorption, and acts to lower serum phosphate 
( see Figure 8–10 and Chapter 21). 
 Calcium and phosphate also have both direct and indirect 
effects on 1,25(OH) 2 D production. In addition to direct actions 
on 1-hydroxylase to reduce its activity, calcium inhibits PTH 
secretion by the parathyroid glands, and this lowers 1,25(OH) 2 D 
production. Phosphate inhibits the production of growth hor-
mone by the pituitary gland, leading to decreased IGF-1 genera-
tion, and stimulates FGF23 production, each step contributing to 
the indirect inhibition of 1,25(OH) 2 D production by phosphate. 
 1,25(OH) 2 D inhibits its own synthesis and stimulates the pro-
duction of 24,25(OH) 2 D and 1,24,25(OH) 3 D by the 24- 
hydroxylase, which are the initial products of both 25(OH)D and 
1,25(OH) 2 D catabolism, respectively. Other hormones such as 
prolactin and CT may regulate 1,25(OH) 2 D production, but 
their roles under normal physiologic conditions in humans have 
not been demonstrated. 
 Extrarenal production of 1,25(OH) 2 D is regulated in a cell-
specific fashion. Cytokines such as γ-interferon (γ-IFN) and 
tumor necrosis factor-α ( TNF-α) stimulate 1,25(OH) 2 D produc-
tion by macrophages and keratinocytes. 1,25(OH) 2 D and calcium 
have minimal effects on 1,25(OH) 2 D production by these cells. 
This is important in understanding the pathophysiology of hyper-
calcemia and the increased 1,25(OH) 2 D levels in patients with 
sarcoidosis, lymphomas, and other granulomatous diseases. 
 Mechanisms of Action 
 The main function of vitamin D metabolites is the regulation of 
calcium and phosphate homeostasis, which occurs in conjunction 
with PTH. The gut, kidney, and bone are the principal target tis-
sues for this regulation. The major pathologic complication of 
vitamin D deficiency is rickets (in children with open epiphyses) 
or osteomalacia (in adults), which results mainly from the defi-
ciency of calcium and phosphate required for bone mineralization. 
1,25(OH) 2 D is the most biologically active, if not the only vita-
min D metabolite involved in maintaining calcium and phosphate 
homeostasis. 
 Most of the cellular processes regulated by 1,25(OH) 2 D 
involve the nuclear vitamin D receptor (VDR), a 50-kDa protein 
related by structural and functional homology to a large class of 
nuclear hormone receptors including the steroid hormone recep-
tors, thyroid hormone receptors (TRs), retinoic acid and retinoid 
X receptors (RARs, RXRs), and endogenous metabolite receptors, 
including peroxisome proliferation activator receptors (PPARs), 
liver X receptors (LXRs), and farnesoid X receptors (FXRs) (see 
Chapter 1). These receptors are transcription factors. The VDR, 
as is the case with TRs, RARs, PPARs, LXRs, and FXRs, generally 
acts by forming heterodimers with RXRs. The VDR–RXR com-
plex then binds to specific regions within the regulatory portions 
of the genes whose expression is controlled by 1,25(OH) 2 D 
( Figure 8–11 ). The regulatory regions are called vitamin D 
response elements (VDREs) and are generally composed of two 
stretches of six nucleotides (each called a half-site) with a specific 
and nearly identical sequence separated by three nucleotides with 
a less specific sequence (a direct repeat with three base-pair separa-
tion; DR3). Numerous exceptions to this rule can be found such 
as a VDR–RAR complex binding to a DR6 (direct repeat with six 
X
Kidney
Urinary Pi
Plasma Pi
Bone
FGF23
and other
phosphatonins
Rickets/
osteomalacia
Pi absorption
Gut
–
+
 FIGURE 8–10  Regulation of phosphate homeostasis and 
1,25(OH) 2 D production by FGF23 and other phosphatonins. FGF23 
decreases phosphate reabsorption by the kidney and lowers plasma 
phosphate levels. FGF23 also blocks 1,25(OH) 2 D synthesis by the kid-
ney, which reduces intestinal calcium and phosphate absorption. 
Excessive FGF23 production and/or action result in abnormal bone 
matrix mineralization, causing rickets or osteomalacia. 
CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease     239
base-pair separation) or inverted palindromes (repeat elements 
going in opposite directions) with various degrees of spacing (eg, 
IP9). Other nuclear hormone receptors bind to similar elements 
but with different spacing or orientation of the half-sites. The 
binding of the VDR–RXR complex to the VDRE then attracts a 
number of other proteins called coactivators, which may function 
to open up the gene for transcription by acetylating the histones 
covering the gene or by bridging the gap between the VDRE and 
the initiation complex containing the RNA polymerase to signal 
the beginning of transcription. Not all actions of 1,25(OH) 2 D, 
however, can be explained by changes in gene expression. VDR in 
the membrane and a membrane-bound protein called the 1,25D 3 -
membrane–associated rapid response steroid binding protein 
(1,25D 3 -MARRS) may mediate the rapid effects of 1,25(OH) 2 D 
on calcium influx and protein kinase C activity observed in a 
number of tissues, effects too rapid to be explained by genomic 
activity. 
 A. Intestinal calcium transport 
 Intestinal calcium trans-
port is the best-understood target tissue response of 1,25(OH) 2 D. 
Calcium transport through the intestinal epithelium proceeds by 
at least three distinct steps: (1) entrance into the cell from the 
lumen across the brush border membrane down a steep electro-
chemical gradient; (2) passage through the cytosol, probably 
within subcellular organelles such as mitochondria and endo-
somes; and (3) removal from the cell against a steep electrochemi-
cal gradient at the basolateral membrane. Each of these steps is 
regulated by 1,25(OH) 2 D. At the brush border, 1,25(OH) 2 D 
induces a change in the binding of calmodulin to brush border 
myosin 1, a unique form of myosin found only in the intestine, 
where it resides primarily in the microvillus bound to actin and to 
the plasma membrane. The calmodulin-myosin 1 complex may 
provide the mechanism for removing calcium from the brush 
border after it crosses the membrane into the cell. Changes in the 
phospholipid composition of the brush border may explain the 
increased flux of calcium across this membrane after calcitriol 
administration. None of these changes requires new protein syn-
thesis. However, evidence now indicates that a calcium channel, 
the transient receptor potential cation channel 6 (TRPV6) in the 
brush border membrane is induced by 1,25(OH) 2 D and is likely 
the major mechanism by which calcium enters the intestinal epi-
thelial cell. The transport of calcium through the cytosol requires 
a vitamin D-inducible protein called calbindin. Calbindin exists 
either in a 28-kDa or 9-kDa form, depending on the species and 
tissue. Calbindin has a high affinity for calcium. If its synthesis is 
blocked, the calcium content of the cytosol and mitochondria 
increases, and efficiency of transport is reduced. At the basolateral 
membrane, calcium is removed from the cell by an ATP-driven 
pump, the Ca 2+ -ATPase (PMCA1b), a protein also induced by 
1,25(OH) 2 D. Recent studies, however, in which calbindin or 
TRPV6 expression is deleted show surprisingly little impact on 
intestinal calcium transport (calbindin knockout) or only a partial 
reduction (TRPV6 knockout) suggesting that there is more to 
learn about the mechanisms governing intestinal calcium trans-
port. Nevertheless in mice in which the VDR is rendered non-
functional (VDR knockout), intestinal calcium transport is 
markedly impaired, indicating the importance of VDR function—
presumably via regulation of gene expression—in governing intes-
tinal calcium transport. 
 B. Actions of vitamin D in bone 
 The critical role of 
1,25(OH) 2 D in regulating bone formation and resorption is evi-
denced by the development of rickets in children who are vitamin 
D-deficient, have inactivating mutations in CYP27B1 (the 
1- hydroxylase) (pseudovitamin D-deficient rickets), or lack a func-
tioning VDR (hereditary 1,25[OH] 2 D-resistant rickets). The histo-
logic and radiologic appearance of bone in these genetic conditions 
is quite similar to that in patients with severe vitamin D deficiency. 
 Patients with inactivating mutations in the  1-hydroxylase gene 
can be treated successfully with calcitriol (but not with vitamin D), 
whereas those with mutations in the VDR are resistant to calcitriol 
as well as to vitamin D. These experiments of nature, however, do 
not exclude the possibility that other vitamin D metabolites, in 
combination with 1,25(OH) 2 D, are essential for normal bone 
metabolism. 
 In vitamin D deficiency, all vitamin D metabolites are reduced, 
but 25(OH)D and 24,25(OH) 2 D tend to be reduced out of pro-
portion to 1,25(OH) 2 D, which may be maintained in the low 
normal range despite clear abnormalities in bone mineralization. 
Thus, it is reasonable to ask whether 1,25(OH) 2 D is the only 
vitamin D metabolite of consequence for the regulation of skeletal 
homeostasis. In fact, a number of studies point to unique actions 
of 24,25(OH) 2 D that cannot be replicated by 1,25(OH) 2 D, espe-
cially in cartilage, although this remains controversial. Studies in 
RXR VDR
TATA
mRNA
ATG
VDRE
Coactivator
complex
Initiation
complex
RNA
polymerase II
Translation
start site
1,25(OH)2D
Nucleus
Protein
 FIGURE 8–11  1,25(OH) 2 D-initiated gene transcription. 
1,25(OH) 2 D enters the target cell and binds to its receptor, VDR. The 
VDR then heterodimerizes with the retinoid X receptor, RXR. This 
increases the affinity of the VDR–RXR complex for the vitamin D 
response element (VDRE), a specific sequence of nucleotides in the 
promoter region of a vitamin D responsive gene. Binding of the VDR–
RXR complex to the VDRE attracts a complex of proteins termed 
coactivators to the VDR–RXR complex, some of which open up the 
gene for transcription by acetylating the histones and other proteins 
which communicate with and activate the RNA polymerase II com-
plex. Transcription of the gene is initiated to produce the corre-
sponding mRNA, which leaves the nucleus for the cytoplasm to be 
translated to the corresponding protein. 
240    CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease
mice, in which the  24-hydroxylase gene has been inactivated 
(knocked out), support the concept that 24,25(OH) 2 D has a role 
in bone formation that is not replaced by 1,25(OH) 2 D. At least 
some of the skeletal abnormalities in 24-hydroxylase–null animals 
may be explained by their inability to regulate 1,25(OH) 2 D levels. 
Nevertheless, the need for more than just 1,25(OH) 2 D is an 
important concept in the treatment of vitamin D deficiency; this 
is best done with vitamin D or 25(OH)D rather than calcitriol 
alone, because vitamin D serves as a precursor for both 1,25(OH) 2 D 
and 24,25(OH) 2 D. 
 The mechanisms by which 1,25(OH) 2 D regulates skeletal 
homeostasis remain uncertain. Provision of adequate calcium and 
phosphate for mineralization is clearly important. The rickets 
present in patients with defective VDRs can be cured with calcium 
and phosphate infusions. Similarly, in mice in which the VDR is 
rendered nonfunctional (knocked out), rickets is prevented with 
diets high in calcium and phosphate. Thus, even though the 
osteoblast, the cell responsible for forming new bone, contains a 
VDR and the transcription of a number of proteins in bone is 
regulated by 1,25(OH) 2 D, it is not clear how essential the direct 
actions of 1,25(OH) 2 D on bone are for bone formation and min-
eralization. Thus, the bone is a good example of a tissue in which 
1,25(OH) 2 D and calcium work together, such that limited quan-
tities of one may be compensated for by increased amounts of the 
other. 
 In organ cultures of bone, the best established action of 
1,25(OH) 2 D is to stimulate bone resorption. This is accompanied 
by an increase in osteoclast number and activity and decreased 
collagen synthesis. The increase in osteoclast number and activity 
is now known to be mediated by the production in osteoblasts of 
a membrane-bound protein called receptor activator of NF-kappa 
B ligand (RANKL), which acts on its receptor (RANK) in osteo-
clasts and their precursors to stimulate osteoclast differentiation 
and activity (see later). 1,25(OH) 2 D is one of several hormones 
(PTH and selected cytokines are others) that stimulate RANKL 
production. Vitamin D deficiency does not decrease bone resorp-
tion, probably because PTH levels are elevated. High levels of 
PTH could, therefore, compensate for the lack of 1,25(OH) 2 D at 
the level of RANKL production. The presence of partial skeletal 
resistance to PTH in patients with vitamin D deficiency may be 
explained by this mechanism. 
 1,25(OH) 2 D also promotes the differentiation of osteoblasts. 
This action is less well-delineated than the promotion of osteoclast 
differentiation. Osteoblasts pass through a well-defined sequence 
of biochemical processes as they differentiate from proliferating 
osteoprogenitor cells to cells capable of producing and mineraliz-
ing matrix. The effect of 1,25(OH) 2 D on the osteoblast depends 
on the stage of differentiation at which the 1,25(OH) 2 D is admin-
istered. Early in the differentiation process, in cells characterized 
as immature osteoblast-like cells, 1,25(OH) 2 D stimulates collagen 
production and alkaline phosphatase activity. These functions are 
inhibited in more mature osteoblasts. On the other hand, osteo-
calcin production is stimulated by 1,25(OH) 2 D only in mature 
osteoblasts. Experiments in vivo demonstrating that excessive 
1,25(OH) 2 D can inhibit normal bone mineralization—leading to 
the paradoxical appearance of osteomalacia—can be understood 
in the context of these differential effects of 1,25(OH) 2 D on the 
osteoblast as it differentiates. Excess 1,25(OH) 2 D can disrupt the 
differentiation pathway. 
 C. Actions of vitamin D in kidney 
 The kidney expresses 
VDRs, and 1,25(OH) 2 D stimulates the expression of calbindin, 
TRPV5 (the renal homolog of the intestinal TRPV6), and Ca 2+ -
ATPase (PMCA) in the distal tubule as well as 24,25(OH) 2 D 
production in the proximal tubule. However, the role of 
1,25(OH) 2 D in regulating calcium and phosphate transport 
across the renal epithelium remains controversial. 25(OH)D may 
be more important than 1,25(OH) 2 D in acutely stimulating cal-
cium and phosphate reabsorption by the kidney tubules. In vivo 
studies are complicated by the effect of 1,25(OH) 2 D on other 
hormones, particularly PTH, which appears to be more important 
than the vitamin D metabolites in regulating calcium and phos-
phate handling by the kidney. 
 D. Actions of vitamin D in other tissues 
 An exciting 
 observation is that VDRs are found in a large number of tissues 
beyond the classic target tissues—gut, bone, and kidney—and 
these tissues respond to 1,25(OH) 2 D. Furthermore, many of these 
tissues contain CYP27B1 (the 1-hydroxylase) and so are capable 
of producing their own 1,25(OH) 2 D from circulating 25(OH)D. 
These tissues include elements of the hematopoietic and immune 
systems; cardiac, skeletal, and smooth muscle; and brain, liver, 
breast, endothelium, skin (keratinocytes, melanocytes, and fibro-
blasts), and endocrine glands (pituitary, parathyroid, pancreatic 
islets [B cells], adrenal cortex and medulla, thyroid, ovary, and 
testis). Furthermore, malignancies developing in these tissues 
often contain VDRs and respond to the antiproliferative actions 
of 1,25(OH) 2 D. 
 The responses of these tissues to 1,25(OH) 2 D are as varied as 
the tissues themselves. 1,25(OH) 2 D regulates hormone produc-
tion and secretion, including stimulation of insulin secretion from 
the pancreas and prolactin from the pituitary, but inhibiting PTH 
secretion from the parathyroid gland, renin secretion from the 
kidney, and atrial naturetic peptides from the heart. 1,25(OH) 2 D 
enables the innate immune system by inducing antimicrobial 
peptides such as cathelidicin but suppresses the adaptive immune 
response by blocking the maturation of dendritic cells and shifting 
the balance of T-helper cell differentiation from Th1 and Th17 to 
Th2 and Treg. Myocardial contractility and vascular tone are 
modulated by 1,25(OH) 2 D. 1,25(OH) 2 D reduces the rate of pro-
liferation of many cell lines, including normal keratinocytes, 
fibroblasts, lymphocytes, and thymocytes as well as abnormal cells 
of mammary, skeletal, intestinal, lymphatic, and myeloid origin. 
Differentiation of numerous normal cell types, including kerati-
nocytes, lymphocytes, hematopoietic cells, intestinal epithelial 
cells, osteoblasts, and osteoclasts as well as abnormal cells of the 
same lineage is enhanced by 1,25(OH) 2 D. Thus, the potential for 
manipulating a vast array of physiologic and pathologic processes 
with calcitriol and its analogs is enormous. This promise is starting 
to be realized in that vitamin D analogs are being used to treat 
psoriasis, uremic hyperparathyroidism, and osteoporosis. 
CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease     241
Epidemiologic and animal studies indicate a role for vitamin D in 
the prevention and treatment of both type 1 and type 2 diabetes 
mellitus, autoimmune diseases such as multiple sclerosis and 
inflammatory bowel disease, and infections such as tuberculosis. 
Trials of vitamin D analogs in the treatment of a variety of cancers 
are also being conducted. Thus, although regulation of bone min-
eral homeostasis remains the major physiologic function of vita-
min D and its metabolites, clinical applications for these 
compounds and their analogs are being found outside the classic 
target tissues. 
 HOW VITAMIN D AND PTH 
CONTROL MINERAL 
HOMEOSTASIS 
 Consider a person who switches from a high normal to a low 
normal intake of calcium and phosphate—from 1200 mg/d to 
300 mg/d of calcium (the equivalent of leaving three glasses of 
milk out of the daily diet). The net absorption of calcium falls 
sharply, causing a transient decrease in the serum calcium level. 
The homeostatic response to this transient hypocalcemia is led by 
an increase in PTH, which stimulates the release of calcium and 
phosphate from bone and the retention of calcium by the kidney. 
The phosphaturic effect of PTH allows elimination of phosphate, 
which is resorbed from bone together with calcium. In addition, 
the increase in PTH, along with the fall in serum calcium and 
serum phosphate, activates renal 1,25(OH) 2 D synthesis. In turn, 
1,25(OH) 2 D increases the fractional absorption of calcium and 
further increases bone resorption. External calcium balance is thus 
restored by increased fractional absorption of calcium and 
increased bone resorption at the expense of higher steady state 
levels of PTH and 1,25(OH) 2 D. 
 MEDULLARY CARCINOMA OF THE 
THYROID 
 MCT, a neoplasm of thyroidal C cells, accounts for 5% to 10% of 
all thyroid malignancies. Approximately 75% of MCTs are spo-
radic. The remainder is familial and associated with one of three 
heritable syndromes: familial isolated MCT; multiple endocrine 
neoplasia 2A (MEN 2A), consisting of MCT, pheochromocy-
toma, and primary hyperparathyroidism; or multiple endocrine 
neoplasia 2B (MEN 2B), consisting of MCT, pheochromocy-
toma, multiple mucosal neuromas, and, rarely, primary hyper-
parathyroidism ( Table 8–4 ). The MEN syndromes are more 
extensively discussed in Chapter 22. 
 Understanding the pathogenesis of MCT has been greatly 
enhanced by the identification of causative mutations in the  RET 
proto-oncogene located on chromosome 10q11.2. The  RET gene 
encodes a membrane tyrosine kinase receptor whose ligands 
belong to the glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) 
family. This receptor is expressed developmentally in migrating 
neural crest cells that give rise to hormone-secreting  neuroendocrine 
cells (eg, C cells and adrenal medullary cells) and to the parasym-
pathetic and sympathetic ganglia of the peripheral nervous system. 
Remarkably, different mutations in  RET can produce five distinct 
diseases (see  Table 8–4 ). Inheritance of certain activating muta-
tions is responsible for MEN 2A and familial MCT. Inheritance 
of a different set of activating mutations causes MEN 2B. In over 
half of sporadic MCTs, the tumor has a clonal somatic mutation 
(present in the tumor but not in genomic DNA), which is identi-
cal to one of the mutations that is responsible for the familial 
forms of MCT. These somatic mutations clearly play a causative 
role in sporadic MCT. Mutations in the  RET gene can also pro-
duce Hirschsprung disease, a congenital absence of the enteric 
parasympathetic ganglia, that can lead to a disturbance in intesti-
nal motility, resulting in megacolon. 
 MCT is usually located in the middle or upper portions of the 
thyroid lobes. It is typically unilateral in sporadic cases but often 
multicentric and bilateral in familial forms of the disease. The 
natural history of MCT is variable. Sporadic tumors may be quite 
aggressive or very indolent; the mean 5-year survival rate is about 
50%. The behavior of familial forms varies among syndromes. 
MEN 2B has the most aggressive form of MCT, with a 2-year 
survival of about 50%; MEN 2A has a course similar to that of 
sporadic forms of this tumor, and familial MCT has the most 
indolent course of all MCT. The natural history of the tumor in 
familial MCT, MEN 2A, and MEN 2B syndromes has been dra-
matically impacted by early prophylactic total thyroidectomy that 
is now advised in most carriers of disease-causing RET mutations. 
MCT may spread to regional lymph nodes or undergo hematog-
enous spread to the lungs and other viscera. When metastatic, this 
tumor is sometimes associated with a chronic diarrhea syndrome. 
The pathogenesis of the diarrhea is unclear. In addition to CT, 
these tumors secrete a variety of other bioactive products, includ-
ing prostaglandins, serotonin, histamine, and peptide hormones 
(ACTH, somatostatin, corticotropin-releasing hormone). In some 
TABLE 8–4  Clinical presentations resulting from RET 
mutations.
Disorder
Characteristic Components
MEN 2A
MCT, pheochromocytoma, primary hyper-
parathyroidism
MEN 2A with lichen 
amyloidosis
MEN 2A + pruritic lesions of upper back
Familial MCT
MCT
MEN 2A or Familial 
MCT and Hirschsprung 
disease
MCT, Hirschsprung disease
MEN 2B
MCT, pheochromocytoma, marfanoid 
habitus, intestinal and mucosal 
ganglioneuromatosis
Modified from Brandi ML, et al. Guidelines for diagnosis and therapy of MEN type 1 
and type 2. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001;86:5658 and Sakorafas GH, et al. The genetic 
basis of hereditary medullary thyroid cancer: clinical implications for the surgeon 
with a particular emphasis on the role of prophylactic thyroidectomy. Endo Rel 
Cancer. 2008;15:871.
242    CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease
cases, the associated diarrhea responds dramatically to treatment 
with long-acting somatostatin analog such as octreotide, which 
blocks secretion of these bioactive products. 
 CT is a tumor marker for MCT. It is most sensitive for this 
purpose when secretion is stimulated with provocative agents. The 
standard provocative tests use pentagastrin (0.5 ug/kg intrave-
nously over 5 seconds) or a rapid infusion of calcium gluconate 
(2 mg calcium/kg over 1 minute). Blood samples are obtained at 
baseline and 1, 2, and 5 minutes after the stimulus. For maximal 
sensitivity, both tests are usually combined, with the calcium infu-
sion immediately followed by administration of pentagastrin. 
Although basal CT levels are often normal in early tumors, CT 
levels may be many times higher than normal in patients with 
disseminated MCT. Despite this, the patients are uniformly nor-
mocalcemic. Although tumors secrete larger molecular weight 
forms of CT with decreased biologic activity, monomeric CT 
levels are often high as well.  RET oncogene analysis has replaced 
provocative testing in most cases, although basal CT levels are still 
used to follow disease burden postoperatively and during chemo-
therapy trials. 
 Members of families carrying  RET mutations must be 
screened for MCT and, if positive, for the associated tumors 
that occur in MEN 2A and MEN 2B (see  Table 8–4 and 
Chapter 22). In the case of MCT, the presence of the  RET 
mutation in an individual generally leads to the recommenda-
tion for a total thyroidectomy prior to the development of 
frank malignancy or abnormal CT levels. It is recommended in 
a kindred with a known  RET mutation that children be 
screened at birth for the carrier state. Total thyroidectomy with 
or without central compartment lymph node dissection can be 
performed in mutation carriers, and further testing can be dis-
continued in genetically normal family members. The timing 
of prophylactic thyroidectomy in carriers of  RET mutations, 
however, depends on the genotype present (ie, codon mutated 
in  RET ) ( Table 8–5 ). As supported by the genotype- phenotype 
correlations in these diseases, surgery is recommended in cer-
tain high-risk cases before 1 year of age, in cases of intermedi-
ate risk before 5 years of age, and in lower-risk patients later in 
childhood usually by 10 years of age. Because a limited number 
of mutations in  RET cause more than 95% of hereditary MCT 
and up to 25% of sporadic disease, it is possible to screen the 
majority of patients using commercial reference laboratories. 
 Apparent sporadic MCT also calls for genetic testing 
and family studies. Up to 25% of new cases of MCT may 
actually be probands of families who harbor one of the 
familial syndromes. It has been noted in some kindreds 
after careful and lengthy follow-up that some individuals 
develop pheochromocytomas or primary hyperparathyroid-
ism. Therefore, patients with apparent familial MCT 
should be followed indefinitely for one of these compo-
nents of MEN 2A. Screening of family members can be 
accomplished by genetic testing, once the index case is 
identified. Identification of a mutation that is present only 
in tumor tissue would establish the mutation as somatic 
and the tumor as a sporadic one. Identification of the same 
 RET mutation in tumor and genomic DNA would make 
the diagnosis of a familial form of the disorder and would 
mandate careful screening of the family. 
 HYPERCALCEMIA 
 Clinical Features 
 A number of symptoms and signs accompany hypercalcemia. They 
include central nervous system effects such as lethargy, depression, 
psychosis, ataxia, stupor, and coma; neuromuscular effects such as 
weakness, proximal myopathy, and hypertonia; cardiovascular effects 
such as hypertension, bradycardia (and eventually asystole), and a 
shortened QT interval; renal effects such as stones, decreased glom-
erular filtration, polyuria, hyperchloremic acidosis, and nephrocalci-
nosis; gastrointestinal effects such as nausea, vomiting, constipation, 
and anorexia; eye findings such as band keratopathy; and systemic 
metastatic calcification. Primary hyperparathyroidism, one of the 
most common etiologies for hypercalcemia, has the mnemonic for 
recalling its signs and symptoms as  stones, bones, abdominal groans, 
and psychic moans ( Figure 8–12 ). 
TABLE 8-5  RET mutations: their frequency and age 
at which surgery is recommended in gene 
carriers based on level of risk of MCT.
Codon
Frequency (Percent of Total)
MEN 2Aa
634
87
620
6
618
3
611
2
609
<1
MEN 2Bb
918
94
883
5
804
<1
Familial MCTc
618
30
634
26
620
21
768
8
609
4
804
3
790, 791, 891
Uncertain
aSurgery recommended before 5 years of age.
bSurgery recommended in the first year of life.
cRecommendations for surgery by some experts at 5 years of age and by others 
before 10 years of age.
Reproduced, with permission, from Sakorafas GH, et al. The genetic basis of heredi-
tary medullary thyroid cancer: clinical implications for the surgeon, with a particular 
emphasis on the role of prophylactic thyroidectomy. Endo Rel Cancer. 2008;15:871.
CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease     243
 Mechanisms 
 Although many disorders are associated with hypercalcemia 
( Table 8–6 ), they produce it by a limited number of mechanisms: 
(1) increased bone resorption, (2) increased gastrointestinal 
absorption of calcium, or (3) decreased renal excretion of calcium. 
Although any of these mechanisms can be involved in a given 
patient, the common feature of virtually all hypercalcemic disor-
ders is accelerated bone resorption. The only hypercalcemic disor-
der in which bone resorption does not play a part is the milk-alkali 
syndrome. 
 The central feature of the defense against hypercalcemia is sup-
pression of PTH secretion. This reduces bone resorption, renal 
production of 1,25(OH) 2 D, and, thereby, intestinal calcium 
absorption and increases urinary calcium losses. The kidney plays 
a key role in the adaptive response to hypercalcemia as the only 
route of net calcium elimination. The level of renal calcium excre-
tion is markedly increased by the combined effects of an increased 
filtered load of calcium and the suppression of PTH. However, the 
patient who relies on the kidneys to excrete an increased calcium 
load is in precarious balance. Glomerular filtration is impaired by 
hypercalcemia; the urinary concentrating ability is diminished, 
predisposing to dehydration; poor mentation may interfere with 
access to fluids; and nausea and vomiting may further predispose 
to dehydration and renal azotemia. Renal insufficiency, in turn, 
compromises calcium clearance, leading to a downward spiral 
( Figure 8–13 ). Thus, once established, many hypercalcemic states 
are self-perpetuating or aggravated through the  vicious cycle of 
hypercalcemia . The only alternative to the renal route for elimina-
tion of calcium from the extracellular fluid is deposition of 
 calcium phosphate and other salts in bone and soft tissues. Soft 
tissue calcification is observed with massive calcium loads, with 
massive phosphate loads (as in tumor lysis syndrome, crush inju-
ries and compartment syndromes), and when renal function is 
markedly impaired and the calcium-phosphate product rises. 
Stones
Renal stones
Nephrocalcinosis
Polyuria
Polydipsia
Uremia
Abdominal groans
Constipation
Indigestion, nausea,
  vomiting
Peptic ulcer
Pancreatitis
Psychic moans
Lethargy, fatigue
Depression
Memory loss
Psychoses-paranoia
Personality change, 
  neuroses
Confusion, stupor, coma
Other
Proximal muscle weakness
Keratitis, conjunctivitis
Hypertension
Itching
Bones
Osteitis fibrosa with
  -Subperiosteal resorption
  -Osteoclastomas
  -Bone cysts
Radiologic osteoporosis
Osteomalacia or rickets
Arthritis
1 HPTH
signs and symptoms
 FIGURE 8–12  Signs and symptoms of primary 
 hyperparathyroidism. 
TABLE 8–6 Causes of hypercalcemia.
Primary hyperparathyroidism
Sporadic
Associated with MEN 1 or MEN 2A
Familial
Postrenal transplantation
Variant forms of hyperparathyroidism
Familial benign hypocalciuric hypercalcemia
Lithium therapy
Tertiary hyperparathyroidism in chronic renal failure
Malignancies
Humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy
Caused by PTHrP (solid tumors, adult T-cell leukemia syndrome)
Caused by 1,25(OH)2D (lymphomas)
Caused by ectopic secretion of PTH (rare)
Local osteolytic hypercalcemia (multiple myeloma, leukemia, 
lymphoma)
Sarcoidosis or other granulomatous diseases
Endocrinopathies
Thyrotoxicosis
Adrenal insufficiency
Pheochromocytoma
VIPoma
Drug induced
Vitamin A intoxication
Vitamin D intoxication
Thiazide diuretics
Lithium
Milk-alkali syndrome
Estrogens, androgens, tamoxifen (in breast carcinoma)
Immobilization
Acute renal failure
Idiopathic hypercalcemia of infancy
ICU hypercalcemia
Serum protein disorders
Anorexia, nausea,
vomiting
Renal salt and
water loss
Ca2+ excretion
ECF volume contraction
Hypercalcemia
 FIGURE 8–13  Vicious cycle of hypercalcemia. Once estab-
lished, hypercalcemia can be maintained or aggravated as depicted. 
 ( Reproduced, with permission, from Felig P, Baxter JD, Frohman LA, 
ed.  Endocrinology and Metabolism . 3rd ed. McGraw-Hill; 1995.) 
244    CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease
 Differential Diagnosis 
 As a practical matter, the categories for differential diagnosis are pri-
mary hyperparathyroidism and  everything else (see  Table 8–6 ). 
Hyperparathyroidism is by far the most common cause of hypercal-
cemia and has distinctive pathophysiologic features. Thus, the first 
step in the differential diagnosis is determination of intact PTH 
( Figure 8–14 ). If the PTH level is high, and thus inappropriate for 
hypercalcemia, little further workup is required except to consider the 
variant forms of hyperparathyroidism that are discussed later. If the 
PTH level is suppressed, then a search for other entities must be con-
ducted. Most other entities in  Table 8–6 are readily diagnosed by their 
distinctive features, as discussed later. 
 DISORDERS CAUSING HYPERCALCEMIA 
 1. PRIMARY HYPERPARATHYROIDISM 
 Primary hyperparathyroidism results from the excessive secretion 
of PTH and typically produces frank hypercalcemia. With the 
advent of multiphasic screening of serum chemistries, we have 
come to recognize that primary hyperparathyroidism is a common 
and usually asymptomatic disorder. Its incidence is approximately 
42 per 100,000, and its prevalence is up to 4 per 1000 in women 
over age 60. Primary hyperparathyroidism is approximately 2 to 
3 times more common in women than in men. 
 Etiology and Pathogenesis 
 Primary hyperparathyroidism is caused by a single parathyroid 
adenoma in about 80% of cases and by primary hyperplasia of the 
parathyroids in 10% to 15%. Parathyroid carcinoma is a rare 
cause of hyperparathyroidism, accounting for 1% to 2% of cases. 
Parathyroid carcinoma is often recognizable preoperatively because 
it presents with severe hypercalcemia or a palpable neck mass. 
 Sporadic parathyroid adenomas have a clonal origin, indicating 
that they can be traced back to an oncogenic mutation in a single 
progenitor cell. A few of these genetic alterations have been identi-
fied and/or assigned to chromosomal loci. About 25% of sporadic 
parathyroid adenomas have chromosomal deletions involving 
Hypercalcemia
associated
with
malignancy
Primary
hyperparathyroidism
Normal
Hypoparathyroidism
Limit of 
detection→
50
100
150
200
500
Intact PTH (pg/mL of hPTH [1-84])
Coexisting primary
hyperparathyroidism
and malignancy
Normal
range
968
634
 FIGURE 8–14  Clinical utility of immunoradiometric assay for intact PTH. ( Reproduced, with permission, from Endres DB, et al. Measurement of 
parathyroid hormone.  Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am . 1989;18:611. ) 
CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease     245
chromosome 11q12-13 that are thought to eliminate the putative 
tumor suppressor gene  MENIN. As reviewed later and in Chapter 
22, loss of the functioning menin protein, a tumor suppressor, is 
the cause of parathyroid, pituitary, and pancreatic tumors in the 
MEN 1 syndrome. An additional 40% of parathyroid adenomas 
display allelic loss on chromosome 1p (1p32pter). 
 Another important locus on chromosome 11 that has been 
implicated in approximately 4% of sporadic parathyroid adenomas 
involves the  cyclin D1 gene. In the initial elucidation of this patho-
genic mechanism, a chromosomal rearrangement was found in a 
parathyroid tumor. Breakage and then inversion of a piece of 
chromosome 11 led to the expression of cyclin D1, a cell-cycle 
regulatory protein, under the control of the PTH promoter. As 
expected, this promoter is highly active in parathyroid cells, result-
ing in marked overexpression of cyclin D1 in these tumor cells. 
Cyclin D1 is normally expressed at high levels in the G 1 phase of 
the cell cycle and permits entry of cells into the mitotic phase of 
the cycle. Thus, a parathyroid-specific disorder of cell-cycle regula-
tion leads to abnormal cell proliferation and ultimately excessive 
PTH production. 
 Parathyroid hyperplasia accounts for 12% to 15% of cases of 
primary hyperparathyroidism and is the pathologic basis for these 
inherited conditions: MEN 1, MEN 2A, the hyperparathyroidism-
jaw tumor (HPT-JT) syndromes, and isolated familial hyperpara-
thyroidism. In all of these instances four or fewer glands may be 
involved at the time of presentation. Inheritance of all of these 
conditions is autosomal dominant. 
 Parathyroid hyperplasia was traditionally viewed as an example 
of true hyperplasia, a polyclonal expansion of cell mass. This 
occurs in other endocrine tissues when a trophic hormone present 
in excess (eg, ACTH excess) induces bilateral adrenal hyperplasia. 
Molecular analysis, however, has revised this view. Parathyroid 
hyperplasia appears to share similar pathogenic mechanisms with 
parathyroid adenomas. The MEN 1 syndrome illustrates this. 
MEN 1 is due to the inherited inactivation of one allele of the 
 MENIN gene, which encodes a tumor suppressor. Acquired post-
natal somatic mutations in the remaining  MENIN gene result in 
loss of the other allele’s function. This leads to tumors in those 
endocrine tissues in which the gene is expressed. In this view, 
multicentric somatic mutations would account for the occurrence 
of four-gland hyperparathyroidism. 
 Kindreds with a presentation like MEN 1 but without muta-
tions in  MENIN have been investigated for germline mutations in 
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors (CDKIs) of which there are 
seven known genes. In an analysis of 196 consecutive cases of 
MEN 1 or other tumor states without germline mutations in 
 MENIN , one laboratory found seven probable pathologic muta-
tions in these genes. Three of the seven mutations were in  p27 
with the remainder in three other CDKIs ( p15, p18 , and  p27 ). 
These mutations are thought to be disease causing because abnor-
malities in CDKI–protein interaction were uncovered in the 
majority of these mutations tested. The CDKIs negatively control 
the cell cycle through interaction with and inhibition of cyclins D, 
E, and A. The germline mutations in these kindreds would, there-
fore, involve loss of function in known inhibitors of cell growth 
and cell cycle activity. 
 In MEN 2A, the occurrence of parathyroid hyperplasia is also 
a consequence of expression of activating mutations of the  RET 
gene in the four glands. These and other studies clearly indicate 
that parathyroid hyperplasia is typically monoclonal in its origin, 
implying that cell hyperproliferation arose from a single progeni-
tor cell in each gland. 
 In addition to hyperparathyroidism, as one part of classical 
MEN 1, it is now clear that a subset of cases of familial isolated 
hyperparathyroidism is due to germline mutations in the  MENIN 
gene. This observation established the concept that isolated famil-
ial hyperparathyroidism can be an allelic variant of the MEN 1 
syndrome. The variation from MEN 1 lies in the absence of 
tumors in the other endocrine glands. 
 Other cases of familial isolated hyperparathyroidism are 
explained, albeit rarely, by mutations in the gene that causes the 
HPT-JT syndrome (see later). Additional families with isolated 
hyperparathyroidism have, as yet, no identified mutations. 
 In contrast to MEN 1 and MEN 2A, both benign and malig-
nant parathyroid tumors occur in the HPT-JT syndrome. This is 
an autosomal dominant disorder that includes primary hyperpara-
thyroidism (90%), jaw tumors (ossifying fibromas of the mandible 
or maxilla) (30%), renal cysts (10%), and less frequently renal 
hamartomas and Wilms tumor. Linkage analysis originally deter-
mined the locus for this syndrome, which had been designated as 
 hyperparathyroidism 2 or HRPT2 to be at 1q24-q32. Inactivating 
mutations in  HRPT2 gene, encoding the protein parafibromin, 
have been identified in HPT-JT kindreds. Mutations in the 
 HRPT2 gene inactivate parafibromin. This protein like menin 
normally functions as a tumor suppressor. Its function(s) in para-
thyroid cells have not yet been elucidated. 
 Inactivating mutations in the  HRPT2 gene have also been 
identified in kindreds with isolated familial hyperparathyroidism. 
Both single- and multiple-gland disease have been noted. It was 
further noted that approximately 15% of affected individuals with 
HPT-JT syndrome develop parathyroid cancer, instead of ade-
nomas or hyperplasia, suggesting that reduced parafibromin func-
tion also contributes to a malignant phenotype. Several groups 
have shown that a large percentage (~70%) of patients with spo-
radic parathyroid cancer harbor somatic mutations in the  HRPT2 
gene. Surprisingly, approximately 30% of individuals with isolated 
parathyroid cancer have also been found to have germline muta-
tions in  HRPT2 without the other manifestations of the HPT-JT 
syndrome. It is now thought that the majority of sporadically 
occurring parathyroid cancers are due to somatic mutations in the 
coding region of the  HRPT2 gene. It is anticipated that mutations 
in the noncoding regulatory regions of this gene may explain 
additional cases. A pathologic study of more than 50 cases of 
parathyroid cancer indicates that the loss of parafibromin immu-
noreactivity is a specific and key feature of malignancy with a 
sensitivity of 96% (CI, 85%-99%) and specificity of 99% (CI, 
92%-100%). 
 Clinical Features 
 A. Symptoms and signs 
 The typical clinical presentation of 
primary hyperparathyroidism has evolved considerably over the 
246    CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease
past few decades. As the disease continues to be detected primarily 
by multiphasic screening that includes determination of serum 
calcium levels, there has been a marked reduction in the frequency 
of the classic signs and symptoms of primary hyperparathyroid-
ism. Renal disease (stones, decreased renal function, and occasion-
ally nephrocalcinosis) and the classic hyperparathyroid bone 
disease osteitis fibrosa cystica are decidedly rare today. In fact, 
about 85% of patients presenting today have neither bone nor 
renal manifestations of hyperparathyroidism and are regarded as 
asymptomatic or at most minimally symptomatic. At the same 
time, we have begun to recognize more subtle manifestations of 
hyperparathyroidism. This has presented a number of questions 
about the role of parathyroid surgery in primary hyperparathy-
roidism, which are discussed later (see Treatment). 
 1. Hyperparathyroid bone disease— The classic bone disease of 
hyperparathyroidism is osteitis fibrosa cystica. Formerly com-
mon, this disorder now occurs in less than 10% of patients. 
Clinically, osteitis fibrosa cystica causes bone pain and some-
times pathologic fractures. The most common laboratory find-
ing is an elevation of the alkaline phosphatase level, reflecting 
high bone turnover. Histologically, there is an increase in the 
number of bone-resorbing osteoclasts, marrow fibrosis, and 
cystic lesions that may contain fibrous tissue (brown tumors). 
The most sensitive and specific radiologic finding of osteitis 
fibrosa cystica is subperiosteal resorption of cortical bone, best 
seen in high-resolution films of the phalanges ( Figure 8–15 A). 
A similar process in the skull leads to a salt-and-pepper appear-
ance ( Figure 8–15 B). Bone cysts or brown tumors may present 
as osteolytic lesions. Dental films may disclose loss of the 
lamina dura of the teeth, but this is a nonspecific finding also 
seen in periodontal disease. 
 The other important skeletal consequence of hyperparathy-
roidism is osteoporosis. Unlike other osteoporotic disorders, 
hyperparathyroidism often results in the preferential loss of 
cortical bone ( Figure 8–16 ). In general, both the mass and 
mechanical strength of trabecular bone are relatively main-
tained in mild primary hyperparathyroidism. Patients who are 
followed medically with this disease generally do not experi-
ence progressive bone loss for as long as 8 years after diagnosis 
( Figure 8–17 ). This may be due to the fact that mild PTH 
excess has an anabolic effect on the skeleton to maintain or 
even increase bone mass. Although  osteoporosis, defined by 
bone mineral density (BMD) T-scores by dual-energy x-ray 
 FIGURE 8–15  A : Magnified x-ray of index finger on fine-grain industrial film showing classic subperiosteal resorption in a patient with 
severe primary hyperparathyroidism. Note the left (radial) surface of the distal phalanx, where the cortex is almost completely resorbed, leaving 
only fine wisps of cortical bone.  B : Skull x-ray from a patient with severe secondary hyperparathyroidism due to end-stage renal disease. 
Extensive areas of demineralization alternate with areas of increased bone density, resulting in the “salt and pepper” skull x-ray. ( Both films 
 courtesy of Dr. Harry Genant.) 
100
*
*
*
90
80
70
Femoral neck
Radius
Lumbar spine
% of expected for age
Site examined
 FIGURE 8–16  Bone mineral density at several sites in primary 
hyperparathyroidism shown as the percentage of expected for age.
( Reproduced, with permission, from Silverberg SJ, et al. Nephrolithiasis 
and bone involvement in primary hyperparathyroidism.  Am J Med . 
1990;89:327.) 
CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease     247
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15
Years of follow-up
B
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
Lumbar spine
0
5
10
15
20
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
Femoral neck
0
5
10
15
20
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
Radius
0
5
10
15
20
n = 46
38
24
15
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15
Lumbar spine
Change in bone mineral density (%)
Years of follow-up
A
0
–50
–40
–30
–20
–10
10
Femoral neck
0
–50
–40
–30
–20
–10
10
Radius
0
–50
–40
–30
–20
–10
10
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
n = 36
24
11
6
 FIGURE 8–17  Mean changes in bone mineral density (BMD) measurements by dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA) in patients who 
underwent parathyroidectomy compared with medical follow-up during a 15-year observational study. BMD changes are reported compared 
with baseline and were statistically different from baseline as shown (* P < .05, ** P < .01, *** P < 0.001). The number of patients whose measure-
ments are included are shown underneath each time point. Either just before (distal 1/3 radius) or after 10 years of conservative follow-up 
(femoral neck) BMD measurements began to fall significantly, while lumbar spine BMD remained unchanged ( Panel A ). Patients who under-
went parathyroidectomy demonstrated improved BMD which persisted during 15 years of follow-up ( Panel B ). ( Reproduced and modified, with 
permission, from Rubin MR, et al. The natural history of primary hyperparathyroidism with or without parathyroid surgery after 15 years.
  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2008;93:3462. Copyright 2008 by The Endocrine Society. All rights reserved.) 
248    CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease
absorptiometry (DXA) of −2.5 or lower, is generally considered 
to be an indication for surgical treatment of primary hyper-
parathyroidism, the impact of low bone mass on morbidity is 
difficult to corroborate clinically (see Treatment of 
Hypercalcemia). 
 2. Hyperparathyroid kidney disease— Once common in 
 primary hyperparathyroidism, kidney stones now occur in 
10% to 20% of cases depending on the series. These are usu-
ally calcium oxalate stones. From the perspective of a stone 
clinic, only about 7% of calcium stone formers prove to have 
primary hyperparathyroidism. They are difficult to manage 
medically, and stones constitute one of the agreed indications 
for parathyroidectomy. Clinically evident nephrocalcinosis 
rarely occurs, but a gradual loss of renal function is not 
uncommon. Renal function is stabilized after a successful 
parathyroidectomy, and otherwise unexplained renal insuffi-
ciency (defined as an estimated glomerular filtration rate 
[eGFR] <60 mL/min) in the setting of primary hyperparathy-
roidism is also considered to be an indication for surgery 
because of the risk of progression. Chronic hypercalcemia can 
also compromise the renal concentrating ability, giving rise to 
polydipsia and polyuria. 
 3. Nonspecific features of primary hyperparathyroidism— -
Although stupor and coma occur in severe hypercalcemia, the 
degree to which milder impairments of central nervous system 
function affect the typical patient with primary hyperparathy-
roidism is unclear. Lethargy, fatigue, depression, difficulty in 
concentrating, and personality changes may occur; however, 
some patients appear to benefit from parathyroidectomy. 
Frank psychosis also responds to surgery on occasion. Muscle 
weakness with characteristic electromyographic changes is also 
seen, and there is evidence from controlled clinical trials that 
surgery can improve muscle strength. A number of studies 
have examined quality of life (QOL) and psychological func-
tion in patients with primary hyperparathyroidism pre- and 
post-parathyroid surgery, compared to a medically followed 
group. Results vary as to whether QOL improves with surgery. 
It was formerly thought that the incidence of hypertension 
was increased in primary hyperparathyroidism, but more 
 recent evidence suggests that it is probably no greater than in 
age-matched controls, and parathyroidectomy appears to be of 
no benefit. Dyspepsia, nausea, and constipation all occur, 
probably as a consequence of hypercalcemia, but there is prob-
ably no increase in the incidence of peptic ulcer disease. The 
articular manifestations of primary hyperparathyroidism 
 include chondrocalcinosis in up to 5% of patients. Acute 
 attacks of pseudogout, however, are less frequent. 
 B. Laboratory findings 
 Hypercalcemia is virtually universal 
in primary hyperparathyroidism, although the serum calcium 
sometimes fluctuates into the upper normal range. In patients 
with subtle hyperparathyroidism, repeated serum calcium mea-
surements over a period of time may be required to establish the 
pattern of intermittent hypercalcemia. Both total and ionized 
calcium are elevated, and in most clinical instances there is no 
advantage to measuring the ionized calcium level. Patients with 
normocalcemic primary hyperparathyroidism, in whom subtle 
vitamin D deficiency and malabsorption have been eliminated, are 
being recognized more frequently. In patients with primary hyper-
parathyroidism, the serum phosphorus level is low-normal 
(<3.5 mg/dL) or low (<2.5 mg/dL) because of the phosphaturic 
effect of PTH. A mild hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis may also 
manifest itself. 
 The diagnosis of primary hyperparathyroidism in a hypercalce-
mic patient can be made by determining the intact PTH level. As 
shown in  Figure 8–14 , an elevated or even upper-normal level of 
PTH is clearly inappropriate in a hypercalcemic patient and estab-
lishes the diagnosis of hyperparathyroidism or one of its variants—
FBHH or lithium-induced hypercalcemia. The reliability of the 
two-site intact PTH assay allows for the definitive diagnosis of 
primary hyperparathyroidism. In a patient with a high PTH level, 
there is no need to screen for such disorders as metastatic cancer 
or sarcoidosis. Determinations of BMD, renal function, and a 
plain abdominal radiograph for renal stones are often obtained for 
clinical decision-making reasons. A determination of urinary cal-
cium concentration and urinary creatinine excretion should 
always be obtained to exclude FBHH. 
 Treatment 
 The definitive treatment of primary hyperparathyroidism is para-
thyroidectomy. The surgical strategy (ie, minimally invasive vs 
bilateral neck exploration) depends on the ability of localizing 
studies such as sestamibi scanning to identify one clearly abnormal 
gland and the availability of intraoperative PTH determinations 
to verify that the disease-producing lesion has been removed dur-
ing surgery. If multiple enlarged glands are suspected, the likely 
diagnosis is parathyroid hyperplasia or double adenoma. In 
patients with hyperplasia, the preferred operation is a 3½ gland 
parathyroidectomy, leaving a remnant sufficient to prevent 
hypocalcemia. Double parathyroid adenomas are both removed in 
affected patients. The pathologist is of little help in distinguishing 
among normal tissue, parathyroid adenoma, and parathyroid 
hyperplasia: these in essence are surgical diagnoses, based on the 
size and appearance of the glands. The recurrence rate of hypercal-
cemia is high in patients who have parathyroid hyperplasia— 
particularly in those with MEN 1 or allelic variants of MEN 1 or 
the HPT-JT syndromes, because of the inherited propensity for 
tumor growth. In such cases, the parathyroid remnant can be 
removed from the neck and implanted in pieces in forearm mus-
cles to allow for easy subsequent removal of some parathyroid 
tissue if hypercalcemia recurs. 
 In experienced hands, the cure rate for a single parathyroid 
adenoma is more than 95%. The success rate in primary parathy-
roid hyperplasia is somewhat lower, because of missed glands and 
recurrent hyperparathyroidism in patients with MEN syndromes. 
There is a 20% incidence of persistent or recurrent hypercalcemia. 
However, parathyroidectomy is difficult surgery: the normal para-
thyroid gland weighs only about 40 mg and may be located 
throughout the neck or upper mediastinum. It is mandatory in 
this situation not only to locate a parathyroid adenoma, but also 
to find the other gland or glands and determine whether or not 
they are normal in size. Complications of surgery include damage 
to the recurrent laryngeal nerve, which passes close to the posterior 
thyroid capsule, and inadvertent removal or devitalization of all 
parathyroid tissue, producing permanent hypoparathyroidism. In 
skilled hands, the incidence of these complications is less than 1%. 
CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease     249
It is critical that parathyroid surgery be performed by someone 
with specialized skill and experience (see Chapter 26). 
 Localization studies of the parathyroid glands in patients with 
primary hyperparathyroidism and intraoperative PTH testing are 
critical components in the contemporary surgical management of 
patients presenting for minimally invasive surgical procedures. If 
localizing studies clearly indicate a single abnormal gland and if 
intraoperative PTH testing is available, surgical management gen-
erally consists of unilateral exploration with the removal of the 
single abnormal gland. Localization studies continue to be essen-
tial in the management of patients with recurrent or persistent 
hyperparathyroidism. The most successful procedures are  99m Tc-
sestamibi scanning, computed tomography, magnetic resonance 
imaging, and ultrasound. Individually, each has a sensitivity of 
60% to 80% in experienced hands. Used in combination, they are 
successful in at least 80% of reoperated cases. Invasive studies, 
such as angiography and venous sampling, are reserved for the 
most difficult cases. 
 There is no definitive medical therapy for primary hyperpara-
thyroidism. In postmenopausal women, estrogen therapy in high 
doses (1.25 mg of conjugated estrogens or 30-50 μg of ethinyl 
estradiol) produces an average decrease of 0.5 to 1 mg/dL in the 
serum calcium and an increase in BMD. The effects of estrogen 
are on the skeletal responses to PTH. PTH levels do not fall. Small 
series of patients provide experience with oral bisphosphonates 
(eg, alendronate) and the selective estrogen response modulator 
(SERM) raloxifene in these patients. Treatment with alendronate 
for 1 or 2 years reduces biochemical markers of bone turnover and 
improves BMD by DXA, especially in the spine and also in the 
femoral neck, compared to baseline values prior to treatment. 
Studies have shown that raloxifene, administered over several 
weeks, to postmenopausal women with mild primary hyperpara-
thyroidism also reduces bone turnover markers significantly. 
Neither alendronate nor raloxifene have significant and or persis-
tent effects on serum calcium or intact PTH levels, nor is either 
agent approved for treatment of primary hyperparathyroidism by 
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Calcimimetic 
agents that activate the parathyroid  CaSR , currently under inves-
tigation, may offer an alternative to surgery. The calcimimetic 
cinacalcet is FDA-approved for the management of secondary 
hyperparathyroidism in patients on dialysis (see later). In small 
clinical trials, cinacalcet was shown to normalize serum [Ca 2+ ] and 
raise serum phosphate with modest lowering of PTH levels in 
patients with mild asymptomatic primary hyperparathyroidism 
for up to 5 years of therapy. No significant changes in BMD by 
DXA were seen. This therapy, therefore, is most effective at con-
trolling hypercalcemia in these patients. 
 The relatively asymptomatic status of most patients with pri-
mary hyperparathyroidism today presents a dilemma. Which of 
them should be subjected to surgery? To answer this question 
definitively, it is necessary to know more about the natural history 
of untreated primary hyperparathyroidism. Most observational 
studies lack long-term follow-up and appropriate control groups. 
However, one observational study of 15 years duration showed 
modest increases in serum [Ca 2+ ] (after 10 years) and slow but 
consistent downward trends in BMD at cortical sites (femoral 
neck and distal radius) (after 8-10 years of follow-up) (see  Figure 
8–17 A). This study has challenged the skeletal safety of long-term 
observation of otherwise asymptomatic patients. On the other 
hand, surgery is usually curative. In experienced hands, surgery 
has a low morbidity rate. Although parathyroid surgery has a sub-
stantial initial cost, over the long term, the cost-benefit ratio may 
be favorable when compared with a lifetime of medical follow-up. 
Moreover, there is a marked improvement in BMD after surgery 
( see Figure 8–17 B), with sustained increases over 15 years postop-
eratively. Consensus Development Conferences or International 
Workshops in 1990, 2002, and 2008 examined evidence and 
published recommendations for surgery in mild asymptomatic 
primary hyperparathyroidism and for conservative management. 
Current recommendations are for surgery (1) if the serum calcium 
is greater than 1 mg/dL above the upper limits of normal; (2) if 
there had been a previous episode of life-threatening hypercalce-
mia; (3) if the eGFR is <60 mL/min; (4) if a kidney stone is pres-
ent; (5) if the BMD by DXA at the lumbar spine, hip, or distal 
radius is substantially reduced (≥2.5 SD below peak bone mass; 
T-score ≤−2.5); (6) if the patient is young (<50 years of age); or 
(7) if long-term medical surveillance is not desired or possible. 
Patients with a coexisting illness complicating the management of 
hypercalcemia should also be referred for surgery. 
 The expert panel also considered neuropsychiatric dysfunction, 
impending onset of menopause, older age and functional status, 
biochemical markers of bone turnover, and nonclassical symptoms 
of primary hyperparathyroidism (eg, gastrointestinal and cardio-
vascular manifestations) in their recommendations. The partici-
pants thought that there was sufficient uncertainty regarding these 
factors that firm recommendations for surgical referral based on 
these factors alone was not warranted. This panel agreed, however, 
that these clinical issues should be carefully considered in making 
decisions regarding surgery and/or long-term follow-up in indi-
vidual patients. 
 Variants of Primary Hyperparathyroidism 
 A. Familial benign hypocalciuric hypercalcemia 
Inherited as an autosomal dominant trait, this disorder is respon-
sible for lifelong asymptomatic hypercalcemia, first detectable in 
cord blood. Hypercalcemia is usually mild (10.5-12 mg/dL [2.7-3 
mmol/L]) and is often accompanied by mild hypophosphatemia 
and hypermagnesemia. The PTH level is normal or slightly ele-
vated, indicating that this is a PTH-dependent form of hypercal-
cemia. The parathyroid glands are normal in size or slightly 
enlarged. The most notable laboratory feature of the disorder is 
hypocalciuria. The urinary calcium level is usually less than 50 
mg/24 h, and the calcium/creatinine clearance ratio is less than 
0.01 and calculated as follows: 
 
Urine calcium
Serum creatinine
Serum calci
×
um
u
Urine creatinine
×
 Hypocalciuria is an intrinsic renal trait; it persists even in 
patients who have undergone total parathyroidectomy and become 
hypocalcemic. 
250    CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease
 Because FBHH is asymptomatic and benign, the most impor-
tant role of diagnosis is to distinguish it from primary hyperpara-
thyroidism and avoid an unnecessary parathyroidectomy. If 
subtotal parathyroidectomy is performed, the serum calcium 
invariably returns shortly to preoperative levels; these persons 
resist attempts to lower the serum calcium while functioning para-
thyroid tissue remains. Unfortunate patients with this condition 
who have undergone total parathyroidectomy are rendered 
hypoparathyroid and are dependent on calcium and vitamin D 
supplementation. 
 The diagnosis must be considered in patients with asymptom-
atic mild hypercalcemia who are relatively hypocalciuric. However, 
an unequivocal diagnosis cannot be made biochemically because 
the serum and urinary calcium and PTH levels all overlap with 
typical primary hyperparathyroidism. Family screening or sequenc-
ing of the  CaSR gene in an affected individual is necessary to make 
the diagnosis and can be obtained commercially. The penetrance 
of the phenotype is essentially 100%, and affected family mem-
bers are hypercalcemic throughout life, so if the proband has the 
disorder, each first-degree relative who is screened has a 50% 
chance of being hypercalcemic. 
 Most cases of FBHH are caused by loss-of-function mutations 
in the CaSR. Loss of the functional output of one CaSR allele 
shifts the set point for inhibition of PTH release to the right, 
producing hypercalcemia. The same receptor is expressed in the 
kidney, where it regulates renal calcium excretion. A variety of 
point mutations in different exons of the CaSR produce the phe-
notype. Acquired hypocalciuric hypercalcemia has been described 
in association with antibodies that interact with the parathyroid 
CaSRs and block the ability of high [Ca 2+ ] to suppress PTH. 
 A child of two parents with FBHH may inherit a mutant allele 
from each parent, producing  neonatal severe hypercalcemia, a 
life-threatening disorder in which failure to sense extracellular 
calcium causes severe hyperparathyroidism, requiring total para-
thyroidectomy soon after birth. 
 B. MEN syndromes 
 As noted above, primary hyperparathy-
roidism is a feature of both MEN 1 and MEN 2A (see also 
Chapter 22). The penetrance of primary hyperparathyroidism in 
MEN 1 is over 90% by age 40. Patients with the MEN 1 syn-
drome inherit a loss-of-function germline mutation in the tumor 
suppressor gene  MENIN on chromosome 11q12-13. Menin is a 
nuclear protein that appears to interact with JunD, a member of 
the AP1 family of transcription factors. A mutation during mitosis 
of a parathyroid cell that resulted in loss of function in the remain-
ing allele in that cell would abrogate the cell’s growth control 
mechanism and permit clonal expansion of its progeny ultimately 
to generate the parathyroid tumor. A similar mechanism appears 
also to operate in a small fraction of sporadic parathyroid ade-
nomas with 11q12-13 deletions. 
 The penetrance of primary hyperparathyroidism in MEN 2A 
is about 30%. As discussed in the above section on MCT, the 
disorder is caused by activating mutations in the  RET gene, a 
tyrosine kinase growth factor receptor. Evidently, the  RET gene 
product is less important for growth of the parathyroids than for 
thyroid C cells, because the penetrance of primary hyperparathy-
roidism is fairly low and because (in MEN 2B) a separate class of 
activating  RET mutations produces MCT and pheochromocy-
toma and very rarely primary hyperparathyroidism. The treatment 
for parathyroid hyperplasia in MEN 1 or MEN 2 is subtotal para-
thyroidectomy. The recurrence rate is higher than in sporadic 
parathyroid hyperplasia and may approach 50% in MEN 1. 
 C. Lithium therapy 
 Both in patients and in isolated parathy-
roid cells, exposure to extracellular lithium shifts the set point for 
inhibition of PTH secretion to the right. Clinically, this results in 
hypercalcemia and a detectable or elevated level of PTH. Lithium 
treatment also produces hypocalciuria and is thus a virtual pheno-
copy of FBHH. Most patients with therapeutic lithium levels for 
bipolar affective disorder have a slight increase in the serum calcium 
level, and up to 10% become mildly hypercalcemic, with PTH levels 
that are high normal or slightly elevated. Lithium treatment can also 
unmask underlying primary hyperparathyroidism. It is difficult to 
diagnose primary hyperparathyroidism in a lithium-treated patient, 
particularly when temporary cessation of lithium therapy is difficult. 
However, the likelihood of underlying primary hyperparathyroidism 
is high when the serum calcium is greater than 11.5 mg/dL, and the 
decision to undertake surgery must be based on clinical criteria. 
Unfortunately, surgical cure of hyperparathyroidism rarely amelio-
rates the underlying psychiatric condition. 
 2. MALIGNANCY-ASSOCIATED 
HYPERCALCEMIA 
 Malignancy-associated hypercalcemia is the second most common 
form of hypercalcemia, with an incidence of 15 cases per 100,000 
per year—about one-half the incidence of primary hyperparathy-
roidism. It is, however, much less prevalent than primary hyper-
parathyroidism, because most patients have a very limited survival. 
Nonetheless, malignancy-associated hypercalcemia is the most 
common cause of hypercalcemia in hospitalized patients. The 
clinical features and pathogenesis of malignancy-associated hyper-
calcemia are presented in Chapter 21. The treatment of nonpara-
thyroid hypercalcemia is presented later. 
 3. SARCOIDOSIS AND OTHER 
GRANULOMATOUS DISORDERS 
 Hypercalcemia is seen in up to 10% of subjects with sarcoidosis. A 
higher percentage has hypercalciuria. This is due to inappropriately 
elevated 1,25(OH) 2 D levels and abnormal vitamin D metabolism. 
Lymphoid tissue and pulmonary macrophages from affected indi-
viduals contain 25(OH)D 1-hydroxylase activity that is not seen in 
normal individuals. The 1-hydroxylase enzyme, responsible for the 
overproduction of 1,25(OH) 2 D in sarcoidosis, is the same as that 
in the kidney (CYP27B1). 1-Hydroxylase activity in these cells is 
not readily inhibited by calcium or 1,25(OH) 2 D, indicating a lack 
of feedback inhibition. Macrophages expressing the 1-hydroxylase 
in these patients do not express a normally functioning 24-hydrox-
ylase so that the catabolism and clearance of 1,25(OH) 2 D in these 
cells are lacking. This makes these subjects vulnerable to 
CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease     251
 hypercalcemia or hypercalciuria during periods of increased vita-
min D production (eg, summertime with increased sunlight expo-
sure). γ-IFN stimulates 1-hydroxylase activity in these cells, which 
makes such subjects more vulnerable to altered calcium homeosta-
sis when their disease is active. Glucocorticoids, on the other hand, 
suppress the inflammation, and subsequently 1-hydroxylase activ-
ity, and antagonize 1,25(OH) 2 D action, providing effective treat-
ment for both the disease and this complication of it. 
 Other granulomatous diseases are associated with abnormal 
vitamin D metabolism, resulting in hypercalcemia and/or hyper-
calciuria. These disorders include tuberculosis, berylliosis, dissemi-
nated coccidioidomycosis, histoplasmosis, leprosy, and pulmonary 
eosinophilic granulomatosis. Furthermore, a substantial number of 
subjects with Hodgkin or non-Hodgkin lymphomas develop 
hypercalcemia associated with inappropriately elevated 1,25(OH) 2 D 
levels. Although most such patients are normocalcemic on presen-
tation, they may be hypercalciuric, and this should be evaluated as 
part of the workup. Hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria may not 
become apparent until situations such as increased sunlight expo-
sure or vitamin D and calcium ingestion are experienced. Thus, 
one should remain alert to this complication even when the initial 
evaluation of serum calcium is within normal limits. 
 4. ENDOCRINOPATHIES 
 Thyrotoxicosis 
 Mild hypercalcemia is found in about 10% of patients with thy-
rotoxicosis. The PTH level is suppressed, and the serum phos-
phate is in the upper normal range. The serum alkaline phosphatase 
and biochemical markers of bone turnover may be mildly 
increased. Significant hypercalcemia may develop in patients with 
thyrotoxicosis, particularly if it is severe and if patients are tempo-
rarily immobilized. Thyroid hormone has direct bone-resorbing 
properties causing a high turnover state, which often eventually 
progresses to mild osteoporosis. 
 Adrenal Insufficiency 
 Hypercalcemia can be a feature of acute adrenal crisis and responds 
rapidly to glucocorticoid therapy. Animal studies suggest that 
hemoconcentration is a critical factor. In experimental adrenal 
insufficiency, ionized [Ca 2+ ] is normal. 
 5. ENDOCRINE TUMORS 
 Hypercalcemia in patients with pheochromocytoma is most often 
a manifestation of the MEN 2A syndrome, but hypercalcemia is 
found occasionally in uncomplicated pheochromocytoma, where 
it appears to result from secretion of PTHrP by the tumor. About 
40% of tumors secreting VIP (VIPomas) are associated with 
hypercalcemia. The cause is unknown. It is known, however, that 
high levels of VIP may activate PTH/PTHrP receptors. 
 6. THIAZIDE DIURETICS 
 The administration of thiazides and related diuretics such as chlo-
rthalidone, metolazone, and indapamide can produce an increase 
in the serum calcium that is not fully accounted for by hemocon-
centration. Hypercalcemia is mild and usually transient, lasting 
for days or weeks, but occasionally it persists. Thiazide administra-
tion can also exacerbate the effects of underlying primary hyper-
parathyroidism; in fact, thiazide administration was formerly used 
as a provocative test for hyperparathyroidism in patients with 
borderline hypercalcemia. Most patients with persistent hypercal-
cemia while receiving thiazides prove to have primary hyperpara-
thyroidism. 
 7. VITAMIN D AND VITAMIN A 
 Hypervitaminosis D 
 Hypercalcemia may occur in individuals ingesting large doses of 
vitamin D either therapeutically or accidentally (eg, irregularities 
in milk product supplementation with vitamin D have been 
reported). The initial signs and symptoms of vitamin D intoxica-
tion include weakness, lethargy, headaches, nausea, and polyuria 
and are attributable to hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria. Ectopic 
calcification may occur, particularly in the kidneys, resulting in 
nephrolithiasis or nephrocalcinosis; other sites include blood ves-
sels, heart, lungs, and skin. Infants appear to be quite susceptible 
to vitamin D intoxication and may develop disseminated athero-
sclerosis, supravalvular aortic stenosis, and renal acidosis. 
 Hypervitaminosis D is readily diagnosed by the very high 
serum levels of 25(OH)D, because the conversion of vitamin D to 
25(OH)D is not tightly regulated. In contrast, 1,25(OH) 2 D levels 
are often normal, but not suppressed. This reflects the expected 
feedback regulation of 1,25(OH) 2 D production by the elevated 
calcium and reduced PTH levels. Levels of free 1,25(OH) 2 D 
when measured have been found to be increased. This is in part 
caused by the high levels of 25(OH)D that displace 1,25(OH) 2 D 
from DBP, raising the ratio of free:total 1,25(OH) 2 D. The ele-
vated free concentration of 1,25(OH) 2 D, plus the intrinsic bio-
logic effects of the elevated 25(OH)D concentration, combine to 
increase intestinal calcium absorption and bone resorption. The 
hypercalciuria, which is invariably seen, may lead to dehydration 
and coma as a result of hyposthenuria, prerenal azotemia, and 
worsening hypercalcemia due, in part, to decreased renal 
 clearance. 
 The dose of vitamin D required to induce toxicity varies 
among patients, reflecting differences in absorption, storage, and 
subsequent metabolism of the vitamin as well as in target tissue 
response to the active metabolites. For example, an elderly patient 
is likely to have reduced intestinal calcium transport and renal 
production of 1,25(OH) 2 D. Such an individual may be able to 
tolerate 50,000 to 100,000 units of vitamin D daily (although 
these levels far exceed daily requirements). However, patients with 
unsuspected hyperparathyroidism receiving such doses for the 
treatment of osteoporosis are more likely to experience hypercal-
cemia. Treatment consists of withdrawing the vitamin D, rehydra-
tion, reducing calcium intake, and administering glucocorticoids, 
which antagonize the ability of 1,25(OH) 2 D to stimulate intesti-
nal calcium absorption. Excess vitamin D is slowly cleared from 
the body (weeks to months), so treatment is prolonged. 
252    CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease
 Hypervitaminosis A 
 Excessive ingestion of vitamin A, usually from self-medication 
with vitamin A preparations, causes a number of abnormalities, 
including gingivitis, cheilitis, erythema, desquamation, and hair 
loss. Bone resorption is increased, leading to osteoporosis and 
fractures, hypercalcemia, and hyperostosis. Excess vitamin A 
causes hepatosplenomegaly with hypertrophy of fat storage cells, 
fibrosis, and sclerosis of central veins. Many of these effects can be 
attributed to the effects of vitamin A on cellular membranes. 
Under normal circumstances, such effects are prevented because 
vitamin A is bound to retinol-binding protein (RBP), and its 
release from the liver is regulated. In vitamin A toxicity, however, 
these protective mechanisms are overcome, and retinol and its 
retinyl esters appear in blood unbound to RBP. The mechanism by 
which vitamin A stimulates bone resorption is not clear. 
 8. MILK-ALKALI SYNDROME 
 The ingestion of large quantities of calcium together with an 
absorbable alkali can produce hypercalcemia with alkalosis, renal 
impairment, and often nephrocalcinosis. The syndrome was more 
common when absorbable antacids were the standard treatment 
for peptic ulcer disease, but it is still seen occasionally. This is the 
only recognized example of pure absorptive hypercalcemia. The 
details of its pathogenesis are poorly understood. 
 9. MISCELLANEOUS CONDITIONS 
 Immobilization 
 In immobilized patients there is a marked increase in bone resorp-
tion, which often produces hypercalciuria and occasionally hyper-
calcemia, mainly in individuals with a preexisting high bone 
turnover state, such as adolescents and patients with thyrotoxicosis 
or Paget disease. Intact PTH and PTHrP levels are suppressed. 
The disorder remits with the restoration of activity. If acute treat-
ment is required, bisphosphonates appear to be the treatment of 
choice. 
 Acute Renal Failure 
 Hypercalcemia is often seen when renal failure is precipitated by 
rhabdomyolysis and usually occurs during the early recovery stage, 
presumably as calcium deposits are mobilized from damaged 
muscle tissue. It typically resolves over a few weeks. 
 TREATMENT OF HYPERCALCEMIA 
 Initial management of hypercalcemia consists of assessing the 
hydration state of the patient and rehydrating as necessary with 
saline. The first goal is to restore renal function, which is often 
impaired in hypercalcemia because of reduced glomerular filtra-
tion and dehydration. Hypercalcemia impairs the urinary concen-
trating ability, leading to polyuria, and at the same time impairs 
the sensorium, diminishing the sense of thirst. Once renal func-
tion is restored, excretion of calcium can be further enhanced by 
inducing a saline diuresis. Because most of the filtered calcium is 
reabsorbed by bulk flow in the proximal tubule along with sodium 
chloride, a saline diuresis markedly increases calcium excretion. 
However, a vigorous saline diuresis also induces substantial uri-
nary losses of potassium and magnesium, and these must be 
monitored and replaced as necessary. 
 After these initial steps, attention should be given to finding a 
suitable chronic therapy. It is important to start chronic therapy 
soon after hospitalization, because several of the most useful agents 
take up to 5 days to have their full effect. Intravenous bisphospho-
nates (pamidronate or zoledronic acid) are the first choice for most 
patients. Bisphosphonates act by inhibiting osteoclastic bone 
resorption. The initial dose of pamidronate is 60 to 90 mg by 
intravenous infusion over 1 hour, and the dose of zoledronic acid 
is 4 mg infused over 15 minutes. In two large trials, 88% and 70% 
of patients with malignancy-associated hypercalcemia normalized 
their serum calcium values after infusions of zoledronic acid (4 mg) 
and pamidronate (90 mg), respectively. Zoledronic acid produced 
a longer duration of response when treating hypercalcemia of 
malignancy—32 days versus 18 days for pamidronate. The nadir of 
serum calcium does not occur until 4 to 5 days after administration 
of either agent. Retreatment with either agent can be conducted 
after recurrence of hypercalcemia. Transient fever and myalgia occur 
in between 10 and 20% of patients who undergo intravenous bis-
phosphonate therapy. Increases in serum creatinine of ≥0.5 mg/dL 
occur in about 15% of patients. Intravenous bisphosphonates 
should be used cautiously (if at all) and at reduced doses when the 
baseline serum creatinine exceeds 2.5 mg/dL. 
 In patients with severe hypercalcemia and in those with renal 
insufficiency that is refractory to rehydration, it may be necessary to 
use an alternative second-line antiresorptive agent for a few days 
while awaiting the full therapeutic effect of intravenous bisphospho-
nates. For this purpose, synthetic salmon CT may be administered 
at a dose of 4 to 8 IU/kg subcutaneously every 12 hours. This is a 
useful adjunct acutely, but most patients become totally refractory 
to CT within days to weeks, so it is not suitable for chronic use. 
 The use of an antiresorptive agent together with saline diuresis 
provides for a two-pronged approach to hypercalcemia. Other 
agents besides bisphosphonates may be considered (eg, plicamycin 
or gallium nitrate), but their toxicity and lack of superior efficacy 
discourage their use. Both agents act to inhibit osteoclastic bone 
resorption. 
 Glucocorticoid administration is first-line treatment for hyper-
calcemia in patients with multiple myeloma, lymphoma, sarcoido-
sis, or intoxication with vitamin D or vitamin A. Glucocorticoids 
are also beneficial in some patients with breast carcinoma. 
However, they are of little use in most other patients with solid 
tumors and hypercalcemia. 
 HYPOCALCEMIA 
 Classification 
 Both PTH and 1,25(OH) 2 D maintain a normal serum calcium 
and are thus central to the defense against hypocalcemia. 
CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease     253
Hypocalcemic disorders are best understood as failures of the 
adaptive response. Thus, chronic hypocalcemia can result from a 
failure to secrete PTH, altered responsiveness to PTH, a defi-
ciency of vitamin D, or a resistance to vitamin D ( Table 8–7 ). 
Acute hypocalcemia is most often the consequence of an over-
whelming challenge to the adaptive response such as rhabdomy-
olysis, in which a flood of phosphate from injured skeletal muscle 
inundates the extracellular fluid. 
 Clinical Features 
 Most of the symptoms and signs of hypocalcemia occur because of 
increased neuromuscular excitability (tetany, paresthesias, seizures, 
organic brain syndrome) or because of deposition of calcium in 
soft tissues (cataract, calcification of basal ganglia). 
 A. Neuromuscular manifestations 
 Clinically, the hall-
mark of severe hypocalcemia is tetany. Tetany is a state of sponta-
neous tonic muscular contraction. Overt tetany is often heralded 
by tingling paresthesias in the fingers and around the mouth, but 
the classic muscular component of tetany is carpopedal spasm. 
This begins with adduction of the thumb, followed by flexion of 
the metacarpophalangeal joints, extension of the interphalangeal 
joints, and flexion of the wrists to produce the  main d’accoucheur 
posture ( Figure 8–18 ). These involuntary muscle contractions are 
painful. Although the hands are most typically involved, tetany 
can involve other muscle groups, including life-threatening spasm 
of laryngeal muscles. Electromyographically, tetany is typified by 
repetitive motor neuron action potentials, usually grouped as dou-
blets. Tetany is not specific for hypocalcemia. It also occurs with 
hypomagnesemia and metabolic alkalosis, and the most common 
cause of tetany is respiratory alkalosis from hyperventilation. 
 Lesser degrees of neuromuscular excitability (eg, serum [Ca] 
7.5-8.5 mg/dL) produce latent tetany, which can be elicited by 
testing for Chvostek and Trousseau signs. Chvostek sign is 
 elicited by tapping the facial nerve about 2 cm anterior to the 
earlobe, just below the zygoma. The response is a contraction of 
facial muscles ranging from twitching of the angle of the mouth 
to hemifacial contractions. The specificity of the test is low; 
about 25% of normal individuals have a mild Chvostek sign. 
Trousseau sign is elicited by inflating a blood pressure cuff to 
about 20 mm Hg above systolic pressure for 3 minutes. A 
 positive response is carpal spasm. Trousseau sign is more specific 
than Chvostek, but 1% to 4% of normal individuals have 
 positive Trousseau signs. 
 Hypocalcemia predisposes to focal or generalized seizures. 
Other central nervous system effects of hypocalcemia include 
pseudotumor cerebri, papilledema, confusion, lassitude, and 
organic brain syndrome. Twenty percent of children with chronic 
hypocalcemia develop mental retardation. The basal ganglia are 
often calcified in patients with long-standing hypoparathyroidism 
or PHP. This is usually asymptomatic but can produce a variety of 
movement disorders. 
 B. Other manifestations of hypocalcemia 
 1. Cardiac effects— Repolarization is delayed, with  prolongation 
of the QT interval. Excitation-contraction coupling may be 
impaired, and refractory congestive heart failure is sometimes 
TABLE 8–7 Causes of hypocalcemia.
Hypoparathyroidism
Surgical
Idiopathic
Neonatal
Familial
Autoimmune
Deposition of metals (iron, copper, aluminum)
Postradiation
Infiltrative
Functional (in hypomagnesemia)
Resistance to PTH action
Pseudohypoparathyroidism
Renal insufficiency
Medications that block osteoclastic bone resorption
 Plicamycin
 Calcitonin
 Bisphosphonates
Failure to produce 1,25(OH)2D normally
Vitamin D deficiency
Hereditary vitamin D-dependent rickets, type 1 (renal 25-OH-vitamin 
D 1alpha-hydroxylase deficiency)
Resistance to 1,25(OH)2D action
Hereditary vitamin D-dependent rickets, type 2 (defective VDR)
Acute complexation or deposition of calcium
Acute hyperphosphatemia
 Crush injury with myonecrosis
 Rapid tumor lysis
 Parenteral phosphate administration
 Excessive enteral phosphate
 Oral (phosphate-containing antacids)
 Phosphate-containing enemas
Acute pancreatitis
Citrated blood transfusion
Rapid, excessive skeletal mineralization
 Hungry bones syndrome
 Osteoblastic metastasis
 Vitamin D therapy for vitamin D deficiency
 FIGURE 8–18  Position of fingers in carpal spasm due to 
hypocalcemic tetany. ( Reproduced, with permission, from Ganong 
WF.  Review of Medical Physiology . 16th ed. Originally published by 
Appleton & Lange. Copyright 1993 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.) 
254    CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease
observed, particularly in patients with underlying cardiac 
disease. 
 2. Ophthalmologic effects— Subcapsular cataract is common in 
chronic hypocalcemia, and its severity is correlated with the 
duration and level of hypocalcemia. 
 3.  Dermatologic effects— The skin is often dry and flaky and 
the nails brittle. 
 CAUSES OF HYPOCALCEMIA 
 1. HYPOPARATHYROIDISM 
 Hypoparathyroidism may be surgical, autoimmune, familial, or 
idiopathic. The signs and symptoms are those of chronic hypocal-
cemia. Biochemically, the hallmarks of hypoparathyroidism are 
hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia (because the phosphaturic 
effect of PTH is lost), and an inappropriately low or undetectable 
PTH level. 
 Surgical Hypoparathyroidism 
 The most common cause of hypoparathyroidism is surgery on the 
neck, with removal or destruction of the parathyroid glands. The 
operations most often associated with hypoparathyroidism are 
cancer surgery, total thyroidectomy, and parathyroidectomy, but 
the skill and experience of the surgeon are more important predic-
tors than the nature of the operation. Tetany ensues 1 or 2 days 
postoperatively, but about half of patients with postoperative tet-
any recover sufficiently so they do not require long-term replace-
ment therapy. In these cases, a devitalized parathyroid remnant has 
recovered its blood supply and resumes secretion of PTH. In some 
patients, hypocalcemia may not become evident until years after 
the procedure. Surgical hypoparathyroidism is the presumptive 
diagnosis for hypocalcemia in any patient with a surgical scar on 
the neck. 
 In patients with severe hyperparathyroid bone disease preopera-
tively, a syndrome of postoperative hypocalcemia can follow suc-
cessful parathyroidectomy. This is the  hungry bones syndrome , 
which results from avid uptake of calcium and phosphate by the 
bones. The parathyroids, although intact, cannot compensate. 
The syndrome is usually seen in patients with an elevated preop-
erative serum alkaline phosphatase and/or severe uremic secondary 
hyperparathyroidism. It can usually be distinguished from surgical 
hypoparathyroidism by the serum phosphorus, which is low in the 
hungry bones syndrome, because of skeletal avidity for phosphate, 
and high in hypoparathyroidism, and by the serum PTH, which 
becomes appropriately elevated in the hungry bones syndrome. 
 Idiopathic Hypoparathyroidism 
 Acquired hypoparathyroidism is sometimes seen in the setting of 
polyglandular endocrinopathies. Most commonly, it is associated 
with primary adrenal insufficiency and mucocutaneous candidia-
sis in the syndrome of  autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1 
(APS1) (see Chapter 3). The typical age at onset of hypoparathy-
roidism is 5 to 9 years. A similar form of hypoparathyroidism can 
occur as an isolated finding. The age at onset of idiopathic 
hypoparathyroidism is 2 to 10 years, and there is a preponderance 
of female cases. Circulating parathyroid antibodies are common in 
both APS1 and in isolated hypoparathyroidism. Many patients 
have antibodies that recognize the CaSR. Many patients with 
autoimmune hypoparathyroidism have antibodies reactive with 
NALP5 (NACHT leucine-rich-repeat protein 5), an intracellular 
signaling molecule expressed in the parathyroid. The pathogenetic 
role of any of these antibodies is not yet clarified. APS1 is an 
autosomal recessive disorder in which mutations are found in the 
 AIRE (autoimmune regulator) protein. AIRE is a transcription 
factor involved in negative selection in the thymus and 
 periphery. 
 Another form of autoimmune hypoparathyroidism has been 
reported in patients with autoantibodies to the CaSR that func-
tionally activate it and suppress PTH secretion. These rare cases 
have been detected along with other autoimmune disorders such 
as Addison disease and Hashimoto thyroiditis. 
 Familial Hypoparathyroidism 
 Hypoparathyroidism is an uncommon disorder and presents in 
familial forms transmitted as either autosomal dominant or reces-
sive traits. Autosomal recessive hypoparathyroidism occurs in 
families with  PTH gene mutations that interfere with the normal 
processing of PTH. Another autosomal recessive form of this dis-
ease is due to a deletion of the 5′ sequence of the gene encoding 
the transcription factor  glial cell missing 2 , which is necessary for 
parathyroid gland development. Hypoparathyroidism is evident 
in the newborn period because of parathyroid gland agenesis. 
 Autosomal dominant hypoparathyroidism can be due to point 
mutations in the  CaSR gene, which render the protein constitu-
tively active. This property enables the receptor to mediate sup-
pression of PTH secretion at normal and even subnormal serum 
calcium levels. Several families with different mutations have been 
described; affected individuals typically have mild hypoparathy-
roidism (mildly reduced serum [Ca 2+ ] and PTH levels). These 
patients also demonstrate marked hypercalciuria due to CaSR 
mutations in their kidneys. The set point for calcium-induced 
suppression of PTH secretion in these patients is shifted to the left 
as is the effect of serum [Ca 2+ ] on renal calcium excretion. Thus, 
this syndrome is the mirror image of FBHH. Therapy is often not 
necessary and risks precipitating even greater degrees of hypercal-
ciuria, nephrocalcinosis, and renal stones. 
 Other Causes of Hypoparathyroidism 
 Neonatal hypoparathyroidism can be part of the  DiGeorge syn-
drome (dysmorphic facies, cardiac defects, immune deficiency, 
and hypoparathyroidism) due to a microdeletion (or other genetic 
abnormalities) on chromosome 22q11.2; the  HDR  syndrome 
(hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness, and renal anoma-
lies) due to mutations in or deletion of an allele of the GATA3 
transcription factor; and other rare conditions. Transfusion-
dependent individuals with thalassemia or red cell aplasia who 
survive into the third decade of life are susceptible to 
CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease     255
 hypoparathyroidism as the result of iron deposition in the para-
thyroid glands. Copper deposition can cause hypoparathyroidism 
in Wilson disease. Infiltration with metastatic carcinoma is a very 
rare cause of hypoparathyroidism. 
 Severe magnesium depletion temporarily paralyzes the parathy-
roid glands, preventing secretion of PTH. Magnesium depletion 
also blunts the actions of PTH on target organs (kidney and bone) 
to counteract the hypocalcemia. This is seen with magnesium 
losses due to gastrointestinal and renal disorders and alcoholism. 
The syndrome responds immediately to infusion of magnesium. 
As discussed above in the section on regulation of PTH secretion, 
magnesium is probably required for effective stimulus-secretion 
coupling in the parathyroids. 
 2. PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM 
 PHP is a genetic disorder of target-organ unresponsiveness to 
PTH. Biochemically, it mimics hormone-deficient forms of 
hypoparathyroidism, with hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia, 
but the PTH level is elevated, and there is a markedly blunted 
response to the administration of PTH (see Diagnosis, later). 
 Clinical Features 
 Two distinct forms of PHP are recognized. PHP type IB is a dis-
order of isolated resistance to PTH, which presents with the bio-
chemical features of hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, and 
secondary hyperparathyroidism. PHP type IA has, in addition to 
these biochemical features, a characteristic somatic phenotype 
known as  Albright hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO). This 
consists of short stature, round face, short neck, obesity, brachy-
dactyly (short digits), shortened metatarsals, subcutaneous ossifi-
cations, and often reduced intelligence. Because of shortening of 
the metacarpal bones—most often the fourth and fifth 
 metacarpals—affected digits have a dimple, instead of a knuckle, 
when a fist is made ( Figure 8–19 ). Primary hypothyroidism is 
frequently seen. Less commonly, these patients have abnormalities 
of reproductive function—oligomenorrhea in females and infertil-
ity in males due to primary hypogonadism. Interestingly, certain 
individuals in families with PHP inherit the somatic phenotype of 
AHO without any disorder of calcium metabolism; this state, 
which mimics PHP, is called  pseudo-PHP or  PPHP. 
 Pathophysiology 
 PHP type IA is caused by the loss of function of one allele (haplo-
insufficiency) of the gene encoding the stimulatory G protein 
alpha subunit, (G s alpha or GNAS). This abnormality is predicted 
to produce only 50% of the normal levels of the alpha subunit of 
the heterotrimeric G s , which couples the PTH receptor to adeny-
lyl cyclase. Patients with PHP type IA have a markedly blunted 
response of urinary cAMP to administration of PTH. Because G s 
also couples many other receptors to adenylyl cyclase, the expected 
result of this mutation would be a generalized disorder of hor-
monal unresponsiveness. The presence of primary hypothyroidism 
and primary hypogonadism in these patients indicates that resis-
tance to TSH, LH, and FSH occurs fairly commonly. 
Responsiveness to other hormones (eg, ACTH, glucagon) is fairly 
 FIGURE 8–19  Hands of a patient with pseudohypoparathyroidism.  A : Note the short fourth fingers.  B : Note the “absent“ fourth knuckle.
  C: Film shows the short fourth metacarpal. ( Reproduced, with permission, from Potts JT. Pseudohypoparathyroidism: clinical features; signs and 
symptoms; diagnosis and differential diagnosis. In: Stanbury JB, Wyngaarden JB, Fredrickson DS, eds.  The Metabolic Basis of Inherited Disease . 
4th ed. McGraw-Hill; 1978.) 
256    CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease
normal. Thus, a 50% loss of the G s alpha protein produces resis-
tance to some hormones but not others. G s alpha is also deficient 
in individuals with PPHP, who have AHO but normal responsive-
ness to PTH. Thus, a mutation in the  G s alpha gene invariably 
produces AHO but only sometimes produces resistance to PTH, 
suggesting that the occurrence of a metabolic phenotype is deter-
mined by other factors described below ( Table 8–8 ). 
 In PHP type IB, there is resistance to PTH but no somatic 
phenotype (ie, AHO), and levels of G s alpha protein in red blood 
cell or fibroblast membranes are normal. The disorder, however, is 
also linked to the GNAS locus, but it does not involve mutations 
in the coding region of GNAS. Instead epigenetic defects in 
GNAS are present that cause the differentially methylated region 
at exon A/B to lose its imprinting. Most cases demonstrate a 
maternally derived 3-kb deletion of DNA sequences located more 
than 200 kb centromeric of the GNAS locus at the STX16 locus. 
Other deletions remove this entire differentially methylated 
region—a key regulator of the levels of GNAS transcription. 
Transcription directed by this (unmethylated) promoter does not 
produce appropriate levels of G s alpha protein in the renal cortex 
where this biallelic promoter activity is important. Thus, abnor-
mal methylation of GNAS regulatory sequences plays a key role in 
the pathogenesis of PHP1B. 
 Genetics 
 PHP type IA is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. Individuals 
who have acquired the trait from their fathers almost always present 
with PPHP and lack hormone resistance. When the mutant allele is 
derived from the mother, PHP with hormone resistance is always 
present. This pattern of inheritance is due to genomic imprinting of 
the GNAS1 locus. In the kidney cortex, the maternal allele is pref-
erentially expressed and the paternal allele is silenced. Thus, if the 
mutant GNAS1 allele is maternally derived, the resulting offspring 
will have PHP; if the mutant GNAS1 allele is paternally derived 
(and therefore silenced), the resulting offspring will have PPHP. 
Tissue-specific imprinting of the  GNAS1 gene, therefore, deter-
mines the expression of hormone resistance in the kidney and thy-
roid. The expression of AHO does not depend on imprinting 
mechanisms and occurs in PHP type IA and PPHP. 
 Diagnosis 
 Several disorders present with hypocalcemia and secondary hyper-
parathyroidism (eg, vitamin D deficiency), but when these fea-
tures occur together with hyperphosphatemia or AHO, this 
suggests the diagnosis of PHP. To confirm that resistance to PTH 
is present, the patient can be challenged with PTH (the Ellsworth-
Howard test). For this purpose, synthetic human PTH(1-34) 
(teriparatide acetate, 3 IU/kg body weight) is infused intrave-
nously over 10 minutes during a water diuresis, and urine is col-
lected during the hour preceding the infusion, during the 
half-hour following the infusion, 30 to 60 minutes after the infu-
sion, and 1 to 2 hours after the infusion and assayed for cAMP 
and creatinine. Data are expressed as nanomoles of cAMP per liter 
of glomerular filtrate, based on creatinine measurements. Normally, 
there is an increase in urinary cAMP of more than 300 nmol/L 
glomerular filtrate after administration of PTH. The use of the 
urinary phosphate response as a gauge of PTH responsiveness is 
much less reliable. For practical purposes, hypocalcemia, hyper-
phosphatemia, elevated PTH levels, and normal levels of vitamin 
D metabolites (with or without AHO) confirm the presence of 
resistance to PTH. 
 3. VITAMIN D DEFICIENCY 
 Pathogenesis 
 Vitamin D deficiency results from one or more factors: inadequate 
sunlight exposure, inadequate nutrition, or malabsorption. In 
addition, drugs that activate the catabolism of vitamin D and its 
metabolites, such as phenytoin and phenobarbital, can precipitate 
vitamin D deficiency in subjects with marginal vitamin D status. 
Although the human skin is capable of producing sufficient 
amounts of vitamin D if exposed to sunlight of adequate intensity, 
institutionalized patients frequently do not get adequate exposure. 
Furthermore, the fear of skin cancer has led many to avoid sun-
light exposure or to apply protective agents that block the ultra-
violet portion of sunlight from reaching the lower reaches of the 
epidermis where most of the vitamin D is produced. Heavily pig-
mented and elderly individuals have less efficient production of 
vitamin D for a given exposure to ultraviolet irradiation. Serum 
levels of 25(OH)D are used to indicate vitamin D status. Although 
there is no consensus on what level of 25(OH)D constitutes suf-
ficiency, 30 ng/mL has become the preferred target in North 
America. With that standard, a large portion of the population is 
vitamin D insufficient. A recent NHANES survey found that in 
the population over age 60, 67% of Caucasians, 82% of 
Hispanics, and 88% of African Americans had 25(OH)D levels 
below 30 ng/mL. Studies of hospitalized patients or those in nurs-
ing homes show almost universal vitamin D insufficiency if not 
frank deficiency. The intensity of sunlight is an important factor 
that limits effective vitamin D production as a function of season 
(summer > winter) and latitude (less intense the higher the lati-
tude). The supplementation of milk has reduced the incidence of 
vitamin D deficiency in the United States, but most countries do 
not follow this practice. Even in the United States, severe vitamin D 
deficiency and rickets may occur in children of vegetarian mothers 
TABLE 8–8 Features of pseudohypoparathyroidism.
PHP 1A
PPHPa
PHP 1B
Hypocalcemia
Yes
No
Yes
Response to PTH
No
Yes
No
Albright hereditary osteodystrophy
Yes
Yes
No
GNAS coding region mutation
Yes
Yes
No
GNAS regulatory region mutation 
or deletion
No
No
Yes
Generalized target organ 
unresponsiveness
Yes
No
No
aPseudopseudohypoparathyroidism.
CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease     257
who avoid milk products (and presumably have reduced vitamin 
D stores) and in children who are not weaned to vitamin 
D-supplemented milk by age 2. Breast milk contains little vitamin 
D, although vitamin D content can be increased by supplement-
ing the mother. Adults who avoid milk as well as sunlight are 
likewise at risk. Individuals with a variety of small bowel, pancre-
atic, and biliary tract disease and those after partial gastrectomy or 
intestinal bypass surgery have reduced capacity to absorb the vita-
min D from the diet. 
 Clinical Features 
 The clinical features of individuals with severe vitamin D deficiency 
will be discussed more thoroughly in the section on “Osteomalacia 
and Rickets.” Severe vitamin D deficiency should be suspected in 
individuals complaining of lethargy, proximal muscle weakness, and 
bone pain who have frankly low or low normal serum calcium and 
phosphate and low urine calcium on routine biochemical evalua-
tion. A low serum 25(OH)D level is diagnostic in this setting. 
1,25(OH) 2 D levels are often normal and reflect the increased 
1-hydroxylase activity in these subjects that is responding appropri-
ately to the increased PTH levels as well as the low serum calcium 
and phosphate levels. However, there is increasing awareness that 
less severe degrees of vitamin D deficiency may not present with 
obvious musculoskeletal signs and symptoms. These individuals 
may be more susceptible to conditions such as hyperparathyroid-
ism, osteoporosis, increased risk of falls and fractures, but also 
increased infections, hypertension, increased cardiovascular disease, 
diabetes mellitus, and various malignancies. Solid data from large-
scale randomized placebo controlled clinical trials demonstrating 
cause and effect for vitamin D deficiency and many of these disor-
ders are lacking, although animal studies and a large body of epide-
miologic evidence and case control studies point in this direction. 
 Treatment 
 The goal in treating severe vitamin D deficiency manifesting as 
rickets or osteomalacia is to normalize the clinical, biochemical, 
and radiologic abnormalities without producing hypercalcemia, 
hyperphosphatemia, hypercalciuria, nephrolithiasis, or ectopic 
calcification. To realize this goal, patients must be followed care-
fully. As the bone lesions heal or the underlying disease improves, 
the dosage of vitamin D, calcium, or phosphate needs to be 
adjusted to avoid such complications. With the appreciation that 
most individuals have a less severe form of vitamin D deficiency 
and do not have obvious signs or symptoms associated with rickets 
or osteomalacia, the goal of treatment is to achieve a level of 
25(OH)D that existing data indicate will reduce the predisposi-
tion of such individuals to the numerous diseases associated with 
vitamin D deficiency. Correction of vitamin D deficiency can usu-
ally be achieved by the weekly administration of 50,000 IU ergo-
calciferol for 6 to 8 weeks followed by replacement doses of 800 
to 2000 IU/d based on maintenance of adequate serum 25(OH)
D levels. Patients with malabsorption may respond to larger 
amounts of vitamin D (25,000-100,000 IU/d or one to three 
times per week). 25(OH)D (50-100 μg/d) is better absorbed than 
vitamin D and may be used if malabsorption of vitamin D is a 
limiting factor, but is not readily available in the United States. 
Calcitriol (1,25(OH) 2 D) and its analogs are not appropriate 
therapy for patients with vitamin D deficiency because of the 
likely requirement for vitamin D metabolites other than 
1,25(OH) 2 D and the advantage of providing adequate substrate 
(25(OH)D) for tissues capable of producing their own 1,25(OH) 2 D 
as the need arises (eg, as in the immune response). The exception 
to this rule is in patients with renal failure incapable of producing 
adequate 1,25(OH) 2 D. Vitamin D therapy should be supple-
mented with 1 to 3 g of elemental calcium per day. Care must be 
taken in managing patients with vitamin D deficiency who also 
have elevated PTH levels, because long-standing vitamin D defi-
ciency may produce a degree of autonomy in the parathyroid 
glands such that rapid replacement with calcium and vitamin D 
could result in hypercalcemia or hypercalciuria. A listing of avail-
able vitamin D metabolites and analogs with their main indica-
tions for clinical use is presented in  Table 8–2 . 
 4. PSEUDOVITAMIN D DEFICIENCY 
 Pseudovitamin D deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive disease in 
which rickets is accompanied by low levels of 1,25(OH) 2 D but 
normal levels of 25(OH)D. The disease is due to mutations in the 
 25(OH)D 1-hydroxylase gene ( CYP27B1 ) that render it nonfunc-
tional. Both alleles need to be defective in order for the disease to 
be manifest. Although affected patients do not respond to doses of 
vitamin D that are effective in subjects with vitamin D deficiency, 
they can respond to pharmacologic doses of vitamin D and to 
physiologic doses of calcitriol, which is the preferred treatment. 
 5. HEREDITARY VITAMIN D–RESISTANT 
RICKETS 
 Hereditary vitamin D–resistant rickets is a rare autosomal reces-
sive disease that presents in childhood with rickets similar to that 
seen in patients with vitamin D deficiency. Many of these 
patients also have alopecia, which is not characteristic of vitamin 
D deficiency or pseudovitamin D deficiency. The biochemical 
changes are similar to those reported in subjects with vitamin D 
deficiency except that the 1,25(OH) 2 D levels are generally very 
high. The disease is caused by inactivating mutations in the  VDR 
gene. The location of the mutation can affect the severity of the 
disease. In particular, mutations in the DNA-binding domain 
(exons 2, 3) that prevent DNA binding and mutations in the 
ligand-binding domain (exons 5-7) that prevent 1,25(OH) 2 D 
binding lead to a more. The latter mutations may alter but not 
inhibit DNA/ligand binding. These patients are treated with 
large doses of calcitriol and dietary calcium and may show partial 
or complete remission as they grow older. An animal model of 
this disease (inactivation or knockout of both VDR alleles) dem-
onstrates that the bone disease can be corrected with high dietary 
intake of calcium and phosphate, although the alopecia is not 
altered. This disease points to a role for the VDR in epidermis 
and hair development that is independent of its activity in the 
intestine and bone. 
258    CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease
 6. OTHER HYPOCALCEMIC DISORDERS 
 Hypoalbuminemia produces a low total serum [Ca 2+ ] because of a 
reduction in the bound fraction of calcium, but the ionized [Ca 2+ ] 
is normal. The ionized [Ca 2+ ] can be determined directly, or the 
effect of hypoalbuminemia can be roughly corrected for by using 
the following formula: 
 Corrected serum calcium = Measured serum calcium + (0.8)
(4 − Measured serum albumin)
 Thus, in a patient with a serum [Ca 2+ ] of 7.8 mg/dL and a 
serum albumin of 2 g/dL, the corrected serum [Ca 2+ ] is 7.8 + (0.8)
(4 − 2) = 9.4 mg/dL. 
 Several disorders produce acute hypocalcemia even if homeo-
static mechanisms are intact, simply because they overwhelm these 
mechanisms. Acute hyperphosphatemia resulting from rhabdomy-
olysis or tumor lysis, often in the setting of renal insufficiency, 
may produce severe symptomatic hypocalcemia. Transfusion of 
large volumes of cit-rated blood causes acute hypocalcemia by 
complexation of calcium as calcium citrate. In this instance, total 
calcium may be normal, but the ionized fraction is reduced. In 
acute pancreatitis, hypocalcemia is an ominous prognostic sign. 
The mechanism of hypocalcemia is sequestration of calcium by 
saponification with fatty acids, which are produced in the retro-
peritoneum by the action of pancreatic lipases. Skeletal mineral-
ization, when very rapid, can cause hypocalcemia. This is seen in 
the  hungry bones syndrome , which was discussed above in the 
section on surgical hypoparathyroidism, and occasionally with 
widespread osteoblastic metastases from prostatic carcinoma. 
 TREATMENT OF HYPOCALCEMIA 
 Acute Hypocalcemia 
 Patients with tetany should receive intravenous calcium as calcium 
chloride (272 mg calcium/10 mL), calcium gluconate (90 mg 
calcium/10 mL), or calcium gluceptate (90 mg calcium/10 mL). 
Approximately 200 mg of elemental calcium can be given over 
several minutes. The patient must be observed for stridor and the 
airway secured if necessary. Oral calcium and a rapidly acting 
preparation of vitamin D should be started. If necessary, calcium 
can be infused in doses of 400 to 1000 mg/24 h until oral therapy 
has taken effect. Intravenous calcium is irritating to the veins and 
is best infused into a large vein or through a central venous 
 catheter. 
 Chronic Hypocalcemia 
 The objective of chronic therapy is to keep the patient free of 
symptoms and to maintain a serum [Ca 2+ ] of approximately 8.5 to 
9.0 mg/dL. With lower serum [Ca 2+ ], the patient may not only 
experience symptoms but may be predisposed over time to cataract 
formation if the phosphate level is also high. With serum calcium 
concentrations in the upper normal range, there may be marked 
hypercalciuria, which occurs because the hypocalciuric effect of 
PTH has been lost. This may predispose to nephrolithiasis, 
 nephrocalcinosis, and chronic renal insufficiency. In addition, the 
patient with borderline elevated calcium is at increased risk of 
overshooting the therapeutic goal and may develop symptomatic 
hypercalcemia. 
 The mainstays of treatment are calcium and a form of 
 vitamin D. Oral calcium can be given in a dose of 1.5 to 3 g of 
elemental calcium or more per day. These large doses of calcium 
reduce the doses of vitamin D that are needed and allow for 
rapid normalization of serum calcium if vitamin D intoxication 
subsequently occurs. Numerous preparations of calcium are 
available. A short-acting preparation of vitamin D (calcitriol) 
and the very long-acting preparations such as vitamin D 2 (ergo-
calciferol) are available (see  Table 8–2 ). By far the most inex-
pensive regimens are those that use ergocalciferol. In addition to 
economy, they have the advantage of rather easy maintenance in 
most patients. The disadvantage is that ergocalciferol can slowly 
accumulate and produce prolonged vitamin D intoxication. 
Caution must be exercised in the introduction of other drugs 
that influence calcium metabolism. For example, thiazide 
diuretics have a hypocalciuric effect. By reducing urinary cal-
cium excretion in treated patients, whose other adaptive mecha-
nisms such as the modulation of PTH secretion by calcium, are 
nonoperative and who are thus absolutely dependent on renal 
excretion of calcium to maintain the serum calcium level, thiaz-
ides may produce significant hypercalcemia. In a similar way, 
intercurrent illnesses that compromise renal function (and 
therefore calcium excretion) may produce dangerous hypercal-
cemia in the patient who is maintained on large doses of 
 vitamin D. Short-acting preparations are less prone to some of 
these effects but may require more frequent titration and are 
much more expensive than vitamin D 2 . 
 BONE ANATOMY AND 
REMODELING 
 FUNCTIONS OF BONE 
 Bone has four major functions. 
 (1)  It provides rigid support to extremities and body cavities con-
taining vital organs. In diseases in which the skeleton is weak-
ened or defective, erect posture may be impossible and vital 
organ function may be compromised. An example is the car-
diopulmonary dysfunction that occurs in patients with severe 
kyphosis due to vertebral collapse. 
 (2)  Bones are crucial to locomotion in that they provide efficient 
levers and sites of attachment for muscles. With bony defor-
mity, these levers become defective, and severe abnormalities 
of gait develop. 
 (3)  Bone provides a large reservoir of ions, such as calcium, phos-
phate, magnesium, and sodium that are critical for life and 
can be mobilized when the external environment fails to pro-
vide them. 
 (4)  Bone houses the hematopoietic elements. There is increasing 
evidence of a trophic relationship between the stromal cells in 
bone and the hematopoietic elements. 
CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease     259
 STRUCTURE OF BONE 
 The material properties of normal bone strike an ideal balance 
between rigidity and elasticity. Bone is rigid enough to provide 
structural stability and resist applied forces but not overly mineral-
ized and brittle, which would result in an increased tendency to 
fracture. Bone must also be light enough to be moved by muscle 
contractions. Cortical bone, composed of densely packed layers of 
mineralized collagen, provides rigidity and is the major compo-
nent of tubular bones ( Figure 8–20 ). Trabecular (cancellous) bone 
is spongy in cross-section, provides strength and elasticity, and 
constitutes the major portion of the axial skeleton. Disorders in 
which cortical bone is defective or reduced in mass lead to frac-
tures of the long bones. Disorders in which trabecular bone is 
defective or scanty, in contrast, lead preferentially to vertebral 
fractures. Fractures of long bones may also occur because normal 
trabecular bone reinforcement is lost. 
 Two-thirds of the weight of bone is due to mineral; the remain-
der is due to water and type I collagen. Minor organic compo-
nents such as proteoglycans, lipids, acidic proteins containing 
gamma-carboxyglutamic acid, osteonectin, osteopontin, and 
growth factors comprise the remainder. 
 FIGURE 8–20  Diagram showing features of the microstructure of mature bone seen in both transverse (top) and longitudinal section. 
Areas of cortical (compact) and trabecular (cancellous) bone are included. ( Reproduced, with permission, from Warwick R, Williams PL, eds.  Gray’s 
Anatomy . 35th ed. Longman; 1973.) 
260    CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease
 Bone Mineral 
 The mineral of bone is present in two forms. The major form 
consists of hydroxyapatite in crystals of varying maturity. The 
remainder is amorphous calcium phosphate, which lacks a coher-
ent x-ray diffraction pattern, has a lower calcium-to-phosphate 
ratio than pure hydroxyapatite, occurs in regions of active bone 
formation, and is present in larger quantities in young bone. 
 Bone Cells 
 Bone is composed of three types of cells: the osteoblast, the osteo-
cyte, and the osteoclast. 
 A. Osteoblast 
 The osteoblast is the principal bone-forming 
cell. It arises from a pool of mesenchymal stem cells in the bone 
marrow, which as they differentiate, acquire a set of characteristics, 
including expression of PTH and vitamin D receptors; surface 
expression of the ectoenzyme alkaline phosphatase; and expression 
of bone matrix protein genes—type I collagen, osteocalcin, osteo-
pontin, and others. Differentiated osteoblasts are directed to the 
bone surface, where they line regions of new bone formation, lay-
ing down bone matrix (osteoid) in orderly lamellae and inducing 
its mineralization ( Figure 8–21 ). In the mineralization process, 
hydroxyapatite crystals are deposited on the collagen layers to 
produce lamellar bone. Mineralization requires an adequate sup-
ply of extracellular calcium and phosphate as well as alkaline 
phosphatase, which is secreted in large amounts by active osteo-
blasts. The fate of senescent osteoblasts is not well defined. Some 
probably become flattened, inactive lining cells on trabecular bone 
surfaces, some are buried in cortical bone as osteocytes, and others 
undergo apoptosis. 
 B. Osteocyte  Osteoblasts that remain within cortical bone dur-
ing the remodeling process become osteocytes. Protein synthetic 
activity decreases markedly, and the cells develop multiple processes 
(canaliculi) that reach out through lacunae in bone tissue to com-
municate with nutrient capillaries, with processes of other osteocytes 
within a unit of bone (osteon), and also with the cell processes of 
surface osteoblasts ( see Figure 8–20 ). The physiologic functions of 
osteocytes are poorly understood. They are believed to (1) act as a 
cellular syncytium that permits the translocation of mineral in and 
out of regions of bone removed from surfaces, and (2) serve as the 
sensors of mechanical loading by providing key signals that trigger 
bone modeling and remodeling. 
 C. Osteoclast 
 The osteoclast is a multinucleated giant cell 
that is specialized for resorption of bone. Osteoclasts are termi-
nally differentiated cells that arise from hematopoietic precursors 
in the monocyte lineage and do not divide. Osteoblasts stimulate 
both osteoclast formation and activation via the cell surface mol-
ecule  RANKL . RANKL stimulates its cognate ligand RANK on 
the surface of osteoclast precursors and mature osteoclasts 
( Figure 8–22 ). Osteoblasts also elaborate macrophage colony 
stimulating factor-1 (M-CSF), which potentiates the effects of 
RANKL on osteoclastogenesis. In addition, osteoblasts and other 
cells produce a decoy receptor,  osteoprotegerin (OPG) , which binds 
to RANKL and blocks its actions. PTH and 1,25(OH) 2 D both 
increase RANKL expression by osteoblasts, as do cytokines such as 
Osteoclast
Osteoblast
RANK
C-FMS
OPG
M-CSF
OPG
RANKL
1, 25 (OH)2D
PTHrP/PTH
IL-11, IL-6, IL-1
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
 FIGURE 8–21  The remodeling cycle.  A : Resting trabecular 
 surface.  B : Multinucleated osteoclasts dig a cavity of approximately 
20 microns.  C : Completion of resorption to 60 microns by 
mononuclear phagocytes.  D : Recruitment of osteoblast precursors to 
the base of the resorption cavity.  E : Secretion of new matrix 
(gray shading) by osteoblasts.  F : Continued secretion of matrix, with 
initiation of calcification (black areas).  G : Completion of 
 mineralization of new matrix. Bone has returned to quiescent state, 
but a small deficit in bone mass persists. 
 FIGURE 8–22  Regulation of osteoclast formation and activation 
by the osteoblast. The osteoblast stimulates osteoclast formation and 
activation via the interaction of RANKL on the osteoblast with RANK 
on the osteoclast. M-CSF secreted by the osteoblast enhances the 
process via its receptor on the osteoclast C-FMS, whereas OPG, also 
secreted by the osteoblast, blocks the process by blocking RANKL. 
RANKL expression is stimulated by 1,25(OH) 2 D and PTHrP/PTH as well 
as by the cytokines IL-1, IL-6, and IL-11.  
CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease     261
IL-1, IL-6, and IL-11. TNF potentiates the ability of RANKL to 
stimulate osteoclastogenesis, whereas IFN-gamma blocks this pro-
cess by direct effects on the osteoclast. 
 To resorb bone, the motile osteoclast alights on a bone surface 
and seals off an area by forming an adhesive ring. Having isolated 
an area of bone surface, the osteoclast develops above the surface 
an elaborately invaginated plasma membrane structure called the 
 ruffled border ( Figure 8–23 ). The ruffled border is a distinctive 
organelle, but it acts essentially as a huge lysosome that dissolves 
bone mineral by secreting acid onto the isolated bone surface and 
simultaneously breaks down bone matrix by secretion of proteases, 
in particular cathepsin K. The collagen breakdown products from 
bone resorption can be assayed in serum and urine as measures of 
bone resorption rates ( N - and  C -telopeptides). Bone resorption 
can be controlled in two ways: by regulating the formation of 
osteoclasts via changes in cell numbers or by regulating the activity 
of mature osteoclasts. The mature osteoclast has receptors for CT 
but does not appear to have PTH or vitamin D receptors. 
 BONE REMODELING 
 Bone remodeling is a continuous process of breakdown and 
renewal that occurs throughout life. During childhood and 
 adolescence, remodeling proceeds at a vigorous rate but is quanti-
tatively overwhelmed by the concomitant occurrence of bone 
modeling and linear growth. Once peak bone mass has been estab-
lished, remodeling supervenes as the common mechanism by 
which bone mass is modified for the remainder of a person’s life. 
Each remodeling event is carried out by individual “bone remod-
eling units” on bone surfaces throughout the skeleton (see  Figure 
8–21 ). Normally, about 90% of these surfaces lie dormant, cov-
ered by a thin layer of lining cells. Following physical or bio-
chemical signals, precursor cells from the bone marrow migrate to 
specific loci on the bone surface, where they fuse into multinucle-
ated bone-resorbing cells known as osteoclasts that then excavate 
a resorption cavity into the bone. 
 Cortical bone is remodeled from within by cutting cones, 
groups of osteoclasts that cut tunnels through the compact bone 
( Figure 8–24 ). They are followed by trailing osteoblasts that line 
the tunnels with a cylinder of new bone, progressively narrowing 
the tunnels until all that remains are the tiny haversian canals by 
which the cells left behind as resident osteocytes are fed. The 
packet of new bone formed by a single cutting cone is called an 
osteon ( see Figure 8–20 ). 
 By contrast, trabecular resorption creates scalloped areas of the 
bone surface called Howship lacunae. Two to three months after 
initiation, the resorption phase reaches completion, having created 
Nucleus
Nucleus
Nucleus
Carbonic anhydrase
H2O + CO2 → H+ + HCO−3
RGD
 
Bone matrix
protein
Bone
Ruffled border
RGD
 
Bone matrix
protein
Calcitonin
Calcitonin
receptor
cAMP
Tartrate-resistant
acid phosphatase
Cl−/HCO−3 exchange
K+
Na+
Ca2+ channels
K+
H+
H+
pH ~ 4
Integrin
Integrin
H+-K+ ATPase
H+-K+ ATPase
Na+-K+ ATPase
 FIGURE 8–23  Osteoclast-mediated bone resorption. The osteoclast attaches to the bone surface via integrin-mediated binding to bone 
matrix bone proteins. When enough integrin binding has occurred, the osteoclast is anchored and a sealed space is formed. The repeatedly 
folded plasma membrane creates a ruffled border. Secreted into the sealed space are acid and enzymes forming an extracellular lysosome. 
( Reproduced, with permission, from Felig P, Baxter JD, Frohman LA, ed.  Endocrinology and Metabolism . 3rd ed. McGraw-Hill; 1995.) 
262    CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease
a cavity about 60 um deep. This is accompanied by ingress from 
marrow stroma into the base of the resorption cavity of precursors 
for bone-forming osteoblasts. These cells develop an osteoblastic 
phenotype, expressing characteristic bone-specific proteins such as 
alkaline phosphatase, osteopontin, and osteocalcin, and begin to 
replace the resorbed bone by elaborating new bone matrix. Once 
the newly formed osteoid reaches a thickness of about 20 um, 
mineralization begins. Completion of a full remodeling cycle nor-
mally lasts about 6 months ( see Figure 8–21 ). 
 Bone remodeling does not absolutely require systemic hor-
mones except to maintain intestinal absorption of minerals by 
1,25(OH) 2 D and thus ensure an adequate supply of calcium and 
phosphate. For example, bone is normal, aside from being in a 
state of low turnover, in patients with hypoparathyroidism. 
However, systemic hormones use the “bone pool” as a source of 
minerals for regulation of extracellular calcium homeostasis. 
When they do, the coupling mechanism ensures that bone is 
replenished. For example, when bone resorption is activated by 
PTH to provide calcium to correct hypocalcemia, bone formation 
also increases, tending to replenish lost bone. Although the role of 
the osteoblast in regulating osteoclast activity is reasonably well 
understood, the mechanism by which osteoblasts are recruited to 
sites of bone resorption is not. One possibility is that bone resorp-
tion releases IGF-1 from the bone matrix, and IGF-1 then stimu-
lates osteoblast proliferation and differentiation. However, it is 
also becoming clear that the osteoclast itself can regulate osteoblast 
differentiation through bidirectional signaling molecules of the 
ephrin/Eph family. 
 If the replacement of resorbed bone matched the amount that 
was removed, remodeling would lead to no net change in bone 
mass. However, small deficits in bone mass persist on completion 
of each cycle, reflecting inefficiency in remodeling dynamics. 
Consequently, lifelong accumulation of remodeling deficits under-
lies the well-documented phenomenon of age-related bone loss, a 
process that begins shortly after growth stops. Alterations in 
remodeling activity represent the final pathway through which 
diverse stimuli, such as dietary insufficiency, hormones, and drugs 
affect bone balance. A change in whole body remodeling rate can 
be brought about through distinct perturbations in remodeling 
dynamics. Changes in the hormonal milieu often increase the 
activation of remodeling units. Examples include hyperthyroid-
ism, hyperparathyroidism, and hypervitaminosis D. Other factors 
may impair osteoblastic functional adequacy, such as high doses of 
glucocorticoids or ethanol. Yet other perturbations, such as estro-
gen or androgen deficiency, may augment osteoclastic resorptive 
capacity. At any given time, a transient deficit in bone exists called 
the  remodeling space representing sites of bone resorption that 
have not yet filled in. In response to any stimulus that alters the 
birth rate of new remodeling units, the remodeling space either 
increases or decreases accordingly until a new steady state is estab-
lished, and this adjustment is seen as an increase or decrease in 
bone mass. 
 OSTEOPOROSIS 
 Osteoporosis is a condition of low bone mass and microarchitec-
tural disruption that results in fractures with minimal trauma. The 
term  primary osteoporosis denotes reduced bone mass and frac-
tures in postmenopausal women (postmenopausal osteoporosis) 
or in older men and women due to age-related factors. The term 
 secondary osteoporosis refers to bone loss resulting from specific 
clinical disorders, such as thyrotoxicosis or hyperadrenocorticism 
( Table 8–9 ). There is overlap in these designations; for example, 
many postmenopausal women with low bone mass have vitamin 
D insufficiency or deficiency which could be considered a second-
ary cause of osteoporosis. 
 Osteoporotic fractures are a major public health problem for 
older women and men in Western society. Half the men and 
women over age 55 have low bone mass or osteoporosis, placing 
them at increased risk of fracture. At any age, women experience 
twice as many osteoporosis-related fractures as men, reflecting 
gender-related differences in skeletal properties as well as the 
almost universal loss of bone at menopause. However, the number 
of osteoporotic fractures in older men is not trivial ( Figure 8–25 ). 
One white woman in six suffers a hip fracture; mortality after hip 
fracture is as high as 20% in the first year. One-third of hip frac-
tures occur in men and have been associated with an even higher 
mortality rate than in women. Billions of dollars are spent annu-
ally for acute hospital care of hip fracture alone. The consequences 
of vertebral deformity are also significant and include chronic 
pain, inability to conduct daily activities, depression, increased 
mortality, and high risk of additional vertebral fractures. 
 Typically, fractures attributed to bone fragility are those due to 
trauma equal to or less than a fall from a standing position. 
Common sites of fragility-related fractures include the vertebral 
bodies, distal forearm, and proximal femur, but because the 
Resorption
(cutting cone)
Reversal
Formation
(closing cone)
Resting
 FIGURE 8–24  Schematic representation of the four principal 
stages involved in the formation of a new basic structural unit in 
 cortical bone. ( Reproduced, with permission, from Felig P, Baxter 
JD, Frohman LA, ed.  Endocrinology and Metabolism . 3rd ed. 
McGraw-Hill; 1995.) 
CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease     263
 skeletons of patients with osteoporosis are diffusely fragile, other 
sites, such as ribs and long bones, also fracture with high fre-
quency. Vertebral compression fractures are the most common 
fragility-related fractures. Pain sufficient to require medical atten-
tion occurs in approximately one-third of vertebral fractures, the 
majority being detected only when height loss or spinal deformity 
(kyphosis) occurs. However, even asymptomatic vertebral frac-
tures confer an increased risk of future vertebral fractures and 
mortality. Thus, incidentally detected vertebral fractures have the 
same clinical significance as a clinical vertebral fracture. 
Furthermore, even fractures that appear to be due to trauma por-
tend an increased future fracture risk. Both skeletal and extraskel-
etal factors determine fracture risk ( Table 8–10 ). 
 Gain, Maintenance, and Loss of Bone 
 The amount of bone mineral present at any time in adult life 
represents that which has been gained at skeletal maturity (peak 
bone mass) minus that which has been subsequently lost. Bone 
acquisition is completed in the late teenage years and early twen-
ties in girls and by the second decade in boys. Heredity accounts 
for most of the variance in bone acquisition. African American 
adolescent girls have greater calcium retention on a fixed calcium 
intake compared to Caucasian adolescent girls, potentially explain-
ing at least part of the racial differences in bone mass. Specific 
genes implicated in bone acquisition include those affecting body 
size, hormone responsiveness, and bone-specific proteins such as 
type 1 collagen and transforming growth factor beta. 
 Recent evidence indicates that the  Wnt pathway plays a central 
role in determining bone mass. The low-density lipoprotein 
(LDL) receptor-like protein 5 (LRP5) along with the frizzled pro-
tein serves as coreceptor for members of the Wnt family of ligands. 
Activation of Wnt and its downstream signaling pathways medi-
ates increased osteoblastic activity (gene expression, cell prolifera-
tion). Mutations that render LRP5 constitutively active are 
associated with high bone mass, and autosomal recessive inactivat-
ing mutations in LRP5 play a causative role in the osteoporosis-
pseudoglioma syndrome. These mutations lead to accelerated 
bone loss and fractures as well as blindness. These two disorders of 
bone mass have firmly established Wnts, LRP5, and frizzled as 
essential molecules in osteoblast-mediated bone formation. 
TABLE 8–9 Causes of secondary osteoporosis.
Endocrinopathies
 Thyrotoxicosis
 Hyperprolactinemia
 Primary hyperparathyroidism
 Acromegaly
 Hypogonadism
 Glucocorticoid excess
Gastrointestinal/nutritional
 Vitamin D deficiency
 Chronic liver disease
 Celiac sprue
 Malabsorption
Medications
 Glucocorticoids
 Androgen deprivation therapy with gonadotropin-releasing 
 hormone agonists
 Certain anticonvulsants
 Excess thyroid hormone replacement
Other
 Alcoholism
 Osteogenesis imperfecta
 Rheumatoid arthritis
 Multiple myeloma
 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
 Idiopathic hypercalciuria
4000
3000
2000
1000
35-39
35-39
 85
Age group, year
Incidence/100,000 person-years
Men
Hip
Vertebrae
Colles
 85
Women
Hip
Vertebrae
Colles
 FIGURE 8–25  Incidence rates for the three common osteoporo-
tic fractures (Colles, hip, and vertebral) in men and women, plotted 
as a function of age at the time of the fracture. ( Reproduced, with 
permission, from Cooper C, Melton LJ, III. Epidemiology of osteoporo-
sis.  Trend Endocrinol Metab . 1992;314:224.) 
TABLE 8–10 Risk factors for fractures.
Advanced age
Postmenopausal fracture
First-degree relative with a fracture
Current tobacco use
Low body weight
Inability to rise without using arms
Lifelong low calcium intake
Vitamin D deficiency
Inactivity/bed rest
Early estrogen loss
Low testosterone in men
Dementia
Alcoholism
Impaired vision
History of falls
Low bone mineral density
264    CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease
 Other factors contributing to the acquisition of peak bone mass 
include circulating gonadal steroids, physical activity, and nutrient 
intake. In adolescents, calcium retention is maximal at a calcium 
intake of 1300 mg/d; this is the current recommended intake for 
individuals aged 9 to 18 years. Adolescence is a critical time for the 
skeleton; bone gained during adolescence accounts for about 60% 
of final adult bone mass. Assuming adequate exposure to key nutri-
ents, physical activity, and reproductive hormones, adolescent 
growth supports acquisition of the maximum bone mass permitted 
by the genetic endowment. Estradiol plays a decisive role in the 
initiation of adolescent growth and bone acquisition. Rare exam-
ples have been reported of young men bearing mutations in the 
estradiol receptor or in aromatase, the enzyme that converts andro-
gen to estrogen. Although these men had normal or increased cir-
culating concentrations of testosterone, estradiol was either absent 
or totally ineffective. In all cases, severe deficits in BMD were 
observed, and these patients had not undergone the anticipated 
acceleration in linear growth at the time of puberty. In the patients 
with aromatase deficiency, substantial gains in bone were observed 
shortly after initiating estrogen  therapy. 
 Adolescent bone acquisition falters in the face of inadequacies 
in diet, physical activity, or reproductive function, resulting in a 
lower peak bone mass and less reserve to accommodate future 
losses. Recent trends in habitual physical activity and calcium 
intake for North American teenagers, particularly girls, offer little 
encouragement in this regard. A list of representative conditions 
often associated with reduced peak bone mass acquisition is pre-
sented in  Table 8–11 . 
 Once peak bone mass is achieved, bone mass remains fairly 
stable until the late third or early fourth decades ( Figure 8–26 ). 
Successful bone maintenance requires continued attention to the 
same factors that influenced bone acquisition: diet, physical activ-
ity, and sex hormone status. Maintenance of bone requires suffi-
ciency in all areas, and deficiency in one is not compensated by the 
others. For example, amenorrheic athletes lose bone despite fre-
quent high-intensity physical activity and supplemental calcium 
intake. Successful bone maintenance is also jeopardized by known 
toxic exposures such as smoking, alcohol excess, and immobility 
as well as by systemic illnesses and many medications. 
TABLE 8–11  Examples of disorders associated with 
reduced peak bone mass.
Anorexia nervosa
Ankylosing spondylitis
Childhood immobilization (therapeutic bed rest)
Cystic fibrosis
Delayed puberty
Exercise-associated amenorrhea
Galactosemia
Intestinal or renal disease
Marfan syndrome
Osteogenesis imperfecta
BMD (g/cm2)
1.1
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
Men
Women
Age (years)
 FIGURE 8–26  Mean bone mineral density by DXA in white males (upper curve) and females (lower curve) aged 5 to 85 years. 
 (The data are from Southard RN, et al. Bone mass in healthy children: measurement with quantitative DXA.  Radiology . 1991;179:735; and from 
Kelly TL. Bone mineral reference databases for American men and women.  J Bone Miner Res . 1990;5(suppl 2):702. Courtesy of Hologic, Inc.) 
CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease     265
 Bone Loss Associated with Estrogen 
Deficiency 
 Estrogen deprivation promotes bone remodeling by releasing con-
straints on the production and activity of cytokines, particularly 
IL-6, which stimulates the proliferation of osteoclast precursors. 
Estradiol suppresses IL-6 secretion by marrow stromal osteoblastic 
cells, and treatment of mice with neutralizing IL-6 antibodies sup-
presses osteoclast production after oophorectomy. Estradiol directly 
suppresses IL-6 production in human osteoblasts, and  IL-6 gene 
knockout prevents bone loss in oophorectomized mice. Thus, a 
strong case implicates IL-6 as a critical molecule by which osteo-
blasts signal increased bone remodeling and suggests that this link is 
a major site for estrogen action in bone. Subsidiary roles for IL-1 
and IL-11 have also been described. As discussed above, the RANK-
RANKL-OPG system acts as a bone regulatory system through 
which osteoblast signals stimulate the production of osteoclasts. 
With estrogen deficiency, OPG secretion is low, permitting a robust 
response of osteoclast precursors to RANKL. With estrogen suffi-
ciency, increased local concentrations of OPG bind to RANKL, 
reduce osteoclast production, and thereby decrease bone turnover. 
 With accelerated bone turnover, delivery of calcium from bone 
to the circulation increases, and the resultant subtle increase in 
plasma calcium concentration suppresses the secretion of PTH, 
thereby enhancing calciuria, suppressing renal production of 
1,25(OH) 2 D, and reducing intestinal calcium absorption efficiency. 
At menopause, loss of endogenous estrogen promotes an increase in 
daily calcium loss from 20 mg to about 60 mg, reflecting a relative 
increase in bone resorption over formation activity. Although small, 
this magnitude of change in mineral balance accounts, after a 
decade, for about 13% of an original whole body calcium mass of 
1000 g, equivalent to a standard deviation in BMD, and leads to a 
two- to threefold increase in the risk of fracture ( see Figure 8–26 ). 
In the 5 years after menopause, women not on estrogen can lose as 
much as 5% to 8% of bone mass. To accommodate menopausal 
changes in calcium economy by dietary means alone, a rise in daily 
calcium intake from 1000 mg to about 1500 mg would be neces-
sary. Increased calcium intake can slow but usually does not entirely 
prevent the bone loss that occurs with menopause. 
 Bone Loss in Later Life 
 Progressive deficits in renal and intestinal function impair whole 
body calcium economy during normal human aging. These deficits 
include progressive inefficiency of vitamin D production by the skin 
as well as declining ability to convert 25(OH)D to 1,25(OH) 2 D in 
the kidney. Consequently, intestinal calcium absorption becomes less 
efficient, leading to modest reductions in plasma ionized calcium 
activity and compensatory hypersecretion of PTH. PTH maintains 
blood calcium concentrations by activating new bone remodeling 
units, although as a result of its inherent inefficiency, increased bone 
remodeling leads to accelerated bone loss. Little can be done to coun-
teract remodeling inefficiency, but the impact of these physiologic 
deficits can be minimized by suppressing the stimulus for PTH 
secretion by consuming adequate amounts of dietary calcium (about 
1500 mg/d) and vitamin D (at least 800-1200 units/d). 
 Diagnosis of Osteoporosis 
 The diagnosis of osteoporosis may be obvious in patients who 
have sustained fragility fractures ( Figure 8–27 ), but noninvasive 
 FIGURE 8–27  A : Magnified x-rays of thoracic vertebrae from a woman with osteoporosis. Note the relative prominence of vertical trabecu-
lae and the absence of horizontal trabeculae.  B : Lateral x-ray of the lumbar spine of a woman with postmenopausal osteoporosis. Note the 
increased density of the superior and inferior cortical margins of vertebrae, the marked demineralization of vertebral bodies, and the central 
compression of articular surfaces of vertebral bodies by intervertebral disks. ( Courtesy of Dr. G. Gordan.) 
266    CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease
methods to estimate BMD are required to identify high-risk 
patients who have not yet sustained a fracture. Due to the signifi-
cant consequences of fractures, diagnosis prior to fracture is essen-
tial. Several techniques have been developed for this purpose, but 
DXA offers the most precise measurements at multiple skeletal 
sites for the least amount of radiation exposure. Current guide-
lines recommend that all women over the age of 65 years be 
screened for osteoporosis using bone densitometry. Under age 
65, the National Osteoporosis Foundation (NOF) guidelines 
recommend that screening start after menopause in women with 
risk factors for fracture. NOF recommends screening men over 
70 and targeted screening of men between age 50 and 70 if there 
is a risk factor for bone loss and or fracture. There are no routine 
screening recommendations for younger individuals. Younger 
men and women should have bone density testing as clinically 
indicated (eg, clinical evidence of bone fragility). Assessment of 
skeletal health should be based on age-matched normative data 
(Z-scores). Although there are no formal guidelines and a 
 paucity of long-term data, most experts consider a BMD more 
than two standard deviations below the age-matched normal 
reference population (a Z score of −2 or lower) to indicate low 
BMD in a young person. However, BMD in younger individuals 
must be interpreted in light of the clinical situation and other 
risk factors for fracture. 
 BMD is a highly significant predictor of fracture risk. For 
each standard deviation BMD below the average BMD of indi-
viduals at the age of peak bone mass, fracture risk approximately 
doubles. Site-specific measurements best predict fracture risk at 
that site (ie, hip BMD best predicts hip fracture), but a mea-
surement at any site predicts overall fracture risk. Based on data 
from Caucasian postmenopausal women and originally intended 
to be used as an epidemiologic tool, a World Health Organization 
(WHO) panel in 1994 offered an absolute standard for catego-
rization of BMD. By this criterion, BMD values 2.5 or more 
SD below the average value for a person at the age of peak bone 
mass (a T-score of −2.5 or below) are categorized as 
 osteoporosis. BMD values between −1.0 and −2.5 SD below 
the standard (T-score between −1 and −2.5) are categorized as 
low bone density or  osteopenia. 
 While not their original intended purpose, these T-score cut 
points became integrated into clinical practice and have been 
used to place individuals with low BMD into diagnostic catego-
ries. Problematically, there are no risk thresholds at these values 
and an individual with a T-score of −2.4 and an individual with 
a T-score of −2.5 have nearly identical fracture risk, but one is 
considered to have osteoporosis and one is not. Additionally, 
two individuals with the same T-score value can have very dif-
ferent fracture risk. A woman in her fifties with no personal or 
family history of fracture but a femoral neck T-score of −2.5 has 
a 10-year risk of fracture of less than 10%. However, an 
80-year-old woman whose mother had a hip fracture and who 
has a personal history of fracture but the same femoral neck 
T-score of −2.5 has a 10-year risk of fracture of more than 50%. 
It has long been recognized that the combination of risk factors 
for fracture and BMD can improve fracture risk prediction. An 
approach to formally estimating individual fracture risk from 
femoral neck bone density and risk factors for fracture was 
developed by the WHO and became available in 2008 at the 
website http://www.shef.ac.uk/FRAX/index.htm. While still 
undergoing revisions and improvements, the FRAX tool has 
greatly improved the clinician’s ability to estimate fracture risk 
for an individual patient. The levels of risk at which treatment 
should be initiated are country specific and being revised, but a 
cost-effectiveness analysis in the United States suggests that 
individuals with a 10-year probability of major osteoporotic 
fracture of 20% or of hip fracture of 3% should be considered 
for treatment. Limitations of this fracture prediction model 
include that it only incorporates BMD by DXA at the hip, 
many risk factors are not available in the model, and there is no 
way to incorporate the effect of prior treatment on fracture 
risk. 
 TREATMENT OF OSTEOPOROSIS 
 Drugs used for prevention and treatment of osteoporosis act 
either by decreasing the rate of bone resorption, thereby slowing 
the rate of bone loss, or by increasing bone formation 
( Table 8–12 ). Because of the coupled nature of bone resorption 
and formation, agents that decrease bone resorption ultimately 
decrease the rate of bone formation. Thus, increases in BMD, 
representing a reduction of the remodeling space to a new steady-
state level, are commonly observed during the first year or two of 
therapy, after which BMD increases slowly and may even reach a 
plateau. It is not uncommon for there to be minimal changes in 
BMD observed with treatment in clinical practice. Analysis of 
data from the Fracture Intervention Trial demonstrated that 
women in the alendronate treatment group whose bone density 
did not increase during treatment still benefited with rates of 
fracture reduction similar to the women whose BMD measurably 
increased. Thus, women on treatment with stable BMD should 
not be considered treatment failures based on a perceived lack of 
response. 
TABLE 8–12  Pharmacologic approaches to 
osteoporosis.
Antiresorptive agents
Calcium
Vitamin D and calcitriol
Estrogen
SERMs
Calcitonin
Bisphosphonates
RANK-ligand inhibition
Bone-forming agents
Fluoridea
Androgensa
Parathyroid hormone
Strontium ranelatea
aNot approved in the United States.
CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease     267
 Specific Antiresorptive Agents 
 A. Calcium 
 In the seventh decade and beyond, supplemental 
calcium and vitamin D therapy suppresses bone turnover, increases 
bone mass, and has been shown in clinical trials to decrease frac-
ture incidence. Studies confirming the clinical efficacy of various 
pharmacologic agents to increase BMD or decrease fracture have 
been performed in the setting of calcium and vitamin D suffi-
ciency. Thus, adequate intake of calcium and vitamin D should be 
considered a basic approach for prevention and treatment of 
osteoporosis in all patients ( Table 8–13 ). 
 The current recommended intake of calcium is 1300 mg/d 
for adolescents, 1000 mg/d for adults up to age 50, and 1200 
mg/d for adults over age 50 years. Intakes of 1500 mg/d for 
individuals with or at risk of developing osteoporosis are recom-
mended by some authors. A dairy-free diet contains approxi-
mately 250 mg/d of calcium. Achieving the recommended 
calcium intake goals by food alone typically requires consump-
tion of three to four servings per day of dairy foods or calcium-
fortified foods. Patients who are unable to increase dietary 
calcium by diet alone may choose from many palatable, low-cost 
calcium preparations, the most frequently prescribed being the 
carbonate salt. Others include the lactate, gluconate, and citrate 
salts and hydroxyapatite. Absorption of most commonly pre-
scribed calcium products is similar. For many patients, cost and 
palatability outweigh modest differences in absorption. Calcium 
carbonate requires an acid environment for optimal absorption. 
For older individuals who may have hypo- or achlorhydria, tak-
ing calcium carbonate tablets with meals generally provides 
adequate acidity for this requirement. To maximize absorption, 
calcium should be taken in doses of 500 mg or less at a time and 
spread throughout the day. Calcium can interfere with the 
absorption of iron and L-thyroxine and should be ingested sepa-
rately from these medications. 
 B. Vitamin D and calcitriol 
 In recent years, it has become 
necessary to reassess our concepts of vitamin D sufficiency 
(see also Vitamin D earlier). Although circulating 25(OH)D 
concentrations above 10 ng/mL appear adequate for preventing 
histologic evidence of osteomalacia, a strong case can now be 
made that values below 25 to 30 ng/mL are associated with 
hypersecretion of PTH, proximal muscle weakness predisposing 
to falls, and increased bone turnover. In some regions of the 
United States, healthy adults show average 25(OH)D concentra-
tions of 30 ng/mL or above, but in others, such as New England 
or in states farther north than Missouri, the ultraviolet compo-
nent of sunlight fails to contain sufficient amounts, at the criti-
cal region of approximately 270 to 310 nm, to support 
cutaneous vitamin D synthesis. In those areas, vitamin D 
 insufficiency is very common, particularly in frail, homebound, 
or hospitalized patients. Vitamin D supplementation in 
 individuals with marginal or deficient vitamin D status improves 
intestinal calcium absorption, suppresses PTH and bone 
 remodeling, increases bone mass, and, in doses of 800 IU/d or 
greater, reduces fracture risk. 
 The use of potent vitamin D analogs or metabolites—such as 
calcitriol—to treat osteoporosis is an intervention distinct from 
ensuring vitamin D nutritional adequacy. In the treatment of 
osteoporosis, the rationale is to exploit the ability of these com-
pounds to interact with the VDR in parathyroid cells to suppress 
PTH secretion directly and reduce bone turnover. Clinical expe-
rience with calcitriol remains mixed. Higher doses impose an 
added risk of hypercalciuria and hypercalcemia. 
 C. Estrogen 
 Conjugated equine estrogens at a dose of 
0.625 mg/d increase BMD about 5% and 2.5% at the lumbar 
spine and proximal femur respectively, and reduce the risk of hip 
and vertebral fractures by 35% to 40%. Both oral and transdermal 
estrogen offers protection against bone loss. Cessation of estrogen 
administration leads to rapid bone loss, and protection against 
fracture dissipates within a few years of stopping even after 
 prolonged treatment. 
 Data from the Women’s Health Initiative (WHI) released 
since 2002 underscore the lack of cardiovascular disease preven-
tion in estrogen-treated postmenopausal woman and the small 
but statistically significant increases in breast cancer and venous 
thromboembolic phenomena that occur with estrogen and pro-
gesterone therapy (hormone therapy; HT) in postmenopausal 
women. The WHI has led to a marked change in prescribing of 
HT for postmenopausal women such that only patients suffering 
from significant vasomotor effects of estrogen deficiency and 
early in menopause are currently prescribed HT and for the 
shortest possible time. Reduced BMD is not considered an indi-
cation for HT, because effective alternative therapies for skeletal 
preservation exist. In older women who also receive adequate 
calcium supplementation, 0.3 mg of conjugated estrogens pro-
duces similar gains in bone density, but this dose has not been 
tested for antifracture effects. In the relatively small randomized 
trials in which lower doses of estrogen have been studied, 
increases in vascular events or breast cancer have not been seen. 
Interest remains in whether there might be a low dose of estrogen 
at which the skeletal benefits could be achieved without incurring 
the adverse vascular and malignant consequences. It is unclear 
TABLE 8–13  Current daily recommendations for 
adequate intake of calcium and food 
sources of calcium.
Children/adolescents
Age 1-3
500 mg
Age 4-8
800 mg
Ages 9-18
1300 mg
Adults
Age 19-50
1000 mg
Age >51
1200 mg
Food sources of calcium
Dairy-free diet
300 mg
Milk (8 oz)
300 mg
Calcium set tofu (1/2 cup)
400 mg
Cheese (1 oz)
250 mg
Yogurt (1 cup)
300 mg
Cooked greens (1 cup)
100 mg
Fortified foods
Varies
268    CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease
whether a trial of sufficient size to address this question is feasible 
at the present time. 
 D. Selective estrogen response modulators 
 The past 
decade has witnessed the design and development of several mol-
ecules that act as estrogens on some tissues but antiestrogens on 
others. The only currently approved SERM, raloxifene, is an estro-
gen agonist at bone and liver, that promotes conservation of BMD 
and lowering of LDL cholesterol concentrations, but it is inert at 
the endometrium and a potent antiestrogen at the breast. 
Raloxifene has been shown to decrease the vertebral fracture inci-
dence in older osteoporotic women and has received FDA 
approval for both prevention and treatment of osteoporosis in 
postmenopausal women. 
 E. Calcitonin 
 The role of endogenous calcitonin in calcium 
metabolism is unclear. However, given as a pharmacologic agent, 
calcitonin inhibits osteoclastic bone resorption. Originally avail-
able only as an injectable form, calcitonin is now also available as 
a nasal spray, and both formulations are approved for postmeno-
pausal osteoporosis treatment. CT nasal spray (200 IU/d) increases 
BMD by 2% to 3% and reduces vertebral fractures by about 35%. 
CT has not been shown to reduce hip or nonspine fractures in 
randomized trials; however, a meta-analysis of 14 CT trials sug-
gested a significant reduction in both vertebral and nonvertebral 
fractures with CT therapy. CT may provide some analgesic benefit 
in women with acute or painful vertebral fractures, possibly 
through central nervous system effects. Side-effects of nasal spray 
CT appear mild and include rhinitis. The nasal spray daily dose 
should be alternated between nostrils. Injectable CT has addi-
tional side-effects of flushing, nausea, and local injection reac-
tions, making the nasal option the preferred form of 
administration. 
 F. Bisphosphonates 
 Bisphosphonates bind avidly to the 
hydroxyapatite crystals in bone, particularly at sites of active 
remodeling. The currently approved amino bisphosphonates 
interfere with protein prenylation in the osteoclast, impairing 
osteoclast-mediated bone resorption as well as enhancing osteo-
clast apoptosis. Four bisphosphonates, alendronate, risedronate, 
ibandronate, and zoledronic acid are FDA-approved for preven-
tion and treatment of osteoporosis. Three of them, alendronate, 
risedronate, and zoledronic acid are approved for treatment of 
glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis in men and women and for 
the treatment of osteoporosis in men. 
 All the approved bisphosphonates have been shown to reduce 
vertebral fractures by approximately 50% to 60%. Alendronate, 
risedronate, and zoledronic acid have also been shown to reduce 
the risk of nonvertebral fractures. In clinical trials, hip fractures 
were reduced by 51% after treatment with alendronate, 30% after 
treatment with risedronate, and 41% after annual infusions of 
zoledronic acid for 3 years. Head-to-head comparisons, however, 
have not been performed. Treatment of individuals (men and 
women) who have had a hip fracture with zoledronic acid has also 
been shown to reduce subsequent fractures and decrease mortality 
in individuals. Ibandronate has not been shown to reduce the risk 
of nonvertebral fractures except in the post hoc analysis of women 
with T-scores less than -3. The fracture trials for all the bisphos-
phonates were conducted using daily dosing, except for zoledronic 
acid which was given as a 5 mg annual intravenous dose. Based on 
equivalent effects on BMD to daily dosing, alendronate and rise-
dronate are approved for weekly dosing, and risedronate and 
ibandronate are approved for monthly dosing. Ibandronate is also 
approved for quarterly intravenous dosing. 
 Oral bisphosphonate absorption is very low, less than 1% of 
the administered dose. Consequently, patients must take these 
medications on first arising in the morning, on an empty stomach, 
with at least 8 oz of water, remain upright to ensure passage of the 
pill into the stomach, and ingest nothing else for 30 minutes for 
alendronate and risedronate, and 60 minutes for ibandronate. 
Side-effects from the oral bisphosphonates are primarily upper 
gastrointestinal, most notably esophageal irritation if the pill does 
not clear the esophagus. Hence the requirement to administer 
with sufficient water and remain upright after dosing. None of the 
bisphosphonates are recommended for use in patients with sig-
nificant renal impairment (creatinine clearance <35 mL/min). 
 Intravenous therapy can be given conveniently for zoledronic 
acid (5 mg annually) and ibandronate (3 mg quarterly). 
 Osteonecrosis of the jaw has been reported in patients taking 
bisphosphonates, and a warning regarding this possible adverse 
effect was recently added to all bisphosphonate labeling. The vast 
majority of cases have occurred after dental work in patients with 
malignancies on intravenous bisphosphonates at more frequent 
intervals and at much higher doses of drug than the annual infu-
sions for patients with osteoporosis. Several cases, however, have 
been reported in patients with osteoporosis. Estimates of the inci-
dence of this complication related to bisphosphonate treatment in 
benign conditions vary widely, but appear to be approximately 
1/50,000 patient years. Rates are significantly higher in malignant 
conditions such as multiple myeloma or breast cancer. Osteonecrosis 
of the jaw is a difficult disorder to treat, and additional oral pro-
cedures including biopsy of the affected site may worsen the 
condition. Suspected cases should be referred to an experienced 
dental professional. 
 Other bisphosphonate related side-effects include bone pain 
and, for the intravenous agents, an acute phase reaction tempo-
rally related to dosing and typically limited to the patient’s first 
dose. 
 G. Rank-L inhibition 
 Denosumab, a human monoclonal 
IgG2 antibody to RANK-L, has been shown to reduce spine frac-
tures by 68%, hip fractures by 40%, and nonvertebral fractures by 
20% in postmenopausal women with low bone density (T-score 
<−2.5 and >−4.0) aged 60 to 90 years. In the pivotal trial estab-
lishing this antifracture efficacy, 60 mg denosumab was adminis-
tered subcutaneously every 6 months for 3 years. Denosumab has 
been approved by the FDA for the treatment of patients with 
severe osteoporosis at high risk for fracture. Adverse events include 
eczema and cellulitis. Another clinical trial in men with prostate 
cancer undergoing androgen deprivation therapy has shown sub-
stantial increases in BMD and reduced risk of vertebral fractures 
CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease     269
in these men. At present, the FDA has not given formal approval 
to the use of denosumab in these high-risk men. 
 Bone-Forming Agents 
 A. Parathyroid hormone 
 Fractures, skeletal deformity, and 
bone pain are well-described manifestations of bone disease associ-
ated with severe primary hyperparathyroidism. It may seem coun-
terintuitive, therefore, to suggest that administration of PTH to 
individuals with low BMD may not only improve BMD but also 
reduce the risk of fractures. Yet, that is what experience over the 
past two decades indicates. The decisive element apparently that 
determines the effects of PTH to be destructive or therapeutic is 
whether PTH concentrations in blood are elevated constantly or 
only intermittently. In severe hyperparathyroidism, PTH concen-
trations remain high, varying little throughout the day. In most 
cases of mild hyperparathyroidism seen today, PTH concentra-
tions are lower, sometimes even within the normal range. In such 
patients, normal and even increased lumbar spine BMD measure-
ments are commonly observed. Administration of PTH as daily 
pulse injections has been shown to increase BMD in both animals 
and humans. Abundant evidence now indicates that PTH is truly 
an osteotropic agent, and several groups have shown increases in 
vertebral BMD of patients with osteoporosis. In a large clinical 
trial conducted in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis, 
recombinant human PTH(1-34)(rhPTH[1-34]), given in daily 
subcutaneous doses for approximately 21 months, reduced the 
incidence of vertebral fractures by more than 60% and that of 
nonvertebral fractures by 50%. During the course of this trial, a 
long-term carcinogenicity study showed that rats given near-life-
time daily injections of rhPTH(1-34) showed a dose-related inci-
dence of osteosarcoma. Clinical studies with this agent were 
immediately suspended, pending a thorough review of all relevant 
information by an independent group of cancer biologists, who 
concluded that the rat osteosarcoma finding was not likely to 
predict a relationship to osteosarcoma in humans. Consequently, 
human trials with rhPTH(1-34) were resumed. rhPTH(1-34) or 
teriparatide was approved by the FDA for use in both men and 
postmenopausal women with osteoporosis who are at high risk for 
fractures as well as in glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis. 
Therapeutic use is limited to 2 years and is recommended for 
individuals who have had a fracture related to osteoporosis, who 
have multiple risk factors for fracture, or who cannot use other 
osteoporosis treatments. Side-effects include hypercalcemia, 
hypercalciuria, and bone pain. Teriparatide is contraindicated for 
patients with conditions placing them at increased risk for osteo-
sarcoma such as Paget disease of bone, unexplained elevations of 
alkaline phosphatase, open epiphyses, or patients who have 
received radiation therapy involving the skeleton. Over 430,000 
patients have received teriparatide therapy, and there have been 
two reported cases of possible osteosarcoma; this approximates the 
background risk of osteosarcoma in the general population. After 
cessation of PTH therapy, bone loss resumes, and all bone gained 
may be lost over 1 to 2 years. It is strongly recommended that 
PTH therapy be followed with a bisphosphonate, thus maintain-
ing the gain in BMD achieved with PTH administration. Given 
the potency of bisphosphonates like alendronate and zoledronic 
acid, it is not recommended that patients treated with these agents 
receive teriparatide therapy concomitantly. 
 B. Androgen 
 Testosterone increases bone mass in hypogo-
nadal men. Androgens also improve bone mass in osteoporotic 
women, but therapy is frequently limited by virilizing side-effects. 
Nandrolone decanoate, 50 mg intramuscularly every 3 weeks, and 
the androgenic progestin norethisterone acetate increased BMD in 
osteoporotic women without bothersome side-effects. Fracture 
data do not yet permit a conclusion about the clinical utility of 
these agents. 
 Nonpharmacologic Aspects of 
Osteoporosis Management 
 Much of the day-to-day management of osteoporotic patients 
involves issues that are not specific for bone. These include depres-
sion therapy as appropriate, pain control, maintaining nutritional 
status, exercise, fall prevention, and assisting the patient to orga-
nize activities of daily living. 
 Minimal attention has been devoted to the role of exercise for 
patients with established osteoporosis. Patients and physicians 
often show reluctance to participate in exercise because of con-
cerns for additional injury. However, activity avoidance aggravates 
bone loss and places the skeleton in even greater jeopardy, whereas 
improving muscle strength, particularly of the back extensor 
groups, constitutes a powerful means for reducing pain and 
increasing functional capacity. Even the most frail individuals can 
successfully implement exercise regimens with the assistance of a 
trained physical therapist. 
 Exercise regimens that include a component of weight bearing 
and/or resistance exercise have been shown to increase BMD 
approximately 1% per year in randomized trials. If exercise is 
discontinued, these gains in BMD are lost. 
 Because the great majority of hip fractures are the immediate 
result of a fall, strategies aimed at reduction of falls are of critical 
importance. Muscle weakness is an important predictor of fall 
risk, and decreased muscle mass and strength are consequences of 
normal human aging. Resistance exercise (ie, weight training) 
promotes muscle strength even in very old men and women, and 
evidence suggests that increased lower extremity strength may 
reduce falls risk by improving postural stability. Thus, a widely 
disseminated program of leg-strengthening exercise could lower 
the risk of falling and reduce hip fracture incidence even if no 
changes in BMD are achieved. 
 Several additional measures may lower the risk of fracture for 
osteoporotic patients. Proper footwear and installation of safety 
features around the home may minimize the risk of falling. Such 
features include bathroom safety rails and night lights, rails and 
lighting for stairways, and elimination of floor clutter. Canes and 
other walking aids should be recommended to patients with an 
unsteady gait. Physicians may need to overcome substantial 
patient resistance, but these aids can be lifesaving. Visual acuity 
should be maximized and visual impairments corrected to the 
270    CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease
extent possible. Corsets and other support garments stabilize pos-
ture and relieve strain on paraspinous muscles. Metal braces may 
be indicated at times, but they are expensive, poorly accepted by 
most patients, and frequently end up unused. Attention should be 
given to other comorbid conditions that may affect fracture risk 
such as pain and depression and the effects of medications that 
may cause diminished alertness and responsiveness by causing 
sedation or orthostatic hypotension. 
 GLUCOCORTICOID-INDUCED 
OSTEOPOROSIS 
 In children, chronic exposure to glucocorticoids impairs skeletal 
growth. Glucocorticoid-induced deficits in childhood bone mass 
reflect failure of normal skeletal acquisition occasionally com-
pounded by bone loss. In adults, initiation of glucocorticoid 
therapy leads to rapid bone loss, resulting in significant BMD 
deficits within even a few months with a greater impact on trabe-
cular than cortical bone. The magnitude of bone loss can be large, 
typically approaching 40% reduction of the initial BMD. 
Approximately half of long-term glucocorticoid-treated patients 
suffer a fracture. Skeletal fragility is not the only risk factor for 
fracture in steroid-treated patients, because glucocorticoids (and 
the illnesses for which they are prescribed) are also associated with 
muscle weakness, which itself creates instability and increases the 
risk of falling. 
 Glucocorticoid-induced bone loss generally follows sustained 
administration of systemic doses greater than 5 mg/d of predni-
sone or its equivalent. Short, infrequent courses of glucocorti-
coids, such as for poison oak dermatitis, do not appear to have 
long-term skeletal consequences. Used according to manufacturer 
recommendations, most steroid inhalers available in the United 
States also appear to be without skeletal consequence, because 
systemic absorption of glucocorticoids is minimal. However, 
excessive use of standard preparations may achieve systemic con-
centrations, adequate to suppress the hypothalamic-pituitary axis 
and predictably lead to loss of bone mass. Patients receiving main-
tenance hydrocortisone dosages (eg, 20 mg/d) for adrenocortical 
insufficiency do not generally have an increased skeletal risk. 
However, based on accurate measurements of steroid production 
rates in normal humans, maintenance doses of hydrocortisone are 
now estimated to be lower (ie, 15 mg/d) than have traditionally 
been recommended (about 30 mg/d). Patients who continue to be 
treated according to older recommendations may be at risk of 
excessive bone loss. 
 Pathophysiology 
 Glucocorticoids affect mineral balance through alterations in 
renal, intestinal, and skeletal function. 
 A. Renal calcium losses 
 Within a few days after initiating 
therapy, direct inhibition of renal tubular calcium reabsorption 
leads to hypercalciuria, which is magnified by excessive dietary 
sodium intake and attenuated by thiazide diuretics. 
 B. Intestinal calcium losses 
 Glucocorticoids, given in high 
doses for several weeks, inhibit intestinal calcium absorption, low-
ering plasma ionized [Ca 2+ ]. This is thought to stimulate compen-
satory hypersecretion of PTH, which restores ionized [Ca 2+ ] by 
increasing the efficiency of renal calcium reabsorption and by 
activating bone turnover to increase delivery of calcium to the 
circulation from bone. However, it has never been shown consis-
tently that plasma PTH concentrations are actually elevated in 
steroid-treated patients. Evidence suggests that PTH action in 
bone and kidney may be enhanced even if there are minimal or no 
increases in detectable PTH. PTH may contribute to the 
pathophysiology of bone loss in glucocorticoid-treated patients. 
Consistent effects of glucocorticoids on the production, clearance, 
and circulating concentrations of vitamin D metabolites have not 
been demonstrable, so it appears that the intestinal actions of 
glucocorticoids are independent of the vitamin D system. 
 C. Skeletal losses 
 Glucocorticoids affect the skeleton by 
multiple mechanisms. There is evidence for direct stimulation of 
bone resorption via increased RANK-L expression and decreased 
OPG production. Glucocorticoids also inhibit osteoblastic matu-
ration and activity. Recent information indicates that glucocorti-
coids shift multipotent stem cell maturation away from 
osteoblastic lineage toward other cell lines, particularly adipocytes. 
Glucocorticoids also promote apoptosis in osteoblasts and osteo-
cytes. In patients chronically treated with glucocorticoids, bone 
formation is suppressed. High-dose glucocorticoid administration 
also suppresses gonadotropin secretion and creates a hypogonadal 
state in both men and women. Thus, a component of the bone 
loss in some steroid-treated patients is likely to be related to loss 
of gonadal function. 
 Prevention and Treatment of 
Glucocorticoid-Related Osteoporosis 
 A. Reduction of steroid dose 
 Prevention of bone loss 
remains the approach most likely to give a favorable outcome. 
The most important aspect of a preventive strategy is to limit 
exposure to glucocorticoids and to find alternative treatments if 
possible. Opportunities should be sought for initiating dose 
reduction or switching to nonsystemic forms of steroid adminis-
tration. Unfortunately, the use of alternate-day steroids, which is 
known to protect growth in steroid-treated children, appears not 
to offer skeletal protection to adults. The possibility that a bone-
sparing glucocorticoid might be developed has been under con-
sideration for many years, but no such agent is currently available. 
In patients who require immunosuppression following organ 
transplantation, the use of cyclosporine and tacrolimus has per-
mitted reductions in glucocorticoid use. However, these newer 
drugs also have been associated with lower BMD; whether long-
term therapy will have less negative skeletal effects than 
 glucocorticoids is not established. 
 B. Calcium and vitamin D 
 Providing supplemental calcium 
and vitamin D to glucocorticoid-treated patients normalizes 
CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease     271
 plasma-ionized [Ca 2+ ], suppresses PTH secretion, and reduces 
bone remodeling, thereby reducing the number of active remodel-
ing units at a given time. So long as the patient continues to take 
glucocorticoids, however, suppression of osteoblast function does 
not reverse. Patients should receive 1200 mg/d of supplemental 
calcium on the condition that such supplementation does not 
result in hypercalciuria. Vitamin D dosing should be targeted to 
maintain values at or above the current target of 30 ng/mL. 
However, periodic surveillance of glucocorticoid-treated patients 
for urinary calcium excretion is warranted, because they are at 
higher risk of developing kidney stones as a consequence of 
 hypercalciuria. 
 C. Physical activity 
 Skeletal immobilization precipitates 
bone loss, so inactivity must be avoided in steroid-treated 
patients. Some conditions such as polymyalgia rheumatica 
respond exuberantly to steroid therapy, giving patients a rapid 
and complete recovery of function. These patients may have little 
difficulty maintaining a vigorous schedule of weight-bearing 
activities during treatment. Patients with other conditions may 
not regain full mobility and may have residual functional dis-
abilities. It is particularly important that such patients receive 
physical therapy or other appropriate support for maintaining 
and restoring functional capacity. 
 D. Hormone therapy 
 In some rheumatologic conditions 
(eg, systemic lupus erythematosus), estrogens have traditionally 
been avoided. If there are no contraindications to estrogen admin-
istration, HT will counteract the negative skeletal consequences of 
pituitary-gonadal suppression. Evaluation of gonadal hormone 
status should be considered in all glucocorticoid-treated patients 
and estrogen or testosterone therapy utilized where appropriate. 
 Pharmacologic Therapy of 
Glucocorticoid-Related Osteoporosis 
 Alendronate, risedronate, zoledronic acid, and teriparatide have 
been shown to increase BMD and decrease the risk of new vertebral 
fractures by up to 70% in patients on glucocorticoid therapy. 
 Because the bone loss associated with glucocorticoid therapy 
has a very rapid onset and occurs in approximately 50% of treated 
patients, it is prudent to assess BMD prior to initiating therapy 
and consider starting a bisphosphonate along with the glucocorti-
coids in patients whose BMD is already low. Patients with normal 
BMD may be followed by repeating the BMD at a shorter interval 
than is typically done with osteoporosis, namely, in 6 to 9 months. 
If significant bone loss is evident, a bisphosphonate or teriparatide 
may then be started. All patients should receive appropriate cal-
cium and vitamin D and other risk factors for fracture addressed. 
 OSTEOMALACIA AND RICKETS 
 Osteomalacia and rickets are caused by the abnormal mineraliza-
tion of bone and cartilage. Osteomalacia is a bone defect occurring 
after the epiphyseal plates have closed (ie, in adults). Rickets occur 
in growing bone (ie, in children). Abnormal mineralization in 
growing bone affects the transformation of cartilage into bone at 
the zone of provisional calcification. As a result, an enormous 
profusion of disorganized, nonmineralized, degenerating cartilage 
appears in this region, leading to widening of the epiphyseal plate 
(observed radiologically as a widened radiolucent zone) with flar-
ing or cupping and irregularity of the epiphyseal-metaphyseal 
junctions. This latter problem gives rise to the clinically obvious 
beaded swellings along the costochondral junctions known as the 
 rachitic rosary and the swelling at the ends of the long bones. 
Growth is retarded by the failure to make new bone. Once bone 
growth has ceased (ie, after closure of the epiphyseal plates), the 
clinical evidence for defective mineralization becomes more subtle, 
and special diagnostic procedures may be required for its 
 detection. 
 Pathogenesis 
 The best-known cause of abnormal bone mineralization is vitamin 
D deficiency (see discussed earlier). Vitamin D, through its bio-
logically active metabolites, ensures that the calcium and phos-
phate concentrations in the extracellular milieu are adequate for 
mineralization. Vitamin D may also permit osteoblasts to produce 
a bone matrix that can be mineralized and then allows them to 
mineralize that matrix normally. Phosphate deficiency can also 
cause defective mineralization, as in diseases in which phosphate 
is lost in the urine or poorly absorbed in the intestine. Phosphate 
deficiency may act independently or in conjunction with other 
predisposing abnormalities, because most hypophosphatemic dis-
orders associated with osteomalacia or rickets also affect the vita-
min D endocrine system. Dietary calcium deficiency has been 
shown to lead to rickets in children in the absence of vitamin D 
deficiency and may contribute to the osteomalacia of elderly 
adults who are also susceptible to vitamin D deficiency. 
 Osteomalacia or rickets may develop despite adequate levels of 
calcium, phosphate, and vitamin D if the bone matrix cannot 
undergo normal mineralization as a result of enzyme deficiencies, 
such as decreased alkaline phosphatase in patients with hypophos-
phatasia, or in the presence of inhibitors of mineralization, such as 
aluminum, fluoride, or etidronate.  Table 8–14 lists diseases associ-
ated with osteomalacia or rickets according to their presumed 
mechanism. Several diseases appear under several headings, indi-
cating that they contribute to bone disease by several 
 mechanisms. 
 Diagnosis 
 The following discussion refers primarily to vitamin D deficiency. 
In children, the presentation of rickets is generally obvious from a 
combination of clinical and radiologic evidence. The diagnostic 
challenge is to determine the cause. In adults, the clinical, radio-
logic, and biochemical evidence of osteomalacia is often subtle. In 
situations in which osteomalacia should be suspected such as mal-
nutrition or malabsorption, BMD is strikingly low, and the clini-
cian must decide whether to obtain a bone biopsy for 
histomorphometric examination. This decision rests on the 
272    CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease
 availability of resources to obtain and examine the biopsy speci-
men, the index of suspicion coupled with the lack of certainty 
from other diagnostic procedures, and the degree to which the 
therapeutic approach will be altered by the additional informa-
tion. In many cases, a therapeutic trial of vitamin D supplements 
suffices to establish the diagnosis without the need for bone 
biopsy. 
 Clinical Features 
 A. Symptoms and signs 
 The clinical presentation of rickets 
depends on the age of the patient and, to some extent, the cause 
of the syndrome. The affected infant or young child may be apa-
thetic, listless, weak, hypotonic, and growing poorly. A soft, some-
what misshapen head, with widened sutures and frontal bossing, 
TABLE 8–14 Causes of osteomalacia.
Disorders of the vitamin D endocrine system
 Decreased bioavailability
  Insufficient sunlight exposure
  Nutritional vitamin D deficiency
  Nephrotic syndrome (urinary loss)
  Malabsorption (fecal loss)
   Billroth type II gastrectomy
   Sprue
   Regional enteritis
   Jejunoileal bypass
   Pancreatic insufficiency
   Cholestatic disorders
   Cholestyramine
 Abnormal metabolism
  Liver disease
  Chronic renal failure
  Vitamin D-dependent rickets type I
  Tumoral hypophosphatemic osteomalacia
  X-linked hypophosphatemia
  Chronic acidosis
  Anticonvulsants
 Abnormal target tissue response
  Vitamin D-dependent rickets type II
  Gastrointestinal disorders
Disorders of phosphate homeostasis
 Decreased intestinal absorption
  Malnutrition
  Malabsorption
  Antacids containing aluminum hydroxide
 Increased renal loss
  X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets
  Tumoral hypophosphatemic osteomalacia
  De Toni-Debré-Fanconi syndrome
Calcium deficiency
Primary disorders of bone matrix
 Hypophosphatasia
 Fibrogenesis imperfecta ossium
 Axial osteomalacia
Inhibitors of mineralization
 Aluminum
  Chronic renal failure
  Total parenteral nutrition
 Etidronate
 Fluoride
 FIGURE 8–28  The clinical appearance of a young child with 
rickets. The most striking abnormalities are the bowing of the legs 
and protuberant abdomen. Flaring of the ends of the long bones can 
also be appreciated. ( Photograph courtesy of Dr. Sara Arnaud.) 
may be observed. Eruption of teeth may be delayed, and teeth that 
do appear may be pitted and poorly mineralized. The enlargement 
and cupping of the costochondral junctions produce the  rachitic 
rosary on the thorax. The tug of the diaphragm against the soft-
ened lower ribs may produce an indentation at the point of inser-
tion of the diaphragm (Harrison groove). Muscle hypotonia can 
result in a pronounced potbelly and a waddling gait. The limbs 
may become bowed, and joints may swell because of flaring at the 
ends of the long bones (including phalanges and metacarpals) 
( Figure 8–28 ). Pathologic fractures may occur in patients with 
florid rickets. After the epiphyses have closed, the clinical signs of 
rickets or osteomalacia are subtle and cannot be relied on to make 
the diagnosis. Patients with severe osteomalacia complain of bone 
pain and proximal muscle weakness. Difficulty climbing stairs or 
rising from chairs may be reported and should be looked for. Such 
individuals may have a history of fractures and be diagnosed as 
having osteoporosis. 
 B. Laboratory findings 
 1. Biochemistry— Vitamin D deficiency results in decreased 
intestinal absorption of calcium and phosphate. In conjunction 
with the resulting secondary hyperparathyroidism, vitamin D 
deficiency leads to an increase in bone resorption, increased 
excretion of urinary phosphate, and increased renal tubular 
reabsorption of calcium. The net result tends to be low-normal 
CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease     273
serum calcium, low serum phosphate, elevated serum alkaline 
phosphatase, increased PTH, decreased urinary calcium, and 
increased urinary phosphate levels. Finding a low 25(OH)D 
level, in combination with these other biochemical alterations, 
strengthens the diagnosis of vitamin D deficiency. The 
1,25(OH) 2 D level may be normal, making this determination 
less useful for the diagnosis of osteomalacia. Both 25(OH)D 
and 1,25(OH) 2 D levels may be reduced in patients with liver 
disease or nephrotic syndrome because the binding proteins for 
the vitamin D metabolites are low secondary to decreased pro-
duction (liver disease) or increased renal losses (nephrotic syn-
drome; see later). Such individuals may have normal free 
concentrations of these metabolites and so are not vitamin D 
deficient. Other factors, such as age and diet, must be consid-
ered. For example, serum phosphate values are normally lower 
in adults than in children. Dietary history is important, 
because urinary phosphate excretion and, to a lesser extent, 
urinary calcium excretion reflect dietary phosphate and cal-
cium content. Because phosphate excretion depends on the 
filtered load (the product of the glomerular filtration rate and 
plasma phosphate concentration), urinary phosphate levels 
may be reduced despite the presence of hyperparathyroidism, 
when serum phosphate levels are particularly low. Expressions 
of renal phosphate clearance that account for these variables 
(eg, renal threshold for phosphate, or T m P/GFR) are a better 
indicator of renal phosphate handling than is total phosphate 
excretion. The T m P/GFR can be calculated from a nomogram 
using measurements of a fasting serum and urine phosphate 
concentration. 
 2. Histologic examination— Transcortical bone biopsy is the 
definitive means of making the diagnosis of osteomalacia. A rib 
or the iliac crest is the site at which biopsy is usually performed. 
To assess osteoid content and mineral appositional rate, the bone 
biopsy specimen is processed without decalcification. This 
requires special equipment. In osteomalacia, bone is mineralized 
poorly and slowly, resulting in wide osteoid seams (>12 μm) and a 
large fraction of bone covered by unmineralized osteoid. States 
of high bone turnover (increased bone formation and resorp-
tion), such as hyperparathyroidism, can also cause wide osteoid 
seams and an increased osteoid surface, producing a superficial 
resemblance to osteomalacia. Therefore, the rate of bone turn-
over should be determined by labeling bone with tetracycline, 
which provides a fluorescent marker of the calcification front. 
When two doses of tetracycline are given at different times, the 
distance between the two labels divided by the time interval 
between the two doses equals the mineral appositional rate. The 
normal appositional rate is approximately 0.74 um/d. 
Mineralization lag time—the time required for newly formed 
osteoid to be mineralized—can be calculated by dividing osteoid 
seam width by the appositional rate corrected by the linear 
extent of mineralization of the calcification front (a measure of 
the bone surface that is undergoing active mineralization as 
measured by tetracycline incorporation). Mineralization lag time 
is normally about 20 to 25 days. Bone formation rate is calcu-
lated as the product of the appositional rate times the linear 
extent of mineralization of the calcification front. Depressed 
appositional rate, increased  mineralization lag time, and reduced 
bone formation rate clearly distinguish osteomalacia from high-
turnover states such as hyperparathyroidism. Low-turnover 
states, as can be seen in various forms of osteoporosis, also have 
low appositional and bone formation rates, but these conditions 
are distinguished from osteomalacia by normal or reduced 
osteoid surface and volume. 
 C. Imaging studies 
 The radiologic features of rickets can be 
quite striking, especially in the young child. In growing bone, the 
radiolucent epiphyses are wide and flared, with irregular epiphy-
seal-metaphyseal junctions. Long bones may be bowed. The corti-
ces of the long bones are often indistinct. Occasionally, evidence 
of secondary hyperparathyroidism—subperiosteal resorption in 
the phalanges and metacarpals and erosion of the distal ends of the 
clavicles—is observed. Pseudofractures (also known as looser 
zones or milkman fractures) are an uncommon but nearly pathog-
nomonic feature of rickets and osteomalacia ( Figure 8–29 ). These 
radiolucent lines are most often found along the concave side of 
the femoral neck, pubic rami, ribs, clavicles, and lateral aspects of 
the scapulae. Pseudofractures may result from unhealed microfrac-
tures at points of stress or at the entry point of blood vessels into 
bone. They may progress to complete fractures that go unrecog-
nized and thus lead to substantial deformity and disability. BMD 
is not a reliable indicator of osteomalacia, because BMD can be 
decreased in patients with vitamin D deficiency or increased in 
patients with chronic renal failure. In adults with normal renal 
function, radiologic evidence of a mineralization defect is often 
subtle and not readily distinguished from osteoporosis, with 
which it often coexists. 
 Treatment 
 The treatment of vitamin D deficiency is covered under that head-
ing. The treatment of other diseases causing rickets or osteomala-
cia is found below under the specific disease headings. 
 NEPHROTIC SYNDROME 
 Nephrotic syndrome may lead to osteomalacia because of losses of 
vitamin D metabolites in the urine. Vitamin D metabolites are 
tightly bound to DBP, an α-globulin, and less tightly bound to 
 FIGURE 8–29  X-ray of the pelvis of an elderly woman with 
osteomalacia. Note marked bowing of both femoral necks, with 
pseudofractures of the medial aspect of the femoral necks and the 
superior aspect of the left pubic ramus (arrows).  (Photograph 
 courtesy of Dr. Harry Genant.) 
274    CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease
albumin as described earlier. Patients with the nephrotic syndrome 
may lose large amounts of DBP and albumin in their urine and so 
deplete their vitamin D stores. Such patients can have very low 
levels of vitamin D metabolites in their serum, although the free 
concentrations are less affected. Thus, the measurement of total 
25(OH)D or 1,25(OH) 2 D may be misleading with respect to the 
severity of the vitamin D deficiency. Although bone disease has 
been recognized as a complication of the nephrotic syndrome, the 
prevalence of osteomalacia in this population is unknown. If vita-
min D deficiency is suspected, treatment with vitamin D is indi-
cated with the proviso that normal total levels of 25(OH)D and 
1,25(OH) 2 D are not the goal. Blood levels of calcium, phosphate, 
and PTH are a more reliable guide to treatment. 
 HEPATIC OSTEODYSTROPHY 
 Hepatic osteodystrophy is the bone disease associated with liver 
disease. In the United States, patients with severe liver disease 
generally have osteoporosis, not osteomalacia. Both osteomalacia 
and osteoporosis are found in patients with liver disease in Great 
Britain, where vitamin D deficiency is more common. Although 
the liver is the site of the first step in the bioactivation of vitamin 
D—the conversion of vitamin D to 25(OH)D—this process is 
not tightly controlled, and until the liver disease is severe it is not 
rate limiting. Neither cholestatic nor parenchymal liver disease has 
much effect on 25(OH)D production until the late stages of liver 
failure. The low levels of 25(OH)D and 1,25(OH) 2 D associated 
with liver disease can usually be attributed to the reduced produc-
tion of DBP and albumin, poor nutrition, or malabsorption rather 
than a deficiency in the vitamin D 25-hydroxylase. As in patients 
with the nephrotic syndrome, the low total levels of the vitamin D 
metabolites may be misleading, as they reflect a reduction in DBP 
and albumin rather than a reduction in the free concentrations of 
these metabolites. 
 DRUG-INDUCED OSTEOMALACIA 
 Phenytoin and phenobarbital are anticonvulsants that induce 
drug-metabolizing enzymes in the liver that alter the hepatic 
metabolism of vitamin D and its metabolites. This action is not 
limited to anticonvulsants; the antituberculosis drug rifampin has 
been reported to do likewise. This effect may account for the lower 
circulating levels of 25(OH)D found in patients treated with such 
drugs. Levels of 1,25(OH) 2 D are less affected. Chronic anticon-
vulsant or antituberculosis therapy does not appear to lead to 
clinically significant bone disease except in subjects with other 
predisposing factors such as inadequate sunlight exposure (institu-
tionalized patients) and poor nutrition. Children may be more 
vulnerable than adults. In animal studies, phenytoin has been 
noted to exert a direct inhibitory effect on bone mineralization, 
but the relevance of this observation to the human use of this drug 
is uncertain. The decrease in 25(OH)D levels in patients taking 
these drugs can be readily reversed with supplemental vitamin D 
administration. 
 HYPOPHOSPHATEMIC DISORDERS 
 Chronic hypophosphatemia may lead to rickets or osteomalacia 
independently of other predisposing abnormalities. The princi-
pal diseases in which hypophosphatemia is associated with 
osteomalacia or rickets, however, also include other abnormali-
ties that can interfere with bone mineralization. Chronic phos-
phate depletion is caused by dietary deficiency (as in strict 
vegetarians), decreased intestinal absorption, or increased renal 
clearance (renal wasting). Acute hypophosphatemia can result 
from movement of phosphate into cells (eg, after infusion of 
insulin and glucose), but this condition is transient and does not 
result in bone disease. 
 Seventy to ninety percent of dietary phosphate is absorbed 
under normal conditions in the jejunum. This process is not 
tightly regulated, although 1,25(OH) 2 D stimulates phos-
phate absorption, a factor that needs to be considered when 
calcitriol is being used to treat other conditions. Meat and 
dairy products are the principal dietary sources of phosphate. 
The incidence of osteomalacia in vegetarians who avoid all 
meat and dairy products is unknown, but its occurrence has 
been reported. Intrinsic small bowel disease and small bowel 
surgery interfere with phosphate absorption and, if coupled 
with diarrhea or steatorrhea, can result in phosphate deple-
tion. A number of antacids (eg, Mylanta, Maalox, Basaljel, 
and Amphojel) contain aluminum hydroxide, which binds 
phosphate and prevents its absorption. Patients who ingest 
large amounts of these antacids may become phosphate 
depleted. When this occurs in the setting of renal failure, 
reductions in serum phosphate plus aluminum intoxication 
in these individuals, who also have reduced 1,25(OH) 2 D 
production, can produce profound osteomalacia. Eighty-five 
to ninety percent of the phosphate filtered by the glomerulus 
is reabsorbed, primarily in the proximal tubule. This process 
is regulated by PTH which reduces renal tubular phosphate 
reabsorption. It is also probably regulated by various vitamin 
D metabolites that appear to increase renal tubular phosphate 
reabsorption, and importantly by FGF23, which blocks the 
insertion of sodium phosphate cotransporters into and 
increases their internalization from the luminal membrane of 
renal proximal tubular cells. Many diseases that affect renal 
handling of phosphate are associated with osteomalacia— 
especially those also associated with abnormalities in vitamin D 
metabolism and in FGF23 production and or clearance, as 
 discussed later (see also Chapter 21). 
 Treatment of phosphate deficiency is generally geared to cor-
rection of the primary problem. Oral preparations of phosphate 
(and the amounts required to provide 1 g of elemental phospho-
rus) include Fleet Phospho-soda (6.12 mL) and Neutra-Phos 
(300 mL). These preparations are usually given in amounts that 
provide 1 to 3 g of phosphorus daily in divided doses, although 
diarrhea may limit the dose. Careful attention to both serum 
calcium and serum phosphate concentrations is required to 
avoid hypocalcemia, ectopic calcification, or secondary 
 hyperparathyroidism. 
CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease     275
 X-Linked and Autosomal Dominant 
Hypophosphatemia 
 X-linked hypophosphatemia (XLH), formerly called vitamin 
D-resistant rickets, is characterized by renal phosphate wasting, 
hypophosphatemia, and decreased 1,25(OH) 2 D production rela-
tive to the degree of hypophosphatemia. Clinical presentation is 
variable, but children often present with florid rickets. This 
X-linked dominant disorder generally affects males more severely 
than females. A similar but genetically distinct syndrome, auto-
somal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets (ADHR), is less com-
mon, affects females to the same extent as males, and may present 
later in life (second to fourth decades). Animal studies have indi-
cated that the cause of the renal phosphate wasting in XLH is 
humoral rather than a structural defect in the phosphate trans-
porter itself. Recent evidence strongly suggests that this humoral 
factor is FGF23, although other candidates have been proposed. 
Circulating FGF23 appears to be responsible for both the reduc-
tion in phosphate reabsorption in the renal proximal tubule and 
the blunted response of the proximal tubule to the ensuing hypo-
phosphatemia with respect to 1,25(OH) 2 D production. The gene 
responsible for XLH has been identified and is called  PHEX . It 
shares structural homology with a number of endopeptidase 
genes and it is located on the X chromosome. As is implicit in this 
ambiguous name, the role of  PHEX in renal phosphate transport 
is not clear. The prevailing hypothesis is that  PHEX indirectly 
leads to the cleavage and subsequent inactivation of FGF23, thus 
relieving the inhibition of phosphate reabsorption and 1,25(OH) 2 
production. 
 ADHR is due to a mutation in FGF23 that renders it resistant 
to cleavage . Recent evidence suggests that the defects in XLH and 
ADHR may not be restricted to the proximal renal tubule but may 
affect osteoblast function as well, a cell in which  PHEX is 
expressed. With the recent cloning of  PHEX and FGF23, our 
understanding of these diseases should rapidly increase. 
 Treatment of XLH and ADHR generally requires a combina-
tion of phosphate (1-4 g/d in divided doses) combined with cal-
citriol (1-3 μg/d) as tolerated. Vitamin D is less effective than 
calcitriol and should not be used for this condition. Appropriate 
therapy heals the rachitic lesions and increases growth velocity. A 
frequent complication of these diseases, however, is the develop-
ment of hyperparathyroidism, which may become autonomous 
and require parathyroidectomy. It is unclear whether the hyper-
parathyroidism is a complication of therapy or intrinsic to the 
disease process itself. Treatment with phosphate and calcitriol may 
also lead to ectopic calcification, including nephrocalcinosis. 
Thus, these patients need to be followed closely. 
 Tumor-Induced Osteomalacia 
 The association of osteomalacia and hypophosphatemia with 
tumors, primarily of mesenchymal origin, has been recognized for 
half a century (see Chapter 21). The cause of this syndrome has 
until recently remained obscure. Removal of the tumors, which 
are often small and difficult to find, cures the disease. Although 
most implicated tumors are mesenchymal, including fibromas and 
osteoblastomas, other tumors, including breast, prostate, and lung 
carcinomas; multiple myeloma; and chronic lymphocytic leuke-
mia have been associated with this syndrome. The patient gener-
ally presents with bone pain, muscle weakness, and osteomalacia. 
Symptoms may occur for years before the diagnosis is made. Renal 
phosphate wasting, hypophosphatemia, and normal serum cal-
cium and 25(OH)D levels but inappropriately low 1,25(OH) 2 D 
levels characterize the disease. Thus, it resembles XLH or ADHR. 
Tumor extracts contain molecules that inhibit renal phosphate 
transport and 1,25(OH) 2 D production, suggesting that a phos-
phate-regulating substance or  phosphatonin is involved. Thus, it 
was of great interest to observe that many of these tumors overpro-
duce FGF23 and that production by the tumor of FGF23 can 
explain the metabolic abnormalities associated with the hypophos-
phatemic syndrome ( see Figure 8–10 ). Other tumor products 
such as MEPE (matrix extracellular phosphoglycoprotein) and 
sFRP4 (secreted frizzled related protein 4) have also been impli-
cated. The best treatment is removal of the tumor, but this is not 
always possible. Phosphate and calcitriol have been the mainstays 
of treatment but with limited success. Patients should be dosed to 
tolerance as in XLH and ADHR. 
 Fibrous Dysplasia 
 Fibrous dysplasia results from activating mutations in the  GNAS 
gene, which encodes Gs alpha. Fibrous dysplasia of bone is a com-
ponent of the McCune-Albright syndrome. The bony lesions in 
this disorder overproduce FGF23 which like tumor-induced 
osteomalacia, described above, leads to hypophosphatemia, 
osteomalacia, and inappropriately normal 1,25(OH) 2 D. These 
lesions can be mono-ostotic or polyostotic, with the extent of 
bone involved correlating with the degree of FGF23 hypersecre-
tion, and hence the hypophosphatemia observed. 
 De Toni-Debré-Fanconi Syndrome and 
Hereditary Hypophosphatemic Rickets 
with Hypercalciuria 
 The De Toni-Debré-Fanconi syndrome includes a heterogeneous 
group of disorders affecting the proximal tubule and leading to 
phosphaturia and hypophosphatemia, aminoaciduria, glycosuria, 
bicarbonaturia, and proximal renal tubular acidosis. Not all fea-
tures must be present to make the diagnosis. Damage to the renal 
proximal tubule secondary to genetic or environmental causes is 
the underlying cause. This syndrome may be divided into two 
types depending on whether vitamin D metabolism is also abnor-
mal. In the more common type I, 1,25(OH) 2 D production is 
reduced relative to the degree of hypophosphatemia. In type II, 
1,25(OH) 2 D production is appropriately elevated in response to 
the hypophosphatemia, and this leads to hypercalciuria . The rea-
son that 1,25(OH) 2 D production is reduced in type I, despite the 
hypophosphatemia, is unclear but may suggest damage to the 
mitochondria where the 1-hydroxylase is located. 
 The type II Fanconi syndrome shares the principal features of 
hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets with hypercalciuria (HHRH). 
276    CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease
This rare disorder results from mutations in  SLC34A3 , the gene 
that encodes the type IIc sodium phosphate cotransporter (NaPiIIc), 
leading to loss of function of this transporter. Mutations in 
NaPiIIa, the other major renal sodium phosphate cotransporter, 
produces a similar picture. The key difference between HHRH and 
ADHR or XLH is that FGF23 is not elevated—so 1-hydroxylase 
activity is not suppressed. Thus, the hypophosphatemia leads to 
increased 1,25(OH) 2 D production, increased intestinal calcium 
absorption, and hypercalciuria. HHRH is heterogeneous in clinical 
presentation, but in severely affected individuals, it begins in child-
hood with bone pain and skeletal deformities. The syndrome is 
characterized by renal phosphate wasting and hypophosphatemia, 
hypercalciuria and normal serum calcium, and elevated 1,25(OH) 2 D 
levels. The osteomalacia associated with these renal phosphate-
wasting syndromes is probably the result of the hypophosphatemia, 
with contributions from the acidosis and decreased 1,25(OH) 2 D 
levels in the type I syndrome. 
 The ideal treatment is correction of the underlying defect, 
which may or may not be identified and/or reversible. Otherwise, 
treatment includes phosphate supplementation in all cases, correc-
tion of the acidosis, and 1,25(OH) 2 D replacement in the type I 
syndrome, but not in HHRH as this will aggravate the 
 hypercalciuria. 
 CALCIUM DEFICIENCY 
 Calcium deficiency may contribute to the mineralization defect 
that complicates gastrointestinal disease and proximal tubular dis-
orders, but it is less well established as a cause of osteomalacia than 
is vitamin D or phosphate deficiency. In carefully performed stud-
ies of children who ingested a very low-calcium diet in Africa, there 
was clinical, biochemical, and histologic evidence of osteomalacia. 
The serum phosphate and 25(OH)D and 1,25(OH) 2 D levels were 
normal; serum alkaline phosphatase levels were elevated; and serum 
and urine calcium levels were low. Because intestinal absorption of 
calcium decreases with age, the daily requirement for calcium 
increases from approximately 800 mg in young adults to 1400 mg 
in the elderly. Calcium deficiency can result not only from inade-
quate dietary intake but also from excessive fecal and urinary losses. 
Except in cases in which a renal leak of calcium plays an important 
role in the etiology of calcium deficiency (certain forms of idio-
pathic hypercalciuria or following glucocorticoid therapy for 
inflammatory diseases), urinary calcium excretion provides a useful 
means to determine the appropriate level of oral calcium replace-
ment. Because of its low cost and high percentage of elemental 
calcium, calcium carbonate is the treatment of choice. 
 PRIMARY DISORDERS OF THE BONE 
MATRIX 
 Several diseases lead to abnormalities in bone mineralization 
because of intrinsic defects in the matrix or in the osteoblast pro-
ducing that matrix. With the exception of osteogenesis imperfecta, 
these tend to be rare. Examples are listed below. 
 OSTEOGENESIS IMPERFECTA 
 Osteogenesis imperfecta is a heritable disorder of connective tissue 
due to a qualitative or quantitative abnormality in type I collagen, 
the most abundant collagen in bone. The disease is typically trans-
mitted in an autosomal dominant mode, although autosomal 
recessive inheritance has also been described. Clinical expression is 
highly variable, depending on the location and type of mutation 
observed. Although skeletal deformity and fracture are the hall-
marks of this disease, other tissues are often affected, including the 
teeth, skin, ligaments, and scleras. Routine biochemical studies of 
bone and mineral metabolism are generally normal; however, ele-
vated serum alkaline phosphatase and increased excretion of bio-
chemical markers of bone turnover and calcium are often found. 
Bone histology shows abundant disorganized, poorly mineralized 
matrix but with a high rate of bone turnover as reflected by 
increased tetracycline labeling. 
 Treatment is supportive and includes orthopedic, rehabilita-
tive, and dental intervention as appropriate. Bisphosphonates have 
recently been shown to be of value in children to prevent fractures 
and reduce bone pain and skeletal morbidity. 
 Hypophosphatasia 
 Hypophosphatasia, transmitted in an autosomal recessive or 
dominant pattern, has considerable variability in clinical expres-
sion ranging from a severe form of rickets in children to a pre-
disposition to fractures in adults. The biochemical hallmarks are 
low serum and tissue levels of alkaline phosphatase (liver-bone-
kidney but not intestine-placenta) and increased urinary levels 
of phosphoethanolamine. Serum calcium and phosphate levels 
may be high, and many patients have hypercalciuria. Levels of 
vitamin D metabolites and PTH are generally normal. In some 
families, a mutation in the  alkaline phosphatase gene has been 
identified. Radiologic examination shows osteopenia, with the 
frequent occurrence of stress fractures and chondrocalcinosis. 
Bone biopsy specimens show osteomalacia. It is not clear why 
these patients develop osteomalacia or rickets. Skeletal alkaline 
phosphatase cleaves pyrophosphate, an inhibitor of bone 
 mineralization. Thus, patients deficient in alkaline phosphatase 
may be unable to hydrolyze this inhibitor and so develop a 
 mineralization defect. 
 There is no established medical therapy. Use of vitamin D or 
its metabolites may further increase the already elevated serum 
calcium and phosphate and should not be used. 
 Fibrogenesis Imperfecta Ossium 
 Fibrogenesis imperfecta ossium is a rare, painful disorder that 
affects middle-aged subjects in what appears to be a sporadic 
 fashion. Serum alkaline phosphatase activity is increased. The 
bones have a dense, amorphous mottled appearance radiologically 
and a disorganized arrangement of collagen with decreased bire-
fringence histologically when viewed with polarized light micros-
copy. Presumably, the disorganized collagen matrix retards normal 
bone mineralization. There is no specific therapy. 
CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease     277
 Axial Osteomalacia 
 This rare disease involves only the axial skeleton and affects mostly 
middle-aged or elderly males. Most cases are sporadic. It is not 
particularly painful. Alkaline phosphatase activity may be 
increased, but calcium, phosphate, and vitamin D metabolite 
levels are normal. Histologically, the bone shows increased osteoid 
and reduced tetracycline incorporation. The reason for the miner-
alization disorder is uncertain. No effective medical therapy has 
been established. 
 INHIBITORS OF MINERALIZATION 
 Several drugs are known to cause osteomalacia or rickets by inhib-
iting mineralization. However, the mechanisms by which this 
occurs are not fully understood. 
 Aluminum 
 Aluminum-induced bone disease is found primarily in patients 
with renal failure on chronic hemodialysis and in patients being 
treated with total parenteral nutrition (TPN). With the recogni-
tion of this complication and the switch to deionized water for 
dialysis, decreased use of aluminum-containing antacids, and the 
use of purified amino acids rather than casein hydrolysates (which 
contained large amounts of aluminum) for TPN, the incidence and 
prevalence of this complication have been markedly reduced. The 
problem, however, still exists. As described under renal osteodystro-
phy, the bone disease is osteomalacia and can be severe and painful. 
Aluminum deposits in the mineralization front and appears to 
inhibit the mineralization process. Removal of the  aluminum with 
deferoxamine chelation therapy is the treatment of choice. 
 Fluoride 
 Fluoride is a potent stimulator of bone formation. If administered 
at high doses with inadequate calcium supplementation, the bone 
formed as a result is poorly mineralized. The mechanisms 
 underlying the effects of fluoride on osteoblast function and bone 
mineralization remain unclear. 
 PAGET DISEASE OF BONE 
(OSTEITIS DEFORMANS) 
 Paget disease is a focal disorder of bone remodeling that leads to 
greatly accelerated rates of bone turnover, disruption of the nor-
mal architecture of bone, and sometimes to gross deformities of 
bone. As a focal disorder it is not, strictly speaking, a metabolic 
bone disease. Paget disease is prevalent in northern Europe, par-
ticularly in England and Germany. It is also common in the 
United States but is unusual in Africa and Asia. 
 Etiology 
 It has long been thought that Paget disease, with its late onset and 
spotty involvement of the skeleton, might be due to a chronic slow 
virus infection of bone. Inclusion bodies that resemble paramyxo-
virus inclusions have been identified in pagetic osteoclasts, and the 
presence of measles virus transcripts has been detected by molecu-
lar techniques. However, considerably more work would be 
required to prove the infectious etiology of Paget disease. There are 
also familial clusters of the disease, with up to 20% of patients in 
some studies having afflicted first-degree relatives so a heterogene-
ity of pathogenetic mechanisms is likely (see later). 
 Pathology 
 At the microscopic level, the disorder is characterized by highly 
vascular and cellular bone, consistent with its high metabolic 
activity. The osteoclasts are sometimes huge and bizarre, with up 
to 100 nuclei per cell. Because pagetic osteoclasts initiate the bone 
remodeling cycle in a chaotic fashion, the end result of remodeling 
is a mosaic pattern of lamellar bone. Paget disease (and other high 
turnover states) can also produce woven bone—bone that is laid 
down rapidly and in a disorganized fashion, without the normal 
lamellar architecture. 
 Pathogenesis 
 Abnormal osteoclastic bone resorption is the probable initiating 
event in Paget disease. Not only are the osteoclasts very abnormal 
histologically and prone to unruly behavior, but some forms of the 
disease are marked by an early resorptive phase in which pure 
osteolysis occurs without an osteoblastic response. Additionally, 
Paget disease responds dramatically to inhibitors of osteoclastic 
bone resorption. 
 The rate of bone resorption is often increased by as much as 
10- to 20-fold, and this is reflected in biochemical indices of bone 
resorption. Over the skeleton as a whole, osteoblastic new bone 
formation responds appropriately to this challenge. Even though 
local disparities in remodeling may result in areas with the radio-
graphic appearance of osteolysis or dense new bone, there is a close 
relationship between biochemical markers of bone resorption 
(eg,  N -telopeptide,  C -telopeptide, deoxypyridinoline) and 
 formation (eg, alkaline phosphatase, osteocalcin). Because this 
tight coupling is maintained in Paget disease, in the face of enor-
mously increased skeletal turnover rates, systemic mineral 
 homeostasis is usually unperturbed. 
 Genetic Forms 
 Approximately 20% of patients with Paget disease have a positive 
family history. This interesting observation plus the uncertain viral 
etiology has led several groups to determine the genetic loci 
responsible for the disease. These studies plus work done to 
unravel the molecular defects in patients with rare but clear disor-
ders of accelerated and unregulated bone remodeling have shed 
light on molecular pathways that may be important in sporadic 
Paget disease. 
 Mutations in RANK and OPG are important in the pathogen-
esis of high bone remodeling states. Whyte and colleagues investi-
gated two unrelated Navajo patients with autosomal recessive 
juvenile Paget disease in whom they found approximately 100-kb 
278    CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease
deletions of the gene encoding TNFRSF11B or OPG on chromo-
some 8q24.2. In two other clinical disorders of high bone remod-
eling designated as familial expansile osteolysis and expansile 
skeletal hyperphosphatasia, tandem duplications are present 
within the signal peptide of RANK, leading to a gain-of-function 
in the activity of RANK. This is predicted to enhance osteoclasto-
genesis. 
 Familial Paget disease is not, however, generally explained by 
abnormalities in  RANK or  OPG genes. In contrast, several groups 
have uncovered mutations in SQSTM1 or sequestosome 1 (also 
known as p62) in multiple kindreds with Paget disease. SQSTM1 
is a ubiquitin-binding protein involved in signaling pathways for 
IL-1, TNF, and RANKL—all molecules important in the produc-
tion and function of osteoclasts. A variety of different SQSTM1 
mutations are thought to explain approximately 30% of cases of 
familial Paget disease. The identification of additional candidate 
genes is in progress. 
 Clinical Features 
 A. Symptoms and signs 
 Typical Paget disease may affect 
any of the bones, but the most common sites are the sacrum and 
spine (50% of patients), femur (46%), skull (28%), and pelvis 
(22%). The clinical features of Paget disease are pain, fractures, 
deformity, and manifestations of the neurologic, rheumatologic, 
or metabolic complications of the disease. However, at least two-
thirds of patients are asymptomatic. Thus, Paget disease is often 
discovered as an incidental radiologic finding or during the inves-
tigation of an elevated alkaline phosphatase level. On physical 
examination, enlargement of the skull, frontal bossing, or deafness 
may be evident. Involvement of the weight-bearing long bones of 
the lower extremity often results in bowing. The femur and tibia 
bow anteriorly and laterally, but the fibula is almost never affected. 
Cutaneous erythema and warmth, as well as bone tenderness, may 
be evident over affected areas of the skeleton, reflecting greatly 
increased blood flow through pagetic bone. The findings of pain, 
warmth, and erythema led to the appellation osteitis deformans, 
although Paget disease is not truly an inflammatory disorder. The 
most common fractures in Paget disease are vertebral crush frac-
tures and incomplete  fissure fractures through the cortex, usually 
on the convex surface of the tibia or femur. Affected bones may 
fracture completely; when they do, healing is usually rapid and 
complete—the increased metabolic activity of pagetic bone seems 
to favor fracture healing. 
 B. Laboratory findings 
 The serum alkaline phosphatase 
activity is usually increased, sometimes to very high levels. Levels 
of biochemical markers of bone turnover are often high, but it is 
not clear that their determination offers any special advantage over 
that of serum alkaline phosphatase activity. The serum calcium 
and phosphate concentrations and the urinary calcium excretion 
are normal, although if a patient sustains a fracture and becomes 
immobilized, hypercalciuria and hypercalcemia may occur. 
 C. Imaging studies 
 The early stages of Paget disease are 
often osteolytic. Examples are erosion of the temporal bone of 
the skull, osteoporosis circumscripta, and pagetic lesions in the 
extremities, which begin in the metaphysis and migrate down 
the shaft as a V-shaped resorptive front ( Figure 8–30 ). Over 
years or even decades, the typical mixed picture of late Paget 
disease evolves. Trabeculae are thickened and coarse. The bone 
may be enlarged or bowed. In the pelvis, the iliopectineal line 
or pelvic brim is often thickened ( Figure 8–31 ). In the spine, 
osteoblastic lesions of the vertebral bodies may present a  picture-
frame appearance or a homogeneously increased density, the 
 ivory vertebra . Associated osteoarthritis may present with nar-
rowing of the joint space ( see Figure 8–31 ). Osteosarcoma may 
present with cortical destruction or a soft tissue mass ( see Figure 8–31 ). 
Radionuclide bone scanning with technetium-labeled bisphos-
phonates or other bone-seeking agents is uniformly positive in 
active Paget disease and is useful for surveying the skeleton 
when a focus of Paget disease has been found  radiographically 
( Figure 8–32 ) or the disease is suspected. 
 Complications 
 Complications of Paget disease may be neurologic, otologic, rheu-
matologic, neoplastic, or cardiac ( Table 8–15 ). 
 FIGURE 8–30  Lytic Paget disease in the tibia before ( left ) and 
after ( right ) immobilization in a cast. The lytic area has a flame- or 
V-shaped leading edge ( left ). ( Reproduced, with permission, from 
Strewler GJ. Paget’s disease of bone.  West J Med . 1984;140:763.) 
CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease     279
 A. Neurologic/Otologic 
 The brain, spinal cord, and periph-
eral nerves are all at risk. Sensorineural deafness occurs in up to 
50% of patients in whom the skull is involved, and compression of 
the other cranial nerves can also occur. At the base of the skull, 
Paget disease can produce platybasia and basilar impression of the 
brain stem, with symptoms of brain stem compression, obstructive 
hydrocephalus, or vertebrobasilar insufficiency. Spinal stenosis is 
common in vertebral Paget disease, in part because the pagetic 
vertebra can be enlarged, and may extend posteriorly when collapse 
occurs, but spinal stenosis responds well to medical treatment of 
the disease. 
 B. Rheumatologic 
 Osteoarthritis is common in Paget dis-
ease. It may be an unrelated finding in elderly patients with the 
disorder, or it may result directly from pagetic deformities and 
their effects on wear and tear in the joints. Arthritis presents a 
conundrum to the clinician attempting to relieve pain, as it may 
be difficult to determine whether the pain originates in pagetic 
bone or in the nearby joint. An association of osteitis deformans 
and gout was first noted by James Paget himself, and asymptom-
atic hyperuricemia is also common. 
 C. Neoplastic 
 The most dreaded complication of Paget disease 
is development of a sarcoma. The tumor arises in pagetic bone, 
typically in individuals with polyostotic involvement, and may 
present with soft tissue swelling, increased pain, or a rapidly 
increasing alkaline phosphatase. Osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, 
and giant cell tumors all occur in Paget disease, with a combined 
incidence of about 1%. Because osteosarcoma is otherwise uncom-
mon in the elderly, fully 30% of elderly patients with osteosarcoma 
have underlying Paget disease. 
 D. Cardiac 
 High-output congestive heart failure occurs rarely 
and is due to markedly increased blood flow to bone, usually in 
patients with more than 50% involvement of the skeleton. 
 Treatment 
 In a patient known to have Paget disease, bone pain that is unre-
sponsive to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents deserves a trial 
of specific therapy. As noted earlier, it may not be easy to 
 FIGURE 8–31  Paget disease of the right femur and pelvis. The 
right femur displays cortical thickening and coarse trabeculation. The 
right ischium is enlarged, with sclerosis of ischial and pubic rami and 
the right ilium. Two complications of Paget disease are present. There 
is concentric bilateral narrowing of the hip joint space, signifying 
osteoarthritis. The destructive lesion interrupting the cortex of the 
right ilium is an osteosarcoma. ( Reproduced, with permission, from 
Strewler GJ. Paget disease of bone.  West J Med . 1984;140:763.) 
 FIGURE 8–32  Bone scan of a patient with Paget disease of the 
pelvis, right femur, and acetabulum. Note localization of bone-seeking 
isotope ( 99m Tc-labeled bisphosphonate) in these areas. 
TABLE 8–15 Complications of Paget disease.
Rheumatologic
Osteoarthritis
Gout
Calcific periarthritis
Neurologic/Otologic
Basilar impression
Hydrocephalus (rare)
Cranial nerve dysfunction (especially deafness)
Spinal cord and root compression
Peripheral nerve entrapment (carpal and tarsal tunnel syndromes)
Metabolic
Immobilization hypercalciuria-hypercalcemia
Urolithiasis
Neoplastic
Sarcoma
Giant cell tumor
280    CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease
 differentiate pagetic bone pain from that due to osteoarthritis. The 
other indications for treatment of Paget disease are controversial. 
Treatment has been advocated for neurologic compression syn-
dromes, as preparation for surgery, and to prevent deformities. 
Neurologic deficits often respond to medical treatment, and a trial 
of treatment is often warranted. Pretreatment for 2 to 3 months 
before orthopedic surgery prevents excessive bleeding and postop-
erative hypercalcemia, but satisfactory bone healing usually occurs 
without medical treatment. Paget disease is sometimes treated in 
the hope of arresting the progress of deformities (eg, bowing of the 
extremities and resultant osteoarthritis), but it is not certain 
whether medical treatment can achieve this aim or whether it will 
arrest the progression of deafness in patients with skull involve-
ment. 
 Two classes of agents are used in the treatment of Paget dis-
ease: bisphosphonates and CT. Both inhibit osteoclastic bone 
resorption. 
 A. Bisphosphonates  The oral bisphosphonates (alendronate 
and risedronate) are commonly used in the treatment of Paget dis-
ease. Alendronate is administered at a dose of 40 mg daily for 
6 months. On average, alkaline phosphatase activity is suppressed by 
about 80% using such treatment. Biochemical remissions are often 
prolonged for more than 1 year, after the drug is stopped. The main 
side-effect is gastrointestinal upset, requiring discontinuation of 
therapy in about 6% of patients. Risedronate, given at a dosage of 
30 mg/d for 2 months, is also highly efficacious in lowering and even 
normalizing alkaline phosphatase activity and reducing bone pain. 
For patients with gastrointestinal intolerance to oral bisphosphonates 
or more severe bony involvement, it may be more convenient or 
appropriate to administer intravenous bisphosphonates. If the disease 
is highly active and surgery is planned in the immediate future, 
intravenous therapy is generally preferred. Pamidronate, an amino-
bisphosphonate closely related to alendronate, has been used for this 
purpose. Intravenous infusions of pamidronate (60 or 90 mg) pro-
duce a high remission rate and a durable response. More recently, 
intravenous zoledronic acid (5 mg) has been shown to be efficacious, 
in terms of both the strength and duration of alkaline phosphatase 
suppression, in patients with Paget disease. The principal side-effect 
observed with intravenous aminobisphosphonate administration is 
an acute-phase response, including fever and myalgias, that occurs in 
about 10% of patients and may last for several days after a dose. A 
very small percentage of patients receiving multiple and typically 
high doses of intravenous bisphosphonates can develop osteonecrosis 
of the jaw. 
 B. Calcitonin 
 Salmon CT is administered initially at a dos-
age of 50 to 100 IU daily until symptoms are improved; thereaf-
ter, many patients can be maintained on 50 units three times a 
week. Improvement in pain is usually evident within 2 to 
6 weeks. On average, the alkaline phosphatase falls by 50% 
within 3 to 6 months. Many patients have a sustained response 
to treatment extending over years, and biochemical parameters 
are often suppressed for 6 months to 1 year after treatment is 
discontinued. Up to 20% of patients receiving chronic CT treat-
ment develop late resistance to CT, which may be antibody- 
mediated. Data on the use of nasal spray CT’s efficacy in Paget 
disease are limited. 
 RENAL OSTEODYSTROPHY 
 Pathogenesis 
 Metabolism of 25(OH)D to 1,25(OH) 2 D and 24,25(OH) 2 D in 
the kidney is tightly regulated. Renal disease results in reduced 
circulating levels of both of these metabolites. With the reduction 
in 1,25(OH) 2 D levels, intestinal calcium absorption falls, and 
bone resorption appears to become less sensitive to PTH—a result 
that leads to hypocalcemia. Phosphate excretion by the diseased 
kidney is decreased, resulting in hyperphosphatemia, which 
amplifies the fall in serum calcium and independently increases 
PTH secretion. The fall in serum calcium combined with the low 
levels of 1,25(OH) 2 D, which is an inhibitor of PTH secretion, 
and the hyperphosphatemia result in hyperparathyroidism 
( Figure 8–33 ). The parathyroid glands, under chronic proliferative 
stimulation in uremic individuals, can develop clonal expansion of 
cells that harbor mutations in known parathyroid growth- 
promoting genes. This can result in nodular hyperplasia. In addi-
tion, the expression of both VDRs and CaSRs is often depressed 
in tissues from individuals with chronic secondary hyperparathy-
roidism. Both calcium, likely acting via CaSRs, and 1,25(OH) 2 D, 
acting via VDRs, exert inhibitory effects on parathyroid cell 
growth. Furthermore, the hyperphosphatemia of uremia stimu-
lates FGF23 production by bone, and this can further inhibit 
1,25(OH) 2 D production. 
Decreased nephron mass
Decreased formation of
1,25(OH)2D
Phosphate
retention
Decreased intestinal
calcium absorption
Increased serum
phosphate
Reduced
suppression
of PTH by
1,25(OH)2D
Decreased serum [Ca2+]
Secondary hyperparathyroidism
Increased PTH secretion
and cell proliferation
 FIGURE 8–33  Pathogenesis of renal secondary 
 hyperparathyroidism. 
CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease     281
 The net effect of deficient 1,25(OH) 2 D and 24,25(OH) 2 D 
and excess PTH and FGF23 on bone in uremia is complex. 
Patients may have osteitis fibrosa (reflecting excessive PTH), 
osteomalacia (in part reflecting decreased vitamin D  metabolites 
and high FGF23 which have complex effects on bone mineral-
ization), or a combination of the two. One particularly debili-
tating form of renal osteodystrophy is now found in an 
increasing percentage of patients on hemodialysis in whom 
only osteomalacia occurs. Rarely now, some patients have 
increased aluminum content in their bones, particularly in the 
region where mineralization is occurring (calcification front), 
and this appears to inhibit mineralization. More commonly, 
however, these patients do not have aluminum excess or 
increased osteoid but have low bone turnover, a state termed 
 adynamic bone disease . These patients are particularly prone 
to develop symptoms of bone pain, fractures, and muscle 
weakness, and are particularly sensitive to developing 
 hypercalcemia when treated with calcitriol despite the  relatively 
low levels of PTH. 
 Clinical Features 
 Most patients with renal osteodystrophy have osteitis fibrosa 
alone or in combination with osteomalacia. If not well 
controlled, these patients will have a low serum level of calcium 
and high serum levels of phosphorus, alkaline phosphatase, and 
PTH. A few patients develop severe secondary hyperparathy-
roidism in which the PTH level increases dramatically and stays 
elevated even with restoration of the serum calcium to normal. 
Such patients are prone to developing hypercalcemia with the 
usual replacement doses of calcium (sometimes referred to as 
tertiary hyperparathyroidism). Another subset of patients with 
renal osteodystrophy present with relatively normal levels of 
PTH and alkaline phosphatase. Their serum calcium levels are 
often elevated after treatment with small doses of calcitriol. 
These patients generally have adynamic bone disease on bone 
biopsy and may suffer from aluminum intoxication (see dis-
cussed earlier). 
 Treatment 
 Patients with renal osteodystrophy generally respond to calcitriol 
(0.5-1 μg/d) or one of the vitamin D analogs paricalcitol 
(19-nor-1-alpha, 25[OH] 2 D 2 ) or doxercalciferol (1αOHD 2 ), 
calcium supplementation (1-3 g/d), and phosphate restriction. 
Vitamin D supplementation is also recommended to ensure 
adequate 25(OH)D levels (30 ng/mL). Because of the concern 
about aluminum intoxication, sevelamer (Renagel) and other 
nonaluminum phosphate binders have replaced aluminum 
hydroxide to reduce intestinal phosphate absorption. To mini-
mize the calcium-phosphate product, absorbable calcium- 
containing salts are used only at low doses to maintain sufficient 
calcium intake and not to act as a phosphate binder. The goal is 
to maintain normal serum levels of calcium, phosphate, and 
alkaline phosphatase. This regimen treats osteitis fibrosa more 
effectively than osteomalacia. 
 To prevent the development of adynamic bone disease, intact 
PTH levels higher than the upper limit of normal in standard 
intact PTH assays are allowed. The optimal intact PTH level for 
preserving skeletal integrity in end-stage renal disease and in 
patients on dialysis is uncertain. Newer or so-called  biointact or 
 whole PTH assays give a better reflection of the levels of the full-
length PTH(1-84) molecule in these settings (described earlier). 
As previously noted, aluminum toxicity is associated with low- 
turnover bone disease rarely now. In the absence of aluminum 
toxicity, the etiology of uremic adynamic bone disease is 
unknown. 
 Patients with aluminum intoxication are very sensitive to and 
respond poorly to calcitriol and calcium, with rapid onset of 
hypercalcemia and little improvement in their bone disease. These 
patients may respond to chelation therapy with deferoxamine, a 
drug also used for iron chelation. 
 Severe secondary hyperparathyroidism is difficult to manage. 
These patients are prone to the development of hypercalcemia 
with calcium supplementation. Intravenous doses of calcitriol 
with hemodialysis may preferentially inhibit PTH secretion with 
less effect on raising serum calcium. Several analogs of calcitriol 
with less hypercalcemic potential than calcitriol itself have recently 
been approved for the management of such patients, as has the 
calcimimetic cinacalcet. Cinacalcet inhibits PTH secretion by 
activating the CaSR on parathyroid cells. Calcimimetic therapy 
has the distinct advantage of lowering PTH and presumably bone 
turnover, and thereby serum phosphate, calcium, and their prod-
uct unlike the vitamin D analogs which tend to raise serum cal-
cium and phosphate. Cinacalcet has contributed substantially to 
the management of uremic secondary hyperparathyroidism, 
although its major side effect, nausea and vomiting, limits its use 
in some patients. 
 HEREDITARY FORMS OF 
HYPERPHOSPHATEMIA 
 Tumoral Calcinosis 
 Mutations in genes leading to reduced FGF23 production, 
secretion, or action have recently been described which result 
in hyperphosphatemia and increased 1,25(OH)2D produc-
tion. FGF23 requires glycosylation for its export from the cell 
where it is produced. Although FGF23 utilizes FGF receptors 
in common with many other members of the FGF family 
(FGFR 1 and 3), it also requires a coreceptor alpha klotho, to 
activate FGF23-mediated signaling in target cells. Inactivating 
mutations in FGF23 itself, the enzyme that glycosylates FGF23 
which is necessary for secretion,  GALNT3 (UDP- N -acetyl-α-
D-galactosamine transferase), and alpha klotho all lead to 
hyperphosphatemia and increased 1,25(OH)2D levels, 
although serum calcium levels are generally normal. Urinary 
phosphate reabsorption is increased. These findings are the 
opposite of those of familial hypophosphatemic disorders 
described earlier. As a result of the increased calcium-phosphate 
product, ectopic calcification occurs, generally around joints 
282    CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease
and soft tissues. Dentition may be affected in some individuals. 
Treatment involves the use of phosphate binders in an effort to 
reduce the serum phosphate levels and reduce the painful and 
sometimes disfiguring ectopic calcifications which can become 
very large. 
 REFERENCES 
 Parathyroid Hormone, Parathyroid Hormone–Related Peptide, 
and Their Receptors 
 Gensure RC, Gardella TJ, Juppner H. Parathyroid hormone and parathyroid 
hormone-related peptide, and their receptors.  Biochem Biophys Res Commun . 
2005;328:666. [PMID: 15694400] 
 Murray TM, Rao LG, Divieti P, Bringhurst FR. Parathyroid hormone secretion 
and action: evidence for discrete receptors for the carboxyl-terminal region 
and related biological actions of carboxyl-terminal ligands.  Endocr Rev . 
2005;26:78. [PMID: 15689574] 
 Calcitonin 
 Findlay DM, Sexton PM. Calcitonin.  Growth Factors . 2004;22:217. [PMID: 
15621724] 
 Katafuchi T, Yasue H, Osaki T, Minamino N: Calcitonin receptor-stimulating 
peptide: its evolutionary and functional relationship with calcitonin/calci-
tonin-gene related peptide based on gene structure.  Peptides . 2009;30:1753. 
[PMID: 19540291] 
 Naot D, Cornish J. The role of peptides and receptors of the calcitonin family in 
the regulation of bone metabolism.  Bone . 2008;43:813. [PMID: 
18687416] 
 Vitamin D 
 Bikle DD. Nonclassic actions of vitamin D.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2009;94:26. 
[PMID: 18854395] 
 Bikle DD. Extrarenal synthesis of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D and its health implica-
tions.  Clin Rev Bone Miner Metab . 2009;7:114. 
 Bouillon R, Carmeliet G, Verlinden L, et al. Vitamin D and human health: lessons 
from vitamin D receptor null mice.  Endo Rev . 2008;29:726. [PMID: 
18694980] 
 Christakos S, Dhawan P, Benn B, et al. Vitamin D: molecular mechanism of 
action.  Ann NY Acad Sci . 2007;1116:340. [PMID: 18083936] 
 Dawson-Hughes B. Serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D and functional outcomes in the 
elderly.  Am J Clin Nutr . 2008;88:537S. [PMID: 18689397] 
 Holick MF. Vitamin D deficiency.  N Engl J Med . 2007;357:266. [PMID: 
17634462] 
 Khanal RC, Nemere I. Regulation of intestinal calcium transport.  Ann Rev Nutr . 
2008;28:179. [PMID: 18598134] 
 Medullary Thyroid Carcinoma 
 Costante G, Durante C, Francis Z, Schlumberger M, Filetti S. Determination of 
calcitonin levels in C-cell disease: clinical interest and potential pitfalls.  Nat 
Clin Pract Endo Metab . 2009;5:35. [PMID: 19079202] 
 Frank-Raue K, Rondot S, Raue F. Molecular genetics and phenomics of RET 
mutations: impact on prognosis of MTC.  Mol Cell Endocrinol . 2010;322:2. 
[PMID: 20083156] 
 Moo-Young TA, Traugott AL, Moley JF. Sporadic and familial medullary thyroid 
carcinoma: state of the art.  Surg Clin North Am . 2009;89:1193. [PMID: 
19836492] 
 Raue F, Frank-Raue K. Update multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2.  Fam Cancer . 
Epub 20 Jan 2010. [PMID: 20087666] 
 Sakorafas GH, Friess H, Peros G. The genetic basis of hereditary medullary thyroid 
cancer: clinical implications for the surgeon, with a particular emphasis on 
the role of prophylactic thyroidectomy.  Endo Rel Canc . 2008;15:871. 
[PMID: 19015274] 
 Tuttle RM, Ball DW, Byrd D, et al. Medullary carcinoma.  J Natl Compr Canc 
Netw . 2010;8:512. [PMID: 20495082] 
 Hypercalcemic Disorders 
 Agarwal SK, Mateo CM, Marx SJ. Rare germline mutations in cyclin-dependent 
kinase inhibitor genes in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 and related 
states.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2009;94:1826. [PMID: 19141585] 
 Bilezikian JP, Potts JT Jr., Fuleihan G, et al. Guidelines for management of asymp-
tomatic primary hyperparathyroidism: summary statement from the Third 
International Workshop.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2009;94:335. [PMID: 
19193908] 
 Conron M, Young C, Beynon HL. Calcium metabolism in sarcoidosis and its clinical 
implications.  Rheumatology (Oxford) . 2000;39:707. [PMID: 10908687] 
 Eastell R, Arnold A, Brandi ML, Diagnosis of asymptomatic primary hyperpara-
thyroidism: proceedings of the Third International Workshop.  J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab . 2009;94:340. [PMID: 19193909] 
 Egbuna OI, Brown EM. Hypercalcaemic and hypocalcaemic conditions due to 
calcium-sensing receptor mutations.  Best Pract Res Clin Rheum . 2008;22:129. 
[PMID: 18328986] 
 Fraser WD. Hyperparathyroidism.  Lancet . 2009;374:145. [PMID: 19595349] 
 Iqbal AA, Burgess EH, Gallina DL, Nanes MS, Cook CB. Hypercalcemia in 
hyperthyroidism: patterns of serum calcium, parathyroid hormone, and 
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 levels during management of thyrotoxicosis. 
 Endocr Pract . 2003;9:517. [PMID: 14715479] 
 Jacobs TP, Bilezikian JP. Clinical review: rare causes of hypercalcemia.  J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab . 2005;90:6316. [PMID: 16131579] 
 Khan A, Grey A, Shoback D. Medical management of asymptomatic primary 
hyperparathyroidism: proceedings of the Third International Workshop. 
 J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2009;94:373. [PMID: 19193912] 
 Marcocci C, Cetani F, Rubin MR, Silverberg SJ, Pinchera A, Bilezikian JP. 
Parathyroid carcinoma.  J Bone Min Res . 2008;23:1869. [PMID: 19016595] 
 Marcocci C, Chanson P, Shoback D, et al. Cinacalcet reduces serum calcium con-
centrations in patients with intractable primary hyperparathyroidism.  J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab . 2009;94:2766. [PMID: 19470620] 
 Marx SJ. Molecular genetics of multiple endocrine neoplasia types 1 and 2. 
 Nat Rev Cancer . 2005;5:367. [PMID: 15864278] 
 Peacock M, Bolognese MA, Borofsky M, et al. Cinacalcet treatment of primary hyper-
parathyroidism: biochemical and bone densitometric outcomes in a five-year 
study.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2009;94:4860. [PMID: 19837909] 
 Ralston SH, Coleman R, Fraser WD, et al. Medical management of hypercalce-
mia.  Calcif Tissue Int . 2004;74:1. [PMID: 14523593] 
 Rubin MR, Bilezikian JP, McMahon DJ, et al. The natural history of primary 
hyperparathyroidism with or without parathyroid surgery after 15 years. 
 J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2008;93:3462. [PMID: 18544625] 
 Saunders Y, Ross JR, Broadley KE, Edmonds PM, Patel S; Steering Group. 
Systematic review of bisphosphonates for hypercalcaemia of malignancy. 
 Palliat Med . 2004;18:418. [PMID: 15332420] 
 Shepard MM, Smith JW, 3rd. Hypercalcemia.  Am J Med Sci . 2007;334:381. 
[PMID: 18004092] 
 Stewart AF. Clinical practice. Hypercalcemia associated with cancer.  N Engl J Med . 
2005;352:373. [PMID: 15673803] 
 Udelsman R, Pasieka JL, Sturgeon C, Young JE, Clark OH. Surgery for asymp-
tomatic primary hyperparathyroidism: proceedings of the Third International 
Workshop.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2009;94:366. [PMID: 19193911] 
 Hypocalcemic Disorders 
 Alimohammadi M, Björklund P, Hallgren A, et al. Autoimmune polyendocrine 
syndrome type 1 and NALP5, a parathyroid autoantigen.  N Engl J Med . 
2008;358:1018. [PMID: 18322283] 
 Bhattacharyya A, et al. Hungry bone syndrome—revisited.  J R Coll Phys Edinb . 
2002;32:83. 
 Brown EM. Anti-parathyroid and anti-calcium sensing receptor antibodies in 
autoimmune hypoparathyroidism.  Endocrinol Metab Clin N Am . 
2009:38:437. [PMID: 19328421] 
 Cooper MS, Gittoes NJL. Diagnosis and management of hypocalcemia.  BMJ . 
2008;336;1298. [PMID: 18535072] 
 Husebye ES, Perheentupa J, Rautemaa R, Kämpe O. Clinical manifestations and 
management of patients with autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type I. 
 J Intern Med . 2009:265:514. [PMID: 19382991] 
CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease     283
 Kobrysnki LJ, Sullivan KE. Velocardiofacial syndrome, DiGeorge syndrome: the 
chromosome 22q11.2 deletion syndromes.  Lancet . 2007;370:1443. [PMID: 
17950858] 
 Mannstadt M, Bertrand G, Muresan M, et al. Dominant-negative GCMB muta-
tions cause an autosomal dominant form of hypoparathyroidism.  J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab . 2008;93:3568. [PMID: 18583467] 
 Mantovani G, Spada A. Mutations in Gs alpha gene causing hormone resistance. 
 Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metabol . 2006;20:501. [PMID: 17161328] 
 Plagge A, Kelsey G, Germain-Lee EL. Physiological functions of the imprinted 
Gnas locus and its protein variants G{alpha}s and XL{alpha}s in human and 
mouse.  J Endocrinol . 2008;196:193. [PMID: 18252944] 
 Shoback D. Hypoparathyroidism.  N Engl J Med . 2008;358:391. [PMID: 
18650515] 
 Zahirieh A, Nesbit MA, Ali A, et al. Functional analysis of a novel GATA3 muta-
tion in a family with the hypoparathyroidism, deafness, and renal dysplasia 
syndrome.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2005;90:2445. [PMID: 15705923] 
 Bone Anatomy and Remodeling 
 Almeida M, Han L, Martin-Millan M, et al. Skeletal involution by age-associated 
oxidative stress and its acceleration by loss of sex steroids.  J Biol Chem . 
2007;282:27285. [PMID: 17623659] 
 Fukumoto S, Martin TJ. Bone as an endocrine organ.  Trends Endo Metab . 
2009:20:230. [PMID: 19546009] 
 Henriksen K, Neutzsky-Wulff AV, Bonewald LF, Karsdal MA. Local communica-
tion on and within bone controls bone remodeling.  Bone . 2009;44:1026. 
[PMID: 19345750] 
 Kearns AE, Khosla S, Kostenuik PJ. Receptor activator of nuclear factor kappaB 
ligand and osteoprotegerin regulation of bone remodeling in health and 
disease.  Endo Rev . 2008;29:155. [PMID: 18057140] 
 Matsuo K, Irie N. Osteoclast-osteoblast communication.  Arch Biochem Biophys . 
2008;473:201. [PMID: 18406338] 
 Quarles LD. Endocrine function of bone in mineral metabolism regulation.  J Clin 
Invest . 2008;118:3820. [PMID: 19033649] 
 Teitelbaum SL. Osteoclasts: what do they do and how do they do it?  Am J Pathol . 
2007;170:427. [PMID: 17255310] 
 Yadav VK, Ryu JH, Suda N, et al. Lrp5 controls bone formation by inhibiting 
serotonin synthesis in the duodenum.  Cell . 2008;135:825. [PMID: 
19041748] 
 Yadav VK, Oury F, Suda N, et al. A serotonin-dependent mechanism explains the 
leptin regulation of bone mass, appetite, and energy expenditure.  Cell . 
2009;138:976. [PMID: 19737523] 
 Osteoporosis 
 Anderson GL, Limacher M, Assaf AR, et al. Effects of conjugated equine estrogen 
in postmenopausal women with hysterectomy: the Women’s Health Initiative 
randomized controlled trial.  JAMA . 2004;291:1701. [PMID: 15082697] 
 Bischoff-Ferrari HA, Giovannucci E, Willett WC, Dietrich T, Dawson-Hughes B, 
et al. Estimation of optimal serum concentrations of 25- hydroxyvitamin D 
for multiple health outcomes.  Am J Clin Nutr. 2006;84:18. [PMID: 
16825677] 
 Cadarette SM, Katz JN, Brookhart MA, Stürmer T, Stedman MR, Solomon DH. 
Relative effectiveness of osteoporosis drugs for preventing nonvertebral frac-
ture.  Ann Int Med . 2008;148:637. [PMID: 18458276] 
 Canalis E, Giustina A, Bilezikian JP. Mechanism of anabolic therapies for osteopo-
rosis.  N Engl J Med . 2007;357:905. [PMID: 17761594] 
 Center JR, Bliuc D, Nguyen TV, Eisman JA. Risk of subsequent fracture after 
low-trauma fracture in men and women.  JAMA . 2007;297:387. [PMID: 
17244835] 
 Cummings SR, San Martin J, McClung MR, et al. Denosumab for prevention of 
fracture in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis.  N Engl J Med . 
2009;361:756. [PMID: 19671655] 
 Dawson-Hughes B, Tosteson AN, Melton LJ 3rd, et al. Implications of absolute 
fracture risk assessment for osteoporosis practice guidelines in the USA. 
 Osteo Int . 2008;19:449. [PMID: 18292975] 
 deKam D, Smulders E, Weerdesteyn V, Smits-Engelsman BC. Exercise interven-
tions to reduce fall-related fractures and their risk factors in individuals with 
low bone density: a systematic review of randomized controlled trials. 
 Osteoporos Int . 2009;20:2111. [PMID: 19421702] 
 Ebeling PR. Clinical practice. Osteoporosis in men.  N Engl J Med. 2008;358:1474. 
[PMID: 18385499] 
 Hofbauer LC, Rauner M. Minireview: live and let die: molecular effects of gluco-
corticoids on bone cells.  Mol Endocrinol . 2009;23:1525. [PMID: 
19477950] 
 Kanis JA, Oden A, Johnell O, et al. The use of clinical risk factors enhances the 
performance of BMD in the prediction of hip and osteoporotic fractures in 
men and women.  Osteo Int . 2007:18:1033. [PMID: 17323110] 
 Khosla S, Burr D, Cauley J, et al. Bisphosphonate-associated osteonecrosis of the 
jaw: report of a Task Force of the American Society for Bone and Mineral 
Research.  J Bone Min Res . 2007;22:1479. [PMID: 176663640] 
 Khosla S, Westendorf JJ, Oursler MJ. Building bone to reverse osteoporosis and 
repair fractures.  J Clin Invest . 2008;118:421. [PMID: 18246192] 
 Liu H, Paige NM, Goldzweig CL, et al. Screening for osteoporosis in men: a sys-
tematic review for an American College of Physicians guideline.  Ann Int 
Med . 2008;148:685. [PMID: 18458282] 
 MacLean C, Newberry S, Maglione M, et al. Systematic review: comparative 
effectiveness of treatment to prevent fractures in men and women with low 
bone density or osteoporosis.  Ann Int Med . 2008;148:197. [PMID: 
18087050] 
 National Osteoporosis Foundation.  Clinician’s Guide to Prevention and Treatment 
of Osteoporosis . Washington, DC: National Osteoporosis Foundation. www.
nof.org. 
 Pleiner-Duxneuner J, Zwettler E, Paschalis E, Roschger P, Nell-Duxneuner V, 
Klaushofer K. Treatment of osteoporosis with parathyroid hormone and 
teriparatide.  Calcif Tiss Int . 2009;84:159. [PMID: 19189037] 
 Qaseem A, Snow V, Shekelle P, et al. Screening for osteoporosis in men: a Clinical 
Practice Guideline from the American College of Physicians.  Ann Int Med . 
2008;148:680. [PMID: 18458281] 
 Richards JB, Kavvoura FK, Rivadeneira F, et al. Genetic factors for osteoporosis. 
Collaborative meta-analysis: associations of 150 candidate genes with osteo-
porosis and osteporotic fracture.  Ann Int Med . 2009;151:528. [PMID: 
19841454] 
 Rossouw JE, Anderson GL, Prentice RL, et al. Risks and benefits of estrogen 
plus progestin in healthy postmenopausal women: principal results from 
the Women’s Health Initiative randomized controlled trial.  JAMA . 
2002;288:321. [PMID: 12117397] 
 Russell RG, Watts NB, Ebetino FH, Rogers MJ. Mechanisms of action of bispho-
sphonates: similarities and differences and their potential influence on clini-
cal efficacy.  Osteo Int . 2008;19:733. [PMID: 18214569] 
 Sambrook P, Cooper C. Osteoporosis.  Lancet . 2006;367:2010. [PMID: 16782492] 
 Smith MR, Egerdie B, Hernández Toriz N, et al. Denosumab in men receiving 
androgen-deprivation therapy for prostate cancer.  N Engl J Med . 
2009;361:745. [PMID: 19671656] 
 Styrkarsdottir U, Halldorsson BV, Gretarsdottir S, et al. Multiple genetic loci for 
bone mineral density and fractures.  N Engl J Med . 2008;358:2355. [PMID: 
18445777] 
 Tang BMP, Eslick GD, Nowson C, Smith C, Bensoussan A. Use of calcium or 
calcium in combination with vitamin D supplementation to prevent frac-
tures and bone loss in people aged 50 years and older: a meta-analysis. 
 Lancet . 2007;370:657. [PMID: 17720017] 
 Tosteson ANA, Melton LJ 3rd, Dawson-Hughes B, et al. Cost-effective osteoporo-
sis treatment thresholds: the United States perspective.  Osteo Int . 2008;19:437. 
[PMID: 18292976] 
 Osteomalacia, Rickets, and Hypophosphatemia 
 De Prisco C, Levine SN. Metabolic bone disease after gastric bypass surgery for 
obesity.  Am J Med Sci . 2005;329:57. [PMID: 15711420] 
 Feng JQ, Ward LM, Liu S, et al. Loss of DMP1 causes rickets and osteomalacia 
and identifies a role for osteocytes in mineral metabolism.  Nat Gen . 
2006;38:1310. [PMID: 17033621] 
 Ichikawa S, Sorenson AH, Imel EA, Friedman NE, Gertner JM, Econs MJ. 
Intronic deletions in the SLC34A3 gene cause hereditary hypophosphatemic 
rickets with hypercalciuria.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2006;91:4022. [PMID: 
16849419] 
 Jonsson KB, Zahradnik R, Larsson T. Fibroblast growth factor 23 in oncogenic 
osteomalacia and X linked hypophosphatemia.  N Engl J Med . 2003;348:1656. 
[PMID: 12711740] 
284    CHAPTER 8 Metabolic Bone Disease
 Lawson J. Drug-induced metabolic bone disorders.  Semin Musculoskelet Radiol . 
2002;6:285. [PMID: 12541185] 
 Levine BS, Kleeman CR, Felsenfeld AJ. The journey from vitamin D-resistant 
rickets to the regulation of renal phosphate transport.  Clin J Am Soc Nephrol . 
2009;4:1866. [PMID: 19808223] 
 Tiosano D, Hochberg Z. Hypophosphatemia: the common denominator of all 
rickets.  J Bone Miner Metab . 2009;27:392. [PMID: 195044043] 
 Ward LM. Renal phosphate-wasting disorders in childhood.  Pediatr Endocrinol 
Rev . 2005;2(suppl 3):342. [PMID: 16456503] 
 FGF23 and Alpha Klotho 
 Fukomoto S, Yamashita T. FGF23 is a hormone regulating phosphate metabolism—
unique biological characteristics of FGF23.  Bone . 2007;40:1190. [PMID: 
17276744] 
 Garringer HJ, Malekpour M, Esteghamat F, et al. Molecular genetic and bio-
chemical analyses of FGF23 mutations in familial tumoral calcinosis.  Am J 
Physiol Endocrinol Metab . 2008;295:E929. [PMID: 18682534] 
 Ichikawa S, Sorenson AH, Austin AM, et al. Ablation of the Galnt3 gene leads to 
low circulating intact fibroblast growth factor 23 (Fgf23) concentrations and 
hyperphosphatemia despite increased Fgf23 expression.  Endocrinology . 
2009;150:2543. [PMID: 19213845] 
 Kuro-OM. Overview of the FGF23-klotho axis.  Pediatr Nephrol . 2010;25:583. 
[PMID: 19626341] 
 Ramon I, Kleynen P, Body JJ, Karmali R, et al. Fibroblast growth factor 23 and its 
role in phosphate homeostasis.  Eur J Endocrinol . 2010;162:1. [PMID: 
19776202] 
 Strom TM, Juppner H. PHEX, FGF23, DMP1 and beyond.  Curr Opin Nephrol 
Hypertens . 2008;17:357. [PMID: 18660670] 
 Urakawa I, Yamazaki Y, Shimada T, et al. Klotho converts canonical FGF receptor 
into a specific receptor for FGF23.  Nature . 2006;444:770. [PMID: 
17086194] 
 Paget Disease 
 Daroszewska A, Ralston SH. Mechanisms of disease: genetics of Paget’s disease of 
bone and related disorders.  Nat Clin Pract Rheum . 2006;2:270. [PMID: 
16932700] 
 Hosking D, Lyles K, Brown JP, et al. Long-term control of bone turnover in Paget’s 
disease with zoledronic acid and risedronate.  J Bone Min Res . 2007;22:142. 
[PMID: 1703222148] 
 Langston AL, Campbell MK, Fraser WD, et al. Randomized trial of intensive 
bisphosphonate treatment versus symptomatic management in Paget’s dis-
ease of bone.  J Bone Min Res . 2010;25:20. [PMID: 19580357] 
 Ralston SH, Langston, Reid IR. Pathogenesis and management of Paget’s disease 
of bone.  Lancet . 2008;372:155. [PMID: 18620951] 
 Reid IR, Miller P, Lyles K, et al. Comparison of a single infusion of zoledronic 
acid with risedronate for Paget’s disease.  N Engl J Med . 2006;353:898. 
[PMID: 16135834] 
 Singer FR. Paget disease: when to treat and when not to treat.  Nat Rev Rheum . 
2009;5:483. [PMID: 19652650] 
 Whyte MP. Paget’s disease of bone.  N Engl J Med . 2006;355:593. [PMID: 
16899779] 
 Renal Osteodystrophy 
 Block GA, Martin KJ, de Francisco AL, et al. Cinacalcet for secondary hyperpara-
thyroidism in patients receiving hemodialysis.  N Engl J Med . 2004;350:1516. 
[PMID: 15071126] 
 Bover J, Canal C, Marco H, Fernandez-Llama P, Bosch RJ, Ballarín J. Diagnostic 
procedures and rationale for specific therapies in chronic kidney disease-
mineral and bone disorders.  Contrib Nephrol . 2008;161:222. [PMID: 
18451681] 
 Cunningham J. New vitamin D analogues for osteodystrophy in chronic kidney 
disease.  Pediatr Nephrol . 2004;19:705. [PMID: 15141342] 
 de Francisco AL. Secondary hyperparathyroidism: review of the disease and its 
treatment.  Clin Ther . 2004;26:1976. [PMID: 15823762] 
 Gutierrez OM, Mannstadt M, Isakova T, et al. Fibroblast growth factor 23 and 
mortality among patients undergoing hemodialysis.  N Engl J Med . 
2008;359:584. [PMID: 18687639] 
 Hruska KA, Mathew S, Lund R, Qiu P, Pratt R. Hyperphosphatemia of chronic 
kidney disease.  Kidney Int . 2008;74:148. [PMID: 18449174] 
 Martin KJ, Akhtar I, Gonzalez EA. Parathyroid hormone: new assays, new recep-
tors.  Semin Nephrol . 2004;24:3. [PMID: 14730504] 
 Navneethan SD, Palmer SC, Craig JC, Elder GJ, Strippoli GF. Benefits and harms 
of phosphate binders in CKD: a systematic review of randomized controlled 
trials.  Am J Kid Dis . 2009;54:619. [PMID: 19692157] 
 Ott SM. Bone histomorphometry in renal osteodystrophy.  Semin Nephrol . 
2009;29:122. [PMID: 19371803] 
 Tentori F, Blayney MJ, Albert JM, et al. Mortality risk for dialysis patients with 
different levels of serum calcium, phosphorus, and PTH: the Dialysis 
Outcomes and Practice Patterns Study (DOPPS).  Am J Kidney Dis . 
2008;52:519. [PMID: 18514987] 
 
 
285
9
 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal 
Androgens 
 Ty B. Carroll, MD, David C. Aron, MD, MS, James 
W. Findling, MD, and J. Blake Tyrrell, MD 
ACTH
Adrenocorticotropic hormone
ADH
Antidiuretic hormone (vasopressin)
APS
Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome
AVP
Arginine vasopressin
CBG
Corticosteroid-binding globulin
CRH
Corticotropin-releasing hormone
DAX1
Dosage-sensitive sex reversal-adrenal hyp-
oplasia gene product
DHEA
Dehydroepiandrosterone
DOC
Deoxycorticosterone
GH
Growth hormone
GIP
Glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide/
Gastrointestinal inhibitory polypeptide
GnRH
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone
HLA
Human leukocyte antigen
HPA
Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
HPLC
High-performance liquid chromatography
IL
Interleukin
IPSS
Inferior petrosal sinus sampling
IRMA
Immunoradiometric assay
LH
Luteinizing hormone
LPH
Lipotropin
PMN
Polymorphonuclear neutrophil
PRA
Plasma renin activity
PRL
Prolactin
PTH
Parathyroid hormone
SF-1
Steroidogenic factor-1a
SHBG
Sex hormone–binding globulin
StAR
Steroidogenic acute regulatory protein
TRH
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone
TSH
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (thyrotropin)
VLCFA
Very long chain fatty acid
 The adrenal cortex produces many steroid hormones of which the 
most important are cortisol, aldosterone, and the adrenal andro-
gens. Disorders of the adrenal glands lead to classic endocrinopa-
thies 
such 
as 
Cushing 
syndrome, 
Addison 
disease, 
hyperaldosteronism, and the syndromes of congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia. This chapter describes the physiology and disorders of 
the glucocorticoids and the adrenal androgens. Disorders of aldos-
terone secretion are discussed in Chapter 10 and congenital 
defects in adrenal hormone biosynthesis in Chapters 10 and 14. 
Hirsutism and virilization (which reflect excess androgen action) 
are discussed in Chapter 13. 
 Advances in diagnostic procedures have simplified the evalua-
tion of adrenocortical disorders; in particular, the assay of plasma 
glucocorticoids, androgens, and adrenocorticotropin (ACTH) has 
allowed more rapid and precise diagnosis. In addition, advances in 
surgical and medical treatment have improved the outlook for 
patients with these disorders. 
 EMBRYOLOGY AND ANATOMY 
 Embryology 
 The adrenal cortex is of mesodermal origin and derives from a 
single cell lineage characterized by expression of certain transcrip-
tion factors such as steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1). At 2 months’ 
gestation, the cortex, already identifiable as a separate organ, is 
composed of a fetal zone and a definitive zone similar to the adult 
adrenal cortex. The adrenal cortex then increases rapidly in size; at 
mid gestation, it is considerably larger than the kidney and much 
larger than the adult gland in relation to total body mass. The fetal 
286    CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens
zone makes up the bulk of the weight of the adrenal cortex at this 
time. Several genes encoding transcription factors are important in 
adrenal development and differentiation. These include SF-1 and 
the product of the dosage-sensitive sex reversal–adrenal hypoplasia 
gene ( DAX1 ), among others; mutations of the  DAX1 gene are 
associated with congenital adrenal hypoplasia. 
 The fetal adrenal is under the control of ACTH by mid preg-
nancy, but the fetal zone is deficient in the activity of 
3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (see section on biosynthesis of 
cortisol and adrenal androgens, later) and thus produces mainly 
dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) and DHEA sulfate, which serve 
as precursors of maternal-placental estrogen production after con-
version in the liver to 16α-hydroxylated derivatives. The definitive 
zone synthesizes a number of steroids and is the major site of fetal 
cortisol synthesis. Mutations of the ACTH- or  melanocortin-2 
receptor gene are associated with familial glucocorticoid 
 deficiency. 
 Anatomy 
 The anatomic relationship of the fetal and definitive zones is 
maintained until birth, at which time the fetal zone gradually 
disappears, with a consequent decrease in adrenocortical weight in 
the 3 months following delivery. During the next 3 years, the 
adult adrenal cortex develops from cells of the outer layer of the 
cortex and differentiates into the three adult zones: glomerulosa, 
fasciculata, and reticularis–adrenal zonation. 
 The adult adrenal glands, with a combined weight of 8 to 
10 g, lie in the retroperitoneum above or medial to the upper poles 
of the kidneys ( Figure 9–1 ). A fibrous capsule surrounds the 
gland; the cortex comprises 90% of the adrenal weight, the inner 
medulla is about 10%. 
 The adrenal cortex is richly vascularized and receives its main 
arterial supply from branches of the inferior phrenic artery, the 
renal arteries, and the aorta. These small arteries form an arterial 
plexus beneath the capsule and then enter a sinusoidal system that 
penetrates the cortex and medulla, draining into a single central 
vein in each gland. The right adrenal vein drains directly into the 
posterior aspect of the vena cava; the left adrenal vein enters the 
left renal vein. These anatomic features account for the fact that it 
is relatively easier to catheterize the left adrenal vein than it is to 
catheterize the right adrenal vein. 
 Microscopic Anatomy 
 Histologically, the adult cortex is composed of three zones: an 
outer zona glomerulosa, a zona fasciculata, and an inner zona 
reticularis ( Figure 9–2 ). However, the inner two zones appear to 
function as a unit (see later). The zona glomerulosa, which pro-
duces aldosterone and constitutes about 15% of adult cortical 
volume, is deficient in 17α-hydroxylase activity and thus cannot 
produce cortisol or androgens (see later and Chapter 10). The 
zona glomerulosa lacks a well-defined structure, and the small 
lipid-poor cells are scattered beneath the adrenal capsule. The zona 
fasciculata is the thickest layer of the adrenal cortex, making up 
about 75% of the cortex, and produces cortisol and androgens. 
The cells of the zona fasciculata are larger and contain more lipid 
and thus are termed  clear cells . These cells extend in columns 
from the narrow zona reticularis to either the zona glomerulosa or 
to the capsule. The inner zona reticularis surrounds the medulla 
and also produces cortisol and androgens. The compact cells of 
this narrow zone lack significant lipid content but do contain 
lipofuscin granules. The zonae fasciculata and reticularis are regu-
lated by ACTH; excess or deficiency of this hormone alters their 
Inferior phrenic vein
Left adrenal gland
Right adrenal gland
Left adrenal vein
Right adrenal 
vein
Adrenal artery
Inferior
phrenic
artery
Left
kidney
Right
kidney
Renal
vein
Renal
vein
Renal
artery
Renal
artery
Inferior
vena cava
Abdominal
aorta
 FIGURE 9–1  Location and blood supply of the adrenal glands (schematic).  (Reproduced, with permission, from Miller WL, Tyrrell JB. The 
adrenal cortex. In: Felig P, et al, eds.  Endocrinology and Metabolism . 4th ed. McGraw-Hill; 2002.) 
 
CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens     287
structure and function. Thus, both zones atrophy when ACTH is 
deficient; when ACTH is present in excess, hyperplasia and hyper-
trophy of these zones occur. In addition, chronic stimulation with 
ACTH leads to a gradual depletion of the lipid from the clear cells 
of the zona fasciculata at the junction of the two zones; these cells 
thus attain the characteristic appearance of the compact reticularis 
cells. With chronic excessive stimulation, the compact reticularis 
cells extend outward and may reach the outer capsule. It is postu-
lated that the zona fasciculata cells can respond acutely to ACTH 
stimulation with increased cortisol production, whereas the reticu-
laris cells maintain basal glucocorticoid secretion and that induced 
by prolonged ACTH stimulation. 
 BIOSYNTHESIS OF CORTISOL AND 
ADRENAL ANDROGENS 
 Steroidogenesis 
 The major hormones secreted by the adrenal cortex are cortisol, 
the androgens, and aldosterone. The carbon atoms in the steroid 
molecule are numbered as shown in  Figure 9–3 , and the major 
biosynthetic pathways and hormonal intermediates are illustrated 
in Figures 9–4 and 9–5. 
 The scheme of adrenal steroidogenic synthesis has been clarified 
by analysis of the steroidogenic enzymes. Most of these enzymes 
belong to the family of cytochrome P450 oxygenases (see  Table 9–1 
for current and historical nomenclature conventions). In mito-
chondria, the  CYP11A gene, located on chromosome 15, encodes 
 FIGURE 9–2  Photomicrograph of the adrenal cortex (H&E stain).  A. A low-power general view. I, the glomerulosa; II, the fasciculata; III, the 
reticularis.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Junqueira LC, Carneiro J.  Basic Histology . 7th ed. McGraw-Hill; 1992.) 
 B. Electron micrograph of a normal adrenocortical steroid-producing cell (L, lipid vacuole; M, large mitochondria with tubular cristae; SER, 
smooth endoplasmic reticulum). (Courtesy of Dr. Medhat O. Hasan, Pathology Department, Louis Stokes Cleveland Department of Veterans 
Affairs Medical Center.) 
O
HO
C19 steroid (dehydroepiandrosterone)
C21 steroid (progesterone)
O
CH3
3
4
5
7
8
6
2
10
9 
11
12
1
A
B
19
CH3
CH3
18
20
21
C
14
13
15
16
D
17
C   O
 FIGURE 9–3  Structure of adrenocortical steroids. The letters in the 
formula for progesterone identify the A, B, C, and D rings; the numbers 
show the positions in the basic C 21 steroid structure. The angular methyl 
groups (positions 18 and 19) are usually indicated simply by straight lines, 
as in the lower formula. Dehydroepiandrosterone is a 17-ketosteroid 
formed by cleavage of the side chain of the C 21 steroid 17-hydroxypreg-
nenolone and its replacement by an O atom.  (Reproduced, with permis-
sion, from Ganong WF.  Review of Medical Physiology . 14th ed. McGraw-Hill; 
1989.) 
288    CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens
P450scc, the enzyme responsible for cholesterol side chain cleav-
age.  CYP11B1 , a gene located on chromosome 8, encodes 
P450c11, another mitochondrial enzyme, which mediates 11β-
hydroxylation in the zona reticularis and zona fasciculata. This 
reaction converts 11-deoxycortisol to cortisol and 11-deoxycorti-
costerone (11-DOC) to corticosterone. In the zona glomerulosa, 
 CYP11B2 , also located on chromosome 8, encodes the enzyme 
P450aldo, also known as aldosterone synthase. P450aldo mediates 
11β-hydroxylation, 18-hydroxylation, and 18-oxidation to convert 
11-DOC to corticosterone, 18-hydroxycorticosterone, and aldos-
terone, respectively. In the endoplasmic reticulum, gene  CYP17 , 
located on chromosome 10, encodes a single enzyme, P450c17, 
which mediates both 17α-hydroxylase activity and 17,20-lyase 
activity, and the gene  CYP21A2 encodes the enzyme P450c21, 
which mediates 21-hydroxylation of both progesterone and 17-hy-
droxyprogesterone. The 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase: Δ 5, 4 -
isomerase activities are mediated by a single non-P450 microsomal 
enzyme (see  Figure 9–4 ). 
 A. Zones and steroidogenesis 
 Because of enzymatic dif-
ferences between the zona glomerulosa and the inner two zones, 
the adrenal cortex functions as two separate units, with differing 
regulation and secretory products. Thus, the zona glomerulosa, 
which produces aldosterone, lacks 17α-hydroxylase activity and 
cannot synthesize 17α-hydroxypregnenolone and 17α-
hydroxyprogesterone, which are the precursors of cortisol and the 
adrenal androgens. The synthesis of aldosterone by this zone is 
primarily regulated by the renin-angiotensin system and by potas-
sium (see Chapter 10). 
 The zona fasciculata and zona reticularis (see  Figure 9–4 ) pro-
duce cortisol, androgens, and small amounts of estrogens. These 
zones, primarily regulated by ACTH, do not express the gene 
 CYP11B2 (encoding P450aldo) and therefore cannot convert 
11-DOC to aldosterone (see Chapter 10). 
 B. Cholesterol uptake and synthesis 
 Synthesis of cortisol 
and the androgens by the zonae fasciculata and reticularis begins 
with cholesterol, as does the synthesis of all steroid hormones. 
Plasma lipoproteins are the major source of adrenal cholesterol, 
although synthesis within the gland from acetate also occurs. Low-
density lipoprotein accounts for about 80% of cholesterol delivered 
to the adrenal gland. A small pool of free cholesterol within the 
adrenal is available for rapid synthesis of steroids when the adrenal 
is stimulated. When stimulation occurs, there is also increased 
hydrolysis of stored cholesteryl esters to free cholesterol, increased 
uptake from plasma lipoproteins, and increased cholesterol synthe-
sis within the gland. The acute response to a steroidogenic stimulus 
is mediated by the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR). 
This mitochondrial phosphoprotein enhances cholesterol transport 
from the outer to the inner mitochondrial membrane. Mutations 
in the  StAR gene result in congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia 
with severe cortisol and aldosterone deficiencies at birth. 
1
6
7
HO
CH3
Pregnenolone
5
C   O
CH3
Progesterone
C=O
CH2OH
11-
Deoxycorticosterone
C=O
CH2OH
Corticosterone
C=O
HO
HO
CH3
17α-Hydroxy-
pregnenolone
17α-Hydroxy-
progesterone
C   O
CH3
C=O
CH2OH
11-Deoxycortisol
C=O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
CH2OH
Cortisol
C=O
HO
OH
OH
Androstenedione
O
OH
OH
DHEA
HO
O
2
3
Cholesterol
P450scc
P450c21
4
P450c11
3βHSD/ISOM
P450c17
P450c17
Sulfokinase
DHEA
sulfate
 FIGURE 9–4  Steroid biosynthesis in the zona fasciculata and zona reticularis of the adrenal cortex. The major secretory products are under-
lined. The enzymes for the reactions are numbered on the left and at the top of the chart, with the steps catalyzed shown by the shaded bars. 
c P450scc, cholesterol 20,22-hydroxylase:20,22 desmolase activity; d 3βHSD/ISOM, 3-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase; δ 5 -oxosteroid isomerase 
activity; e P450c21, 21α-hydroxylase activity; f P450c11, 11β-hydroxylase activity; g P450c17, 17α-hydroxylase activity; h P450c17, 17,20-
lyase/desmolase activity; i sulfokinase.  (Modified and reproduced, with permission, from Ganong WF.  Review of Medical Physiology . 16th ed. 
McGraw-Hill; 1993.) 
CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens     289
 C. Cholesterol metabolism 
 The conversion of cholesterol 
to pregnenolone is the rate-limiting step in adrenal steroidogenesis 
and the major site of ACTH action in the adrenal. This step occurs 
in the mitochondria and involves two hydroxylations and then the 
side chain cleavage of cholesterol. A single enzyme, CYP11A, 
mediates this process; each step requires molecular oxygen and a 
pair of electrons. The latter are donated by NADPH to adreno-
doxin reductase (ferredoxin reductase), a flavoprotein, and then to 
adrenodoxin, an iron-sulfur protein, and finally to CYP11A. Both 
adrenodoxin reductase and adrenodoxin are also involved in the 
action of CYP11B1 (see earlier). Electron transport to microsomal 
cytochrome P450 involves P450 reductase, a flavoprotein distinct 
from adrenodoxin reductase. Pregnenolone is then transported 
outside the mitochondria before further steroid synthesis occurs. 
 D. Synthesis of cortisol 
 Cortisol synthesis proceeds by 17α-
hydroxylation of pregnenolone by CYP17 within the smooth 
endoplasmic reticulum to form 17α-hydroxypregnenolone. This 
steroid is then converted to 17α-hydroxyprogesterone after conver-
sion of its 5,6 double bond to a 4,5 double bond by the 
3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase: Δ 5, 4 -oxosteroid isomerase enzyme 
complex, which is also located within the smooth endoplasmic 
reticulum. An alternative but apparently less important pathway in 
the zonae fasciculata and reticularis is from pregnenolone to proges-
terone to 17α-hydroxyprogesterone (see  Figure 9–4 ). 
 The next step, which is again microsomal, involves the 21- 
hydroxylation by CYP21A2 of 17α-hydroxyprogesterone to form 
11-deoxycortisol; this compound is further hydroxylated within 
mitochondria by 11β-hydroxylation (CYP11B1) to form cortisol. 
The zona fasciculata and zona reticularis also produce 11-DOC, 
18-hydroxydeoxycorticosterone, and corticosterone. However, as 
noted above, the absence of the mitochondrial enzyme CYP11B2 
prevents production of aldosterone by these zones of the adrenal 
cortex ( Figure 9–5 ). Cortisol secretion under basal (ie, non-
stressed) conditions ranges from 8 to 25 mg/d (22-69 μmol/d), 
with a mean of about 9.2 mg/d (25 μmol/d)—rates lower than 
most previous calculations. 
 E. Synthesis of androgens 
 The production of adrenal 
androgens from pregnenolone and progesterone requires prior 
17α-hydroxylation (CYP17) and thus does not occur in the zona 
glomerulosa. The major quantitative production of androgens is by 
conversion of 17α-hydroxypregnenolone to the 19-carbon com-
pounds (C-19 steroids) DHEA and its sulfate conjugate DHEA 
sulfate. Thus, 17α-hydroxypregnenolone undergoes removal of its 
two-carbon side chain at the C 17 position by microsomal 17,20-
desmolase (CYP17), yielding DHEA with a keto group at C 17 . 
DHEA is then converted to DHEA sulfate by a reversible adrenal 
sulfokinase. The other major adrenal androgen, androstenedione, 
is produced mostly from DHEA, mediated by CYP17, and possi-
bly 
from 
17α-hydroxyprogesterone, 
also 
by 
CYP17. 
Androstenedione can be converted to testosterone, although adre-
nal secretion of this hormone is minimal. The adrenal androgens, 
DHEA, DHEA sulfate, and androstenedione, have minimal intrin-
sic androgenic activity, and they contribute to androgenicity by 
their peripheral conversion to the more potent androgens testoster-
one and dihydrotestosterone. Although DHEA and DHEA sulfate 
are secreted in greater quantities, androstenedione is qualitatively 
more important, because it is more readily converted peripherally 
to testosterone (see Chapter 12). Of note, recent studies have iden-
tified de novo synthesis of some steroid hormones in nerve and 
cardiac tissues, where they appear to act as paracrine or autocrine 
factors. Steroidogenic enzymes (eg, 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydroge-
nase and aromatase) are expressed in many tissues. 
 Regulation of Secretion 
 A. Secretion of CRH and ACTH 
 ACTH is the trophic hor-
mone of the zonae fasciculata and reticularis and the major regula-
tor of cortisol and adrenal androgen production, although other 
factors produced within the adrenal, including neurotransmitters, 
 neuropeptides, and nitric oxide also play a role. ACTH in turn is 
regulated by the hypothalamus and central nervous system via 
neurotransmitters and corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) 
O
CH2OH
C=O
O=CH
HO
P450aldo
P450aldo
P450aldo
18-Hydroxycorticosterone
11-Deoxycorticosterone
Corticosterone
Aldosterone
Progesterone
Pregnenolone
Cholesterol
 FIGURE 9–5  Steroid biosynthesis in the zona glomerulosa. The 
steps from cholesterol to 11-deoxycorticosterone are the same as in 
the zona fasciculata and zona reticularis. However, the zona glomeru-
losa lacks 17α-hydroxylase activity and thus cannot produce cortisol. 
Only the zona glomerulosa can convert corticosterone to 18- 
hydroxycorticosterone and aldosterone. The single enzyme P450aldo 
catalyzes the conversion of 11-deoxycorticosterone to corticosterone 
to 18-hydroxycorticosterone to aldosterone.  (Modified and repro-
duced, with permission, from Ganong WF.  Review of Medical 
Physiology . 16th ed. McGraw-Hill; 1993.) 
290    CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens
and arginine vasopressin (AVP). The neuroendocrine control of 
CRH and ACTH secretion involves three mechanisms (see later 
and Chapter 4). 
 B. ACTH effects on the adrenal cortex 
 ACTH adminis-
tration leads to the rapid synthesis and secretion of steroids; 
plasma levels of these hormones rise within minutes. ACTH 
increases RNA, DNA, and protein synthesis. Chronic stimulation 
leads to adrenocortical hyperplasia and hypertrophy; conversely, 
ACTH deficiency results in decreased steroidogenesis and is 
accompanied by adrenocortical atrophy, decreased gland weight, 
and decreased protein and nucleic acid content. 
TABLE 9–1 The main components of the steroidogenic pathway.
Enzyme
Gene
Chromosomal 
Location
Enzyme Activity (or 
Activities)
Subcellular 
Localization
Characteristic Features of 
Normal Tissue-Specific 
Expression
Steroidogenic acute 
 regulatory protein 
 (StAR)
StAR
8p11.2
Activation of 
peripheral type 
benzodiazepine 
receptor
Outer mitochondrial 
membrane
All steroid hormone– 
producing cells except the 
placenta, Schwann cells, 
and the brain
Peripheral type 
 benzodiazepine 
 receptor
PDA
22q13.31
Regulated 
cholesterol channel
Forms channel at 
the contact sites 
between the outer 
and inner mitochon-
drial membranes
All steroid hormone– 
producing cells
P450scc
CYP11A
15q23-24
Cholesterol-20,22-
desmolase
Matrix side of inner 
mitochondrial 
membrane
All steroid hormone– 
producing cells
3β-Hydroxysteroid 
 dehydro genase 
 (HSD)/isomerase
3β-Hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase 
type I
1p13, the HSD3B1 
and HSD3B2 loci 
are located 1-2 cm 
from the 
centromeric 
marker D1Z5
3β-Hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase
Smooth endoplas-
mic reticulum
Expressed in syncytiotro-
phoblast cells, sebaceous 
glands
3β-Hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase 
type II
Expressed in the definitive 
adrenal cortex and the 
gonads. Absent from the 
fetal zone of the adrenal 
cortex
P450c21
CYP21B
6p21.3 (close to 
HLA locus)
21-hydroxylase
Smooth endoplas-
mic reticulum
Only in adrenal cortex 
(all zones); low levels in 
fetal zone
CYP21A
6p21.3 (close to 
HLA locus)
Pseudogene
N/A
N/A
P450c11
CYP11B1
8q21-22
11β-hydroxylase
Matrix side of inner 
mitochondrial 
membrane
Only expressed in zona 
fasciculata and zona reticu-
laris of the adrenal cortex; 
low levels in fetal zone
P450aldo
CYP11B2
8q24.3
Aldosterone 
synthase: 11β-
hydroxylase, 18- 
hydroxylase, 
18-oxidase
Matrix side of inner 
mitochondrial 
membrane
Only expressed in the zona 
glomerulosa of the adrenal 
cortex; low levels in fetal 
zone
P450c17
CYP17
10q24-25
17α-hydroxylase, 
17,20-lyase
Smooth endoplas-
mic reticulum
Absent from the zona 
glomerulosa in adults, the 
placenta, and the definitive 
zone of fetal adrenal cortex 
until the third trimester
P450arom
CYP19
15q
Aromatase
Smooth endoplas-
mic reticulum
Expressed in numerous tis-
sues including gonads, 
brain, adrenal, adipose tis-
sue, and bone
Modified from Kacsoh B. Endocrine Physiology. McGraw-Hill; 2000.
CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens     291
 C. ACTH and steroidogenesis 
 ACTH binds to high-affinity 
plasma membrane receptors, thereby activating adenylyl cyclase 
and increasing cyclic adenosine monophosphate, which in turn 
activates intracellular phosphoprotein kinases ( Figure 9–6 ), includ-
ing StAR. ACTH action results in increased free cholesterol for-
mation as a consequence of increased cholesterol esterase activity 
and decreased cholesteryl ester synthetase as well as increased lipo-
protein uptake by the adrenal cortex. This process stimulates the 
rate-limiting step—cholesterol delivery to the side chain cleavage 
enzyme (P450scc or CYP11A1) for conversion to Δ 5 -pregnenolone, 
thereby initiating steroidogenesis. 
 D. Neuroendocrine control 
 Cortisol secretion is closely 
regulated by ACTH, and plasma cortisol levels parallel those of 
ACTH ( Figure 9–7 ). There are three mechanisms of neuroendo-
crine control: (1) episodic secretion and the circadian rhythm of 
ACTH, (2) stress responsiveness of the hypothalamic-pituitary-
adrenal (HPA) axis, and (3) feedback inhibition by cortisol of 
ACTH secretion. 
 1. Circadian rhythm— Circadian rhythm is superimposed on 
episodic secretion; it is the result of central nervous system 
events that regulate both the number and magnitude of 
CRH and ACTH secretory episodes. Cortisol secretion is 
low in the late evening and continues to decline in the first 
several hours of sleep, at which time plasma cortisol levels 
may be undetectable. During the third and fifth hours of 
sleep there is an increase in secretion; but the major secretory 
episodes begin in the sixth to eighth hours of sleep 
(see  Figure 9–7 ) and then begin to decline as wakefulness 
occurs. About half of the total daily cortisol output is 
secreted during this period. Cortisol secretion then gradually 
declines during the day, with fewer secretory episodes of 
decreased magnitude; however, there is increased cortisol 
secretion in response to eating and exercise. 
 Although this general pattern is consistent, there is consid-
erable intra- and interindividual variability, and the circadian 
rhythm may be altered by changes in sleep pattern, light-dark 
exposure, and feeding times. The rhythm is also changed by 
(1) physical stresses such as major illness, surgery, trauma, or 
starvation; (2) psychologic stress, including severe anxiety, 
endogenous depression, and the manic phase of manic-depres-
sive psychosis; (3) central nervous system and pituitary disor-
ders; (4) Cushing syndrome; (5) liver disease and other 
conditions that affect cortisol metabolism; (6) chronic renal 
failure; and (7) alcoholism. Cyproheptadine inhibits the circa-
dian rhythm, possibly by its antiserotonergic effects, whereas 
other drugs usually have no effect. 
 2. Stress responsiveness— Plasma ACTH and cortisol secretion 
are also characteristically responsive to physical stress. Thus, 
plasma ACTH and cortisol are secreted within minutes follow-
ing the onset of stresses such as surgery and hypoglycemia, and 
these responses abolish circadian periodicity if the stress is pro-
longed. Stress responses originate in the central nervous system 
and increase hypothalamic CRH and thus pituitary ACTH 
secretion. Stress responsiveness of plasma ACTH and cortisol 
is abolished by prior high-dose glucocorticoid administration 
and in spontaneous Cushing syndrome; conversely, the respon-
siveness of ACTH secretion is enhanced following adrenalec-
tomy. Regulation of the HPA axis is linked to that of the 
immune system. For example, interleukin-1 (IL-1) stimulates 
ACTH secretion, and cortisol inhibits IL-1 synthesis. 
 3. Feedback inhibition— The third major regulator of ACTH 
and cortisol secretion is that of feedback inhibition by gluco-
corticoids of CRH, ACTH, and cortisol secretion. 
Glucocorticoid feedback inhibition occurs at both the pituitary 
and hypothalamus and involves two distinct mechanisms—fast 
and delayed feedback inhibition. 
LDL
Cholesteryl
esters
Cholesterol
Cortisol
Preg
11-Deoxy-
cortisol
17-OH
preg
Cyclic
AMP
Protein
kinase A
ATP
CEH
SER
Lipid
droplet
Mitochondrion
ACTH
R
Gs
AC
 FIGURE 9–6  Mechanism of action of ACTH on cortisol-secreting 
cells in the inner two zones of the adrenal cortex. When ACTH binds 
to its receptor (R), adenylyl cyclase (AC) is activated via G s . The result-
ing increase in cAMP activates protein kinase A, and the kinase phos-
phorylates cholesteryl ester hydrolase (CEH), increasing its activity. 
Consequently, more free cholesterol is formed and converted to 
pregnenolone in the mitochondria. Note that in the subsequent 
steps in steroid biosynthesis, products are shuttled between the 
mitochondria and the smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER). 
 (Reproduced, with permission, from Ganong WF.  Review of Medical 
Physiology .16th ed. McGraw-Hill; 1993.) 
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
25
20
15
10
5
0
Noon
Noon
4 PM
8 PM
Mid-
night
4 AM
8 AM
Lunch
Dinner
Snack
Sleep
B'kfast
Snack
Plasma ACTH (pg/mL)
Plasma 11-OHCS (mg/dL)
 FIGURE 9–7  Fluctuations in plasma ACTH and glucocorticoids 
(11-OHCS) throughout the day. Note the greater ACTH and glucocor-
ticoid rises in the morning before awakening.  (Reproduced, with per-
mission, from Krieger DT, et al. Characterization of the normal 
temporal pattern of corticosteroid levels.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
1971;32:266.) 
292    CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens
 Fast feedback inhibition of ACTH secretion is rate-de-
pendent; that is, it depends on the rate of increase of the 
glucocorticoid but not the dose administered. This phase is 
rapid (within minutes) and transient (lasting <10 minutes), 
suggesting mediation by a noncytosolic glucocorticoid recep-
tor mechanism.  Delayed feedback inhibition is both time- 
and dose-dependent. With continued glucocorticoid 
administration, ACTH levels continue to decrease and 
become unresponsive to stimulation, ultimately resulting in 
suppression of CRH and ACTH release and atrophy of the 
zonae fasciculata and reticularis. The suppressed HPA axis 
fails to respond to stress and stimulation. Delayed feedback 
appears to act via the classic glucocorticoid receptor mecha-
nism (see later). 
 E. ACTH effects on regulation of androgen production 
 Adrenal androgen production in adults is also regulated by 
ACTH; both DHEA and androstenedione exhibit circadian 
periodicity in concert with ACTH and cortisol. In addition, 
plasma concentrations of DHEA and androstenedione increase 
rapidly with ACTH administration and are suppressed by glu-
cocorticoid administration. DHEA sulfate, because of its slow 
metabolic clearance rate, does not exhibit a diurnal rhythm. 
The existence of a separate anterior pituitary hormone that 
regulates adrenal androgen secretion has long been postulated 
but not yet proved. 
 CIRCULATION OF CORTISOL AND 
ADRENAL ANDROGENS 
 Cortisol and the adrenal androgens circulate bound to plasma 
proteins. The plasma half-life of cortisol (60-90 minutes) is deter-
mined by the extent of plasma binding and by the rate of meta-
bolic inactivation. 
 Plasma-Binding Proteins 
 Cortisol and adrenal androgens are secreted in an unbound state; 
however, these hormones bind to plasma proteins on entering the 
circulation. Cortisol binds mainly to corticosteroid-binding glob-
ulin (CBG, transcortin) and to a lesser extent to albumin, whereas 
the androgens bind chiefly to albumin. Bound steroids are bio-
logically inactive; the unbound or free fraction is active. The 
plasma proteins may provide a pool of circulating cortisol by 
delaying metabolic clearance, thus preventing more marked fluc-
tuations of plasma-free cortisol levels during episodic secretion by 
the gland. Because there are no binding proteins in saliva, salivary 
cortisol reflects free cortisol. 
 Free and Bound Cortisol 
 Under basal conditions, about 10% of the circulating cortisol is 
free, about 75% is bound to CBG, and the remainder is bound to 
albumin. The plasma free cortisol level is approximately 1 μg/dL, 
and it is this biologically active cortisol that is regulated by 
ACTH. 
 A. Corticosteroid-binding 
globulin 
 Corticosteroid-
binding globulin (CBG) has a molecular weight of about 50,000, 
is produced by the liver, and binds cortisol with high affinity. The 
CBG in plasma has a cortisol-binding capacity of about 25 μg/dL. 
When total plasma cortisol concentrations rise above this level, the 
free concentration rapidly increases and exceeds its usual fraction of 
10% of the total cortisol. Other endogenous steroids usually do not 
appreciably affect cortisol binding to CBG; an exception is in late 
pregnancy, when progesterone may occupy about 25% of the bind-
ing sites on CBG. Synthetic steroids do not bind significantly to 
CBG—with the exception of prednisolone. CBG levels are 
increased in high-estrogen states (pregnancy; estrogen or oral con-
traceptive use), hyperthyroidism, diabetes, certain hematologic 
disorders, and on a genetic basis. CBG concentrations are decreased 
in familial CBG deficiency, hypothyroidism, and protein defi-
ciency states such as severe liver disease or nephrotic syndrome. 
 B. Albumin 
 Albumin has a much greater capacity for cortisol 
binding but a lower affinity. It normally binds about 15% of the 
circulating cortisol, and this proportion increases when the total 
cortisol concentration exceeds the CBG-binding capacity. 
Synthetic glucocorticoids are extensively bound to albumin (eg, 
about 75% of dexamethasone in plasma is bound to albumin). 
 C. Androgen binding 
 Androstenedione, DHEA, and DHEA 
sulfate circulate weakly bound to albumin. However, testosterone 
is bound extensively to a specific globulin, sex hormone–binding 
globulin (SHBG) (see Chapter 12). 
 METABOLISM OF CORTISOL AND 
ADRENAL ANDROGENS 
 The metabolism of these steroids renders them inactive and 
increases their water solubility, as does their subsequent conjuga-
tion with glucuronide or sulfate groups. These inactive conjugated 
metabolites are more readily excreted by the kidney. The liver is 
the major site of steroid catabolism and conjugation, and 90% of 
these metabolized steroids are excreted by the kidney. 
 Conversion and Excretion of Cortisol 
 Cortisol is modified extensively before excretion in urine; less than 
1% of secreted cortisol appears in the urine unchanged. 
 A. Hepatic conversion 
 Hepatic metabolism of cortisol 
involves a number of metabolic conversions of which the most 
important (quantitatively) is the irreversible inactivation of the 
steroid by Δ 4 -reductases, which reduce the 4,5 double bond of the 
A ring. Dihydrocortisol, the product of this reaction, is then con-
verted to tetrahydrocortisol by a 3-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase. 
Cortisol is also converted extensively by 11β-hydroxysteroid dehy-
drogenase to the biologically inactive cortisone, which is then 
metabolized by the enzymes described above to yield tetrahydro-
cortisone. Tetrahydrocortisol and tetrahydrocortisone can be 
 further altered to form the cortoic acids. These conversions result 
CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens     293
in the excretion of approximately equal amounts of cortisol and 
cortisone metabolites. Cortisol and cortisone are also metabolized 
to the cortols and cortolones and to a lesser extent by other path-
ways (eg, to 6β-hydroxycortisol). 
 B. Hepatic conjugation 
 More than 95% of cortisol and 
cortisone metabolites are conjugated by the liver and then reenter 
the circulation to be excreted in the urine. Conjugation is mainly 
with glucuronic acid at the 3α-hydroxyl position. 
 C. Variations in clearance and metabolism 
 The metabo-
lism of cortisol is altered by a number of circumstances. It is 
decreased in infants and in the elderly. It is impaired in chronic 
liver disease, leading to decreased renal excretion of cortisol 
metabolites; however, the plasma cortisol level remains normal. 
Hypothyroidism decreases both metabolism and excretion; con-
versely, hyperthyroidism accelerates these processes. Cortisol clear-
ance may be reduced in starvation and anorexia nervosa and is also 
decreased in pregnancy because of the elevated CBG levels. The 
metabolism of cortisol to 6β-hydroxycortisol is increased in the 
neonate, in pregnancy, with estrogen therapy, and in patients with 
liver disease or severe chronic illness. Cortisol metabolism by this 
pathway is also increased by drugs that induce hepatic microsomal 
enzymes, including barbiturates, phenytoin, mitotane, aminoglu-
tethimide, and rifampin. These alterations generally are of minor 
physiologic importance as the free cortisol levels remain relatively 
stable in these conditions. However, they result in decreased excre-
tion of the urinary metabolites of cortisol measured as 
17- hydroxycorticosteroids. These conditions and drugs have a 
greater influence on the metabolism of synthetic glucocorticoids 
and may result in inadequate plasma levels of the administered 
glucocorticoid because of rapid clearance and metabolism. 
 D. Cortisol-cortisone shunt 
 Aldosterone is the principal 
mineralocorticoid controlling sodium and potassium exchange in 
the distal nephron. Mineralocorticoid receptors in the kidney are 
responsible for this effect, and the sensitivities of both the gluco-
corticoid receptor and the mineralocorticoid receptor for cortisol 
in vitro are similar. Small changes in aldosterone affect sodium 
and potassium exchange in the kidney, whereas free and biologi-
cally active cortisol does not, yet cortisol circulates in much higher 
concentrations. This apparent paradox is explained by an intracel-
lular enzyme—11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 (11β-
HSD2)—that metabolizes cortisol to the inactive cortisone and 
protects the mineralocorticoid receptor from cortisol binding 
( Figure 9–8 ). However, when circulating cortisol is extremely high 
• Skin
• Liver 
• Adipose
• CNS
• Placenta
• Kidney
• Colon
• Sweat glands
• Salivary glands
• Placenta 
Glucocorticoid
receptor
Cortisol
Mineralo-
corticoid
receptor
Cortisol
Cortisol
Cortisone
Cortisone
Cortisone
11β–HSD2
11β–HSD1
 FIGURE 9–8  Cortisol-cortisone shunt. Contrasting functions of the isozymes of 11β-HSD. 11β-HSD2 is an exclusive 11β-dehydrogenase that 
acts in classical aldosterone target tissues to exclude cortisol from otherwise nonselective mineralocorticoid receptors. Inactivation of cortisol 
also occurs in placenta. 11β-HSD1 is a predominant 11β-reductase in vivo that acts in many tissues to increase local intracellular glucocorticoid 
concentrations and thereby maintain adequate exposure of relatively low affinity glucocorticoid receptors to their ligand. 
294    CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens
(as in severe Cushing syndrome), this prereceptor metabolism of 
cortisol is overwhelmed and the mineralocorticoid receptor is 
activated by cortisol, resulting in volume expansion, hypertension, 
and hypokalemia. The active ingredient of licorice (glycyrrhizic 
acid) actually inhibits 11β-HSD2 and gives cortisol free access to 
the unprotected mineralocorticoid receptor in the kidney, causing 
hypokalemia and hypertension. In addition, some tissues can 
actually convert the inactive cortisone to cortisol with the isoform 
called 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 (11β-HSD1). 
The skin expresses this enzyme, explaining why cortisone cream 
can be effective. More importantly, the liver expresses 11β-HSD1 
and can activate cortisone to cortisol, thereby completing the 
cortisol-cortisone shunt such that the kidney inactivates cortisol to 
cortisone and the liver can reactivate cortisone to cortisol. The 
expression of 11β-HSD1 in adipose tissue may contribute to 
abdominal obesity seen in metabolic syndrome without biochem-
ical hypercortisolism. 
 Conversion and Excretion of Adrenal 
Androgens 
 Adrenal androgen metabolism results either in degradation and 
inactivation or the peripheral conversion of these weak androgens 
to their more potent derivatives testosterone and dihydrotestoster-
one. DHEA is readily converted within the adrenal to DHEA 
sulfate, the adrenal androgen secreted in greatest amount. DHEA 
secreted by the gland is also converted to DHEA sulfate by the 
liver and kidney, or it may be converted to Δ 4 -androstenedione. 
DHEA sulfate may be excreted without further metabolism; how-
ever, both it and DHEA are also metabolized to 7α- and 16α-
hydroxylated derivatives and by 17β reduction to Δ 5 -androstenediol 
and its sulfate. Androstenedione is converted either to testosterone 
or by reduction of its 4,5 double bond to etiocholanolone or 
androsterone, which may be further converted by 17α reduction 
to etiocholanediol and androstanediol, respectively. Testosterone is 
converted to dihydrotestosterone in androgen-sensitive tissues by 
5β reduction, and it, in turn, is mainly metabolized by 3α reduc-
tion to androstanediol. The metabolites of these androgens are 
conjugated either as glucuronides or sulfates and excreted in the 
urine. 
 BIOLOGIC EFFECTS OF ADRENAL 
STEROIDS 
 Glucocorticoids 
 Although glucocorticoids were originally so called because of 
their influence on glucose metabolism, they are currently defined 
as steroids that exert their effects by binding to specific cytosolic 
receptors that mediate the actions of these hormones. These glu-
cocorticoid receptors are present in virtually all tissues, and 
 glucocorticoid-receptor interaction is responsible for most of the 
known effects of these steroids. Alterations in the structure of the 
glucocorticoids have led to the development of synthetic com-
pounds with greater glucocorticoid activity. The increased  activity 
of these compounds is due to increased affinity for the glucocor-
ticoid receptors and delayed plasma clearance, which increases 
tissue exposure. In addition, many of these synthetic glucocorti-
coids have negligible mineralocorticoid effects and thus do not 
result in sodium retention, hypertension, and hypokalemia. This 
section describes the molecular mechanisms of glucocorticoid 
action and the effects on individual metabolic functions and tis-
sues ( Table 9–2 ). 
 Molecular Mechanisms 
 Glucocorticoid action is initiated by entry of the steroid into the 
cell and binding to the cytosolic glucocorticoid–receptor proteins 
(see Figures 1–13, 1–14, and 1–15). The most abundant cytoplas-
mic glucocorticoid–receptor complex includes two subunits of the 
90-kDa heat shock protein (hsp) 90. After binding, the hsp90 
subunits dissociate and activated hormone–receptor complexes 
enter the nucleus and interact with nuclear chromatin acceptor 
sites. The DNA-binding domain of the receptor is a cysteine-rich 
region which, when it chelates zinc, assumes a conformation called 
a  zinc finger . The receptor–glucocorticoid complex acts via two 
mechanisms: (1) binding to specific sites in nuclear DNA, the 
glucocorticoid regulatory elements; and (2) interactions with 
other transcription factors such as nuclear factor κB, an important 
regulator of cytokine genes. These result in altered expression of 
specific genes and the transcription of specific mRNAs. The 
resulting proteins elicit the glucocorticoid response, which may be 
inhibitory or stimulatory depending on the specific gene and tis-
sue affected. Although glucocorticoid receptors are similar in 
many tissues, the proteins synthesized in response to glucocorti-
coids vary widely and are the result of expression of specific genes 
in different cell types. The mechanisms underlying this specific 
regulation are unknown. Analyses of cloned complementary 
DNAs for human glucocorticoid receptors have revealed marked 
structural and amino acid sequence homology between glucocor-
ticoid receptors and receptors for other steroid hormones (eg, 
mineralocorticoids, estrogen, progesterone) as well as for thyroid 
hormone and the oncogene v- erb -A. Although the steroid-binding 
domain of the glucocorticoid receptor confers specificity for gluco-
corticoid binding, glucocorticoids such as cortisol and corticoster-
one bind to the mineralocorticoid receptor with an affinity equal 
to that of aldosterone. Mineralocorticoid receptor specificity is 
maintained by the expression of 11β-HSD in classic mineralocor-
ticoid-sensitive tissues—the cortisol-cortisone shunt (see earlier). 
 Although glucocorticoid–receptor complexes and their subse-
quent regulation of gene expression are responsible for most glu-
cocorticoid effects, other effects may occur through plasma 
membrane receptors. 
 Glucocorticoid Agonists and Antagonists 
 The study of glucocorticoid receptors has led to the definition of 
glucocorticoid agonists and antagonists. These studies have also 
identified a number of steroids with mixed effects termed partial 
agonists, partial antagonists, or partial agonist–partial antagonists. 
In addition, novel glucocorticoid receptor ligands are being 
CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens     295
TABLE 9–2  The main targets and actions of glucocorticoids and the consequences of Cushing disease and 
Addison disease.
Target System
Specific Target
Physiologic Function
Cushing Disease
Addison Disease
Intermediary 
 metabolism
Liver
Increased expression of gluconeogenic 
enzymes, phosphoenolpyruvate car-
boxykinase, glucose-6-phosphatase, and 
fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase
Increased hepatic glucose output; 
together with insulin, increased 
hepatic glycogen stores
Diminished hepatic 
glucose output and 
glycogen stores
Adipose tissue
Permissive for lipolytic signals (cate-
cholamines, GH) leading to elevated 
plasma FFA to fuel gluconeogenesis
Overall effect (together with insulin): 
central obesity (truncal obesity, 
moon facies, and buffalo hump)
Decreased adiposity 
and decreased lipolysis
Skeletal muscle
Degradation of fibrillar muscle proteins 
by activating the ubiquitin pathway, 
thereby providing amino acid substrates 
for gluconeogenesis
Muscle weakness and wasting 
mainly in proximal muscles; 
increased urinary nitrogen excretion 
(urea from amino acids)
Muscle weakness, 
decreased muscle gly-
cogen stores; 
decreased urinary 
nitrogen excretion
Plasma glucose
Maintains plasma glucose during fasting 
(antihypoglycemic action); increases 
plasma glucose during stress (hypergly-
cemic action)
Impaired glucose tolerance, insulin-
resistant diabetes mellitus; increased 
plasma glucose is due to decreased 
peripheral glucose utilization and 
increased hepatic glucose output
Hypoglycemia, 
increased insulin 
sensitivity
Calcium 
 homeostasis
Kidney
Decreased reabsorption of calcium
Hypercalciuria without hypercalce-
mia leading to secondary hyperpara-
thyroidism
Retardation of bone 
growth mainly through 
decreased GH; hyper-
calcemia possible
Bone, cartilage
Inhibition of collagen synthesis and bone 
deposition
Retardation of bone growth and 
bone age by direct action and by 
decreasing GH; osteoporosis in 
adults
Gastrointestinal 
tract
Inhibition of calcium, magnesium, and 
phosphate absorption by antagonizing 
calcitriol actions
Other endocrine 
 systems
Hypothalamus, 
pituitary
Decreases endogenous opioid produc-
tion; depresses gonadotroph responsive-
ness to GnRH; stimulates GH gene 
expression by the pituitary; inhibits GH 
secretion via the hypothalamus
Scanty menses due to suppressed 
gonadotroph sensitivity to GnRH; 
suppressed GH secretion by hypo-
thalamic action; minimal suppres-
sion of the TRH-TSH axis
Scanty menses by 
upregulated CRH-
endogenous opioid 
pathway-mediated 
suppression of GnRH; 
suppressed GH secre-
tion; hypothyroidism (if 
present) is due to auto-
immune mechanism
Pancreas
Inhibits insulin secretion by decreasing 
the efficacy of cytoplasmic Ca2+ on the 
exocytotic process
Absolute hyperinsulinemia with rela-
tive hypoinsulinemia (lower plasma 
insulin than expected for the degree 
of hyperglycemia)
Absolute hypoinsuline-
mia with relative 
hyperinsulinemia
Adrenal 
medulla
Increases PNMT expression and activity 
(epinephrine synthesis)
Increased responses to 
sympathoadrenal activation
Decreased responses 
to sympathoadrenal 
activation
Carrier proteins 
(CBG, SHBG, 
TBG)
Decreases all major hormone-binding 
proteins
Decrease in total T4, free T4 remains 
normal
Immune system
Thymus, lym-
phocytes
Causes age-related involution of the 
thymus; induces thymic atrophy
Immunocompromised state; 
lymphocytopenia
Relative lymphocytosis 
in peripheral blood
Monocytes
Inhibits monocyte proliferation and anti-
gen presentation; decreased production 
of IL-1, IL-6, and TNFα
Monocytopenia in peripheral blood
Monocytosis in periph-
eral blood
Granulocytes
Demargination of neutrophils by 
suppressing the expression of adhesion 
molecules
Peripheral blood: granulocytosis, 
eosinopenia
Peripheral blood: 
granulocytopenia, 
eosinophilia
(Continued)
296    CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens
TABLE 9–2  The main targets and actions of glucocorticoids and the consequences of Cushing disease and 
Addison disease.
Target System
Specific Target
Physiologic Function
Cushing Disease
Addison Disease
Inflammatory 
response
Inhibition of inflammation by inhibiting 
PLA2, thereby inhibiting production of 
leukotrienes and prostaglandins; 
suppresses COX-2 expression
Erythrocytes
No significant effect
Increased hemoglobin and 
hematocrit are due to ACTH-
mediated overproduction of 
androgens
Anemia is more pro-
nounced in women 
and is due to loss of 
adrenal androgens; 
anemia may be related 
to direct autoimmune 
targeting of gastric 
parietal cells
Skin and 
 connective 
 tissue
Antiproliferative for fibroblasts and 
keratinocytes
Easy bruisability due to dermal atro-
phy; striae or sites of increased ten-
sion, especially sites of adipose 
tissue accumulation; poor wound 
healing; hirsutism and acne are due 
to ACTH-mediated increase of adre-
nal androgens; hyperpigmentation 
is a direct effect of ACTH on melano-
cortin 1 receptors
Darkening of the skin 
is due to ACTH-
mediated stimulation 
of epidermal melano-
cortin 1 receptors; viti-
ligo may occur due to 
direct autoimmune 
destruction of melano-
cytes in circumscribed 
areas
Breast
Mammary epi-
thelium
Mandatory requirement for lactation
Cushing disease may be associated 
with galactorrhea
Addison disease is not 
associated with galact-
orrhea
Lung
Type II alveolar 
cell
Stimulation of surfactant production
Cardiovascular 
 system
Heart
Increased contractility
Hypertension
Lower peripheral resis-
tance; hypertension 
with further postural 
decrease in blood pres-
sure (orthostatic 
hypotension); low- 
voltage ECG
Vasculature
Increased vascular reactivity to vasocon-
strictors (catecholamines, angiotensin II)
Na+, K+, and 
 ECF volume
Kidney
Increased GFR and nonphysiologic 
actions on mineralocorticoid receptors
Hypokalemic alkalosis, increased 
ECF volume due to mineralocorti-
coid activity (increased DOC, satura-
tion of type 2 11β-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase by high levels of 
cortisol)
Hyponatremia, hyper-
kalemic acidosis, and 
decreased ECF volume 
are mainly due to loss 
of mineralocorticoid 
activity
Posterior pitu-
itary
Hyponatremia due to SIADH
Increased ADH mainly 
via hypovolemia- 
related baroreceptor 
mechanism
Psychiatric 
 parameters of 
 CNS function
Mood
Eucortisolemia maintains emotional 
balance
Initially, euphoria; long-term, 
depression, psychosis
Depression
Appetite
Increases appetite
Hyperphagia
Decreased appetite in 
spite of improved taste 
and smell
Sleep
Suppression of REM sleep
Sleep disturbances
Memory
Sensitizes hippocampal glutamate recep-
tors, induces atrophy of dendrites
Impaired memory, bilateral hip-
pocampal atrophy
Eye
Increasing intraocular pressure
Cataract formation; increased 
intraocular pressure
Decreased intraocular 
pressure
Modified from Kacsoh B. Endocrine Physiology. McGraw-Hill; 2000.
(Continued)
CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens     297
 developed that have more selectivity in terms of receptor binding 
or transcription of specific genes. 
 A. Agonists 
 In humans, cortisol, synthetic glucocorticoids 
(eg, prednisolone, dexamethasone), corticosterone, and aldoster-
one are glucocorticoid agonists. The synthetic glucocorticoids 
have substantially higher affinity for the glucocorticoid receptor, 
and these have greater glucocorticoid activity than cortisol when 
present in equimolar concentrations. Corticosterone and aldoster-
one have substantial affinity for the glucocorticoid receptor; how-
ever, their plasma concentrations are normally much lower than 
that of cortisol, and thus these steroids do not have significant 
physiologic glucocorticoid effects. 
 B. Antagonists 
 Glucocorticoid antagonists bind to the glu-
cocorticoid receptors but do not elicit the nuclear events required 
to cause a glucocorticoid response. These steroids compete with 
agonist steroids such as cortisol for the receptors and thus inhibit 
agonist responses. Other steroids have partial agonist activity 
when present alone (ie, they elicit a partial glucocorticoid 
response). However, in sufficient concentration, they compete 
with agonist steroids for the receptors and thus competitively 
inhibit agonist responses; that is, these partial agonists may func-
tion as partial antagonists in the presence of more active glucocor-
ticoids. Steroids such as progesterone, 11-deoxycortisol, DOC, 
testosterone, and 17β-estradiol have antagonist or partial agonist-
partial antagonist effects; however, the physiologic role of these 
hormones in glucocorticoid action is probably negligible, because 
they circulate in low concentrations. The antiprogestational agent 
mifepristone has substantial glucocorticoid antagonist properties 
and has been used to block glucocorticoid action in patients with 
Cushing syndrome. 
 Intermediary Metabolism ( Table 9–2 ) 
 Glucocorticoids in general inhibit DNA synthesis. In addition, in 
most tissues they inhibit RNA and protein synthesis and accelerate 
protein catabolism. These actions provide substrate for intermedi-
ary metabolism; however, accelerated catabolism also accounts for 
the deleterious effects of glucocorticoids on muscle, bone, connec-
tive tissue, and lymphatic tissues. In contrast, RNA and protein 
synthesis in liver is stimulated. 
 A. Hepatic glucose metabolism 
 Glucocorticoids increase 
hepatic gluconeogenesis by stimulating the gluconeogenic enzymes 
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase and glucose-6-phosphatase. 
They have a permissive effect in that they increase hepatic respon-
siveness to the gluconeogenic hormone glucagon, and they also 
increase the release of substrates for gluconeogenesis from peripheral 
tissues, particularly muscle. This latter effect may be enhanced by the 
glucocorticoid-induced reduction in peripheral amino acid uptake 
and protein synthesis. Glucocorticoids also increase glycerol and free 
fatty acid release by lipolysis and increase muscle lactate release. They 
enhance hepatic glycogen synthesis and storage by stimulating glyco-
gen synthetase activity and to a lesser extent by inhibiting glycogen 
breakdown. These effects are insulin dependent. 
 B. Peripheral glucose metabolism 
 Glucocorticoids also 
alter carbohydrate metabolism by inhibiting peripheral glucose 
uptake in muscle and adipose tissue. This effect and the others 
described earlier may result in increased insulin secretion in states 
of chronic glucocorticoid excess. 
 C. Effects on adipose tissue 
 In adipose tissue, the pre-
dominant effect is increased lipolysis with release of glycerol and 
free fatty acids. This is partially due to direct stimulation of 
lipolysis by glucocorticoids, but it is also contributed to by 
decreased glucose uptake and enhancement by glucocorticoids of 
the effects of lipolytic hormones. Although glucocorticoids are 
lipolytic, increased fat deposition is a classic manifestation of glu-
cocorticoid excess. This paradox may be explained by the increased 
appetite caused by high levels of these steroids and by the lipo-
genic effects of the hyperinsulinemia that occurs in this state. The 
reason for abnormal fat deposition and distribution in states of 
cortisol excess is unknown. In these instances, fat is classically 
deposited centrally in the face, cervical area, trunk, and abdomen; 
the extremities are usually spared. 
 D. Summary 
 The effects of the glucocorticoids on intermedi-
ary metabolism can be summarized as follows: 
 (1)  Effects are minimal in the fed state. However, during fasting, 
glucocorticoids contribute to the maintenance of plasma glu-
cose levels by increasing gluconeogenesis and decreasing 
uptake of glucose by adipose tissue. 
 (2)  Hepatic glucose production is enhanced, as is hepatic RNA 
and protein synthesis. 
 (3)  The effects on muscle are catabolic (ie, decreased glucose 
uptake and metabolism, decreased protein synthesis, and 
increased release of amino acids). This provides amino acid 
substrates for gluconeogenesis in the liver. 
 (4)  In adipose tissue, lipolysis is stimulated. This increases fatty 
acid delivery to the liver where their metabolism provides 
energy to support gluconeogenesis. 
 (5)  In glucocorticoid deficiency, hypoglycemia may result, whereas 
in states of glucocorticoid excess there may be hyperglycemia, 
hyperinsulinemia, muscle wasting, and weight gain with 
abnormal fat distribution. 
 Effects on Other Tissues and Functions 
( Table 9–2 ) 
 A. Connective tissue 
 Glucocorticoids in excess inhibit fibro-
blasts, lead to loss of collagen and connective tissue, and thus 
result in thinning of the skin, easy bruising, stria formation, and 
poor wound healing. 
 B. Bone 
 The physiologic role of glucocorticoids in bone 
metabolism and calcium homeostasis is unknown; however, in 
excess, they have major deleterious effects. Glucocorticoids 
directly inhibit bone formation by decreasing cell proliferation 
and the synthesis of RNA, protein, collagen, and hyaluronate. 
Initially, supraphysiologic doses of glucocorticoids also stimulate 
bone resorption, at least in part via interference of the receptor 
298    CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens
activator of nuclear factor kappa B (RANK)-ligand/RANK/osteo-
protegerin pathway. This leads to osteolysis and increased bio-
chemical markers of bone turnover. In addition, glucocorticoids 
may potentiate the proresorptive actions of parathyroid hormone 
(PTH) and 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol (1,25[OH] 2 D 3 ) on 
bone, and this may further contribute to net bone resorption. 
Chronically, however, the key effect to promote bone loss is due to 
the detrimental impact on bone formation (see Chapter 8). 
 C. Calcium metabolism 
 Glucocorticoids also have other 
major effects on mineral homeostasis. They markedly reduce intes-
tinal calcium absorption, which tends to lower serum calcium. This 
theoretically promotes a state of secondary hyperparathyroidism to 
maintain the serum calcium within the normal range. In reality, 
however, chronic elevations in intact PTH levels have been difficult 
to demonstrate consistently in patients on glucocorticoid therapy. 
The mechanism of decreased intestinal calcium absorption is 
thought to result from antagonism of 1,25(OH) 2 D action in the 
intestine. It is not due to decreased synthesis or decreased serum 
levels of the active vitamin D metabolites; in fact, 1,25(OH) 2 D 
levels are normal or even increased in the presence of glucocorti-
coid excess. Increased 1,25(OH) 2 D synthesis in this setting may 
result from decreased serum phosphorus levels (see later), increased 
PTH secretion, direct stimulation by glucocorticoids of renal 
1α-hydroxylase, and or reduced target cell (intestine) responsive-
ness. Glucocorticoids increase urinary calcium excretion, and 
hypercalciuria is a frequent feature of cortisol excess. They also 
reduce the tubular reabsorption of phosphate, leading to phospha-
turia and decreased serum phosphorus concentrations. 
 Thus, glucocorticoids in excess result in negative calcium bal-
ance, with decreased calcium absorption and increased urinary 
calcium excretion. Serum calcium levels are maintained, but at the 
expense of net bone resorption. Decreased bone formation and 
increased resorption ultimately result in the disabling osteoporosis 
that is often a major complication of spontaneous and iatrogenic 
glucocorticoid excess (see Chapter 8). 
 D. Growth and development 
 Glucocorticoids accelerate 
the development of a number of systems and organs in fetal and 
differentiating tissues, although the mechanisms are unclear. As 
discussed above, glucocorticoids are generally inhibitory, and these 
stimulatory effects may be due to glucocorticoid interactions with 
other growth factors. Examples of these development-promoting 
effects are increased surfactant production in the fetal lung and the 
accelerated development of hepatic and gastrointestinal enzyme 
systems. 
 Glucocorticoids in excess inhibit growth in children, and this 
adverse effect is a major complication of therapy. This may be a 
direct effect on bone cells, although decreased growth hormone 
(GH) secretion and insulin-like growth factor I generation also 
contribute (see Chapter 6). 
 E. Blood cells and immunologic function 
 
 1. Erythrocytes— Glucocorticoids have little effect on erythro-
poiesis and hemoglobin concentration. Although mild 
 polycythemia and anemia may be seen in Cushing syndrome 
and Addison disease, respectively, these alterations are more 
likely to be secondary to altered androgen metabolism. 
 2. Leukocytes— Glucocorticoids influence both leukocyte move-
ment and function. Thus, glucocorticoid administration 
increases the number of intravascular polymorphonuclear neu-
trophils/leukocytes (PMNs) by increasing PMN release from 
bone marrow, by increasing the circulating half-life of PMNs, 
and by decreasing PMN movement out of the vascular com-
partment. Glucocorticoid administration reduces the number 
of circulating lymphocytes, monocytes, and eosinophils, mainly 
by increasing their movement out of the circulation. The con-
verse (ie, neutropenia, lymphocytosis, monocytosis, and 
eosinophilia) is seen in adrenal insufficiency. Glucocorticoids 
also decrease the migration of inflammatory cells (PMNs, 
monocytes, and lymphocytes) to sites of injury, and this is 
probably a major mechanism of the anti-inflammatory actions 
and increased susceptibility to infection that occur following 
chronic administration. Glucocorticoids also decrease lympho-
cyte production and the mediator and effector functions of 
these cells. 
 3. Immunologic effects— Glucocorticoids influence multiple 
aspects of immunologic and inflammatory responsiveness, 
including the mobilization and function of leukocytes, as dis-
cussed earlier. They inhibit phospholipase A 2 , a key enzyme in 
the synthesis of prostaglandins. This inhibition is mediated by 
a class of peptides called lipocortins or annexins. They also 
impair the release of effector substances such as the lymphokine 
IL-1, antigen processing, antibody production and clearance, 
and other specific bone marrow–derived and thymus-derived 
lymphocyte functions. The immune system, in turn, affects the 
HPA axis; IL-1 stimulates the secretion of CRH and ACTH. 
Although traditionally used as anti-inflammatory and/or 
immunosuppressive agents, glucocorticoids, especially at lower 
doses, also have stimulatory and permissive effects on the 
inflammatory response to injury. 
 F. Cardiovascular function 
 Glucocorticoids may increase 
cardiac output, and they also increase peripheral vascular tone, 
possibly by augmenting the effects of other vasoconstrictors (eg, 
the catecholamines). Glucocorticoids also regulate expression of 
adrenergic receptors. Thus, refractory shock may occur when the 
glucocorticoid-deficient individual is subjected to stress. 
Glucocorticoids in excess may cause hypertension independently 
of their mineralocorticoid effects. Although the incidence and the 
precise cause of this problem are unclear, it is likely that the 
mechanism involves the renin-angiotensin system; glucocorticoids 
regulate renin substrate, angiotensinogen, the precursor of 
 angiotensin I. 
 G. Renal function 
 These steroids affect water and electrolyte 
balance by actions mediated either by mineralocorticoid receptors 
(sodium retention, hypokalemia, and hypertension) or via gluco-
corticoid receptors (increased glomerular filtration rate due to 
increased cardiac output or due to direct renal effects on salt and 
water retention). Thus, corticosteroids such as betamethasone or 
dexamethasone, which have little mineralocorticoid activity, 
increase sodium and water excretion. Glucocorticoid-deficient 
subjects have decreased glomerular filtration rates and are unable 
to excrete a water load. This may be further aggravated by 
CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens     299
increased ADH secretion, which may occur in glucocorticoid 
deficiency. 
 H. Central nervous system function 
 Glucocorticoids 
readily enter the brain, and although their physiologic role in 
central nervous system function is unknown, their excess or defi-
ciency may profoundly alter behavior and cognitive function. 
 1. Excessive glucocorticoids— In excess, the glucocorticoids 
initially cause euphoria; however, with prolonged exposure, a 
variety of psychologic abnormalities occur, including irritabil-
ity, emotional lability, and depression. Hyperkinetic or manic 
behavior is less common; overt psychoses occur in a small 
number of patients, particularly those with underlying bipolar 
disorder. Many patients also note impairment in cognitive 
functions, most commonly memory and concentration. Other 
central effects include increased appetite, decreased libido, and 
insomnia, with decreased rapid eye movement sleep and 
increased stage II sleep. 
 2. Decreased glucocorticoids— Patients with Addison disease 
are apathetic and depressed and tend to be irritable, negativis-
tic, and reclusive. They have decreased appetite but increased 
sensitivity of taste and smell mechanisms. 
 I. Effects on other hormones 
 1. Thyroid function— Glucocorticoids in excess affect thyroid 
function. Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) synthesis and 
release are inhibited by glucocorticoids, and TSH responsive-
ness to thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) is frequently 
subnormal. Although basal levels are usually normal, the TSH 
concentration may be acutely low in patients treated with 
moderate- to high-dose glucocorticoids. Serum total thyroxine 
(T 4 ) concentrations are usually low normal because of a 
decrease in thyroxine-binding globulin, but free T 4 levels are 
normal. Total and free T 3 (triiodothyronine) concentrations 
may be low, because glucocorticoid excess decreases the conver-
sion of T 4 to T 3 and increases conversion to reverse T 3 . Despite 
these alterations, manifestations of hypothyroidism are not 
apparent. 
 2. Gonadal function— Glucocorticoids also affect gonadotropin 
and gonadal function. In males, they inhibit gonadotropin 
secretion, as evidenced by decreased responsiveness to admin-
istered gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) and subnor-
mal plasma testosterone concentrations. In females, 
glucocorticoids also suppress luteinizing hormone (LH) respon-
siveness to GnRH, resulting in suppression of estrogens and 
progestins with inhibition of ovulation and amenorrhea. 
 J. Miscellaneous effects 
 1. Peptic ulcer— The role of steroid excess in the production or 
reactivation of peptic ulcer disease is controversial. However, 
there appears to be a modest independent effect of glucocorti-
coids to promote peptic ulcer disease (relative risk about 1.4), 
and when this effect is combined with that of nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs there is a synergistic interaction that 
considerably increases the risk. 
 2. Ophthalmologic effects— Intraocular pressure varies with the 
level of circulating glucocorticoids and parallels the circadian 
variation of plasma cortisol levels. In addition, glucocorticoids 
in excess increase intraocular pressure in patients with open-
angle glaucoma. Glucocorticoid therapy may also cause cata-
ract formation. Central serous chorioretinopathy, an 
accumulation of subretinal detachment, may also complicate 
endogenous or exogenous glucocorticoid excess. 
 ADRENAL ANDROGENS 
 The direct biologic activity of the adrenal androgens (androstene-
dione, DHEA, and DHEA sulfate) is minimal, and they function 
primarily as precursors for peripheral conversion to the active 
androgenic hormones, testosterone and dihydrotestosterone. 
Thus, DHEA sulfate secreted by the adrenal androgens undergoes 
limited conversion to DHEA; this peripherally converted DHEA 
and that secreted by the adrenal cortex can be further converted in 
peripheral tissues to androstenedione, the immediate precursor of 
the active androgens. 
 The actions of testosterone and dihydrotestosterone are 
described in Chapter 12. This section will deal only with the adre-
nal contribution to androgenicity. 
 Effects in Males 
 In males with normal gonadal function, the conversion of adrenal 
androstenedione to testosterone accounts for less than 5% of the 
production rate of this hormone, and thus the physiologic effect 
is negligible. In adult males, excessive adrenal androgen secretion 
has no clinical consequences; however, in boys, it causes premature 
penile enlargement and early development of secondary sexual 
characteristics. 
 Effects in Females 
 In females, the adrenal substantially contributes to total androgen 
production by the peripheral conversion of androstenedione to 
testosterone. In the follicular phase of the menstrual cycle, adrenal 
precursors account for two-thirds of testosterone production and 
one-half of dihydrotestosterone production. During midcycle, the 
ovarian contribution increases, and the adrenal precursors account 
for only 40% of testosterone production. 
 In females, abnormal adrenal function as seen in Cushing syn-
drome, adrenal carcinoma, and congenital adrenal hyperplasia 
results in excessive secretion of adrenal androgens, and their 
peripheral conversion to testosterone results in androgen excess, 
manifested by acne, hirsutism, and virilization. 
 LABORATORY EVALUATION 
 Cortisol and the adrenal androgens are measured by specific 
plasma assays. Certain urinary assays, particularly measurement of 
24-hour urine free cortisol, are also useful. In addition, plasma 
concentrations of ACTH can be determined. The assays for 
plasma steroids commonly used measure the total hormone con-
centrations and are therefore influenced by alterations in plasma-
binding proteins. Furthermore, because ACTH and the plasma 
concentrations of the adrenal hormones fluctuate markedly (see 
 Figure 9–7 ), single plasma measurements are frequently  unreliable. 
300    CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens
Thus, plasma levels must be interpreted cautiously, and more 
specific diagnostic information is usually obtained by performing 
appropriate dynamic tests (stimulation and suppression) or other 
tests that reflect cortisol secretory rate. 
 Plasma ACTH 
 A. Methods of measurement 
 Plasma ACTH measurements 
are extremely useful in the diagnosis of pituitary-adrenal dysfunc-
tion. The normal range for a plasma ACTH, using a sensitive 
immunoradiometric assay (IRMA) or immunochemiluminomet-
ric assay (ICMA), is 9 to 52 pg/mL (2-11.1 pmol/L). 
 B. Interpretation 
 Plasma ACTH levels are most useful in dif-
ferentiating pituitary causes from adrenal causes of adrenal dys-
function as follows: 
 (1)  In adrenal insufficiency due to primary adrenal disease, 
plasma ACTH levels are elevated. Conversely, in pituitary 
ACTH deficiency and secondary hypoadrenalism, plasma 
ACTH levels are inappropriately normal or less than 10 pg/
mL (2.2 pmol/L). 
 (2)  In Cushing syndrome due to primary glucocorticoid-secreting 
adrenal tumors, plasma ACTH is suppressed, and a level less 
than 5 pg/mL (1.1 pmol/L) is diagnostic. In patients with 
Cushing disease (pituitary ACTH hypersecretion), plasma 
ACTH levels are inappropriately normal or elevated. 
 (3)  Plasma ACTH levels are usually markedly elevated in the 
ectopic ACTH syndrome, but there is a considerable amount 
of overlap with levels seen in Cushing disease. In addition, 
values lower than expected may be observed rarely in ectopic 
ACTH syndrome when the two-site immunoradiometric 
assay (IRMA) is used; this assay may not detect high-molecu-
lar-weight precursors of ACTH that can be produced in 
ectopic ACTH syndrome. 
 (4)  Plasma ACTH levels are also elevated in patients with the 
common forms of congenital adrenal hyperplasia and are use-
ful in the diagnosis and management of these disorders (see 
Chapters 10 and 14). 
 Plasma Cortisol 
 A. Methods of measurement 
 The most common methods 
of measurement of plasma cortisol are radioimmunoassay, enzyme-
linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), high-performance liquid 
chromatography (HPLC), and liquid chromatography tandem 
mass spectroscopy (LC/MS/MS). These methods measure total 
cortisol (both bound and free) in plasma. Most commonly used 
drugs and medications do not interfere with this assay. In contrast 
to radioimmunoassays, HPLC and LC/MS/MS do not demon-
strate cross-reactivity with synthetic glucocorticoids. 
 B. Interpretation 
 The diagnostic utility of single plasma cor-
tisol concentrations is limited by the episodic nature of cortisol 
secretion and its appropriate elevations during stress. As explained 
below, more information is obtained by dynamic testing of the 
HPA axis. 
 1. Normal values— Normal plasma cortisol levels vary with the 
method used and time of day the sample is obtained. With 
radioimmunoassay, levels at 8 AM range from 3 to 
20 μg/dL (80-550 nmol/L) and average 10 to 12 μg/dL 
(275.9-331.1 nmol/L). Values obtained later in the day are 
lower and at 4 PM are approximately half of morning values. 
At 10 PM to 2 AM, the plasma cortisol concentrations by these 
methods are usually less than 3 μg/dL (80 nmol/L). 
 2. Levels during stress— Cortisol secretion increases in patients 
who are acutely ill, during surgery, and following trauma. 
Plasma concentrations may reach greater than 40 to 60 μg/dL 
(1100-1655 nmol/L). 
 3. High-estrogen states— The total plasma cortisol concentra-
tion is also elevated with increased CBG-binding capacity, 
which occurs most commonly when circulating estrogen levels 
are high (eg, during pregnancy and when exogenous estrogens 
or oral contraceptives are being used). In these situations, 
plasma cortisol may reach levels two to three times normal. 
 4. Other conditions— CBG levels may be increased or decreased 
in other situations, as discussed above in the sections on circula-
tion and metabolism. Total plasma cortisol concentrations may 
also be increased in severe anxiety, endogenous depression, starva-
tion, anorexia nervosa, alcoholism, and chronic kidney disease. 
 Salivary Cortisol 
 Cortisol in the saliva is in equilibrium with the free and biologically 
active cortisol in the blood. Salivary cortisol concentrations are not 
affected by changes in serum cortisol–binding proteins, by salivary 
flow or composition, and they are stable at room temperature for 
many days. Measurements of salivary cortisol can be obtained from 
late-night, ambulatory saliva samples, which are used as a means of 
establishing the presence or absence of Cushing syndrome. Salivary 
cortisol may also be used to obtain accurate free cortisol levels in 
patients with abnormal serum-binding proteins. 
 A. Methods of measurement 
 Saliva can easily be sampled 
at home by the patient using a variety of techniques, including the 
use of a commercially available sampling device or by passive 
drooling. The same methods that are employed to measure plasma 
cortisol, radioimmunoassay, ELISA, HPLC, and LC/MS/MS, are 
used to measure salivary cortisol concentrations. 
 B. Interpretation 
 1. Normal values— Reference ranges for late-night salivary corti-
sol concentrations are dependent on the assays employed, but 
with radioimmunoassay and ELISA, the normal salivary cortisol 
level at midnight is generally less than 0.15 μg/dL (4 nmol/L). 
 2. Diagnostic utility— As with single plasma cortisol measure-
ments, randomly obtained salivary cortisol concentrations are 
of limited use. However, plasma and salivary cortisol in normal 
individuals reach a nadir from 10 PM to 2 AM. Patients with 
Cushing syndrome do not reach a normal nadir at this time, 
and several studies have shown that elevated late-night time 
salivary cortisol is a sensitive and specific diagnostic test for 
Cushing syndrome. 
 Plasma Free Cortisol 
 This assay measures the free or biologically active fraction 
of plasma cortisol and, thus, is not influenced by alterations in 
CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens     301
corticosteroid-binding globulin and serum albumin. The best cur-
rent method involves equilibrium dialysis to separate bound and 
free hormone followed by measurement of the free fraction by 
radioimmunoassay. In patients with normal serum albumin and 
CBG, the free cortisol correlates well with total cortisol levels; 
however, in patients with disturbances in plasma-binding proteins 
this correlation is lost. 
 Although this assay is not in common use, it is of importance 
in the assessment of adrenal function in patients with critical 
 illness. In these patients the measurement of total plasma cortisol 
and its response to ACTH has overestimated the number of 
patients with adrenal insufficiency especially in the most severely 
ill patients who frequently have hypoalbuminemia and subnormal 
corticosteroid-binding globulin levels. 
 Urinary Corticosteroids 
 A. Free cortisol 
 1. Methods of measurement— The assay of unbound cortisol 
excreted in the urine is an excellent method for the diagnosis 
of Cushing syndrome. Normally, less than 1% of the secreted 
cortisol is excreted unchanged in the urine. However, in states 
of excess secretion, the binding capacity of CBG is exceeded, 
and plasma free cortisol therefore increases, as does its 
urinary excretion. Urine free cortisol is measured in a 24-hour 
urine collection by HPLC, radioimmunoassay, and by 
LC/MS/MS. 
 2. Normal values— HPLC and LC/MS/MS provide the most 
specific measurement of cortisol and are the current proce-
dures of choice. The normal range for urine free cortisol 
assayed by HPLC or LC/MS/MS is 5 to 50 μg/24 h (14-135 
nmol/24 h). 
 3. Diagnostic utility— This method is particularly useful in dif-
ferentiating simple obesity from Cushing syndrome, because 
urine free cortisol levels are not elevated in obesity, as are the 
urinary 17-hydroxycorticosteroids (see later). The levels may 
be elevated in the same conditions that increase plasma cortisol 
(see earlier), including a slight elevation during pregnancy. This 
test is not useful in adrenal insufficiency, because it lacks sensi-
tivity at low levels and because low cortisol excretion is often 
found in normal persons. 
 B. 17-Hydroxycorticosteroids 
 These urinary steroids are 
largely of historical interest and should not be measured at present 
because of the greater utility of plasma cortisol and urine free 
cortisol measurements. 
 Dexamethasone Suppression Tests 
 A. Low-Dose test 
 This procedure is used to establish the 
presence of Cushing syndrome regardless of its cause. 
Dexamethasone, a potent glucocorticoid, normally suppresses 
pituitary ACTH release with a resulting fall in plasma and urine 
cortisol, thus assessing feedback inhibition of the HPA axis. In 
Cushing syndrome, this mechanism is abnormal, and steroid 
secretion fails to be suppressed in the normal way. Dexamethasone 
in the doses used does not interfere with the measurement of 
plasma and urinary cortisol. 
 The overnight 1-mg dexamethasone suppression test is com-
monly used as a screening test for Cushing syndrome. 
Dexamethasone, 1 mg orally, is given as a single dose at 
11:00 PM, and the following morning a plasma sample is obtained 
for cortisol determination. Cushing syndrome is probably excluded 
if the serum or plasma cortisol level is less than 1.8 μg/dL 
(50 nmol/L). Utilizing this criterion leads to very high sensitivity 
but also has an increased false-positive rate and results in a 
 specificity of 80% to 90%. 
 Eighty to ninety-nine percent of patients with Cushing syn-
drome have abnormal responses. False-negative results are more 
common in mild hypercortisolism and may also occur in patients 
in whom dexamethasone metabolism is abnormally slow, because 
plasma levels of dexamethasone in these patients are higher than 
normally achieved and result in apparently normal suppression of 
cortisol. Simultaneous measurement of plasma dexamethasone 
and cortisol levels identifies these patients. 
 False-positive results occur in hospitalized and chronically ill 
patients. Acute illness, depression, anxiety, alcoholism, high- 
estrogen states, and uremia may also cause false-positive results. 
Patients taking phenytoin, barbiturates, and other inducers of 
hepatic microsomal enzymes may have accelerated metabolism of 
dexamethasone and thus fail to achieve adequate plasma levels to 
suppress ACTH. 
 B. High-dose tests 
 High-dose dexamethasone suppression 
testing has historically been used to differentiate Cushing disease 
(pituitary ACTH hypersecretion) from ectopic ACTH and adre-
nal tumors. This rationale has been based on the fact that in some 
patients with Cushing disease, the HPA axis is suppressible with 
supraphysiologic doses of glucocorticoids, whereas cortisol secre-
tion is autonomous in patients with adrenal tumors and in most 
patients with the ectopic ACTH syndrome. Unfortunately, excep-
tions to these rules are so common that high-dose dexamethasone 
suppression testing must be interpreted with extreme caution. 
 1. Overnight high-dose dexamethasone suppression test— 
After a baseline morning cortisol specimen is obtained, a single 
dose of dexamethasone, 8 mg orally, is administered at 
11:00 PM and plasma cortisol is measured at 8:00 AM the fol-
lowing morning. Generally, patients with Cushing disease sup-
press plasma cortisol level to less than 50% of baseline 
values—in contrast to patients with the ectopic ACTH 
 syndrome, who fail to suppress to this level. Patients with cor-
tisol-producing adrenal tumors also fail to suppress: their 
 cortisol secretion is autonomous, and ACTH secretion is 
already suppressed by the high endogenous levels of cortisol. 
 2. Two-day high-dose dexamethasone suppression test— This 
test is performed by administering dexamethasone, 2 mg orally 
every 6 hours for 2 days. Twenty-four-hour urine samples are 
collected before and on the second day of dexamethasone 
administration. Patients with Cushing disease have a reduction 
of urine cortisol excretion to less than 50% of baseline values, 
whereas those with adrenal tumors or the ectopic ACTH syn-
drome usually have little or no reduction in urinary cortisol 
excretion. However, some patients with an ectopic ACTH-
secreting neoplasm suppress steroid secretion with high doses 
of dexamethasone, and some patients with pituitary 
302    CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens
 ACTH-dependent Cushing syndrome fail to suppress to these 
levels. The diagnostic sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of 
the high-dose dexamethasone suppression test are only about 
80%. Better specificity and accuracy can be achieved by utiliz-
ing different criteria. However, it has become increasingly clear 
that high-dose dexamethasone suppression testing, regardless 
of the criteria employed, cannot distinguish pituitary from 
nonpituitary ACTH hypersecretion with certainty. Currently, 
the only biochemical test with a high enough diagnostic accu-
racy to distinguish between these causes is inferior petrosal 
sinus ACTH sampling. 
 Pituitary-Adrenal Reserve 
 These tests are used to evaluate the ability of the HPA axis to 
respond to stress. ACTH administration directly stimulates adre-
nal secretion; metyrapone inhibits cortisol synthesis, thereby 
stimulating pituitary ACTH secretion; and insulin-induced hypo-
glycemia stimulates ACTH release by increasing CRH secretion. 
More recently, CRH has been utilized to directly stimulate pitu-
itary corticotrophs to release ACTH. The relative utility of these 
procedures is discussed below in the section on adrenocortical 
insufficiency and also in Chapter 4. 
 A. ACTH stimulation testing  
 1. Procedure and normal values—High-dose ACTH stimula-
tion test. The rapid ACTH stimulation test measures the acute 
adrenal response to ACTH and is used to diagnose both pri-
mary and secondary adrenal insufficiency. A synthetic human 
α 1-24 -ACTH called tetracosactin or cosyntropin is used. Fasting 
is not required, and the test may be performed at any time of 
the day. A baseline cortisol sample is obtained; cosyntropin is 
administered in a dose of 250 μg intramuscularly or intrave-
nously; and additional samples for plasma cortisol are obtained 
at 30 or 60 minutes following the injection. Because the peak 
concentration of ACTH with this test achieves a pharmacologic 
level exceeding 10,000 pg/mL, this study assesses maximal adre-
nocortical capacity. The peak cortisol response, 30 to 60 min-
utes later, should exceed 18 to 20 μg/dL (>497-552 nmol/L). 
The 30-minute peak cortisol response to ACTH is constant and 
is unrelated to the basal cortisol level. In fact, there is no differ-
ence in the peak cortisol level at 30 minutes regardless of 
whether 250 μg, 5 μg, or even 1 μg of ACTH is administered. 
Early studies of the salivary or plasma free cortisol response to 
ACTH suggest that this method may be useful in patients with 
abnormal levels of cortisol-binding proteins. 
 Low-dose ACTH stimulation test. Since the standard or 
high-dose test may be normal in patients with partial second-
ary adrenal insufficiency, a low-dose (1 μg) ACTH stimulation 
test was developed. Although some studies reported increased 
sensitivity and specificity, two meta-analyses did not establish a 
distinct advantage for the low-dose test. 
 To perform the low-dose test appropriately it must be 
undertaken in the morning and the ACTH must be given 
intravenously. In addition, technical limitations are significant 
(ie, ACTH is available only in 250-μg vials, it is unstable in 
solution, and adheres to glass and plastic syringes and IV tub-
ing). Thus, there are serious issues as to the accuracy of the 
dose of ACTH during reconstitution, dilution, and IV injec-
tion. For these reasons, the low-dose ACTH stimulation test is 
not practical for routine clinical practice. 
 2. Subnormal responses— If the cortisol response to the rapid 
ACTH stimulation test is inadequate, adrenal insufficiency is 
present. In primary adrenal insufficiency, destruction of corti-
cal cells reduces cortisol secretion and increases pituitary 
ACTH secretion. Therefore, the adrenal is already maximally 
stimulated, and there is no further increase in cortisol secretion 
when exogenous ACTH is given; that is, there is decreased 
adrenal reserve. In secondary adrenal insufficiency due to 
ACTH deficiency, there is atrophy of the zonae fasciculata and 
reticularis, and the adrenal thus is either hyporesponsive or 
unresponsive to acute stimulation with exogenous ACTH. In 
either primary or secondary types, a subnormal response to the 
rapid ACTH stimulation test accurately predicts deficient 
responsiveness of the axis to insulin hypoglycemia, metyrapone, 
and surgical stress. 
 3. Normal responses— A normal response to the rapid ACTH 
stimulation test excludes both primary adrenal insufficiency 
(by directly assessing adrenal reserve) and overt secondary 
adrenal insufficiency with adrenal atrophy. However, a nor-
mal response does not rule out partial ACTH deficiency 
(decreased pituitary reserve) in patients whose basal ACTH 
secretion is sufficient to prevent adrenocortical atrophy and 
patients with recently developed secondary adrenal insuffi-
ciency who have not yet undergone adrenal atrophy. These 
patients may be unable to further increase ACTH secretion 
and thus may have subnormal pituitary ACTH responsive-
ness to stress or hypoglycemia. In such patients, further test-
ing with metyrapone, hypoglycemia, or CRH may be 
indicated. For further discussion, see the section on diagnosis 
of adrenocortical insufficiency. 
 B. Metyrapone testing 
 Metyrapone testing has been used to 
diagnose adrenal insufficiency and to assess pituitary-adrenal 
reserve. The test procedures are detailed in Chapter 4. Metyrapone 
blocks cortisol synthesis by inhibiting the 11β-hydroxylase enzyme 
that converts 11-deoxycortisol to cortisol. This stimulates ACTH 
secretion, which in turn increases the secretion and plasma levels 
of 11-deoxycortisol. The overnight metyrapone test is most com-
monly used and is best suited to patients with suspected pituitary 
ACTH deficiency; patients with suspected primary adrenal failure 
are usually evaluated with the rapid ACTH stimulation test as 
described earlier and discussed in the section on diagnosis of adre-
nocortical insufficiency. The normal response to the overnight 
metyrapone test is a plasma 11-deoxycortisol level greater than 
7 ng/dL (0.2 nmol/L) and a plasma ACTH level greater than 
100 pg/mL (22 pmol/L) and indicates both normal ACTH secre-
tion and adrenal function. A subnormal response establishes 
 adrenocortical insufficiency. A normal response to metyrapone 
accurately predicts normal stress responsiveness of the hypotha-
lamic-pituitary axis and correlates well with responsiveness to 
insulin-induced hypoglycemia. Metyrapone is only available 
directly from the manufacturer. 
 C. Insulin-induced hypoglycemia testing 
 The details of 
this procedure are described in Chapter 4. Hypoglycemia induces 
a central nervous system stress response, increases CRH release, 
and in this way increases ACTH and cortisol secretion. It there-
fore measures the integrity of the axis and its ability to respond to 
stress. The normal plasma cortisol response is an increment greater 
CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens     303
than 8 μg/dL (220 nmol/L) and a peak level greater than 18 to 
20 μg/dL (497-552 nmol/L). The plasma ACTH response to 
hypoglycemia is usually greater than 100 pg/mL (22 pmol/L). A 
normal plasma cortisol response to hypoglycemia excludes adrenal 
insufficiency and decreased pituitary reserve. Thus, patients with 
normal responses do not require cortisol therapy during illness or 
surgery. 
 D. CRH testing 
 The procedure for CRH testing is described 
in Chapter 4. ACTH responses are exaggerated in patients with 
primary adrenal failure and absent in patients with hypopituitar-
ism. Delayed responses may occur in patients with hypothalamic 
disorders. CRH testing has also been used to differentiate among 
the causes of Cushing syndrome (see later). 
 Androgens 
 Androgen excess is usually evaluated by the measurement of basal 
levels of these hormones, because suppression and stimulation 
tests are not as useful as in disorders affecting glucocorticoids. 
Assays are available for total plasma levels of DHEA, DHEA sul-
fate, androstenedione, testosterone, and dihydrotestosterone. 
Plasma-free testosterone (ie, testosterone not bound to SHBG) 
can be measured and is a more direct measure of circulating bio-
logically active testosterone than the total plasma level, but com-
mercially available methods vary widely in their accuracy 
(see Chapter 12). 
 DISORDERS OF ADRENOCORTICAL 
INSUFFICIENCY 
 Deficient adrenal production of glucocorticoids or mineralocorti-
coids results in adrenocortical insufficiency, which is either the 
consequence of destruction or dysfunction of the cortex (primary 
adrenocortical insufficiency, or Addison disease) or secondary to 
deficient pituitary ACTH secretion (secondary adrenocortical 
insufficiency). Glucocorticoid therapy is the most common cause 
of secondary adrenocortical insufficiency. 
 PRIMARY ADRENOCORTICAL 
INSUFFICIENCY (ADDISON DISEASE) 
 Etiology and Pathology ( Figure 9–9 ) 
 The etiology of primary adrenocortical insufficiency has changed 
over time. Prior to 1920, tuberculosis was the major cause of adre-
nocortical insufficiency. Since 1950, autoimmune adrenalitis with 
adrenal atrophy has accounted for about 80% of cases. It is associ-
ated with a high incidence of other immunologic and autoim-
mune endocrine disorders (see later). Causes of primary adrenal 
insufficiency are listed in  Table 9–3 . Primary adrenocortical insuf-
ficiency, or Addison disease, is rare, with a reported prevalence of 
35 to 140 per million population. When part of the polyglandular 
system, it is more common in females, with a female-male ratio of 
approximately 2:1. Addison disease is usually diagnosed in the 
third to fifth decades. 
 A. Autoimmune adrenocortical insufficiency 
 Patholo-
gically, the adrenals are small and atrophic, and the capsule is 
thickened. The adrenal medulla is preserved, although cortical 
cells are largely absent, show degenerative changes, and are sur-
rounded by a fibrous stroma and the characteristic lymphocytic 
infiltrates. 
 Autoimmune Addison disease is frequently accompanied by 
other immune disorders. There are two different syndromes in 
which autoimmune adrenal insufficiency may occur. The best 
characterized one is known as autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-
candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy syndrome (APCED), or auto-
immune polyglandular syndrome type 1 (APS-1). This is an 
autosomal recessive disorder that usually presents in childhood 
and is accompanied by hypoparathyroidism, adrenal failure, and 
mucocutaneous candidiasis. APS-1 results in most cases from a 
mutation of the autoimmune regulator gene ( AIRE ), which is 
located on chromosome 21q22.3. These patients have a defect in 
T-cell–mediated immunity, especially toward the candidal anti-
gens. APS-1 has no relationship to human leukocyte antigen 
(HLA) and is often associated with hepatitis, dystrophy of dental 
enamel and nails, alopecia, vitiligo, and keratopathy and may be 
accompanied by hypofunction of the gonads, thyroid, pancreatic 
B cell, and gastric parietal cells. Autoantibodies against the choles-
terol side chain cleavage enzyme (P450scc, CYP11A1) and others 
have been described in patients with this disorder. 
 The more common presentation of autoimmune adrenocorti-
cal insufficiency is associated with HLA-related disorders includ-
ing type 1 diabetes mellitus and autoimmune thyroid disease. 
Other less common related disorders include alopecia areata, viti-
ligo, primary hypogonadism, pernicious anemia, and celiac dis-
ease. This disorder is often referred to as APS type 2. The genetic 
susceptibility to this disorder is linked to HLA-DR3 or DR4 (or 
both). These patients have antiadrenal cytoplasmic antibodies that 
may be important in the pathogenesis of this disorder, and autoan-
tibodies directed against 21α-hydroxylase (P450c21, CYP21A2) 
have been identified (see Chapter 2). 
 B. Adrenal hemorrhage 
 Bilateral adrenal hemorrhage is a 
rare cause of adrenal insufficiency. The diagnosis is usually made 
in critically ill patients in whom a computed tomography (CT) 
scan of the abdomen is performed. Bilateral adrenal enlargement 
is found, leading to an assessment of adrenocortical function. 
Anatomic factors predispose the adrenal glands to hemorrhage. 
The adrenal glands have a rich arterial blood supply, but they are 
drained by a single vein. Adrenal vein thrombosis may occur dur-
ing periods of stasis or turbulence, thereby increasing adrenal vein 
pressure and resulting in a  vascular dam . This causes hemorrhage 
into the gland and is followed by adrenocortical insufficiency. 
 Most patients with adrenal hemorrhage have been taking anti-
coagulant therapy for an underlying coagulopathy or are predis-
posed to thrombosis. Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia 
syndrome may be accompanied by adrenal vein thrombosis and 
304    CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens
Cortisol
Aldosterone
–
Aldosterone
–
Renin-
angiotensin
ACTH
CRH
Hypothalamus
Pituitary
Adrenal cortex
Cortisol
Renin-
angiotensin
ACTH
CRH
Normal state
Primary adrenal insufficiency
Cortisol
Renin-
angiotensin
ACTH
CRH
Secondary adrenal insufficiency
(ACTH deficiency)
–
–
–
–
–
–
Aldosterone
–
Cortisol
Renin-
angiotensin
ACTH
CRH
Tertiary adrenal insufficiency
(CRH deficiency)
–
–
Aldosterone
–
 FIGURE 9–9  Hypothalamic-pituitary axis in adrenal insufficiency of different causes. These panels illustrate hormone secretion in the nor-
mal state (upper left), primary adrenal insufficiency (upper right), secondary adrenal insufficiency—ACTH deficiency (lower left), and tertiary 
adrenal insufficiency—CRH deficiency (lower right). Renin-angiotensin system is also illustrated. In contrast to normal secretion and hormone 
levels, decreased hormonal secretion is indicated by a dotted line and increased secretion by a dark solid line. 
CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens     305
hemorrhage. The primary antiphospholipid antibody syndrome 
(lupus anticoagulant) has emerged as one of the more common 
causes of adrenal hemorrhage. 
 C. Infections 
 Although tuberculosis is a common cause of 
primary adrenal insufficiency in the rest of the world, it is a rare 
cause of this problem in the United States. Clinically significant 
adrenal insufficiency appears to occur in only about 5% of 
patients with disseminated tuberculosis. With the use of antitu-
berculous chemotherapy, it may even be reversible if detected in 
early stages. It is important to recognize that rifampin may acceler-
ate the metabolic clearance of cortisol, thereby increasing the 
replacement dose needed in these patients. Most if not all systemic 
fungal infections can involve and destroy the adrenal cortex. 
Tuberculosis and fungal infections are associated with enlarged 
adrenals that may show calcifications. Of note, the azole antifun-
gal agents, such as ketoconazole, inhibit adrenal cytochrome P450 
steroidogenic enzymes that are essential for cortisol biosynthesis. 
Thus, azole antifungal treatment, especially with ketoconazole, in 
patients with marginal adrenocortical reserve due to fungal disease 
may precipitate adrenal crisis. 
 HIV/AIDS has been associated with pathologic involvement of 
the adrenal gland. Although adrenal necrosis is commonly seen in 
postmortem examination of patients with AIDS, primary adrenal 
insufficiency appears to complicate only a few patients with this 
disorder. Primary adrenal insufficiency in AIDS is usually caused 
by opportunistic infections such as fungal infection, cytomegalo-
virus, and mycobacterium avium complex. Adrenocortical insuf-
ficiency usually occurs as a late manifestation in AIDS patients 
with very low CD4 counts (see Chapter 25). 
 D. Adrenoleukodystrophy 
 X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy 
is an important cause of adrenal insufficiency in men. This disor-
der represents two distinct entities that may cause malfunction of 
the adrenal cortex and demyelination in the central nervous sys-
tem. These disorders are characterized by abnormally high levels 
of very long chain fatty acids (VLCFAs) due to their defective beta 
oxidation within peroxisomes. The abnormal accumulation of 
VLCFAs in the brain, adrenal cortex, testes, and liver result in the 
clinical manifestations of this disorder. 
 Adrenoleukodystrophy has an incidence of approximately one 
in 25,000 and is an X-linked disorder (chromosome Xq28) with 
incomplete penetrance. Molecular analysis is available clinically 
and can be used both in family screening and in prenatal evalua-
tion. Two clinical phenotypes have been described. Cerebral adre-
noleukodystrophy usually presents in childhood, and its neurologic 
symptoms include cognitive dysfunction, behavioral problems, 
emotional lability, and visual and gait disturbances. It may prog-
ress to dementia. Because 30% of these patients develop adrenal 
insufficiency before the onset of neurologic symptoms, a young 
man with primary adrenal insufficiency should always be screened 
for adrenoleukodystrophy. A clinically milder phenotype, adreno-
myeloneuropathy, usually presents in the second to fourth decades 
of life. Spinal cord and peripheral nerve demyelination occur over 
years and may result in loss of ambulation, cognitive dysfunction, 
urinary retention, and impotence. Once again, adrenal insuffi-
ciency may occur before the onset of neurologic symptoms. 
 The diagnosis of adrenoleukodystrophy can be confirmed by dem-
onstration of the defect in fatty acid metabolism with the abnormal 
accumulation of saturated VLCFAs, especially C26:0 fatty acid. 
 E. Metastatic adrenal disease  The adrenal glands are com-
mon sites of metastasis for lung, gastrointestinal, breast, and renal 
neoplasia. Bilateral adrenal involvement is present in approximately 
50% of patients; however, adrenal insufficiency does not occur with 
unilateral metastatic disease. Even with bilateral involvement adrenal 
insufficiency appears to be uncommon. Despite being uncommon, 
patients with bilateral disease should be evaluated for adrenal insuffi-
ciency and then followed as adrenal insufficiency is a potentially life 
threating condition. In addition, non-Hodgkin and Hodgkin lym-
phoma may present with involvement of the adrenal glands with 
bilateral adrenal enlargement and primary adrenal insufficiency. 
 F. Familial glucocorticoid deficiency and congenital 
adrenal hypoplasia 
 Familial glucocorticoid deficiency is a 
rare disorder in which there is hereditary adrenocortical unrespon-
siveness to ACTH. This leads to adrenal insufficiency with sub-
normal glucocorticoid and adrenal androgen secretion as well as 
elevated plasma ACTH levels. As a rule, aldosterone secretion is 
preserved. At least two distinct types of this disorder have been 
described. One type is associated with mutations in the ACTH 
receptor on the cells of the adrenal cortex. Another type is often 
associated with achalasia and alacrima (Allgrove syndrome; triple 
A syndrome) and progressive neurologic impairment, but no 
mutations in the ACTH receptor have been seen in these patients. 
The responsible gene is on chromosome 12 (12q13) and encodes 
a protein belonging to the WD repeat proteins. Its function 
remains unknown. Congenital adrenal hypoplasia is a develop-
mental abnormality usually presenting in the neonatal period. 
X-linked forms associated with mutations of DAX1 and auto-
somal recessive forms have been reported. 
 G. Cortisol resistance 
 Primary cortisol resistance is an 
unusual disorder representing target cell resistance to cortisol due 
to either qualitative or quantitative abnormalities of the glucocor-
ticoid receptor. This disorder is characterized by hypercortisolism 
TABLE 9–3  Causes of primary adrenocortical 
insufficiency.
Autoimmune
Metastatic malignancy or lymphoma
Adrenal hemorrhage
Infectious
 Tuberculosis, CMV, fungi (histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis), HIV
Adrenoleukodystrophy
Infiltrative disorders
 Amyloidosis, hemochromatosis
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
Familial glucocorticoid deficiency and hypoplasia
Drugs
 Ketoconazole, metyrapone, aminoglutethimide, trilostane, 
 mitotane, etomidate
306    CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens
without clinical manifestations of glucocorticoid excess. Pituitary 
resistance to cortisol results in hypersecretion of ACTH, which 
stimulates the adrenal gland to produce excessive amounts of cor-
tisol, mineralocorticoids, and adrenal androgens. The increased 
production of cortisol and these nonglucocorticoid adrenal ste-
roids may cause hypertension, hypokalemia, virilization, and sex-
ual precocity. Because cortisol is essential for life, this disorder 
actually represents partial rather than complete resistance. 
 H. Drug-induced adrenal insufficiency 
 Drugs associated 
with primary adrenal insufficiency include the azole antifungal 
agents, the anesthetic agent etomidate, the antiparasitic agent 
suramin as well as the steroid synthesis inhibitors aminoglute-
thimide, metyrapone, and mitotane. Mifepristone is a progester-
one antagonist that also antagonizes the glucocorticoid receptor 
and may cause adrenal insufficiency if given in a sufficient dose. 
Megestrol acetate, a synthetic progesterone derivative used to 
stimulate appetite, binds to the glucocorticoid receptor and sup-
presses the HPA axis leading to adrenal insufficiency after with-
drawal of therapy. Opioid narcotics cause a transient suppression 
of the HPA axis and can lead to suppression of plasma cortisol 
levels. Additionally, the use of protease inhibitors with exogenous 
glucocorticoids (from oral, injectable, inhaled, or even optic 
routes) can cause secondary adrenal insufficiency after cessation of 
glucocorticoid use. 
 I. Cortisol in critical illness 
 In 2002 it was reported that 
77% of 299 patients with severe sepsis had plasma cortisol incre-
ments of less than 9 μg/dL to standard ACTH-stimulation test-
ing. These patients were classified as having  relative adrenal 
insufficiency (also termed  partial adrenal insufficiency or  decreased 
adrenal reserve ) and randomized to therapy with hydrocortisone 
and fludrocortisones with a modest survival benefit. The study led 
to a widespread recommendation that all severely ill patients with 
sepsis be tested with ACTH and treated with corticosteroids. 
However, the study was compromised by two major issues. First, 
30% of the patients classified as relatively adrenal insufficient had 
received etomidate (a drug which causes adrenal insufficiency) 
within 12 hours of enrollment. Second, the authors did not recog-
nize that total plasma cortisol levels and their response to ACTH 
are lowered in severely ill patients who frequently have hypoalbu-
minemia and low corticosteroid-binding globulin levels. 
Subsequent studies have shown that both plasma free cortisol and 
salivary cortisol are appropriately elevated and respond normally 
to ACTH in patients with sepsis. In addition, several studies have 
shown no survival benefit following corticosteroid therapy. Thus, 
there is no convincing evidence that adrenal insufficiency is 
 frequent in critically ill patients. 
 Pathophysiology 
 Loss of more than 90% of both adrenal cortices results in the 
clinical manifestations of adrenocortical insufficiency. Gradual 
destruction, such as occurs in the idiopathic and invasive forms of 
the disease, leads to chronic adrenocortical insufficiency. However, 
more rapid destruction occurs in many cases; about 25% of 
patients are in crisis or impending crisis at the time of diagnosis. 
With gradual adrenocortical destruction, the initial phase is that 
of decreased adrenal reserve; that is, basal steroid secretion is nor-
mal, but secretion does not increase in response to stress. Thus, 
acute adrenal crisis can be precipitated by the stresses of surgery, 
trauma, or infection, which require increased corticosteroid secre-
tion. With further loss of cortical tissue, even basal secretion of 
glucocorticoids becomes deficient, leading to the manifestations 
of chronic adrenocortical insufficiency. Mineralocorticoid defi-
ciency may occur early or late in the course. Destruction of the 
adrenals by hemorrhage results in sudden loss of both glucocorti-
coid and mineralocorticoid secretion, accompanied by acute adre-
nal crisis. 
 With decreasing cortisol secretion, plasma levels of ACTH are 
increased because of decreased negative feedback inhibition of 
their secretion. In fact, an elevation of plasma ACTH may be the 
earliest and most sensitive indication of suboptimal adrenocortical 
reserve. 
 Clinical Features 
 A. Symptoms and signs 
 Cortisol deficiency causes weak-
ness, fatigue, anorexia, nausea and vomiting, hypotension, hypona-
tremia, and hypoglycemia. Mineralocorticoid deficiency produces 
renal sodium wasting and potassium retention and can lead to 
severe dehydration, hypotension, hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, 
and acidosis. 
 1. Chronic primary adrenocortical insufficiency— The chief 
symptoms ( Table 9–4 ) are hyperpigmentation, weakness 
and fatigue, weight loss, anorexia, and gastrointestinal 
 disturbances. 
 Hyperpigmentation is the classic physical finding, and its 
presence in association with the above manifestations should 
suggest primary adrenocortical insufficiency. Generalized 
hyperpigmentation of the skin and mucous membranes is one 
of the earliest manifestations of Addison disease. It is increased 
in sun-exposed areas and accentuated over pressure areas such 
as the knuckles, toes, elbows, and knees. It is accompanied by 
increased numbers of black or dark-brown freckles. The classic 
hyperpigmentation of the buccal mucosa and gums is preceded 
by generalized hyperpigmentation of the skin; adrenal insuffi-
ciency should also be suspected when there is increased pig-
mentation of the palmar creases, nail beds, nipples, areolae, 
TABLE 9–4  Clinical features of primary 
adrenocortical insufficiency.
Percent
Weakness, fatigue, anorexia, weight loss
Hyperpigmentation
Hypotension
Gastrointestinal disturbances
Salt craving
Postural symptoms
100
92
88
56
19
12
Reproduced, with permission, from Baxter JD, Tyrrell JB. In: Felig P, Baxter JD, Frohman 
LA, eds. Endocrinology and Metabolism. 3rd ed. McGraw-Hill; 1995.
CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens     307
and perivaginal and perianal mucosa. Scars that have formed 
after the onset of ACTH excess become hyperpigmented, 
whereas older ones do not. 
 General weakness, fatigue and malaise, anorexia, and weight 
loss are invariable features of the disorder. Weight loss may 
reach 15 kg with progressive adrenal failure. Gastrointestinal 
disturbances, especially nausea and vomiting, occur in most 
patients; diarrhea is less frequent. An increase in gastrointesti-
nal symptoms during an acute adrenal crisis may confuse the 
diagnosis by suggesting a primary intra-abdominal process. 
 Hypotension is present in about 90% of patients and is 
accompanied by orthostatic symptoms and occasionally syn-
cope. In more severe chronic cases and in acute crises, recum-
bent hypotension or shock is almost invariably present. Vitiligo 
occurs in 4% to 17% of patients with autoimmune Addison 
disease but is rare in Addison disease due to other causes. Salt 
craving occurs in about 20% of patients. 
 Severe hypoglycemia may occur in children. This finding is 
unusual in adults but may be provoked by fasting, fever, infec-
tion, or nausea and vomiting, especially in acute adrenal crisis. 
Hypoglycemia occurs more commonly in secondary adrenal 
insufficiency. 
 Amenorrhea is common in Addison disease. It may be due 
to weight loss and chronic illness or to primary ovarian failure. 
Loss of axillary and pubic hair may occur in women as a result 
of decreased secretion of adrenal androgens. 
 Partial adrenal insufficiency may have subtle clinical mani-
festations. Adrenal insufficiency should be considered in the 
differential diagnosis of unexplained weight loss and in patients 
with hypotension and fever. 
 2. Acute adrenal crisis— Acute adrenal crisis represents a state of 
acute adrenocortical insufficiency and occurs in patients with 
Addison disease who are exposed to the stress of infection, 
trauma, surgery, or dehydration due to salt deprivation, vomit-
ing, or diarrhea. 
 The symptoms are listed in  Table 9–5 . Anorexia and nausea 
and vomiting increase and worsen the volume depletion and 
dehydration. Hypovolemic shock frequently occurs, and adre-
nal insufficiency should be considered in any patient with 
unexplained vascular collapse. Abdominal pain may occur and 
mimic an acute abdominal emergency. Weakness, apathy, and 
confusion are common. Fever is also common and may be due 
to infection or to hypoadrenalism per se. Hyperpigmentation 
is present unless the onset of adrenal insufficiency is rapid and 
should suggest the diagnosis. 
 Additional findings that suggest the diagnosis are hypona-
tremia, hyperkalemia, lymphocytosis, eosinophilia, and hypo-
glycemia. 
 Shock and coma may rapidly lead to death in untreated 
patients (see Chapter 24). 
 3. Acute adrenal hemorrhage ( Table 9–6 )— Bilateral adrenal 
hemorrhage and acute adrenal destruction in an already com-
promised patient with major medical illness follow a progres-
sively deteriorating course. The usual manifestations are 
abdominal, flank, or back pain and abdominal tenderness. 
Abdominal distention, rigidity, and rebound tenderness are less 
frequent. Hypotension, shock, fever, nausea and vomiting, 
confusion, and disorientation are common; tachycardia and 
cyanosis are less frequent. 
 With progression, severe hypotension, volume depletion, 
dehydration, hyperpyrexia, cyanosis, coma, and death ensue. 
 The diagnosis of acute adrenal hemorrhage should be con-
sidered in the deteriorating patient with unexplained abdominal 
or flank pain, vascular collapse, hyperpyrexia, or hypoglycemia, 
particularly in the setting of an underlying coagulopathy. 
 B. Laboratory and electrocardiographic findings and 
imaging studies 
 1. Gradual adrenal destruction— Hyponatremia and hyper-
kalemia are classic manifestations of the glucocorticoid and 
mineralocorticoid deficiency of primary adrenal insufficiency 
and should suggest the diagnosis. Hematologic manifestations 
include normocytic, normochromic anemia, neutropenia, 
eosinophilia, and a relative lymphocytosis. Azotemia with 
increased concentrations of blood urea nitrogen and serum 
creatinine is due to volume depletion and dehydration. Mild 
acidosis is frequently present. Hypercalcemia of mild to mod-
erate degree occurs in about 6% of patients. 
 Abdominal radiographs reveal adrenal calcification in half 
the patients with tuberculous Addison disease and in some 
patients with other invasive or hemorrhagic causes of adrenal 
insufficiency. CT is a more sensitive detector of adrenal calcifi-
cation and adrenal enlargement. Bilateral adrenal enlargement 
in association with adrenal insufficiency may be seen with 
tuberculosis, fungal infections, cytomegalovirus, malignant and 
nonmalignant infiltrative diseases, and adrenal hemorrhage. 
 Electrocardiographic features are low voltage, a vertical 
QRS axis, and nonspecific ST-T wave abnormalities secondary 
to abnormal electrolytes. 
TABLE 9–5 Clinical features of acute adrenal crisis.
Hypotension and shock
Fever
Dehydration, volume depletion
Nausea, vomiting, anorexia
Weakness, apathy, depressed mentation
Hypoglycemia
TABLE 9–6 Clinical features of adrenal hemorrhage.
Percent
General features
Hypotension and shock
Fever
Nausea and vomiting
Confusion, disorientation
Tachycardia
Cyanosis or lividity
74
59
46
41
28
28
Local features
Abdominal, flank, or back pain
Abdominal or flank tenderness
Abdominal distention
Abdominal rigidity
Chest pain
Rebound tenderness
77
38
28
20
13
5
Reproduced, with permission, from Baxter JD, Tyrrell JB. In: Felig P, Baxter JD, Frohman 
LA, eds. Endocrinology and Metabolism. 3rd ed. McGraw-Hill; 1995.
308    CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens
 2. Acute adrenal hemorrhage— Hyponatremia and hyper-
kalemia occur in only a small number of cases, but azotemia is 
a usual finding. Increased circulating eosinophils may suggest 
the diagnosis. The diagnosis is frequently established only 
when imaging studies reveal bilateral adrenal enlargement. 
 SECONDARY ADRENOCORTICAL 
INSUFFICIENCY 
 Etiology 
 Secondary adrenocortical insufficiency due to ACTH deficiency is 
most commonly a result of exogenous glucocorticoid therapy. 
Pituitary or hypothalamic tumors are the most common causes of 
naturally occurring pituitary ACTH hyposecretion. These and 
other less common causes are reviewed in Chapter 4. 
 Pathophysiology 
 ACTH deficiency is the primary event and leads to decreased 
cortisol and adrenal androgen secretion. Aldosterone secretion 
remains normal except in a few cases. In the early stages, basal 
ACTH and cortisol levels may be normal; however, ACTH reserve 
is impaired, and ACTH and cortisol responses to stress are, there-
fore, subnormal. With further loss of basal ACTH secretion, there 
is atrophy of the zonae fasciculata and reticularis of the adrenal 
cortex; and, therefore, basal cortisol secretion is decreased. At this 
stage, the entire pituitary adrenal axis is impaired; that is, there is 
not only decreased ACTH responsiveness to stress but also 
decreased adrenal responsiveness to acute stimulation with exoge-
nous ACTH. 
 The manifestations of glucocorticoid deficiency are similar to 
those described for primary adrenocortical insufficiency. However, 
because aldosterone secretion by the zona glomerulosa is usually 
preserved, the manifestations of mineralocorticoid deficiency are 
absent. 
 Clinical Features 
 A. Symptoms and signs 
 Secondary adrenal insufficiency is 
usually chronic, and the manifestations may be nonspecific. 
However, acute crisis can occur in undiagnosed patients or in 
corticosteroid-treated patients who do not receive increased ste-
roid dosage during periods of stress. 
 The clinical features of secondary adrenal insufficiency differ 
from those of primary adrenocortical insufficiency in that pitu-
itary secretion of ACTH is deficient and hyperpigmentation is, 
therefore, not present. In addition, mineralocorticoid secretion is 
usually normal. Thus, the clinical features of ACTH and gluco-
corticoid deficiency are nonspecific. 
 Volume depletion, dehydration, and hyperkalemia are usually 
absent. Hypotension is usually not present except in acute presen-
tations. Hyponatremia may occur, as a result of water retention 
and inability to excrete a water load, but is not accompanied by 
hyperkalemia. Prominent features are weakness, lethargy, easy 
fatigability, anorexia, nausea, and occasionally vomiting. Arthralgias 
and myalgias also occur. Hypoglycemia is occasionally the present-
ing feature. Acute decompensation with severe hypotension or 
shock unresponsive to vasopressors may occur. 
 B. Associated features 
 Patients with secondary adrenal 
insufficiency commonly have additional features that suggest the 
diagnosis. A history of glucocorticoid therapy, or if this is not 
available, the presence of cushingoid features suggests prior gluco-
corticoid use. Hypothalamic or pituitary tumors leading to 
ACTH deficiency usually cause loss of other pituitary hormones 
(hypogonadism and hypothyroidism). Hypersecretion of GH or 
prolactin (PRL) from a pituitary adenoma may be present. 
 C. Laboratory findings 
 Findings on routine laboratory 
examination consist of normochromic, normocytic anemia, neu-
tropenia, lymphocytosis, and eosinophilia. Hyponatremia is not 
uncommon and may be the presenting laboratory abnormality. 
Hyponatremia is due to the lack of glucocorticoid-negative feed-
back on AVP as well as the reduction in glomerular filtration 
associated with hypocortisolism. Serum potassium, creatinine, 
and bicarbonate and blood urea nitrogen are usually normal; 
plasma glucose may be low, although severe hypoglycemia is 
unusual. 
 DIAGNOSIS OF ADRENOCORTICAL 
INSUFFICIENCY 
 Although the diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency should be con-
firmed by assessment of the pituitary adrenal axis, therapy should 
not be delayed, and the patient should not be subjected to proce-
dures that may increase volume loss and dehydration and further 
contribute to hypotension. If the patient is acutely ill, therapy 
should be instituted and the diagnosis established when the 
patient is stable. 
 Diagnostic Tests 
 Because basal levels of adrenocortical steroids in either urine or 
plasma may be normal in partial adrenal insufficiency, tests of 
adrenocortical reserve are necessary to establish the diagnosis 
( Figure 9–10 ). These tests are described in the section on labora-
tory evaluation and in Chapter 4. 
 Rapid ACTH Stimulation Test 
 The rapid ACTH stimulation test assesses adrenal reserve and is 
the initial procedure in the assessment of possible adrenal insuffi-
ciency, either primary or secondary. As previously discussed, the 
low-dose ACTH (1-μg cosyntropin) stimulation test has been sug-
gested to represent a more physiologic stimulus to the adrenal 
cortex; however, many experienced clinicians continue to employ 
the standard 250-μg cosyntropin dose. 
 Subnormal responses to exogenous ACTH administration are 
an indication of decreased adrenal reserve and establish the diag-
nosis of adrenocortical insufficiency. Further diagnostic  procedures 
CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens     309
are not required, because subnormal responses to the rapid ACTH 
stimulation test indicate lack of responsiveness to metyrapone, 
insulin-induced hypoglycemia, or stress. However, this test does 
not permit differentiation of primary and secondary causes. This 
is best accomplished by measurement of basal plasma ACTH 
levels, as discussed later. 
 A normal response to the rapid ACTH stimulation test 
excludes primary adrenal failure, because a normal cortisol 
response indicates normal cortical function. However, normal 
responsiveness does not exclude partial secondary adrenocortical 
insufficiency in those few patients with decreased pituitary reserve 
and decreased stress responsiveness of the HPA axis who maintain 
sufficient basal ACTH secretion to prevent adrenocortical atro-
phy. If this situation is suspected clinically, pituitary ACTH 
responsiveness may be tested directly with metyrapone or insulin-
induced hypoglycemia (see section “Laboratory Evaluation” and 
below). 
 Plasma ACTH Levels 
 If adrenal insufficiency is present, plasma ACTH levels are used 
to differentiate primary and secondary forms. In patients with 
primary adrenal insufficiency, plasma ACTH levels exceed the 
upper limit of the normal range (>52 pg/mL [11 pmol/L]) and 
usually exceed 200 pg/mL (44 pmol/L). Plasma ACTH 
 concentrations are inappropriately normal or less than 10 pg/mL 
(2.2 pmol/L) in patients with secondary adrenal insufficiency 
( Figure 9–11 ). However, basal ACTH levels must always be 
interpreted in light of the clinical situation, especially because of 
the episodic nature of ACTH secretion and its short plasma half-
life. For example, ACTH levels frequently exceed the normal 
range during the recovery of the HPA axis from secondary adre-
nal insufficiency and may be confused with levels seen in pri-
mary adrenal insufficiency. Patients with primary adrenal 
insufficiency consistently have elevated ACTH levels. In fact, the 
ACTH concentration is elevated early in the course of adrenal 
insufficiency even before a significant reduction in the basal 
cortisol level or its response to exogenous ACTH occurs. 
Therefore, plasma ACTH measurements serve as a valuable 
screening study for primary adrenal insufficiency. 
 Partial ACTH Deficiency 
 When partial ACTH deficiency and decreased pituitary reserve 
are suspected despite normal responsiveness to the rapid ACTH 
stimulation test, the following procedures may be used for more 
direct assessment of hypothalamic-pituitary function. 
 A. Methods of testing 
 The overnight metyrapone test is used 
in patients with suspected hypothalamic or pituitary disorders when 
Adrenocortical
insufficiency
suspected
Adrenocortical
insufficiency
Rapid ACTH
stimulation test
Adrenal atrophy excluded,
decreased ACTH reserve
not excluded
Excludes primary
adrenocortical
insufficiency
Abnormal
Normal
Plasma
ACTH
Metyrapone or
insulin hypoglycemia
testing
Elevated
Normal
or low
Primary
adrenocortical
insufficiency
Secondary
adrenocortical
insufficiency
Excludes secondary
adrenocortical
insufficiency
Abnormal
Normal
 FIGURE 9–10  Evaluation of suspected primary or secondary adrenocortical insufficiency. Boxes enclose clinical decisions, and circles 
enclose diagnostic tests.  (Redrawn and reproduced, with permission, from Miller WL, Tyrrell JB. The adrenal cortex. In: Felig P, et al, eds. 
 Endocrinology and Metabolism . McGraw-Hill; 1995.) 
310    CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens
hypoglycemia is contraindicated and in those with prior glucocorti-
coid therapy. Insulin-induced hypoglycemia is used in patients with 
suspected hypothalamic or pituitary tumors, because both ACTH 
and GH responsiveness can be assessed (see Chapter 4). 
 B. Interpretation 
 A normal response to either metyrapone or 
hypoglycemia excludes secondary adrenocortical insufficiency (see 
section “Laboratory Evaluation”). Subnormal responses, even in 
the presence of a normal response to ACTH administration, 
establish the diagnosis of secondary adrenal insufficiency. 
 TREATMENT OF ADRENOCORTICAL 
INSUFFICIENCY 
 The aim of treatment of adrenocortical insufficiency is to produce 
levels of glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids equivalent to 
those achieved in an individual with normal HPA function under 
similar circumstances. 
 Acute Addisonian Crisis ( Table 9–7 ) 
 Treatment for acute Addisonian crisis should be instituted as soon 
as the diagnosis is suspected. Therapy includes administration of 
glucocorticoids; correction of dehydration, hypovolemia, and 
3600
3000
2500
2400
2200
2000
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
40
30
20
10
0
20
15
10
5
0
−15 0 15 30
60
90
120 150 180
Time (min)
1
2
3
4 (on
prednisone)
Primary adrenal insufficiency
120
130
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
20
15
10
5
0
−15 0 15 30
60
90
120 150 180
Time (min)
Secondary adrenal insufficiency
Plasma cortisol (mg/dL)
Plasma IR-ACTH (pg/mL)
5
6
7
8
9
10
Pituitary lesions
Hypothalamic lesions
 FIGURE 9–11  Plasma ACTH (top) and cortisol (bottom) responses to CRH in subjects with primary adrenal insufficiency (left) or secondary 
adrenal insufficiency (right). Patients with hypothalamic lesions had clearly distinct ACTH responses to CRH, different from those in three 
patients with pituitary adrenal insufficiency.  Shaded area: Absolute range from 15 normal subjects. (IR-ACTH, ACTH by IRMA.)  (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Schulte HM, et al. The corticotropin-releasing hormone stimulation test: a possible aid in the evaluation of patients with 
adrenal insufficiency.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 1984;58:1064.) 
TABLE 9–7 Treatment of acute adrenal crisis.
Glucocorticoid replacement
(1) Administer hydrocortisone sodium phosphate or sodium 
 
 succinate, 100 mg intravenously every 6 h for 24 h
(2) When the patient is stable, reduce the dosage to 50 mg every 6 h
(3) Taper to maintenance therapy by day 4 or 5 and add 
 
 mineralocorticoid therapy as required
(4) Maintain or increase the dose to 200-400 mg/d if complications 
 
 persist or occur
General and supportive measures
(1) Correct volume depletion, dehydration, and hypoglycemia with 
 
 intravenous saline and glucose
(2) Evaluate and correct infection and other precipitating factors
CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens     311
electrolyte abnormalities; general supportive measures; and treat-
ment of coexisting or precipitating disorders. 
 A. Cortisol (Hydrocortisone) 
 Parenteral cortisol in soluble 
form (hydrocortisone hemisuccinate or phosphate) is the gluco-
corticoid preparation most commonly used. When adminis-
tered in supraphysiologic doses, hydrocortisone has sufficient 
sodium-retaining potency so that additional mineralocorticoid 
therapy is not required in patients with primary adrenocortical 
insufficiency. 
 Cortisol in intravenous doses of 100 mg is given every 6 hours 
for the first 24 hours. The response to therapy is usually rapid, 
with improvement occurring within 12 hours or less. If improve-
ment occurs and the patient is stable, 50 mg every 6 hours is given 
on the second day, and in most patients the dosage may then be 
gradually reduced to approximately 10 mg two to three times daily 
by the fourth or fifth day (see section “Maintenance Therapy,” 
later). 
 1. In severely ill patients, especially in those with additional major 
complications (eg, sepsis), higher cortisol doses (100 mg intra-
venously every 6-8 hours) are maintained until the patient is 
stable. 
 2. In primary Addison disease, mineralocorticoid replacement, in 
the form of fludrocortisone (see later), is usually added when 
hydrocortisone replacement is reduced to near physiological 
levels. 
 3. In secondary adrenocortical insufficiency with acute crisis, the 
primary requirement is glucocorticoid replacement and is sat-
isfactorily supplied by the administration of cortisol, as out-
lined above. If the possibility of excessive fluid and sodium 
retention in such patients is of concern, equivalent parenteral 
doses of synthetic steroids such as prednisolone or dexametha-
sone may be substituted. 
 B. Intravenous fluids 
 Intravenous glucose and saline are 
administered to correct volume depletion, hypotension, and 
hypoglycemia. Volume deficits may be severe in Addison disease, 
and hypotension and shock may not respond to vasopressors 
unless glucocorticoids are administered. Hyperkalemia and acido-
sis are usually corrected with cortisol and volume replacement; 
however, an occasional patient may require specific therapy for 
these abnormalities (see also Chapter 24). 
 Maintenance Therapy ( Table 9–8 ) 
 Patients with Addison disease require life-long glucocorticoid and 
mineralocorticoid therapy. Cortisol (hydrocortisone) is the gluco-
corticoid preparation of choice. The basal production rate of 
cortisol is approximately 8 to 12 mg/m 2 /d. The maintenance dose 
of hydrocortisone is usually 15 to 25 mg daily in adults. The oral 
dose is usually divided into 10 to 15 mg in the morning on aris-
ing and 5 to 10 mg later in the day. Cortisol in twice-daily doses 
gives satisfactory responses in most patients; however, some 
patients may require only a single morning dose, and others may 
require three doses daily (eg, 10-5-5) to maintain well-being and 
normal energy levels. Insomnia is a side-effect of glucocorticoid 
administration and can usually be prevented by administering the 
last dose in the early afternoon. 
 Fludrocortisone (9α-fluorocortisol) is used for mineralocorti-
coid therapy; the usual doses are 0.05 to 0.2 mg/d orally in the 
morning. Because of the long half-life of this agent, divided doses 
are not required. About 10% of addisonian patients can be man-
aged with cortisol and adequate dietary sodium intake alone and 
do not require fludrocortisone. 
 Secondary adrenocortical insufficiency is treated with the cor-
tisol dosages described above for the primary form. Fludrocortisone 
is rarely required. The recovery of normal function of the HPA 
axis following suppression by exogenous glucocorticoids may take 
weeks to years, and its duration is not readily predictable. 
Consequently, prolonged replacement therapy may be required. 
Recent studies in women have pointed to the potential benefits of 
DHEA in doses of 50 mg/d in terms of improvement in well- 
being, although this remains controversial. 
 Response to Therapy 
 General clinical signs, such as good appetite and sense of well-
being, are the guides to the adequacy of replacement. Obviously, 
signs of Cushing syndrome indicate overtreatment. It is generally 
expected that the daily dose of hydrocortisone should be doubled 
during periods of minor stress, and the dose needs to be increased 
to as much as 200 to 300 mg/d during periods of major stress, 
such as a surgical procedure. Patients receiving excessive doses of 
glucocorticoids are also at risk for increased bone loss and clini-
cally significant osteoporosis. Therefore, the replacement dose of 
glucocorticoid should be maintained at the lowest amount needed 
to provide the patient with a proper sense of well-being. Two 
major factors have prompted a reassessment of the issue of appro-
priateness and possible excess glucocorticoid replacement for 
patients with adrenal insufficiency. First, there is a greater appre-
ciation of the potential risks of overtreatment or undertreatment. 
Recent evidence suggests that subclinical Cushing syndrome asso-
ciated with adrenal incidentalomas contributes to poor control of 
blood sugar and blood pressure in diabetic patients, decreased 
bone density, and increased serum lipid levels. The levels of corti-
sol secretion by many incidentalomas are similar to those observed 
in patients with adrenal insufficiency receiving mild cortisol 
 overreplacement. In addition, studies in patients receiving 
TABLE 9– 8  Regimen for maintenance therapy of 
primary adrenocortical insufficiency.
(1) Hydrocortisone, 10-15 mg in AM, 5-10 mg in the afternoon (4-5 PM)
(2) Fludrocortisone, 0.05-0.1 mg orally in AM
(3) Clinical follow-up: maintenance of normal weight, blood pressure, 
 
 and electrolytes with regression of clinical features
(4) Patient education plus identification card, medical alert bracelet or 
 
 necklace (dog tag). Useful patient education materials are available 
 
 from the National Institutes of Health. 
 
 http://www.cc.nih.gov/ccc/patient_education/pepubs/mngadrins.pdf
(5) Increase hydrocortisone dosage during stress. Double the oral 
 
 dose for mild illness. Provide patient with injectable form of 
 
 glucocorticoid for emergency use
312    CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens
 glucocorticoid replacement therapy demonstrate an inverse rela-
tionship between dose and bone mineral density and a positive 
correlation between dose and markers of bone resorption. Second, 
there is recognition that there is considerable variation among 
individuals in terms of the plasma levels of cortisol achieved with 
orally administered hydrocortisone or cortisol. 
 The measurement of urine free cortisol does not provide a reli-
able index for appropriate glucocorticoid replacement. Similarly, 
ACTH measurements are not a good indication of the adequacy 
of glucocorticoid replacement; marked elevations of plasma 
ACTH in patients with chronic adrenal insufficiency are often not 
suppressed into the normal range despite adequate hydrocortisone 
replacement. In fact, plasma ACTH values that fall to low normal 
or low levels suggest overreplacement with glucocorticoids. Plasma 
cortisol day curves—multiple samples for plasma cortisol concen-
tration—have been proposed but not yet widely adopted. 
Therefore, it is prudent to use clinical assessment of the patient’s 
response to therapy, rather than biochemical criteria, to gauge the 
adequacy of steroid replacement. 
 Adequate treatment results in the disappearance of weakness, 
malaise, and fatigue. Anorexia and other gastrointestinal symp-
toms resolve, and weight returns to normal. The hyperpigmenta-
tion invariably improves but may not entirely disappear. 
Inadequate cortisol administration leads to persistence of these 
symptoms of adrenal insufficiency, and excessive pigmentation 
remains. 
 Adequate mineralocorticoid replacement may be determined 
by assessment of blood pressure and electrolyte composition. With 
adequate treatment, the blood pressure is normal without orthos-
tatic change, and serum sodium and potassium remain within the 
normal range. Some endocrinologists monitor plasma renin activ-
ity (PRA) as an objective measure of fludrocortisone replacement. 
Upright PRA levels are usually less than 5 ng/mL/h in adequately 
replaced patients. Hypertension and hypokalemia result if 
the fludrocortisone dose is excessive. Conversely, undertreatment 
may lead to fatigue and malaise, orthostatic symptoms, and sub-
normal supine or upright blood pressure, with hyperkalemia and 
hyponatremia. 
 Prevention of Adrenal Crisis 
 The development of acute adrenal insufficiency in previously 
diagnosed and treated patients is almost entirely preventable in 
compliant individuals. The essential elements are patient educa-
tion and increased glucocorticoid dosages during illness. 
 The patient should be informed about the necessity for lifelong 
therapy, the possible consequences of acute illness, and the neces-
sity for increased therapy and medical assistance during acute 
illness. An identification card or bracelet should be carried or 
worn at all times. 
 The cortisol dose should be increased by the patient to 60 to 
80 mg/d with the development of minor illnesses; the usual main-
tenance dosage may be resumed in 24 to 48 hours if improvement 
occurs. Increased mineralocorticoid therapy is not required. 
 If symptoms persist or become worse, the patient should con-
tinue increased cortisol doses and call the physician. 
 Vomiting may result in inability to ingest or absorb oral cortisol, 
and diarrhea in addisonian patients may precipitate a crisis because 
of rapid fluid and electrolyte losses. Patients must understand that 
if these symptoms occur, they should seek immediate medical assis-
tance so that parenteral glucocorticoid therapy can be given. 
 Steroid Coverage for Surgery ( Table 9–9 ) 
 The normal physiologic response to surgical stress involves an 
increase in cortisol secretion. The increased glucocorticoid activity 
may serve primarily to modulate the immunologic response to 
stress. Thus, patients with primary or secondary adrenocortical 
insufficiency scheduled for elective surgery require increased glu-
cocorticoid coverage. This problem is most frequently encoun-
tered in patients with pituitary-adrenal suppression due to 
exogenous glucocorticoid therapy. The principles of management 
are outlined in  Table 9–9 . 
 PROGNOSIS OF ADRENOCORTICAL 
INSUFFICIENCY 
 Before glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid therapy became 
available, primary adrenocortical insufficiency was invariably fatal, 
with death usually occurring within 2 years after onset. Survival 
now depends on the underlying cause of the adrenal insufficiency. 
In patients with autoimmune Addison disease, survival approaches 
that of the normal population, and most patients lead normal 
lives. In general, death from adrenal insufficiency now occurs only 
in patients with rapid onset of disease who may die before the 
diagnosis is established and appropriate therapy started. 
 Secondary adrenal insufficiency has an excellent prognosis with 
glucocorticoid therapy. Adrenal insufficiency due to bilateral adre-
nal hemorrhage may be fatal, with some cases being recognized 
only at autopsy. 
 CUSHING SYNDROME 
 Chronic glucocorticoid excess, whatever its cause, leads to the 
constellation of symptoms and physical features known as 
 Cushing syndrome . It is most commonly iatrogenic, resulting 
TABLE 9–9 Steroid coverage for surgery.
(1) Correct electrolytes, blood pressure, and hydration if necessary
(2) Give hydrocortisone sodium phosphate or sodium succinate, 
 
 100 mg intramuscularly, on call to operating room
(3) Give 50 mg intramuscularly or intravenously in the recovery room 
 
 and then every 6 h for the first 24 h
(4) If progress is satisfactory, reduce dosage to 25 mg every 6 h for 
 
 24 h and then taper to maintenance dosage over 3-5 d. Resume 
 
 previous fludrocortisone dose when the patient is taking oral 
 
 medications
(5) Maintain or increase hydrocortisone dosage to 200-400 mg/d if 
 
 fever, hypotension, or other complications occur
Reproduced, with permission, from Miller WL, Tyrrell JB. In: Felig P, Baxter JD, Frohman 
LA, eds. Endocrinology and Metabolism. 3rd ed. McGraw-Hill; 1995.
CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens     313
from chronic glucocorticoid therapy. Spontaneous Cushing syn-
drome is caused by abnormalities of the pituitary or adrenal gland 
or may occur as a consequence of ACTH or CRH secretion by 
nonpituitary tumors  (ectopic ACTH syndrome; ectopic CRH 
syndrome ) ( Figure 9–12 ).  Cushing disease is defined as the spe-
cific type of Cushing syndrome due to excessive pituitary ACTH 
secretion from a pituitary tumor. This section will review the 
various types of spontaneous Cushing syndrome and discuss their 
diagnosis and therapy (see also Chapter 4). 
 Classification and Incidence 
 Cushing syndrome is conveniently classified as either ACTH 
dependent or ACTH independent ( Table 9–10 ). The ACTH-
dependent types of Cushing syndrome—ectopic ACTH syn-
drome and Cushing disease—are characterized by chronic ACTH 
hypersecretion, which results in hyperplasia of the adrenal zonae 
fasciculata and reticularis and, therefore, increased secretion of 
cortisol, androgens, and DOC. 
Cortisol
ACTH
CRH
Hypothalamus
Pituitary
Adrenal cortex
Normal state
–
–
Cortisol
ACTH
CRH
Pituitary ACTH-dependent
Cushing syndrome
–
–
Cortisol
ACTH
CRH
Ectopic ACTH
 syndrome
–
–
Cortisol
ACTH
CRH
Adrenal adenoma with
ACTH-independent
Cushing syndrome
–
–
Cortisol
ACTH
CRH
Ectopic CRH
 syndrome
–
–
 FIGURE 9–12  Hypothalamic-pituitary axis in Cushing syndrome of different causes. These panels illustrate hormone secretion in the nor-
mal state (upper left), and four types of cortisol excess: Pituitary ACTH-dependent (with an ACTH-secreting pituitary tumor) (upper right), adre-
nal tumor (lower left), ectopic ACTH syndrome due to an ACTH-secreting lung cancer (lower middle), and ectopic CRH syndrome due to a 
CRH-secreting lung tumor. In contrast to normal secretion and hormone levels, decreased hormonal secretion is indicated by a dotted line and 
increased secretion by a dark solid line. 
314    CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens
 ACTH-independent Cushing syndrome may be caused by a 
primary adrenal neoplasm (adenoma or carcinoma) or nodular 
adrenal hyperplasia. In these cases, the cortisol excess suppresses 
pituitary ACTH secretion. 
 A. Cushing disease 
 This is the most frequent type of Cushing 
syndrome and is responsible for about 80% of reported cases. 
Cushing disease is much more common in women than in men 
(female-male ratio of about 5:1) and the age at diagnosis is usually 
20 to 40 years but may range from childhood to 70 years. 
 B. Ectopic ACTH hypersecretion 
 This disorder accounts 
for approximately 10% of patients with ACTH-dependent 
Cushing syndrome. The production of ACTH from a tumor of 
nonpituitary origin may result in severe hypercortisolism, but 
many of these patients lack the classic features of glucocorticoid 
excess. This presumably reflects the acuteness of the clinical course 
in the ectopic ACTH syndrome. The clinical presentation of ecto-
pic ACTH secretion is most frequently seen in patients with 
tumors of a thoracic origin. Bronchial carcinoid and small cell 
lung carcinoma are responsible for about 50% of cases of this 
syndrome. The prognosis in patients with the ectopic ACTH 
syndrome is generally poor and largely a function of the primary 
tumor. Individuals with ectopic ACTH syndrome from small cell 
lung carcinoma have a mean survival of less than 12 months. The 
ectopic ACTH syndrome may also present in a fashion identical 
to classic Cushing disease and pose a challenging diagnostic 
dilemma. A wide variety of tumors has been reported to produce 
ectopic ACTH and may be radiologically inapparent at the time 
of the presentation. The ectopic ACTH syndrome is more com-
mon in men, and the peak age incidence is 40 to 60 years. 
 C. Primary adrenal tumors 
 Primary adrenal tumors cause 
approximately 10% of cases of Cushing syndrome. Most of these 
patients have benign adrenocortical adenomas. Adrenocortical 
carcinomas are uncommon, with an incidence of approxi-
mately 2 per million per year. Both adrenocortical adenomas and 
carcinomas are more common in women. Autonomous cortisol 
secretion without the classic features of Cushing syndrome occurs 
in about 5% of patients with adrenal incidentalomas (see later). 
 D. Childhood cushing syndrome 
 Cushing disease is more 
common in the adolescent population than in younger children. 
Most pediatric cases occur in patients over 10 years of age with an 
equal distribution between the sexes. Cushing disease remains the 
most common cause accounting for more than 80% of cases. 
Primary adrenal disease accounts for an additional 10% to 15% of 
all pediatric cases. 
 Pathology 
 A. Anterior pituitary gland 
 1. Pituitary adenomas— Pituitary adenomas are present in over 
90% of patients with Cushing disease. These tumors are typi-
cally smaller than those secreting GH or PRL; 80% to 90% are 
less than 10 mm in diameter. A small group of patients have 
larger tumors (>10 mm); these macroadenomas are frequently 
invasive, leading to extension outside the sella turcica. 
Malignant pituitary tumors occur rarely. 
 Microadenomas are located within the anterior pituitary; 
they are not encapsulated but surrounded by a rim of com-
pressed normal anterior pituitary cells. With routine histologic 
stains, these tumors are composed of compact sheets of well-
granulated basophilic cells in a sinusoidal arrangement. ACTH, 
β-lipotropin (LPH), and β-endorphin have been demonstrated 
in these tumor cells by immunocytochemical methods. Larger 
tumors may appear chromophobic on routine histologic study; 
however, they also contain ACTH and its related peptides. 
These ACTH-secreting adenomas typically show Crooke 
changes (a zone of perinuclear hyalinization that is the result of 
chronic exposure of corticotroph cells to hypercortisolism). 
Electron microscopy demonstrates secretory granules that vary 
in size from 200 to 700 nm. The number of granules varies in 
individual cells; they may be dispersed throughout the cyto-
plasm or concentrated along the cell membrane. A typical 
feature of these adenomas is the presence of bundles of peri-
nuclear microfilaments (average 7 nm in diameter) surround-
ing the nucleus; these are responsible for Crooke hyaline 
changes visible on light microscopy. 
 2. Hyperplasia— Diffuse hyperplasia of corticotroph cells has 
been reported rarely in patients with Cushing disease. 
 3. Other conditions— In patients with adrenal tumors or ectopic 
ACTH syndrome, the pituitary corticotrophs show prominent 
Crooke hyaline changes and perinuclear microfilaments. The 
ACTH content of corticotroph cells is reduced consistent with 
their suppression by excessive cortisol secretion present in these 
conditions. 
 B. Adrenocortical hyperplasia 
 Bilateral hyperplasia of the 
adrenal cortex occurs with chronic ACTH hypersecretion. Two types 
have been described: simple and bilateral nodular hyperplasia. 
 1. Simple adrenocortical hyperplasia— This condition is usu-
ally due to Cushing disease. Combined adrenal weight (nor-
mal, 8-10 g) is modestly increased, ranging from 12 to 24 g. 
On histologic study, there is equal hyperplasia of the compact 
cells of the zona reticularis and the clear cells of the zona fas-
ciculata; consequently, the width of the cortex is increased. 
Electron microscopy reveals normal ultrastructural features. 
When ACTH levels are very high as in the ectopic ACTH 
syndrome, the adrenals are frequently larger, with combined 
weights up to or more than 50 g. The characteristic  microscopic 
TABLE 9–10  Cushing syndrome: differential 
diagnosis.
ACTH-dependent
Pituitary adenoma (Cushing disease)
Nonpituitary neoplasm (ectopic ACTH)
ACTH-independent
Iatrogenic (glucocorticoid, megestrol acetate)
Adrenal neoplasm (adenoma, carcinoma)
Nodular adrenal hyperplasia
 Primary pigmented nodular adrenal disease (PPNAD)
 Massive macronodular adrenonodular hyperplasia
 Food dependent (GIP mediated)
 Factitious
CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens     315
feature is marked hyperplasia of the zona reticularis; columns 
of compact reticularis cells expand throughout the zona fas-
ciculata and into the zona glomerulosa. The zona fasciculata 
clear cells are markedly reduced. 
 2. Bilateral nodular hyperplasia— Bilateral nodular hyperplasia 
with Cushing syndrome has been identified as a morphologic 
consequence of several unique pathophysiologic disorders. 
Longstanding ACTH hypersecretion—either pituitary or non-
pituitary—may result in nodular enlargement of the adrenal 
gland. These focal nodules are often mistaken for adrenal neo-
plasms and have led to unnecessary as well as unsuccessful 
unilateral adrenal surgery. In occasional cases these nodules 
may, over a period of time, even become autonomous or semi-
autonomous. Removal of the ACTH-secreting neoplasm 
results in regression of the adrenal nodules as well as resolution 
of hypercortisolism unless the nodules have already developed 
significant autonomy. 
 Several types of ACTH-independent nodular adrenal hyper-
plasia have been described. ACTH-independent macronodular 
adrenal hyperplasia (and occasionally a unilateral adrenocortical 
tumor) may be under the control of abnormal or ectopic hormone 
receptors. Aberrant regulation of cortisol production and adrenal 
growth has been shown in some of these patients to be mediated 
by the abnormal adrenal expression of receptors for a variety of 
hormones. The best characterized appears to be the expression of 
glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP), whose adre-
nal expression has resulted in the modulation of cortisol produc-
tion after physiologic postprandial fluctuation of endogenous 
levels of GIP, causing a state of  food-dependent Cushing syndrome . 
Other abnormal hormone receptors that have been described in 
association with endogenous hypercortisolism with this phenom-
enon include vasopressin, beta-adrenergic agonists, human chori-
onic gonadotropin-LH, serotonin, angiotensin II, and leptin (see 
also Chapter 21). The identification of an abnormal adrenal recep-
tor raises the possibility of new pharmacologic approaches to 
control of hypercortisolism by suppressing the endogenous ligands 
or by blocking the abnormal receptor with specific antagonists. 
 Another unusual adrenal-dependent cause of Cushing syn-
drome associated with bilateral adrenal nodular hyperplasia has 
been referred to as primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical 
disease. This is a familial disorder with an autosomal dominant 
inheritance pattern usually presenting in adolescence or young 
adulthood. The disorder is associated with unusual conditions 
such as myxomas (cardiac, cutaneous, and mammary), spotty skin 
pigmentation, endocrine overactivity, sexual precocity, acromegaly, 
and schwannomas—the Carney complex. Activating mutations in 
protein kinase A have recently been shown to be present in many 
of these patients. Interestingly, the adrenal glands in this syndrome 
are often small or normal in size and have multiple black and 
brown nodules with intranodular cortical atrophy. 
 Finally, in McCune-Albright syndrome, activating mutations 
of G s α leads to constitutive steroidogenesis in adrenal nodules 
carrying the mutation. 
 C. Adrenal tumors 
 Adrenal tumors causing Cushing 
 syndrome are independent of ACTH secretion and are either 
adenomas or carcinomas. 
 1. Glucocorticoid-secreting adrenal adenomas— These ade-
nomas are encapsulated, weigh 10 to 70 g, and range in size 
from 1 to 6 cm. Microscopically, clear cells of the zona fascicu-
lata type predominate, although cells typical of the zona reticu-
laris are also seen. 
 2. Adrenal carcinomas— Adrenal carcinomas are usually greater 
than 4 cm when diagnosed and often weigh more than 100 g, 
occasionally exceeding 1 kg. They may be palpable as abdomi-
nal masses. Grossly, they are encapsulated and highly vascular; 
necrosis, hemorrhage, and cystic degeneration are common, 
and areas of calcification may be present. The histologic 
appearance of these carcinomas varies considerably; they may 
appear to be benign or may exhibit considerable pleomor-
phism. Vascular or capsular invasion is predictive of malignant 
behavior, as is local extension. These carcinomas invade local 
structures (kidney, liver, and retroperitoneum) and metastasize 
hematogenously to liver and lung. 
 3. Uninvolved adrenal cortex— The cortex contiguous to the 
tumor and that of the contralateral gland are atrophic in the 
presence of functioning adrenal adenomas and carcinomas. 
The cortex is markedly thinned, whereas the capsule is thick-
ened. Histologically, the zona reticularis is virtually absent; the 
remaining cortex is composed of clear fasciculata cells. The 
architecture of the zona glomerulosa is normal. 
 Etiology and Pathogenesis 
 A. Cushing disease 
 The causes and natural history of 
Cushing disease are reviewed in Chapter 4. Current evidence is 
consistent with the view that spontaneously arising corticotroph-
cell pituitary adenomas are the primary cause and that the conse-
quent ACTH hypersecretion and hypercortisolism lead to the 
characteristic endocrine abnormalities and hypothalamic dysfunc-
tion. This is supported by evidence showing that selective removal 
of these adenomas by pituitary microsurgery reverses the abnor-
malities and is followed by return of the HPA axis to normal. In 
addition, molecular studies have shown that nearly all corti-
cotroph adenomas are monoclonal. 
 Although these primary pituitary adenomas are responsible for 
the great majority of cases, a few patients have been described in 
whom pituitary disease has been limited to corticotroph-cell 
hyperplasia; these may be secondary to excessive CRH secretion 
by rare, benign hypothalamic gangliocytoma. 
 B. Ectopic ACTH syndrome and ectopic CRH syndrome 
 Ectopic ACTH syndrome arises when nonpituitary tumors syn-
thesize and hypersecrete biologically active ACTH. The related 
peptides β-LPH and β-endorphin are also synthesized and 
secreted, as are inactive ACTH fragments. Production of CRH has 
also been demonstrated in ectopic tumors secreting ACTH, but 
whether CRH plays a role in pathogenesis is unclear. A few cases 
in which nonpituitary tumors produced only CRH have been 
reported. 
 Ectopic ACTH syndrome occurs predominantly in only a few 
tumor types ( Figure 9–13 ); carcinoid tumors of lung and small 
cell carcinoma of the lung cause half of cases. Other tumors caus-
ing the syndrome originate from neuroendocrine tumors, thymus, 
gut, ovary, pancreatic islet cell tumors, or medullary thyroid 
316    CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens
 carcinoma. Multiple other tumor types have also been reported 
to cause the ectopic ACTH syndrome, but are very rare (see 
Chapter 21). 
 C. Adrenal tumors 
 Glucocorticoid-producing adrenal ade-
nomas and carcinomas arise spontaneously. They are not under 
hypothalamic-pituitary control and autonomously secrete adreno-
cortical steroids. Rarely, adrenal carcinomas develop in the setting 
of chronic ACTH hypersecretion in patients with either Cushing 
disease and nodular adrenal hyperplasia or congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia. 
 Pathophysiology ( Figures 9–12 , 9–13) 
 A. Cushing disease 
 In Cushing disease, ACTH hypersecre-
tion is random and episodic and causes cortisol hypersecretion in 
the absence of the normal circadian rhythm. Feedback inhibition 
of ACTH (secreted from the pituitary adenoma) by physiologic 
levels of glucocorticoids is suppressed; thus, ACTH hypersecre-
tion persists despite elevated cortisol secretion and results in 
chronic glucocorticoid excess. The episodic secretion of ACTH 
and cortisol results in variable plasma levels that may at times be 
within the normal range. However, elevation of urine free cortisol 
or demonstration of elevated late-night serum or salivary cortisol 
levels because of the absence of diurnal variability confirms corti-
sol hypersecretion (see sections on laboratory evaluation and 
diagnosis of Cushing syndrome). The overall increase in glucocor-
ticoid secretion causes the clinical manifestations of Cushing 
syndrome. ACTH and β-LPH secretion are not usually elevated 
sufficiently to cause hyperpigmentation. 
 1. Abnormalities of ACTH secretion— Despite ACTH hyper-
secretion, stress responsiveness is absent; stimuli such as 
hypoglycemia or surgery fail to further elevate ACTH and 
cortisol secretion. This is probably due to suppression of 
hypothalamic function and CRH secretion by hypercorti-
solism, resulting in loss of hypothalamic control of ACTH 
secretion (see Chapter 4). 
 2. Effect of cortisol excess— Cortisol excess not only inhibits 
normal pituitary and hypothalamic function, affecting ACTH, 
TSH, GH, and gonadotropin release, but also results in all the 
systemic effects of glucocorticoid excess described in previous 
sections and in the section on clinical features later. 
 3. Androgen excess— Secretion of adrenal androgens is also 
increased in Cushing disease, and the degree of androgen excess 
parallels that of ACTH and cortisol. Thus, plasma levels of 
DHEA, DHEA sulfate, and androstenedione may be moder-
ately elevated in Cushing disease; the peripheral conversion of 
these hormones to testosterone and dihydrotestosterone leads 
to androgen excess. In women, this causes hirsutism, acne, and 
amenorrhea. In men with Cushing disease, cortisol suppression 
of LH secretion decreases testosterone secretion by the testis, 
resulting in decreased libido and impotence. The increased 
adrenal androgen secretion is insufficient to compensate for the 
decreased gonadal testosterone production. 
 B. Ectopic ACTH syndrome 
 Hypersecretion of ACTH and 
cortisol is usually greater in patients with ectopic ACTH syn-
drome than in those with Cushing disease. ACTH and cortisol 
hypersecretion is randomly episodic, and the levels are often 
greatly elevated. Usually, ACTH secretion by ectopic tumors is 
not subject to negative feedback control; that is, secretion of 
ACTH and cortisol is nonsuppressible with pharmacologic doses 
of glucocorticoids (see section on diagnosis later). 
0
10
20
30
40
Thoracic tumors
50
60
Lung/mediast. carcinoids
Lung SCLC/adenok
Thymic tumors
Medullary thyroid K
Islet cell tumors
Pheochromocytomas
Gl carcinoids
Gl adenocarcinomas
Disseminated NET
Localized NET
Miscellaneous tumors
Never-found
Percentage (%)
Abdominal tumors
Total n = 383
 FIGURE 9-13  Prevalence of the most common tumors causing ectopic ACTH secretion. (K, carcinoma; NET, neuroendocrine tumor; SCLC, 
small cell lung carcinoma).  (From: Isidori AM, Lenzi A. Ectopic ACTH syndrome.  Arq Bras Endocrinol Metab . 2007;51:1217.) 
CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens     317
 Plasma levels, secretion rates, and urinary excretion of cortisol, 
the adrenal androgens, and DOC are often markedly elevated; 
despite this, the typical features of Cushing syndrome maybe 
absent, presumably because of rapid onset of hypercortisolism, 
anorexia, and other manifestations of the associated malignant 
disease. Features of mineralocorticoid excess (hypertension and 
hypokalemia) are frequently present and have been attributed to 
increased secretion of DOC and the mineralocorticoid effects of 
cortisol. With ectopic CRH secretion, pituitary corticotroph 
hyperplasia and ACTH hypersecretion are observed along with 
resistance to negative feedback by cortisol. 
 C. Adrenal tumors 
 1. Autonomous secretion— Primary adrenal tumors, both ade-
nomas and carcinomas, autonomously hypersecrete cortisol. 
Circulating plasma ACTH levels are suppressed, resulting in 
cortical atrophy of the uninvolved adrenal. Secretion is ran-
domly episodic, and these tumors are typically unresponsive to 
manipulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis with pharma-
cologic agents such as dexamethasone and metyrapone. 
 2. Adrenal adenomas— Adrenal adenomas causing Cushing syn-
drome typically present solely with clinical manifestations of 
glucocorticoid excess, because they usually secrete only corti-
sol. Thus, the presence of androgen or mineralocorticoid excess 
should suggest that the tumor is an adrenocortical carcinoma. 
 3. Adrenal carcinomas— Adrenal carcinomas frequently hyper-
secrete multiple adrenocortical steroids and their precursors. 
Cortisol and androgens are the steroids most frequently 
secreted in excess; 11-deoxycortisol is often elevated, and there 
may be increased secretion of DOC, aldosterone, or estrogens. 
Plasma cortisol and urine free cortisol are often markedly 
increased; androgen excess is usually even greater than that of 
cortisol. Thus, high levels of plasma DHEA, DHEA sulfate, 
and of testosterone typically accompany the cortisol excess. 
Clinical manifestations of hypercortisolism are usually severe 
and rapidly progressive in these patients. In women, features of 
androgen excess are prominent; virilism may occasionally 
occur. Hypertension and hypokalemia are frequent and most 
commonly result from the mineralocorticoid effects of cortisol; 
less frequently, DOC and aldosterone hypersecretion also con-
tribute. 
 Clinical Features ( Table 9–11 ) 
 A. Symptoms and signs 
 1.  Obesity— Obesity is the most common manifestation, and 
weight gain is usually the initial symptom. It is classically central, 
affecting mainly the face, neck, trunk, and abdomen, with rela-
tive sparing of the extremities. Generalized obesity with central 
accentuation is equally common, particularly in children. 
 Accumulation of fat in the face leads to the typical  moon 
facies , which is present in 75% of cases and is accompanied by 
facial plethora in most patients. Fat accumulation around the 
neck is prominent in the supraclavicular and dorsocervical fat 
pads; the latter is responsible for the  buffalo hump . 
 Obesity is absent in a handful of patients who do not gain 
weight; however, they usually have central redistribution of fat 
and a typical facial appearance. 
 2.  Skin changes— Skin changes are frequent, and their presence 
should arouse a suspicion of cortisol excess. Atrophy of the 
epidermis and its underlying connective tissue leads to 
 thinning (a transparent appearance of the skin) and facial 
plethora. Easy bruisability following minimal trauma is pres-
ent in about 40%. Striae occur in 50% but are very unusual 
in patients over 40 years of age. These are typically red to 
purple, depressed below the skin surface secondary to loss of 
underlying connective tissue, and wider (not infrequently 
0.5-2 cm) than the pinkish-white striae that may occur with 
pregnancy or rapid weight gain. These striae are most com-
monly abdominal but may also occur over the breasts, hips, 
buttocks, thighs, and axillae. 
 Acne presenting as pustular or papular lesions may result 
from glucocorticoid excess or hyperandrogenism. 
 Minor wounds and abrasions may heal slowly, and surgical 
incisions sometimes undergo dehiscence. 
 Mucocutaneous fungal infections are frequent, including 
tinea versicolor, involvement of the nails (onychomycosis), 
and oral candidiasis. 
 Hyperpigmentation of the skin is rare in Cushing disease or 
adrenal tumors but is common in ectopic ACTH syndrome. 
 3.  Hirsutism— Hirsutism is present in about 80% of female 
patients owing to hypersecretion of adrenal androgens. Facial 
hirsutism is most common, but increased hair growth may 
also occur over the abdomen, breasts, chest, and upper thighs. 
Acne and seborrhea usually accompany hirsutism. Virilism is 
unusual except in cases of adrenal carcinoma, in which it 
occurs in about 20% of patients. 
 4.  Hypertension— Hypertension is a classic feature of sponta-
neous Cushing syndrome; it is present in about 75% of cases, 
and the diastolic blood pressure is greater than 100 mm Hg 
TABLE 9–11  Clinical features of Cushing syndrome 
(% prevalence).
General
Obesity 90%
Hypertension 85%
Skin
Plethora 70%
Hirsutism 75%
Striae 50%
Acne 35%
Bruising 35%
Musculoskeletal
Osteopenia 80%
Weakness 65%
Neuropsychiatric 85%
Emotional lability
Euphoria
Depression
Psychosis
Gonadal dysfunction
Menstrual disorders 70%
Impotence, decreased libido 85%
Metabolic
Glucose intolerance 75%
Diabetes 20%
Hyperlipidemia 70%
Polyuria 30%
Kidney stones 15%
318    CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens
in over 50%. Hypertension and its complications contribute 
greatly to the morbidity and mortality rates in spontaneous 
Cushing syndrome. 
 5.  Gonadal dysfunction— This is very common as a result of 
elevated androgens (in females) and cortisol (in males and to 
a lesser extent in females). Amenorrhea occurs in 75% of 
premenopausal women and is usually accompanied by infer-
tility. Decreased libido is frequent in males, and some have 
decreased body hair and soft testes. 
 6.  Central nervous system and psychologic disturbances— -
Psychologic disturbances occur in the majority of patients. 
Mild symptoms consist of emotional lability and increased 
irritability. Anxiety, depression, poor concentration, and poor 
memory may also be present. Euphoria is frequent, and occa-
sionally patients manifest overtly manic behavior. Sleep disor-
ders are present in most patients, with either insomnia or 
early morning awakening. 
 Severe psychologic disorders occur in a few patients and 
include severe depression, psychosis with delusions or halluci-
nations, and paranoia. Some patients have committed sui-
cide. Loss of brain volume that is at least partially reversible 
following correction of hypercortisolism has been observed. 
 7.  Muscle weakness— This occurs in about 60% of cases; it is 
more often proximal and is usually most prominent in the 
lower extremities. Hypercortisolism is associated with both 
low fat-free muscle mass and low total body protein. 
 8.  Osteoporosis— Owing to the profound effects of glucocorti-
coids on the skeleton, patients with Cushing syndrome fre-
quently have evidence of significant osteopenia and 
osteoporosis. Patients may present with multiple fragility 
fractures—typically of the feet, ribs, or vertebrae. Back pain 
may be the initial complaint. Compression fractures of the 
spine are demonstrated radiographically in 15% to 20% of 
patients. In fact, unexplained osteopenia in any young or 
middle-aged adult should always prompt an evaluation for 
Cushing syndrome, even in the absence of any other signs or 
symptoms of cortisol excess. Although avascular necrosis of 
bone has been associated with exogenous glucocorticoid 
administration, the problem is rarely observed in patients 
with endogenous hypercortisolism, suggesting a role for the 
underlying disorders in patients for whom glucocorticoids are 
prescribed. 
 9.  Renal calculi— Calculi secondary to glucocorticoid-induced 
hypercalciuria occur in approximately 15% of patients, and 
renal colic may occasionally be a presenting complaint. 
 10.  Thirst and polyuria— Polyuria is rarely due to overt hyperg-
lycemia but is usually cause by glucocorticoid inhibition of 
vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone) secretion and the direct 
enhancement of renal free water clearance by cortisol. 
 11.  Growth deceleration— In children, nearly all (>95%) show 
decreasing linear growth. Weight gain accompanying decreas-
ing linear growth in a child should prompt an evaluation for 
Cushing syndrome. 
 B. Laboratory findings 
 Routine laboratory examinations 
are described here. Specific tests to establish the diagnosis of 
Cushing syndrome are discussed in the section on diagnosis. 
 High normal hemoglobin, hematocrit, and red cell counts are 
usual; polycythemia is rare. The total white count is usually nor-
mal; however, both the percentage of lymphocytes and the total 
lymphocyte count may be subnormal. Eosinophils are also 
depressed, and a total eosinophil count less than 100/μL is present 
in most patients. Serum electrolytes, with rare exceptions, are 
normal in Cushing disease; however, hypokalemic alkalosis occurs 
when there is marked steroid hypersecretion with the ectopic 
ACTH syndrome or adrenocortical carcinoma. 
 Although fasting hyperglycemia occurs in only 10% to 15% of 
patients, glucose intolerance is a relatively common finding and 
occurs in 60% of patients. Most patients have secondary hyperin-
sulinemia and abnormal glucose tolerance tests. 
 Serum calcium is normal; serum phosphorus is low normal or 
slightly depressed. Hypercalciuria is present in 40% of cases. 
 C. Imaging studies 
 Routine radiographs may reveal cardi-
omegaly due to hypertensive or atherosclerotic heart disease or 
mediastinal widening due to central fat accumulation. Vertebral 
compression fractures, rib fractures, and renal calculi may be 
present. 
 D. Electrocardiographic findings 
 Hypertensive, ischemic, 
and electrolyte-induced changes may be present on the electrocar-
diogram. 
 Features Suggesting a Specific Cause 
 A. Cushing disease 
 Cushing disease typifies the classic clini-
cal picture: female predominance, onset generally between ages 20 
and 40, and a slow progression over several years. Hyperpigmentation 
and hypokalemic alkalosis are rare; androgenic manifestations are 
limited to acne and hirsutism. Secretion of cortisol and adrenal 
androgens is only moderately increased. 
 B. Ectopic ACTH syndrome (carcinoma) 
 In contrast, this 
syndrome occurs predominantly in males, with the highest inci-
dence between ages 40 and 60. The clinical manifestations of 
hypercortisolism are frequently limited to weakness, hypertension, 
and glucose intolerance; the primary tumor is usually apparent. 
Hyperpigmentation, hypokalemia, and alkalosis are common, as 
are weight loss and anemia. The hypercortisolism is of rapid onset, 
and steroid hypersecretion is frequently severe, with equally ele-
vated levels of glucocorticoids, androgens, and DOC. 
 C. Ectopic ACTH syndrome (benign tumor) 
 A minority 
of patients with ectopic ACTH syndrome due to more benign 
tumors, especially bronchial carcinoids, present a more slowly 
progressive course, with typical features of Cushing syndrome. 
These patients may be clinically identical to those with pituitary-
dependent Cushing disease, and the responsible tumor may not be 
apparent. Hyperpigmentation, hypokalemic alkalosis, and anemia 
are variably present. Further confusion may arise, since a number 
of these patients with occult ectopic tumors may have ACTH and 
steroid dynamics typical of Cushing disease (see below). 
 D. Adrenal adenomas 
 The clinical picture in patients with 
adrenal adenomas is usually that of glucocorticoid excess alone, 
and androgenic effects such as hirsutism are absent. Onset is 
CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens     319
gradual, and hypercortisolism is mild to moderate. Plasma andro-
gens are usually in the low normal or subnormal range. 
 E. Adrenal carcinomas 
 In general, adrenal carcinomas have 
a rapid onset of the clinical features of excessive glucocorticoid, 
androgen, and mineralocorticoid secretion and are rapidly pro-
gressive. Marked elevations of both cortisol and androgens are 
usual; hypokalemia is common, as are abdominal pain, palpable 
masses, and hepatic and pulmonary metastases. 
 Diagnosis 
 The clinical suspicion of Cushing syndrome must be confirmed 
with biochemical studies. Initially, a general assessment of the 
patient regarding the presence of other illnesses, drugs, alcohol, or 
psychiatric problems must be done since these factors may con-
found the evaluation. In the majority of cases, the biochemical 
differential diagnosis of Cushing syndrome can be easily per-
formed in the ambulatory setting ( Figure 9–14 ). 
 A. Dexamethasone suppression test 
 The overnight 1-mg 
dexamethasone suppression test is a valuable screening test in 
patients with suspected hypercortisolism. This study employs the 
administration of 1 mg of dexamethasone at bedtime (11:00 PM), 
with determination of a plasma cortisol early the following morn-
ing. Normal subjects should suppress plasma cortisol to less than 
1.8 μg/dL (50 nmol/L) following an overnight 1-mg test. Although 
a level of less than 5 μg/dL has been used in the past, several false-
negative studies have been discovered using this test criterion. 
False-negative results may occur in some patients with mild hyper-
cortisolism and exquisite negative feedback sensitivity to glucocor-
ticoids and in those with intermittent hypercortisolism. This test 
should only be employed as a screening tool for the consideration 
of Cushing syndrome, and biochemical confirmation must rely on 
additional biochemical testing. False-positive results with the over-
night 1-mg dexamethasone suppression test may be caused by 
patients receiving drugs that accelerate dexamethasone metabolism 
(phenytoin, phenobarbital, rifampin). False-positive results also 
occur in patients with renal failure, depression, alcoholism, or in 
patients undergoing a stressful event or serious illness. 
 B. Urine free cortisol 
 Another study in the confirmation of 
Cushing syndrome is the determination of urine free cortisol mea-
sured by HPLC or LC/MS/MS in a 24-hour urine collection. 
Normal (CS unlikely)
Discrepant
(Suggest additional evaluation)
ABNORMAL
Cushing syndrome suspected
(consider endocrinologist consultation)
Exclude exogenous glucocorticoid exposure
Perform one of the following tests
ANY ABNORMAL RESULT
Normal (CS unlikely)
Exclude physiologic causes of hypercortisolism (Table 2)
Consult endocrinologist
Cushing syndrome
Perform 1 or 2 other studies shown above
Suggest consider or repeating the abnormal study
Suggest Dex-CRH or midnight serum cortisol in
certain populations (see text)
24-h UFC (≥2 tests)
Consider caveats for each test (see text)
Use 48-h, 2-mg DST in certain populations (see text)
Late-night salivary
cortisol (≥2 tests)
Overnight
1-mg DST
 FIGURE 9–14  The diagnosis of Cushing syndrome.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Nieman LK, et al. The diagnosis of Cushing syn-
drome: an Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guideline.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2008;93:1526. Copyright 2008; The Endocrine Society.) 
 
320    CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens
These methods are highly accurate and specific. Commonly used 
drugs and medications do not interfere; however, carbamazepine 
and fenofibrate can cause falsely elevated results with HPLC since 
they elute with cortisol. Urinary free cortisol is usually less than 
50 μg/24 h (<135 nmol/24 h) when measured by HPLC or LC/
MS/MS. Urine free cortisol determinations usually provide clear 
discrimination between patients with hypercortisolism and obese 
non-Cushing patients, although exceptions occur. Less than 5% of 
obese subjects have mild elevations of urine free cortisol. The 
major liability of urine free cortisol is its poor sensitivity for 
detecting patients with mild hypercortisolism (sensitivity <75%). 
Consequently, this modality should not be used alone to exclude 
Cushing syndrome. 
 C. Late-night serum and salivary cortisol 
 The absence 
of diurnal rhythm has been considered a hallmark of the diagno-
sis of Cushing syndrome. Normally, cortisol is secreted episodi-
cally with a diurnal rhythm paralleling the secretion of ACTH. 
Levels are usually highest early in the morning and decrease 
gradually throughout the day, reaching the nadir in the late eve-
ning between 11:00 PM and midnight. Several studies have dem-
onstrated that an elevated midnight plasma cortisol level (>5.2-7.0 
μg/dL [140-190 nmo1/L]) is highly accurate in differentiating 
patients with Cushing syndrome from normal subjects and from 
patients with pseudo-Cushing conditions such as depression or 
alcoholism. 
 Because obtaining such plasma cortisol measurements is 
impractical on an ambulatory basis, the measurement of salivary 
cortisol provides a simple and more convenient means of probing 
nighttime cortisol secretion. Saliva can easily be sampled at home 
by the patient using a variety of techniques. Reference ranges for 
late-night salivary cortisol concentrations are dependent on the 
assay employed; however, using a radioimmunoassay, normal sub-
jects should have values less than 0.15 μg/dL (4 nmol/L). 
 Problems in Diagnosis 
 A major diagnostic problem is distinguishing patients with mild 
Cushing syndrome from those with mild physiologic hypercorti-
solism due to conditions that are classified as  pseudo-Cushing 
syndrome . These include the depressed phase of affective disor-
der, alcoholism, withdrawal from alcohol intoxication, or eating 
disorders such as anorexia and bulimia nervosa. These conditions 
may have biochemical features of Cushing syndrome, including 
elevations of urine free cortisol, disruptions in the normal diurnal 
pattern of cortisol secretion, and lack of suppression of cortisol 
after the overnight 1-mg dexamethasone suppression test. Although 
the history and physical examination may provide specific clues to 
the appropriate diagnosis, definitive biochemical confirmation 
may be difficult and may require repeated testing. Another study 
to distinguish mild Cushing syndrome from pseudo-Cushing 
conditions is the use of dexamethasone suppression followed by 
CRH stimulation. This test takes advantage of differential 
response of patients with Cushing syndrome and pseudo-Cushing 
syndrome to both dexamethasone and CRH by combining these 
tests to provide greater accuracy in the diagnosis. This study 
involves the administration of dexamethasone, 0.5 mg every 
6 hours for eight doses, followed immediately by a CRH stimula-
tion test, starting 2 hours after the completion of the low-dose 
dexamethasone suppression. A plasma cortisol concentration 
greater than 1.4 μg/dL (38.6 nmol/L) measured 15 minutes after 
administration of CRH correctly identifies the majority of patients 
with Cushing syndrome. After administration of high-dose dex-
amethasone, patients with pseudo-Cushing syndrome do not have 
a rise in cortisol or ACTH in response to CRH. However, it is 
now appreciated that some patients with pseudo-Cushing syn-
drome (eg, anorexia nervosa) may have abnormal dexamethasone 
CRH suppression tests. 
 Differential Diagnosis 
 The differential diagnosis of Cushing syndrome is usually difficult 
and should always be performed with consultation by an endocri-
nologist. The introduction of several technologic advances, including 
a specific and sensitive IRMA or ICMA for ACTH, CRH stimula-
tion test, inferior petrosal sinus sampling (IPSS), CT and magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) of the pituitary and adrenal glands have all 
provided means for an accurate differential diagnosis. 
 A. Plasma ACTH 
 Initially, the differential diagnosis for 
Cushing syndrome must distinguish between ACTH-dependent 
Cushing syndrome (pituitary or nonpituitary ACTH-secreting 
neoplasm) and ACTH-independent hypercortisolism. The best 
way to distinguish these forms of Cushing syndrome is measure-
ment of plasma ACTH by IRMA or ICMA. The development of 
this sensitive and specific test has made it possible to reliably 
identify patients with ACTH-independent Cushing syndrome. 
The ACTH level is less than 5 pg/mL (1.1 pmol/L) and exhibits 
a blunted response to CRH (peak response <10 pg/mL 
[2.2 pmol/L]) in patients with cortisol-producing adrenal neo-
plasms, autonomous bilateral adrenal cortical hyperplasia, and 
factitious Cushing syndrome ( Figure 9–15 ). Patients with ACTH-
secreting neoplasms usually have plasma ACTH levels greater 
than 10 pg/mL (2.2 pmol/L) and frequently greater than 
52 pg/mL (11.5 pmol/L). The major challenge in the differential 
diagnosis of ACTH-dependent Cushing syndrome is identifying 
the source of the ACTH-secreting tumor. The vast majority of 
these patients (90%) have a pituitary tumor, whereas the others 
harbor a nonpituitary neoplasm. Diagnostic studies needed to dif-
ferentiate these two entities must yield nearly perfect sensitivity, 
specificity, and accuracy. Although plasma ACTH levels are usu-
ally higher in patients with ectopic ACTH than those with pitu-
itary ACTH-dependent Cushing syndrome, there is considerable 
overlap between these two entities. Many of the ectopic ACTH-
secreting tumors are radiologically occult at the time of presenta-
tion and may not become clinically apparent for many years after 
the initial diagnosis. However, an enhanced ACTH response for 
CRH administration is more frequently found in pituitary 
Cushing syndrome compared with ectopic ACTH syndrome. 
 B. Pituitary MRI  When ACTH-dependent Cushing syndrome 
is present, MRI of the pituitary gland with gadolinium enhancement 
CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens     321
should be performed and will identify an adenoma in at least 50% 
to 60% of the patients. If the patient has classic clinical laboratory 
findings of ACTH-dependent hypercortisolemia and an unequivocal 
pituitary lesion on MRI, the likelihood of Cushing disease is 98% to 
99%. However, it must be emphasized that approximately 10% of 
the population in the age group from 20 to 50 years will have inci-
dental tumors of the pituitary demonstrable by MRI. Therefore, 
some patients with ectopic ACTH syndrome will have radiographic 
evidence of a pituitary lesion. 
 C. High-Dose dexamethasone suppression 
 Traditio-
nally, the high-dose dexamethasone suppression test has been utilized 
in the differential diagnosis of Cushing syndrome. However, the 
diagnostic accuracy of this procedure is only 70% to 80%, which is 
actually less than the pretest probability of Cushing disease—on aver-
age about 90%. As a result, this study is no longer recommended. 
 D. Inferior petrosal sinus sampling 
 The most definitive 
means of accurately distinguishing pituitary from nonpituitary 
ACTH-dependent Cushing syndrome is the use of bilateral simul-
taneous IPSS with CRH stimulation, and this procedure is the 
next step in the evaluation of patients with ACTH-dependent 
Cushing syndrome when MRI does not reveal a definite adenoma. 
This study takes advantage of the means by which pituitary hor-
mones reach the systemic circulation. Blood leaves the anterior 
lobe of the pituitary and drains into the cavernous sinuses, which 
then empty into the inferior petrosal sinuses and subsequently 
into the jugular bulb and vein. Simultaneous inferior petrosal 
sinus and peripheral ACTH measurement before and after CRH 
stimulation can reliably confirm the presence or absence of an 
ACTH-secreting pituitary tumor. An inferior petrosal sinus to 
peripheral (IPS-P) ratio greater than 2.0 prior to CRH and greater 
than 3.0 after CRH is consistent with a pituitary ACTH-secreting 
tumor, and an IPS-P ratio less than 1.8 supports the diagnosis of 
ectopic ACTH. Anatomical variants can cause false-negative stud-
ies; however, simultaneous measurement of PRL can be used to 
construct a PRL-normalized ACTH ratio which can eliminate 
false negatives caused by anatomical variants. 
 Bilateral IPSS with CRH stimulation does require a skilled 
interventional radiologist. However, in experienced hands, the 
procedure has yielded a diagnostic accuracy approaching 100% in 
identifying the source of ACTH-dependent Cushing syndrome. 
 E. Occult ectopic ACTH 
 If the IPSS study is consistent with a 
nonpituitary ACTH-secreting tumor, a search for an occult ecto-
pic ACTH-secreting tumor is needed. Because the majority of 
these lesions are in the thorax, high-resolution CT of the chest 
may be useful; MRI of the chest may have even better sensitivity 
in finding these lesions, which are usually small bronchial carci-
noid tumors. Unfortunately, utilization of a radiolabeled soma-
tostatin analog scan (octreotide acetate scintigraphy) has met with 
only mixed results in localizing these tumors. 
 F. Adrenal localizing procedures 
 CT ( Figure 9–16 ) and 
MRI are used to define adrenal lesions. Their primary use is to 
localize adrenal tumors in patients with ACTH-independent 
Cushing syndrome. Most adenomas exceed 2 cm in diameter; 
carcinomas are usually much larger. 
 TREATMENT 
 A. Cushing disease 
 The aim of treatment of Cushing syn-
drome is to remove or destroy the basic lesion and thus correct 
hypersecretion of adrenal hormones without inducing pituitary or 
500.0
ACTH-IRMA measurements in pituitary-adrenal disorders
200.0
100.0
50.0
20.0
10.0
5.0
2.0
1.0
0.5
0.2
0.1
pmol/L
Pit
(n = 33)
Ectop
(n = 10)
Adr
(n = 4)
1Adr
insuff
(n = 8)
Hypopit
(n = 8)
Steroids
(n = 10)
Cushing syndrome
2 Adrenal insuff
0.5
1.0
2.0
5.0
10.0
20.0
50.0
100.0
200.0
500.0
1000.0
2000.0
pg/mL
 FIGURE 9–15  Plasma ACTH-IRMA (pmol/L or pg/mL) of patients with pituitary-adrenal disorders. Dashed horizontal lines indicate normal 
range.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Findling JW. Clinical application of a new immunoradiometric assay for ACTH.  Endocrinologist . 
1992;2:360.) 
322    CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens
 FIGURE 9–16  Adrenal CT scans in Cushing syndrome.  A . Patient with ACTH-dependent Cushing syndrome. The adrenal glands are not 
detectably abnormal by this procedure. The curvilinear right adrenal (black arrow) is shown posterior to the inferior vena cava (V) between the 
right lobe of the liver and the right crus of the diaphragm. The left adrenal (white arrow) has an inverted Y appearance anteromedial to the left 
kidney (K).  B. A 3-cm left adrenal adenoma (white arrow) is shown anteromedial to the left kidney (K).  (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Korobkin M, et al. Computed tomography in the diagnosis of adrenal disease.  AJR Am J Roentgenol . 1979;132:231.) 
adrenal damage, which requires permanent replacement therapy 
for hormone deficiencies. 
 Treatment of Cushing disease is currently directed at the pitu-
itary to control ACTH hypersecretion; available methods include 
microsurgery, various forms of radiation therapy, and pharmaco-
logic inhibition of ACTH secretion. Treatment of hypercorti-
solism per se by surgical or medical adrenalectomy is less 
commonly used. These methods are discussed in Chapter 4. 
 B. Ectopic ACTH syndrome 
 Cure of ectopic ACTH syn-
drome is usually possible only in cases involving the more benign 
tumors such as bronchial or thymic carcinoids or pheochromocy-
tomas. Treatment is made difficult by the presence of metastatic 
tumors and accompanying severe hypercortisolism. Therapy 
directed to the primary tumor is usually unsuccessful, and other 
means must be used to correct the steroid-excess state. 
 Severe hypokalemia may require potassium replacement in 
large doses and spironolactone to block mineralocorticoid effects. 
 Drugs that block steroid synthesis (ketoconazole and 
metyrapone) are useful, but they may produce hypoadrenalism, 
and steroid secretion must be monitored and replacement steroids 
given if necessary. The dosage of ketoconazole is 400 to 800 mg/d 
in divided doses and is usually well tolerated. Because of its slow 
onset of action, narrow therapeutic window, and possible serious 
side-effects, mitotane is less useful. If used, several weeks of ther-
apy may be required before control of cortisol secretion is 
achieved. 
 Bilateral adrenalectomy may be necessary if hypercortisolism 
cannot be controlled in other ways. 
 C. Adrenal tumors  
 1. Adrenal adenomas— Patients with adrenal adenomas are suc-
cessfully treated by unilateral adrenalectomy, and the outlook 
is excellent. Laparoscopic adrenal surgery has become widely 
used in patients with benign or small adrenal tumors and has 
significantly reduced the duration of the hospital stay. Because 
the hypothalamic-pituitary axis and the contralateral adrenal 
are suppressed by prolonged cortisol secretion, these patients 
have postoperative adrenal insufficiency and require glucocor-
ticoid therapy both during and following surgery until the 
remaining adrenal recovers. 
 2. Adrenal carcinomas— Therapy in cases of adrenocortical car-
cinoma is less satisfactory, because the tumor has frequently 
already metastasized (usually to the retroperitoneum, liver, and 
lungs) by the time the diagnosis is made. 
 a. Operative treatment— Surgical cure is rare, but excision 
serves to reduce the tumor mass and the degree of steroid 
hypersecretion. Persisting nonsuppressible steroid secretion 
in the immediate postoperative period indicates residual or 
metastatic tumor. 
 b. Medical treatment— Mitotane is the drug of choice. The 
dosage is 6 to 12 g/d orally in three or four divided doses. 
The dose must often be reduced because of side-effects in 
80% of patients (diarrhea, nausea and vomiting, depression, 
somnolence). About 70% of patients achieve a reduction of 
steroid secretion, but only 35% achieve a reduction in 
tumor size. 
 Ketoconazole and metyrapone (singly or in combination) are 
useful in controlling steroid hypersecretion in patients who do not 
respond to mitotane. Radiotherapy and conventional chemother-
apy have not been useful in this disease. 
 D. Nodular adrenal hyperplasia 
 When pituitary ACTH 
dependency can be demonstrated, macronodular hyperplasia may 
be treated like other cases of Cushing disease. When ACTH 
dependency is not present, as in micronodular hyperplasia and in 
some cases of macronodular hyperplasia, bilateral adrenalectomy 
is appropriate. 
CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens     323
 PROGNOSIS 
 A. Cushing syndrome 
 Untreated Cushing syndrome is fre-
quently fatal, and death may be due to the underlying tumor itself, 
as in the ectopic ACTH syndrome and adrenal carcinoma. 
However, in most cases, death is the consequence of sustained 
hypercortisolism and its complications, including hypertension, 
cardiovascular disease, stroke, thromboembolism, and susceptibil-
ity to infection. 
 B. Cushing disease 
 In contrast to patients with untreated 
Cushing syndrome, individuals with Cushing disease who achieve 
normalization of cortisol levels as result of therapy have a standard 
mortality ratio (SMR) similar to age-matched populations. 
However, patients with persistent hypercortisolism despite treat-
ment continue to have an increased SMR (3.8- to 5.0-fold), when 
compared to the general population. 
 With current refinements in pituitary microsurgery and irra-
diation, the great majority of patients with Cushing disease can be 
treated successfully, and the operative mortality and morbidity 
rates that attended bilateral adrenalectomy are no longer a feature 
of the natural history of this disease. Reduction in health-related 
quality of life, especially related to psychological functioning, may 
persist. Patients with Cushing disease, who have large pituitary 
tumors at the time of diagnosis, have a much less satisfactory 
prognosis and may die as a consequence of tumor invasion or 
persistent hypercortisolism. 
 C. Adrenal tumors 
 The prognosis in adrenal adenomas is 
excellent. In adrenal carcinoma, the prognosis is almost universally 
poor, and the median survival from the date of onset of symptoms 
is about 4 years. 
 D. Ectopic ACTH syndrome 
 Prognosis is also poor in 
patients with ectopic ACTH syndrome due to the nature of the 
malignancy producing the hormone, and in these patients with 
severe hypercortisolism, survival is frequently only days to weeks. 
Some patients respond to tumor resection or chemotherapy. The 
prognosis is better in patients with benign tumors producing the 
ectopic ACTH syndrome. 
 HIRSUTISM AND VIRILISM 
 Excessive adrenal or ovarian secretion of androgens or excessive 
conversion of weak androgens to testosterone and dihydrotestos-
terone in peripheral tissues leads to hirsutism and virilism (see 
Chapter 13). As previously discussed, the adrenal secretory prod-
ucts DHEA, DHEA sulfate, and androstenedione are weak andro-
gens; however, the peripheral conversion to testosterone and 
dihydrotestosterone can result in a state of androgen excess. 
 Excessive androgen production is seen in both adrenal and 
ovarian disorders. Adrenal causes include Cushing syndrome, 
adrenal carcinoma, and congenital adrenal hyperplasia (see previ-
ous sections and Chapter 14). Mild adult-onset cases of congenital 
adrenal enzyme deficiencies have been described; these appear to 
be relatively uncommon. Biochemical diagnosis of late-onset 
21-hydroxylase deficiency is best achieved by measurement of the 
17-hydroxyprogesterone response to ACTH. Ovarian causes are 
discussed in Chapter 13. 
 In children, androgen excess is usually due to premature 
adrenarche, congenital adrenal hyperplasia, or adrenal carcinoma. 
In women, hirsutism accompanied by amenorrhea, infertility, 
ovarian enlargement, and elevated plasma LH levels is typical of 
the polycystic ovary syndrome, whereas in Cushing syndrome 
hirsutism is accompanied by features of cortisol excess. Late-onset 
21-hydroxylase deficiency is accompanied by elevated levels of 
plasma 17-hydroxyprogesterone, especially following ACTH 
administration. Virilism and severe androgen excess in adults are 
usually due to androgen-secreting adrenal or ovarian tumors; 
virilism is unusual in the polycystic ovary syndrome and rare in 
Cushing disease. In the absence of these syndromes, hirsutism in 
women is usually idiopathic or due to milder forms of polycystic 
ovary syndrome. Exogenous androgen administration (eg, DHEA) 
should also be considered. 
 The diagnosis and therapy of hirsutism are discussed in 
Chapter 13. 
 INCIDENTAL ADRENAL MASS 
 The incidental adrenal mass has become a common diagnostic 
problem, because approximately 2% to 4% of patients undergoing 
CT studies of the abdomen are found to have focal enlargement 
of the adrenal gland. Adrenal masses in an adult may represent 
functional or nonfunctional cortical adenomas or carcinoma, 
pheochromocytomas, cysts, myelolipomas, or metastasis from 
other tumors. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia may also present as 
a focal enlargement of the adrenal gland, and adrenal hemorrhage 
also causes enlargement, although usually bilateral. 
 The appropriate diagnostic approach to patients with an inci-
dentally discovered adrenal mass is unresolved. The roentgeno-
graphic appearance taken in context with the clinical setting may 
provide some insight. The size of the lesion is important. Primary 
adrenocortical carcinoma is rare in adrenal masses smaller than 4 cm. 
The presence of unilateral or bilateral adrenal masses (>3 cm) in a 
patient with a known malignancy (particularly lung, gastrointesti-
nal, renal, or breast) probably represents metastatic disease. 
Adrenal lesions smaller than 3 cm in patients with a known malig-
nancy actually represent metastases in only 20% to 30% of cases. 
 Other CT findings may be informative. The presence of fat 
within the adrenal mass may suggest a myelolipoma, which is usu-
ally a benign lesion. Adrenocortical adenomas are usually round 
masses with smooth margins, and adrenal cysts can also be identi-
fied with either CT or ultrasound examination. Lesions with low 
density (<10 Hounsfield units) on unenhanced CT scans are usu-
ally benign. Adrenal hemorrhage usually has irregular borders with 
some lack of homogeneity. Primary adrenocortical carcinoma usu-
ally presents as a lesion greater than 5 cm with irregular borders. 
MRI of the adrenal gland is usually not necessary but may be 
 helpful in selected patients. Typically, malignancies and 
324    CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens
 pheochromocytomas tend to have bright signal intensity with 
T2-weighted images, in contrast to benign lesions of the adrenal 
gland; however, exceptions to this rule have been seen, limiting the 
clinical utility of this technique. 
 Malignancy 
 Primary adrenocortical carcinoma usually presents with a large 
lesion, and most authorities recommend removing all adrenal 
masses greater than 4 cm. One series of 45 adrenal masses greater 
than 5 cm showed 30 benign lesions (16 pheochromocytomas, 
6 adenomas, 4 adrenal cysts, 2 myelolipomas, 1 hematoma, 
1 ganglioneuroma) and 15 malignancies (7 adrenocortical carci-
nomas, 5 adrenal metastases, and 3 adrenal lymphomas. Lesions 
less than 4 to 5 cm in diameter are of concern only in patients 
with a known malignancy or in those in whom there is a high 
index of suspicion based on other clinical information. In patients 
with primary malignancies of the lung, gastrointestinal tract, kid-
ney, or breast, an ultrasound or CT-guided needle biopsy may be 
helpful in establishing the presence or absence of metastatic 
 disease once pheochromocytoma has been excluded. Metastatic 
disease can be identified with an accuracy of 75% to 85% in such 
patients; however, there are both false-negative and false-positive 
findings. Percutaneous adrenal biopsy really has no demonstrated 
efficacy in patients with adrenal masses and no history of a malig-
nancy. Percutaneous adrenal biopsy should be reserved for patients 
in whom the presence or absence of adrenal metastases may alter 
the therapy or prognosis of the patient. 
 Endocrine Evaluation 
 The appropriate biochemical evaluation of an incidental adrenal 
mass is also controversial. An expert panel from the National 
Institutes of Health found that the available evidence suggests that an 
overnight (1-mg) dexamethasone suppression test and determination 
of fractionated urinary or plasma metanephrines should be per-
formed, and that in patients with hypertension, serum potassium 
and a plasma aldosterone concentration-PRA ratio should be deter-
mined to evaluate for primary aldosteronism. However, good clinical 
judgment is essential, and repeat CT imaging in 6 to 12 months was 
also recommended to exclude neoplastic disease. Hormonal abnor-
malities may develop over time, and follow-up testing has been rec-
ommended by some depending on the clinical context. 
 Cortisol-Producing Adenoma 
 The most common functioning lesion in patients with an inciden-
tally discovered adrenal mass appears to be an adenoma with 
autonomous secretion of cortisol. Approximately 6% to 9% of 
patients with adrenal incidentalomas ranging from 2 to 5 cm in 
diameter have autonomous cortisol hypersecretion. These benign 
adrenal adenomas secrete small amounts of cortisol that are often 
not sufficient to elevate urine cortisol excretion but are able to cause 
some suppression of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis. These patients 
can be easily identified by their failure to suppress cortisol to less 
than 1.8 μg/dL (50 nmol/L) following an overnight 1-mg dexam-
ethasone suppression test. In addition, the basal levels of ACTH in 
these patients are subnormal or frankly suppressed. DHEA sulfate 
levels are also usually decreased in patients with cortisol-secreting 
adenomas, likely reflecting ACTH suppression. The cortisol secre-
tion by the tumor probably results in blunting of diurnal variation 
and eventually in lack of suppression by dexamethasone. The low 
plasma ACTH level manifests in a blunted response to CRH 
administration. Removal of these silent adrenocortical adenomas 
may be followed by clinically significant secondary adrenal insuffi-
ciency. Therefore, an overnight dexamethasone suppression test or 
measurement of plasma ACTH should be performed before surgical 
removal of any unknown adrenal neoplasm. These patients have 
been described as having  preclinical or  subclinical Cushing syn-
drome. The natural history of this autonomous cortisol secretion is 
unknown. Many of these patients described with this problem have 
hypertension, obesity, or diabetes, and improvements in these clini-
cal problems have been reported following resection of these cortisol-
producing adenomas. Consequently, adrenalectomy is recommended 
in young patients with preclinical Cushing syndrome and in patients 
with clinical problems that might potentially be aggravated by 
 glucocorticoid excess. 
 Pheochromocytoma 
 Pheochromocytoma is a potentially life-threatening tumor that 
may present as an incidental adrenal mass. Surprisingly, pheochro-
mocytoma may account for as many as 2% to 3% of incidental 
adrenal lesions. Many of these patients have hypertension and 
symptoms associated with catecholamine excess such as headache, 
diaphoresis, palpitations, or nervousness (see Chapter 11). 
 Aldosterone-Producing Adenoma 
 Although aldosterone-producing adenomas are more common 
than either pheochromocytomas or cortisol-producing adenomas, 
they actually represent a very unusual cause of an incidentally 
discovered adrenal mass. This appears to be due to the fact that 
aldosterone-producing adenomas are usually small and frequently 
missed with CT imaging of the adrenal gland. Because most of 
these patients have hypertension, this diagnosis needs to be con-
sidered only in patients with hypertension. The presence of 
hypokalemia should arouse suspicion of this diagnosis, but 
hypokalemia is not invariably present. It is usually present in 
patients with aldosterone-producing adenomas greater than 3 cm. 
Hyperaldosteronism can be excluded by the measurement of 
aldosterone and PRA. If the aldosterone (ng/dL)-PRA (ng/mL/h) 
ratio is less than 30 and plasma aldosterone is less than 20 ng/dL, 
an aldosterone-producing adenoma is excluded. 
 GLUCOCORTICOID THERAPY FOR 
NONENDOCRINE DISORDERS 
 Principles 
 Glucocorticoids have been used for their anti-inflammatory and 
immunosuppressive activity in treatment of a wide variety of dis-
orders. These include rheumatologic disorders (eg, rheumatoid 
CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens     325
arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus), pulmonary diseases 
(eg, asthma), renal disease (eg, glomerulonephritis), and many 
others. Because of their side-effects, glucocorticoids should be 
used in the minimum effective dose and for the shortest possible 
duration of therapy. 
 Synthetic Glucocorticoids 
 Steroid compounds have been synthesized, taking advantage of 
chemical alterations to the steroid nucleus that enhances glucocor-
ticoid activity relative to mineralocorticoid activity. For example, 
prednisone has a double bond between positions 1 and 2 of corti-
sol and an 11-keto group instead of a hydroxyl group. It has three 
to five times more glucocorticoid activity than cortisol and rela-
tively little mineralocorticoid activity. It must be converted to 
prednisolone by reduction of the 11-keto group to a hydroxyl 
group in order to be biologically active, a process that may be 
reduced in the presence of liver disease. Dexamethasone has the 
same additional double bond, a fluoro atom in the 9α position 
and a 16α-methyl group. This results in 10 to 20 times the gluco-
corticoid activity of cortisol and negligible mineralocorticoid 
activity. Many other compounds have been synthesized. Although 
most synthetic glucocorticoids exhibit little binding to CBG, their 
plasma half-lives are longer than that of cortisol. 
 Modes of Administration 
 Glucocorticoids may be administered parenterally, orally, topi-
cally, and by inhalation. Absorption rates from intramuscular and 
intra-articular sites depend on the particular glucocorticoid and its 
formulation. Transdermal absorption also depends on the severity 
of the inflammatory disorder, the area of the body to which the 
drug is applied, the presence of vehicles that enhance absorption 
(eg, urea), and the use of an occlusive dressing. Inhaled glucocor-
ticoids vary in their bioavailability; the technique of administra-
tion (eg, use of spacers) also affects the amount of drug delivered 
to the lungs. 
 Side-Effects 
 In general, the severity of the side-effects is a function of dose and 
duration of therapy, but there is marked individual variation. 
 A. Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis suppression 
 Glucocorticoids suppress CRH and ACTH secretion (negative 
feedback). Suppression of the HPA axis may occur with doses of 
prednisone greater than 5 mg/d. It is difficult, however, to predict 
the development or degree of suppression in any given individual. 
In general, patients who develop clinical features of Cushing syn-
drome or who have received glucocorticoids equivalent to 10 to 20 
mg of prednisone per day for 3 weeks or more should be assumed 
to have clinically significant HPA axis suppression. Patients 
treated with alternate-day steroid regimens exhibit less suppression 
than those who receive steroids daily. 
 B. Cushing syndrome 
 Glucocorticoid administration results 
in the development of cushingoid features. Of special concern is 
steroid-induced osteoporosis, particularly in patients for whom a 
long course of steroid therapy is anticipated. The severity of sys-
temic effects of inhaled glucocorticoids varies among different 
preparations. However, they are associated with both local effects 
(dysphonia and oral candidiasis) and systemic effects, especially 
glaucoma, cataracts, osteoporosis, and growth retardation in chil-
dren. Protease inhibitors are now well recognized to decrease the 
metabolism of exogenous glucocorticoids. When the two are used 
in combination, the resultant increase in circulating glucocorti-
coid can lead to exogenous Cushing syndrome. 
 C. Steroid withdrawal 
 Because of their adverse effects, 
glucocorticoids must be tapered downward as the clinical situa-
tion permits. Tapering regimens are essentially empirical. Factors 
that may limit the ability to taper the dose down to physiologic 
replacement levels include recrudescence of disease and steroid 
withdrawal syndrome. The latter appears in a variety of patterns. 
Patients may develop fatigue, arthralgias, and desquamation 
of the skin. Psychologic dependence has also been described. 
Even after the dose has been reduced to physiologic levels, HPA 
axis suppression (ie, secondary adrenal insufficiency) persists for 
an average of 9 to 10 months but may continue for as long as 
1 to 2 years. 
 REFERENCES 
 General 
 Arit W, Stewart PM. Adrenal corticosteroid biosynthesis, metabolism, and 
action.  Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am . 2005;34:293. [PMID: 
15850843] 
 Becker KL, Bilezikian JP, Bremner WJ, et al, eds.  Principles and Practice of 
Endocrinology and Metabolism. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams 
& Wilkins; 2001. 
 Bottner A, Bornstein SR. Lessons learned from gene targeting and transgenesis for 
adrenal physiology and disease.  Rev Endocr Metab Disord . 2001;2:275. 
[PMID: 11705133] 
 DeGroot LJ, Jameson JL, eds.  Endocrinology . 5th ed. vol. 3. Philadelphia, PA: 
Saunders; 2005. 
 Hammer GD, Parker KL, Schimmer BP. Minireview: transcriptional regulation 
of adrenocortical development.  Endocrinology . 2005;146:1018. [PMID: 
15604207] 
 Lindsay JR, Nieman LK. The hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis in pregnancy: 
challenges in disease detection and treatment.  Endocr Rev . 2005;6:775. 
[PMID: 15827110] 
 Miller WL, Tyrrell JB. The adrenal cortex. In: Felig P, Baxter JD, Frohman LA, eds. 
 Endocrinology and Metabolism . 4th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2002. 
 Payne AH, Hales DB. Overview of steroidogenic enzymes in the pathway from 
cholesterol to active steroid hormones.  Endocr Rev . 2004;25:947. [PMID: 
15131259] 
 Seckl JR. 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases: changing glucocorticoid action. 
 Curr Opin Pharm . 2004;4:597. [PMID: 15525550] 
 Simard J, Ricketts ML, Gingras S, Soucy P, Feltus FA, Melner MH. Molecular 
biology of the 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/Δ 5 -Δ 4 isomerase gene fam-
ily.  Endocr Rev . 2005;26:525. [PMID: 15632317] 
 Van den Berghe G. Neuroendocrine pathobiology of chronic critical illness.  Crit 
Care Clin . 2002;18:509. [PMID: 12140911] 
 Williams RH, et al, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology. 11th ed. 
Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2007. 
 Biologic Effects and Glucocorticoid Therapy 
 Chrousos GP. The glucocorticoid receptor gene, longevity, and the complex disor-
ders of Western societies.  Am J Med . 2004;117:204. [PMID: 15300973] 
326    CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens
 Czock D, Keller F, Rasche FM, Häussler U. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacody-
namics of systemically administered glucocorticoids.  Clin Pharmacokinet . 
2005;44:61. [PMID: 15634032] 
 Jones A, Fay JK, Burr ML, et al. Inhaled corticosteroid effects on bone metabolism 
in asthma and mild chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.  Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev . 2002:CD003537. [PMID: 11869676] 
 Limbourg FP, Liao JK. Nontranscriptional actions of the glucocorticoid receptor. 
 J Mol Med . 2003;81:168. [PMID: 12682725] 
 Reichardt HM, Tronchea F, Bergera S, Kellendonka C, Schütza G. New insights 
into glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid signaling: lessons from gene tar-
geting.  Adv Pharmacol . 2000;47:1. [PMID 10582083] 
 Rosen J, Miner JN. The search for safer glucocorticoid receptor ligands.  Endocr 
Rev . 2005;26:452. [PMID: 15814846] 
 Sizonenko PC. Effects of inhaled or nasal glucocorticosteroids on adrenal func-
tion and growth.  J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab . 2002;15:5. [PMID: 
11822580] 
 Tuckermann JP, Kleiman A, McPherson KG, Reichardt HM. Molecular mecha-
nisms of glucocorticoids in the control of inflammation and lymphocyte 
apoptosis.  Crit Rev Clin Lab Sci . 2005;42:71. [PMID: 15697171] 
 Vgontzas AN, Chrousos GP. Sleep, the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, and 
cytokines: multiple interactions and disturbances in sleep disorders. 
 Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am . 2002;31:15. [PMID: 12055986] 
 Wang M. Review: the role of glucocorticoid action in the pathophysiology of the 
metabolic syndrome.  Nutrit Metabol . 2005;2:3. [PMID: 15689240] 
 Adrenal Insufficiency 
 Annane D,  Bellissant E, Bollaert PE, et al. Corticosteroids for severe sepsis and 
septic shock: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ. 2004;329:480. 
[PMID: 15289273]
Annane D, Sébille V, Charpentier C, et al. Effect of treatment with low doses of 
hydrocortisone and fludrocortisone on mortality in patients with septic 
shock.  JAMA . 2002;288:862. [PMID: 12186604] 
 Arit W, Allolio B. Adrenal insufficiency.  Lancet . 2003;361:1881. [PMID: 
12788587] 
 Barker JM, Ide A, Hostetler C, et. al. Endocrine and immunogenetic testing in 
individuals with type 1 diabetes and 21-hydroxylase autoantibodies: 
Addison’s disease in a high-risk population.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2005;90:128. [PMID: 15483092] 
 Bornstein SR. Predisposing factors for adrenal insufficiency.  N Engl J Med . 
2009;360:2328. [PMID: 19474430] 
 Buttgereit F, Burmester GR, Lipworth BJ. Optimised glucocorticoid therapy: the 
sharpening of an old spear.  Lancet . 2005;365:801. [PMID: 15733723] 
 Cameron DR, Braunstein GD. The use of dehydroepiandrosterone therapy in 
clinical practice.  Treat Endocrinol . 2005;4:95. [PMID: 15783247] 
 Charmandari E, Kino T, Chrousos GP. Familial/sporadic glucocorticoid resistance: 
clinical phenotype and molecular mechanisms.  Ann N Y Acad Sci . 
2004;1024:168. [PMID: 15265781] 
 Coursin DB, Wood KE. Corticosteroid supplementation for adrenal insufficiency. 
 JAMA . 2002;287:236. [PMID: 11779267] 
 Dorin RI, Qualls CR, Crapo LM. Diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency.  Ann Intern 
Med . 2003;139:194. [PMID 12899587] 
 Eisenbarth GS, Gottlieb PA. Autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes.  N Engl 
J Med . 2005;350:2068. [PMID 15141045] 
 Glowniak JV, Loriaux DL. A double-blind study of perioperative steroid require-
ments in secondary adrenal insufficiency.  Surgery . 1997;121:123. [PMID: 
9037222] 
 Hamrahian AH, Oseni TS, Arafah BM. Measurements of serum free cortisol in 
critically ill patients.  N Engl J Med . 2004;350:1629. [PMID: 15084695] 
 Inder WJ, Hunt PJ. Glucocorticoid replacement in pituitary surgery: guidelines for 
perioperative assessment and management.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2002;87:2745. [PMID: 12050244] 
 Libè R, Barbetta L, Dall’Asta C, et al. Effects of dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) 
supplementation on hormonal, metabolic and behavioral status in patients 
with hypoadrenalism.  J Endocrinol Invest . 2004;27:736. [PMID: 
15636426] 
 Richter B, Neises G, Clar C. Glucocorticoid withdrawal schemes in chronic 
medical disorders. A systematic review.  Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am . 
2002;31:751. [PMID: 12227130] 
 Sprung CL, Annane D, Keh D, et al. Hydrocortisone therapy for patients with 
septic shock.  N Engl J Med . 2008;358:111. [PMID: 18184957] 
 Suliman AM, Smith TP, Labib M, Fiad TM, McKenna TJ. The low-dose ACTH 
test does not provide a useful assessment of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adre-
nal axis in secondary adrenal insufficiency.  Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) . 
2002;56:533. [PMID: 11966747] 
 Widmer IE, Puder JJ, König C, et al. Cortisol response in relation to the severity 
of stress and illness—the “CORESSI”-Study.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2005;90:4579. [PMID: 15886236] 
 Cushing Syndrome 
 Elamin MD, Murad MH, Mullan R, et al. Accuracy of diagnostic tests for 
Cushing’s syndrome: a systematic review and metaanalyses.  J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab . 2008;94:741. [PMID: 19088166] 
 Findling JW, Raff H. Cushing’s syndrome.  Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am . 
2005;34:257. [PMID: 15850849] 
 Findling JW, Raff H. Screening and diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome.  Endocrinol 
Metab Clin North Am . 2005;34:385. [PMID:15850849] 
 Findling JW, Raff H, Aron DC. The low-dose dexamethasone suppression test: a 
reevaluation in patients with Cushing’s syndrome.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2004;89:1222. [PMID: 15001614] 
 Hammer GD, Tyrrell JB, Lamborn KR, et al. Transsphenoidal microsurgery for 
Cushing’s disease: initial outcome and long-term results.  J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab . 2004;89:6348. [PMID: 15579802] 
 Iacobone M, Mantero F, Basso SM, Lumachi F, Favia G. Results and long-term 
follow-up after unilateral adrenalectomy for ACTH-independent hypercor-
tisolism in a series of fifty patients.  J Endocrinol Invest . 2005;28:327. [PMID: 
15966505] 
 Isidori AM, Lenzi A. Ectopic ACTH syndrome.  Arq Bras Endocrinol Metab . 
2007;51:1217. [PMID: 18209859] 
 Lacroix A, Baldacchino V, Bourdeau I, Hamet P, Tremblay J. Cushing’s syndrome 
variants secondary to aberrant hormone receptors.  Trends Endocrinol Metab . 
2004;15:375. [PMID: 15380809] 
 Newell-Price J, Morris DG, Drake WM, et al. Optimal response criteria for the 
human CRH test in the differential diagnosis of ACTH-dependent 
Cushing’s syndrome.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2002;87:1640. [PMID: 
11932295] 
 Nieman LK, Biller BM, Findling JW, et al. The diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome: 
an Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guideline.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2008;93:1526. [PMID: 18334580] 
 Quddisi S, Browne P, Hirsch IB. Cushing’s syndrome due to surreptitious gluco-
corticoid administration.  JAMA . 1998;158:294. [PMID: 9472211] 
 Savage MO, Lienhardt A, Lebrethon MC, et al. Cushing’s disease in childhood: 
presentation, investigation, treatment and long-term outcome.  Horm Res . 
2001;55(suppl 1):24. [PMID: 11408758] 
 Stratakis CA, Kirschner LS, Carney JA. Clinical and molecular features of the 
Carney complex: diagnostic criteria and recommendations for patient evalu-
ation.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2001;86:4041. [PMID: 11549623] 
 van Aken MO, Pereira AM, Biermasz NR, et al. Quality of life in patients after 
long-term biochemical cure of Cushing’s disease.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2005;90:3279. [PMID: 15741267] 
 Yaneva M, Mosnier-Pudar H, Dugué MA, et al. Midnight salivary cortisol for the 
initial diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome of various causes.  J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab . 2004;89:3345. [PMID: 15240613] 
 Hirsutism and Virilization 
 Azziz R. The evaluation and management of hirsutism.  Obstet Gynecol . 
2003;101:995. [PMID: 12738163] 
 Cabrera MS, Vogiatzi MG, New MI. Long term outcome in adult males with clas-
sic congenital adrenal hyperplasia.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2001;86:3070. 
[PMID: 11443169] 
CHAPTER 9 Glucocorticoids and Adrenal Androgens     327
 Kelestimur F. Hirsutism of adrenal origin in adolescents: consequences in adults.
  J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab . 2001;14:1309. [PMID: 11964028] 
 Miller WL. Androgen biosynthesis from cholesterol to DHEA.  Mol Cell Endocrinol . 
2002;198:7. [PMID: 12573809] 
 New MI. Inborn errors of adrenal steroidogenesis.  Mol Cell Endocrinol . 
2003;211:75. [PMID: 14656479] 
 Speiser PW, White PC. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia.  N Engl J Med . 
2003;349:776. [PMID: 12930931] 
 Wilson JD, Leihy MW, Shaw G, Renfree MB. Androgen physiology: unsolved 
problems at the millennium.  Mol Cell Endocrinol . 2002;198:1. [PMID: 
12573808] 
 Incidentally Discovered Adrenal Masses and Adrenal Cancer 
 Aron DC, Howlett TA. Incidentalomas.  Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am . 
2000;29: 205. [PMID: 10732272] 
 Caoili EM, Korobkin M, Francis IR, et al. Adrenal masses: characterization with 
combined unenhanced and delayed enhanced CT.  Radiology . 2002;222:629. 
[PMID: 11867777] 
 Grumbach MM, Biller BMK, Braunstein GD, et al. Management of the 
clinically inapparent adrenal mass (“incidentaloma”).  Ann Intern Med . 
2003;138:424. [PMID: 12614096] 
 Icard P, Goudet P, Charpenay C, et al. Adrenocortical carcinomas: surgical trends 
and results of a 253- patient series from the French Association of Endocrine 
Surgeons study group.  World J Surg . 2001;25:891. [PMID: 11572030] 
 Ogilvie JB, Duh QY. New approaches to the minimally invasive treatment of 
adrenal lesions.  Cancer J . 2005;11:64. [PMID: 15831226] 
 Sahdev A, Reznek RH. Imaging evaluation of the non-functioning indeterminate 
adrenal mass.  Trend Endocrinol Metab . 2004;15:271. [PMID: 15358280] 
 Young WF. The incidentally discovered adrenal mass.  N Engl J Med . 2007;356:601. 
[PMID: 17287480] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This page intentionally left blank
329
0
1
 Endocrine
Hypertension 
 William F. Young, Jr, MD, MSc 
11β-HSD2
11β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 
type 2
ACE
Angiotensin-converting enzyme
ACTH
Corticotropin
AME
Apparent mineralocorticoid excess
ANP
Atrial natriuretic peptide
APA
Aldosterone-producing adenoma
ARB
Angiotensin receptor blocker
AVS
Adrenal venous sampling
CAH
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
CT
Computed tomography
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
DOC
Deoxycorticosterone
FH
Familial hyperaldosteronism
GH
Growth hormone
GRA
Glucocorticoid-remediable 
aldosteronism
HU
Hounsfield units
IHA
Idiopathic hyperaldosteronism
IVC
Inferior vena cava
PAC
Plasma aldosterone concentration
PAH
Primary adrenal hyperplasia
PRA
Plasma renin activity
 Hypertension affects one in four adults in the developed world. 
Although hypertension is  essential or  idiopathic in most cases, a 
cause can be detected in approximately 15% of the hypertensive 
population. The secondary causes of hypertension can be divided 
into renal (eg, renal vascular or parenchymal disease) and endo-
crine causes. There are at least 14 endocrine disorders in which 
hypertension may be the initial clinical presentation ( Table 10–1 ). 
The diagnosis of endocrine hypertension presents the clinician an 
opportunity to provide a surgical cure or to achieve a marked 
response with targeted pharmacologic therapy. Pheochromocytoma 
and Cushing syndrome are reviewed in detail in Chapters 11 and 
9, respectively. The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, the 
diagnostic and therapeutic approaches to mineralocorticoid hyper-
tension (eg, primary aldosteronism), and less common forms of 
endocrine hypertension are reviewed in this chapter. 
 RENIN-ANGIOTENSIN-ALDOSTERONE 
SYSTEM 
 The components of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system are 
shown in  Figure 10–1 . Aldosterone is secreted from the zona glom-
erulosa under the primary control of angiotensin II, potassium, 
and corticotropin (ACTH). The secretion of aldosterone is 
restricted to the zona glomerulosa because of zonal-specific expres-
sion of aldosterone synthase (CYP11B2). Atrial natriuretic peptide 
(ANP), dopamine, and heparin inhibit aldosterone secretion. 
 Renin and Angiotensin 
 Renin is an enzyme produced in the juxtaglomerular apparatus of 
the kidney, stored in granules, and released in response to specific 
secretagogues. The first 43 amino acids of the 340 amino acid 
renin protein are a prosegment cleaved to produce the active 
enzyme. The release of renin into the circulation is the rate- 
limiting step in the activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone 
system. Renal renin release is controlled by juxtaglomerular cells 
acting as pressure transducers that sense stretch of the afferent 
arteriolar wall and thus renal perfusion pressure; the macula densa, 
a specialized group of convoluted distal tubular cells that function 
as chemoreceptors for monitoring the sodium and chloride loads 
present in the distal tubule; the sympathetic nervous system, 
which modifies the release of renin, particularly in response to 
upright posture; and humoral factors, including potassium, angio-
tensin II, and ANPs. Thus, renin release is maximized in condi-
tions of low renal perfusion pressure or low tubular sodium 
330    CHAPTER 10 Endocrine Hypertension
content (eg, renal artery stenosis, hemorrhage, dehydration). 
Renin release is suppressed by elevated perfusion pressure at 
the kidney (eg, hypertension) and high sodium diets. Renin 
release is increased directly by hypokalemia and decreased by 
hyperkalemia. 
 Angiotensinogen, an α 2 -globulin synthesized in the liver, is 
the substrate for renin and is broken down into the angiotensin 
peptides. Angiotensinogen consists of 485 amino acids, 33 of 
which constitute a signal peptide that is cleaved prior to 
 secretion. The action of renin on angiotensinogen produces 
angiotensin I. Angiotensin I is composed of the first 10 amino 
acid sequence following the signal peptide and does not have 
biologic activity. Angiotensin II, the main form of biologically 
active angiotensin, is formed by cleavage of the two 
 carboxyl-terminal amino acids of angiotensin I by angiotensin-
converting enzyme (ACE) ( Figure 10–2 ). ACE is localized to 
cell membranes in the lung and intracellular granules in certain 
tissues that produce angiotensin II. Amino peptidase A removes 
the amino-terminal aspartic acid to produce the heptapeptide, 
angiotensin III. Angiotensin II and angiotensin III have equiv-
alent efficacy in promoting aldosterone secretion and modify-
ing renal blood flow. The half-life in the circulation of 
angiotensin II is short (<60 seconds). Elements of the renin-
angiotensin-aldosterone system are present in the adrenal 
glands, the kidneys, the heart, and the brain. For example, the 
adrenal glomerulosa cells contain the proteins needed to pro-
duce and secrete angiotensin II. Other tissues contain one or 
more components of the renin-angiotensin system and require 
other cells or circulating components, or both, to generate 
angiotensin II. 
 Angiotensin II functions through the angiotensin receptor to 
maintain normal extracellular volume and blood pressure by 
(a) increasing aldosterone secretion from the zona glomerulosa by 
increasing transcription of CYP11B2; (b) constriction of vascular 
smooth muscle, thereby increasing blood pressure and reducing 
renal blood flow; (c) enhancing the release of norepinephrine and 
epinephrine from the adrenal medulla; (d) enhancement of the 
activity of the sympathetic nervous system by increasing central 
sympathetic outflow, thereby increasing norepinephrine discharge 
from sympathetic nerve terminals; and (e) promotion of the 
release of vasopressin. 
TABLE 10–1  Endocrine causes of hypertension.
Adrenal Dependent
Pheochromocytoma
Primary aldosteronism
Hyperdeoxycorticosteronism
 Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
  11β-Hydroxylase deficiency
  17α-Hydroxylase deficiency
 Deoxycorticosterone-producing tumor
 Primary cortisol resistance
Cushing syndrome
Apparent Mineralocorticoid Excess (AME)/11β-Hydroxysteroid 
Dehydrogenase Deficiency
Genetic
 Type 1 AME
Acquired
 Licorice or carbenoxolone ingestion (type 1 AME)
 Cushing syndrome (type 2 AME)
Thyroid Dependent
Hypothyroidism
Hyperthyroidism
Pituitary Dependent
Acromegaly
Cushing disease
Circulating blood
volume
Renal
perfusion
pressure
Juxtaglomerular
cells
Renin
release
Aldosterone
release
+
–
+
+
–
–
↑ Serum K+
ACTH
↓ Serum K+
Dopamine
ANP
Heparin
↑ Renal K+
excretion
Angiotensin II
and III
Angiotensin I
Angiotensinogen
Renal Na+
retention
↓ Serum K+
↑ Tubular Na+
effect at the
macula densa
↑ Catecholamines
↑ Serum K+
ACE
 FIGURE 10–1  Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone and potassium-aldosterone feedback loops. Zona glomerulosa aldosterone production and 
secretion are determined by input from each loop (ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; ACTH, cortocotropin; ANP, atrial natriuretic peptide; 
BP, blood pressure; K + , potassium; Na + , sodium). 
CHAPTER 10 Endocrine Hypertension     331
 Aldosterone 
 Aldosterone is produced in the zona glomerulosa of the adrenal 
cortex. Approximately 50% to 70% of aldosterone circulates bound 
to either albumin or corticosteroid-binding globulin; 30% to 50% 
of total plasma aldosterone is free. Aldosterone is rapidly inactivated 
to tetrahydroaldosterone in the liver and has a half-life of 15 to 
20 minutes. Aldosterone regulates extracellular volume and potas-
sium homeostasis by binding to renal cortical collecting duct prin-
cipal epithelial cell mineralocorticoid receptors ( Figure 10–3 ). The 
mineralocorticoid receptor—a member of the nuclear receptor fam-
ily and also found in the heart, colon, and hippocampus—is local-
ized to the cytoplasm prior to activation, undergoes a conformation 
change on binding to aldosterone, and translocates into the nucleus 
where it functions as a transcription factor. The aldosterone-regu-
lated serum- and glucocorticoid-inducible kinase appears to be a key 
intermediary (see  Figure 10–3 ). Aldosterone increases expression of 
this kinase which phosphorylates and inactivates neural-precursor-
cell-expressed, developmentally down regulated (Nedd) 4-2, a ubiq-
uitin ligase which is responsible for degrading the epithelial sodium 
channel. This, in turn, leads to an increased number of open 
Renin
Prorenin
↑ Aldosterone synthesis and secretion
↑ Vasoconstriction
↑ Release of vasopressin
↑ Release of adrenal catecholamines
↑ Central sympathetic outflow
ACE
Angiotensin III
Amino
peptidase A
Angiotensin II
Angiotensin I
Angiotensinogen
 FIGURE 10–2  Steps in the production of angiotensin peptides 
by the renin-angiotensin system (ACE, angiotensin-converting 
enzyme). 
K+
Na+/K+
ATPase
ADP
ATP
+
Na+
K+
ER
Na+
Ubiquitin
-P
Nedd4-2
Nedd4-2
Sgk 1
Active
ENaC
Nucleus
Inactive
Transcriptional
response
Aldosterone
Cortisol
Cortisone
Luminal membrane
Basolateral membrane
GRE
Target
genes
Proteasomal degradation of ENaC
H2O
MR
11β-HSD2
 FIGURE 10–3  Aldosterone regulates extracellular volume and potassium homeostasis by binding to the renal cortical collecting duct prin-
cipal epithelial cell mineralocorticoid receptor (MR). The activated MR translocates into the nucleus where it binds to the glucocorticoid 
response element (GRE) and functions as a transcription factor. Aldosterone increases expression of serum- and glucocorticoid-inducible kinase 
(Sgk1), which phosphorylates and inactivates neural-precursor-cell-expressed, developmentally downregulated gene (Nedd) 4-2, a ubiquitin 
ligase which is responsible for degrading the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC). Another mediator of mineralocorticoid receptor transcriptional 
response is the activation is the sodium-potassium ATPase (Na + /K + ATPase) at the basolateral membrane, which drives the uptake of potassium 
and export of sodium. Although glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids bind equally to the mineralocorticoid receptor, specificity of action is 
due to the glucocorticoid-degrading enzyme, 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 (11β-HSD2), which prevents glucocorticoids from 
interacting with the receptor. (Adapted from Odermatt A, Atanasov AG. Mineralocorticoid receptors: Emerging complexity and functional 
diversity. Steroids 2009; 74:163-171. )
332    CHAPTER 10 Endocrine Hypertension
sodium channels in the luminal membrane of the principal cells in 
the cortical collecting tubule, resulting in increased sodium ion 
reabsorption. The sodium loss increases luminal electronegativity, 
which augments tubular secretion of potassium by the renal tubular 
cells and hydrogen ion by the renal interstitial cells. Another media-
tor of the mineralocorticoid receptor transcriptional response is the 
activation is the sodium-potassium ATPase at the basolateral mem-
brane, which drives the uptake of potassium and export of sodium 
(see  Figure 10–3 ). Although glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids 
bind equally to the mineralocorticoid receptor, specificity of action 
is due to the glucocorticoid-degrading enzyme, 11β-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase, which is strongly expressed in the kidney and pre-
vents glucocorticoids from interacting with the receptor. 
 Aldosterone has nonclassic effects that, although probably 
genomic and therefore mediated by activation of the cytosolic 
mineralocorticoid receptor, do not include modification of sodi-
um-potassium balance. Aldosterone-mediated actions include the 
expression of several collagen genes; activation of genes controlling 
tissue growth factors, such as transforming growth factor β and 
plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1; or increased expression of 
genes mediating inflammation. The resultant actions lead to 
microangiopathy, necrosis (acutely), and fibrosis in various tissues 
such as the heart, the vasculature, and the kidney. Increased levels 
of aldosterone are not necessary to cause this damage; an imbal-
ance between the volume or sodium balance state and the level of 
aldosterone appear to be the critical factors. Spironolactone and 
eplerenone 
are 
mineralocorticoid 
receptor 
antagonists. 
Mineralocorticoid receptor blockade has proven to be clinically 
important in patients with cardiovascular disease. For example, 
when spironolactone was added to the treatment program for 
patients with New York Heart Association class IV heart failure or 
class III heart failure, it resulted in a significant 30% reduction in 
overall mortality due to reductions in death from heart failure and 
sudden death. When eplerenone was added to the treatment pro-
gram for patients who had a myocardial infarction 3 to 14 days 
previously and had a left ventricular ejection fraction of ≤40 per-
cent, it resulted in a significantly lower rate of cardiovascular 
mortality and sudden cardiac death. The effect of mineralocorti-
coid receptor antagonists on survival in patients with primary 
aldosteronism has not yet been studied. 
 The action of angiotensin II on aldosterone synthesis and 
secretion involves a feedback loop that also includes extracellular 
fluid volume (see  Figure 10–1 ). A decrease in circulating blood 
volume results in decreased renal perfusion pressure that is 
detected by the renal juxtaglomerular cells. Activation of the juxta-
glomerular cells increases renin release, which catalyzes the conver-
sion of angiotensinogen to angiotensin I. Angiotensin-converting 
enzyme (ACE) in the pulmonary and renal endothelium catalyzes 
the conversion of angiotensin I to angiotensin II and III, which act 
on the adrenal zona glomerulosa angiotensin receptor to stimulate 
aldosterone release. Aldosterone acts at the renal mineralocorti-
coid receptors to stimulate sodium and water retention to preserve 
the circulating blood volume. Renin release can also be triggered 
by catecholamines, hypokalemia, and a decrease in sodium chlo-
ride absorption in the macula densa cells. Aldosterone secretion 
can be directly stimulated by ACTH and hyperkalemia. Thus, 
sodium restriction activates and sodium overload suppresses the 
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis. Mineralocorticoid escape 
refers to the counterregulatory mechanisms that occur after 3 to 5 
days of excessive mineralocorticoid administration. Several mech-
anisms contribute to this escape, including renal hemodynamic 
factors and increased release of ANP. 
 Excess aldosterone secretion causes hypertension through two 
main mechanisms: (1) mineralocorticoid-induced expansion of 
plasma and extracellular fluid volume; and (2) increase in total 
peripheral vascular resistance. 
 PRIMARY ALDOSTERONISM 
 Hypertension, suppressed plasma renin activity (PRA), and 
increased aldosterone excretion characterize the syndrome of pri-
mary aldosteronism. Aldosterone-producing adenoma (APA) and 
bilateral idiopathic hyperaldosteronism (IHA) are the two most 
common subtypes of primary aldosteronism ( Table 10–2 ). 
TABLE 10–2 Adrenocortical causes of hypertension.
Low Renin and High Aldosterone
PRIMARY ALDOSTERONISM
Aldosterone-producing adenoma (APA) ≈35% of cases
Bilateral idiopathic hyperplasia (IHA) ≈60% of cases
Unilateral (primary) adrenal hyperplasia ≈2% of cases
Aldosterone-producing adrenocortical carcinoma <1% of cases
Familial hyperaldosteronism (FH)
 Glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism (FH type I) <1% of cases
 FH type II (APA or IHA) <2% of cases
Ectopic aldosterone-producing adenoma or carcinoma <0.1% of cases
Low Renin and Low Aldosterone
HYPERDEOXYCORTICOSTERONISM
 Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
  11β-Hydroxylase deficiency
  17α-Hydroxylase deficiency
 Deoxycorticosterone-producing tumor
 Primary cortisol resistance
APPARENT MINERALOCORTICOID EXCESS (AME)/11β-HYDROXYSTEROID 
DEHYDROGENASE DEFICIENCY
Genetic
 Type 1 AME
 Type 2 AME
Acquired
 Licorice or carbenoxolone ingestion (type 1 AME)
 Cushing syndrome (type 2 AME)
CUSHING SYNDROME
Exogenous glucocorticoid administration–most common cause
Endogenous
 ACTH-dependent ≈85% of cases
  Pituitary
  Ectopic
 ACTH-independent ≈15% of cases
  Unilateral adrenal disease
  Bilateral adrenal disease
   Massive macronodular hyperplasia (rare)
   Primary pigmented nodular adrenal disease (rare)
ACTH, corticotropin; AME, apparent mineralocorticoid excess; APA, aldosterone-pro-
ducing adenoma; FH, familial hyperaldosteronism; IHA, idiopathic hyperaldoster-
onism.
CHAPTER 10 Endocrine Hypertension     333
A much less common form, unilateral hyperplasia, is caused by 
micronodular or macronodular hyperplasia of the zona glomeru-
losa of predominantly one adrenal gland. Unilateral hyperplasia is 
referred to as primary adrenal hyperplasia (PAH). Familial hyper-
aldosteronism (FH) is also rare and two types have been described: 
FH type I and FH type II. FH type I, or glucocorticoid-remedia-
ble aldosteronism (GRA), is autosomal dominant in inheritance 
and associated with variable degrees of hyperaldosteronism, high 
levels of hybrid steroids (eg, 18-hydroxycortisol and 18-oxocorti-
sol), and suppression with exogenous glucocorticoids. FH type II 
refers to the familial occurrence of APA or IHA or both. 
 Prevalence 
 In the past, clinicians would not consider the diagnosis of primary 
aldosteronism unless the patient presented with spontaneous 
hypokalemia, and then the diagnostic evaluation would require 
discontinuing antihypertensive medications for at least 2 weeks. 
The spontaneous  hypokalemia/no antihypertensive drug diagnostic 
approach resulted in predicted prevalence rates of less than 0.5% 
of hypertensive patients. However, it is now recognized that most 
patients with primary aldosteronism are not hypokalemic and that 
case-detection testing can be completed with a simple blood test 
(plasma aldosterone concentration [PAC]-to-plasma renin activity 
[PRA] ratio) while the patient is taking most antihypertensive 
drugs. Using the PAC-PRA ratio as a case-detection test, followed 
by aldosterone suppression confirmatory testing, has resulted in 
much higher prevalence estimates (5%-10% of all patients with 
hypertension) for primary aldosteronism. 
 Clinical Presentation 
 The diagnosis of primary aldosteronism is usually made in patients 
who are in the third to sixth decade of life. Few symptoms are 
specific to the syndrome. Patients with marked hypokalemia may 
have muscle weakness and cramping, headaches, palpitations, 
polydipsia, polyuria, nocturia, or a combination of these. Periodic 
paralysis is a very rare presentation in Caucasians, but it is not an 
infrequent presentation in patients of Asian descent. The polyuria 
and nocturia are a result of a hypokalemia-induced renal concen-
trating defect and the presentation is frequently mistaken for 
prostatism in men. There are no specific physical findings. Edema 
is not a common finding because of mineralocorticoid escape. The 
degree of hypertension is usually moderate to severe and may be 
resistant to usual pharmacologic treatments. Although not com-
mon, primary aldosteronism may present with hypertensive 
urgencies. Patients with APA tend to have higher blood pressures 
than those with IHA. Hypokalemia is frequently absent; thus, all 
patients with hypertension are candidates for this disorder. In 
other patients, the hypokalemia only becomes evident with addi-
tion of a potassium-wasting diuretic (eg, hydrochlorothiazide, 
furosemide). Aldosterone excess also leads to a mild metabolic 
alkalosis because of increased urinary hydrogen excretion medi-
ated both by hypokalemia and by the direct stimulatory effect 
of aldosterone on distal renal tubule acidification. Because of a 
reset osmostat, the serum sodium concentration tends to be 
 high- normal or slightly above the upper limit of normal—this 
clinical finding is very useful when initially assessing the potential 
for primary aldosteronism. 
 Several studies have shown that patients with primary aldoster-
onism may be at higher risk than other patients with hypertension 
for target organ damage of the heart and kidney. When matched 
for age, blood pressure, and duration of hypertension, patients 
with primary aldosteronism have greater left ventricular mass by 
echocardiographic measurements than patients with other types of 
hypertension (eg, pheochromocytoma, Cushing syndrome, or 
essential hypertension). In patients with APA, the left ventricular 
wall thickness and mass decreases markedly 1 year after adrenalec-
tomy. Patients presenting with either APA or IHA have a signifi-
cantly higher rate of cardiovascular events (eg, stroke, atrial 
fibrillation, and myocardial infarction) than matched patients 
with essential hypertension who have similar degrees of hyperten-
sion duration and control. 
 Diagnosis 
 The diagnostic approach to primary aldosteronism can be consid-
ered in three parts: case-detection tests, confirmatory tests, and 
subtype evaluation tests. 
 A. Case-detection tests 
 Spontaneous hypokalemia is 
uncommon in patients with uncomplicated hypertension and, 
when present, strongly suggests associated mineralocorticoid 
excess. However, most patients with primary aldosteronism have 
baseline serum levels of potassium in the normal range. Therefore, 
hypokalemia is not and should not be the only criterion used to 
determine whom to test for primary aldosteronism. Patients with 
hypertension and hypokalemia (regardless of presumed cause), 
treatment-resistant hypertension (three antihypertensive drugs 
and poor control), severe hypertension (≥160 mm Hg systolic or 
≥100 mm Hg diastolic), hypertension and an incidental adrenal 
mass, and onset of hypertension at a young age should undergo 
case-detection testing for primary aldosteronism ( Figure 10–4 ). In 
addition, primary aldosteronism should be tested for when con-
sidering a secondary hypertension evaluation (eg, when testing for 
renovascular disease or pheochromocytoma). 
 In patients with suspected primary aldosteronism, case detec-
tion can be accomplished by measuring a morning (preferably 
between 8 AM and 10 AM) ambulatory paired random PAC and PRA 
(see  Figure 10–4 ). This test may be performed while the patient is 
taking most antihypertensive medications and without posture 
stimulation. Hypokalemia reduces the secretion of aldosterone, 
and it is optimal in patients with hypokalemia to restore the serum 
level of potassium to normal before performing diagnostic studies. 
Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (eg, spironolactone and 
eplerenone) are the only medications that absolutely interfere with 
interpretation of the ratio and should be discontinued at least 
6 weeks before testing. ACE-inhibitors and angiotensin receptor 
blockers (ARB) have the potential to falsely elevate PRA. 
Therefore, in a patient treated with an ACE inhibitor or ARB, the 
finding of a detectable PRA level or a low PAC-PRA ratio does not 
exclude the diagnosis of primary aldosteronism. However, a very 
334    CHAPTER 10 Endocrine Hypertension
useful clinical point is that when a PRA level is undetectably low 
in a patient taking an ACE inhibitor or ARB, primary aldoster-
onism is likely. A second important clinical point is that PRA is 
suppressed (<1.0 ng/mL/h) in almost all patients with primary 
aldosteronism, regardless of concurrent medications. 
 The PAC-PRA ratio is based on the concept of paired hormone 
measurements. For example, in a hypertensive hypokalemic 
patient: (a) secondary hyperaldosteronism should be considered 
when both PRA and PAC are increased and the PAC-PRA ratio is 
less than 10 (eg, renovascular disease); (b) an alternate source of 
mineralocorticoid receptor agonism should be considered when 
both PRA and PAC are suppressed (eg, hypercortisolism); and 
(c) primary aldosteronism should be suspected when PRA is sup-
pressed (<1.0 ng/mL/h) and PAC is increased ( Figure 10–5 ). 
Although there is some uncertainty about test characteristics and 
lack of standardization, the PAC-PRA ratio is widely accepted as 
the case-detection test of choice for primary aldosteronism. It 
is important to understand that the lower limit of detection varies 
among different PRA assays and can have a dramatic effect on the 
PAC-PRA ratio. As an example, if the lower limit of detection for 
PRA is 0.6 ng/mL/h and the PAC is 18 ng/dL, then the PAC-PRA 
ratio would be 30; however, if the lower limit of detection for PRA 
is 0.1 ng/mL/h and the PAC is 18 ng/dL, then the PAC-PRA ratio 
would be 180. Thus, the cutoff for a high PAC-PRA ratio is labo-
ratory dependent and, more specifically, PRA assay dependent. At 
Mayo Clinic, a PAC (in ng/dL)-PRA (in ng/mL/h) ratio of 20 or 
more and PAC of at least 15 ng/dL are found in more than 90% 
of patients with surgically confirmed APA. In patients without 
primary aldosteronism, most of the variation occurs within the 
normal range. The sensitivity and specificity of the PAC-PRA 
ratio in the diagnosis of primary aldosteronism are approximately 
80% and 75%, respectively. A high PAC-PRA ratio with a PAC of 
at least 15 ng/dL is a positive case-detection test result, a finding 
that warrants further testing. Other initial case-detection strategies 
include measurement of isolated plasma renin activity or 24-hour 
urinary aldosterone excretion. 
Consider testing for primary aldosteronism in the following settings:
• Hypertension and hypokalemia
• Resistant hypertension (three drugs and poor BP control)
• Adrenal incidentaloma and hypertension
• Onset of hypertension at a young age (< 30 y)
• Severe hypertension (≥ 160 mm Hg systolic or ≥ 100 mm Hg diastolic)
• Whenever considering secondary hypertension
Case-detection testing:
Morning blood sample in seated ambulant patient
• Plasma aldosterone concentration (PAC)
• Plasma renin activity (PRA) or plasma renin concentration (PRC)
and
Confirmatory testing
↑ PAC (≥ 15 ng/dL; ≥ 416 pmol/L)
↓ PRA (< 1.0 ng/mL/h)
PAC-PRA ratio ≥ 20 ng/dL per ng/mL/h (≥ 555 pmol/L per ng/mL/h)
 FIGURE 10–4  When to consider testing for primary aldoster-
onism and use of the plasma aldosterone concentration to plasma 
renin activity ratio as a case-finding tool (BP, blood pressure, PAC, 
plasma aldosterone concentration, PRA, plasma renin activity, 
PRC, plasma renin concentration). 
Hypertension and hypokalemia
Plasma aldosterone concentration (PAC)
Plasma renin activity (PRA)
↑ PAC
↑ PRA
PAC-PRA ratio <10
(277 in SI units)
Renovascular hypertension
Diuretic use
Renin-secreting tumor
Malignant-phase hypertension
Coarctation of the aorta
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
Exogenous mineralocorticoid
DOC-producing tumor
Cushing syndrome
11 β-OHSD deficiency
Altered aldosterone metabolism
Liddle syndrome
Primary
aldosteronism
↑ PAC
↓ PRA
PAC-PRA ratio ≥20
(≥555 in SI units)
and
PAC ≥15 ng/dL (≥416 pmol/L)
↓ PAC
↓ PRA
 FIGURE 10–5  Use of the plasma aldosterone concentration-to-plasma renin activity ratio to differentiate among different causes of hyper-
tension and hypokalemia (DOC, deoxycorticosterone; OHSD, hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase; PAC, plasma aldosterone concentration; PRA, 
plasma renin activity; SI units, International System of Units). (Adapted from Young WF Jr, Hogan MJ. Renin-independent hypermineralocorti-
coidism.  Trends Endocrinol Metab . 1994;5:97-106.) 
CHAPTER 10 Endocrine Hypertension     335
 B. Confirmatory tests 
 An increased PAC-PRA ratio is not 
diagnostic by itself, and primary aldosteronism must be confirmed 
by demonstrating lack of normal suppressiblity of aldosterone 
secretion. The list of drugs and hormones capable of affecting the 
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis is extensive and frequently a 
medication-contaminated evaluation is unavoidable. Calcium 
channel blockers and α 1 -adrenergic receptor blockers do not affect 
the diagnostic accuracy in most cases. It is impossible to interpret 
data obtained from patients receiving treatment with mineralocor-
ticoid receptor antagonists (eg, spironolactone, eplerenone) when 
PRA is not suppressed. Therefore, treatment with a mineralocor-
ticoid receptor antagonist should not be initiated until the evalu-
ation has been completed and the final decisions about treatment 
have been made. If primary aldosteronism is suspected in a patient 
receiving treatment with spironolactone or eplerenone, the treat-
ment should be discontinued for at least 6 weeks before further 
diagnostic testing. Aldosterone suppression testing can be per-
formed with orally administered sodium chloride and measure-
ment of urinary aldosterone or with intravenous sodium chloride 
loading and measurement of PAC: 
 a.  Oral sodium loading test —After hypertension and 
hypokalemia are controlled, patients should receive a high- 
sodium diet (supplemented with sodium chloride tablets if 
needed) for 3 days, with a goal sodium intake of 5000 mg 
of sodium (equivalent to 12.8 g sodium chloride or 
218 mEq of sodium). The risk of increasing dietary sodium 
in patients with severe hypertension must be assessed in each 
case. Because the high-sodium diet can increase kaliuresis 
and hypokalemia, vigorous replacement of potassium chlo-
ride may be needed, and the serum level of potassium 
should be monitored daily. On the third day of the high- 
sodium diet, a 24-hour urine specimen is collected for mea-
surement of aldosterone, sodium, and creatinine. To docu-
ment adequate sodium repletion, the 24-hour urinary 
sodium excretion should exceed 200 mEq. Urinary aldoster-
one excretion more than 12 mcg/24 h is consistent with 
autonomous aldosterone secretion. The sensitivity and 
specificity of the oral sodium loading test are 96% and 93%, 
respectively. 
 b. Intravenous saline infusion test —The intravenous saline 
infusion test has also been used for the confirmation of pri-
mary aldosteronism. Normal subjects show suppression of 
PAC after volume expansion with isotonic saline; subjects 
with primary aldosteronism do not show this suppression. 
The risks associated with rapid intravenous volume expan-
sion should be assessed in each case. The test is done after an 
overnight fast. Two liters of 0.9% sodium chloride solution 
are infused intravenously with an infusion pump over 
4 hours into the recumbent patient. Blood pressure and 
heart rate are monitored during the infusion. At the comple-
tion of the infusion, blood is drawn for measurement of 
PAC. PAC levels in normal subjects decrease to less than 
5 ng/dL; most patients with primary aldosteronism do not 
suppress to less than 10 ng/dL; postsaline infusion PAC 
values between 5 and 10 ng/dL are indeterminate and can 
be seen in patients with IHA. 
 C. Subtype studies 
 Following case-detection and confirma-
tory testing, the third management step guides the therapeutic 
approach by distinguishing APA and PAH from IHA and GRA. 
Unilateral adrenalectomy in patients with APA or PAH results in 
normalization of hypokalemia in all; hypertension is improved in 
all and is cured in approximately 30% to 60% of them. In IHA 
and GRA, unilateral or bilateral adrenalectomy seldom corrects 
the hypertension. IHA and GRA should be treated medically. APA 
is found in approximately 35% of cases and bilateral IHA in 
approximately 60% of cases (see  Table 10–2 ). APAs are usually 
hypodense nodules (<2 cm in diameter) on CT and are golden 
yellow in color on cut section. IHA adrenal glands may be normal 
on CT or show nodular changes. Aldosterone-producing adrenal 
carcinomas are almost always greater than 4 cm in diameter and 
have a suspicious imaging phenotype on CT. Patients with aldos-
terone-producing adrenocortical carcinomas usually have severe 
aldosterone excess with serum potassium concentrations fre-
quently less than 2.0 mEq/L. 
 a. Adrenal CT— Primary aldosteronism subtype evaluation 
may require one or more tests, the first of which is imaging 
the adrenal glands with CT ( Figure 10–6 ). This imaging test 
is usually ordered as CT of the abdomen limited to the 
adrenal glands with 2-mm contiguous cuts. Although con-
trast enhancement is not necessary, contrast administration 
result in improved discrimination between normal adrenal 
cortex and the small lipid-rich cortical adenoma. When a 
solitary unilateral hypodense (Hounsfield units [HU] <10) 
macroadenoma (>1 cm) and normal contralateral adrenal 
morphology are found on CT in a young patient (adrenal 
incidentalomas are uncommon in patients <40 years) with 
primary aldosteronism, unilateral adrenalectomy is a reason-
able therapeutic option ( Figure 10–7 ). However, in many 
cases, CT may show normal-appearing adrenals, minimal 
unilateral adrenal limb thickening, unilateral microadenomas 
(<1 cm), bilateral macroadenomas, or a large (eg, >2 cm) 
unilateral macroadenomas that would be atypical for pri-
mary aldosteronism. In these cases, when the patient wants 
to pursue the surgical treatment option for primary aldoster-
onism, additional testing is required to determine the source 
of excess aldosterone secretion ( Figure 10–8 ). Small APAs 
may be labeled incorrectly as IHA on the basis of CT find-
ings of bilateral nodularity or normal-appearing adrenals. 
Also, apparent adrenal microadenomas may actually repre-
sent areas of hyperplasia, and unilateral adrenalectomy 
would be inappropriate. In addition, nonfunctioning unilat-
eral adrenal macroadenomas are not uncommon, especially 
in individuals more than 40 years of age. Unilateral PAH 
may be visible on CT or the PAH adrenal may appear nor-
mal on CT. In general, patients with APAs have more severe 
hypertension, more frequent hypokalemia, higher plasma 
(>25 ng/dL) and urinary (>30 mcg/24 h) levels of aldoster-
one than those with IHA. 
 Adrenal CT is not accurate in distinguishing between 
APA and IHA. In one study of 203 patients with primary 
aldosteronism who were evaluated with both CT and adre-
nal venous sampling (AVS), CT was accurate in only 53% 
of patients; based on CT findings, 42 patients (22%) would 
have been incorrectly excluded as candidates for adrenalec-
tomy and 48 (25%) might have had unnecessary or inap-
propriate surgery. Therefore, AVS is essential to direct 
appropriate therapy in patients older than 40 years of age 
with primary aldosteronism who have a high probability of 
336    CHAPTER 10 Endocrine Hypertension
APA and who seek a potential surgical cure. However, it is 
important to recognize that the surgical option is not man-
datory in patients with APA—pharmacologic therapy with 
a mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist is the medication 
equivalent of adrenalectomy (see later). 
 b. Adrenal venous sampling— AVS is the criterion standard 
test to distinguish between unilateral and bilateral disease in 
patients with primary aldosteronism who want to pursue 
surgical management for their hypertension. AVS is an intri-
cate procedure because the right adrenal vein is small and 
may be difficult to locate and cannulate—the success rate 
depends on the proficiency of the angiographer. The five 
keys to a successful AVS program are (1) appropriate 
patient selection; (2) careful patient preparation; (3) focused 
technical expertise; (4) defined protocol; and (5) accurate 
data interpretation. A center-specific, written protocol is 
mandatory. The protocol should be developed by an inter-
ested group of endocrinologists, hypertension specialists, 
internists, radiologists, and laboratory personnel. Safeguards 
should be in place to prevent mislabeling of the blood tubes 
in the radiology suite and to prevent sample mix-up in the 
laboratory. At Mayo Clinic, we use continuous cosyntropin 
infusion during AVS (50 µg/h started 30 minutes before 
sampling and continued throughout the procedure) for the 
following reasons: (a) to minimize stress-induced fluctua-
tions in aldosterone secretion during nonsimultaneous AVS; 
(b) to maximize the gradient in cortisol from adrenal vein to 
inferior vena cava (IVC) and thus confirm successful 
 sampling of the adrenal veins; and (c) to maximize the secre-
tion of aldosterone from an APA. The adrenal veins are 
catheterized through the percutaneous femoral vein 
approach, and the position of the catheter tip is verified by 
gentle injection of a small amount of nonionic contrast 
medium and radiographic documentation (see  Figure 10–8 ). 
Blood is obtained from both adrenal veins and the IVC 
below the renal veins and assayed for aldosterone and corti-
sol concentrations. To be sure there is no cross-contamina-
tion, the IVC sample should be obtained from the external 
iliac vein. The venous sample from the left side typically 
is obtained from the common phrenic vein immediately 
adjacent to the entrance of the adrenal vein. The cortisol 
concentrations from the adrenal veins and IVC are used 
to confirm successful catheterization; the adrenal vein-IVC 
cortisol ratio is typically more than 10:1. 
 Dividing the right and left adrenal vein PACs by their 
respective cortisol concentrations corrects for the dilutional 
effect of the inferior phenic vein flow into the left adrenal 
vein; these are termed  cortisol-corrected 
ratios 
(see  Figure 10–8 ). In patients with APA, the mean cortisol- 
corrected aldosterone ratio (APA-side PAC/cortisol:normal 
adrenal PAC/cortisol) is 18:1. A cutoff of the cortisol- 
corrected aldosterone ratio from high side to low side more 
than 4:1 is used to indicate unilateral aldosterone excess (see 
 Figure 10–8 ). In patients with IHA, the mean cortisol- 
corrected aldosterone ratio is 1.8:1 (high side:low side); a 
ratio less than 3:1 is suggestive of bilateral aldosterone 
Subtype testing
Adrenal CT scan
Normal, micronodularity,
bilateral masses, or atypical
unilateral mass (eg >2 cm)
Surgery not
desired
Surgery
desired
No
lateralization
with AVS
Lateralization
with AVS
>40 y
consider
AVS
IHA or GRA:
Pharmacologic
therapy
Pharmacologic
therapy
APA or PAH:
Unilateral laparoscopic
adrenalectomy
<40 y
consider
Surgery not
desired
Unilateral hypodense
nodule >1 cm and <2 cm
 FIGURE 10–6  Subtype evaluation of primary aldosteronism. For patients who want to pursue a surgical treatment for their hypertension, 
adrenal venous sampling is frequently a key diagnostic step. See text for details (APA, aldosterone-producing adenoma; AVS, adrenal venous 
sampling; CT, computed tomography; IHA, idiopathic hyperaldosteronism; PAH, primary adrenal hyperplasia). (Adapted from Young WF Jr, 
Hogan MJ. Renin-independent hypermineralocorticoidism.  Trends Endocrinol Metab . 1994;5:97-106). 
CHAPTER 10 Endocrine Hypertension     337
 hypersecretion. Therefore, most patients with a unilateral 
source of aldosterone will have cortisol-corrected aldosterone 
lateralization ratios greater than 4.0; ratios greater than 3.0 
but less than 4.0 represent a zone of overlap. Ratios no more 
than 3.0 are consistent with bilateral aldosterone secretion. 
The test characteristics of AVS for detecting unilateral aldos-
terone hypersecretion (APA or PAH) have sensitivity of 95% 
and specificity of 100%. However, since all patients who 
undergo AVS are not sent to surgery, the true diagnostic 
sensitivity of AVS is unknown. At centers with experience 
with AVS, the complication rate is 2.5% or less. Complications 
can include symptomatic groin hematoma, adrenal hemor-
rhage, and dissection of an adrenal vein. 
 Some centers and clinical practice guidelines recommend 
that AVS should be performed in all patients who have the 
diagnosis of primary aldosteronism. However, a more practi-
cal approach is to consider the use of AVS based on patient 
preferences, patient age, clinical comorbidities, and clinical 
probability of finding an APA (see  Figure 10–6 ). 
 c. Glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism—familial 
hyperaldosteronism type I —This syndrome is inherited in 
an autosomal dominant fashion and is extremely rare 
(responsible for fewer than 1% of cases of primary aldoster-
onism) (see  Table 10–2 ). GRA is characterized by hyperten-
sion of early onset that is usually severe and refractory to 
conventional antihypertensive therapies, aldosterone excess, 
A
B
C
 FIGURE 10–7  A 30-year-old woman had a 7-year history of hypertension and hypokalemia. Her blood pressure was not well controlled despite a 
four-drug program that included a calcium channel blocker, ACE-inhibitor, thiazide diuretic, and a β-adrenergic blocker. To correct her hypokalemia, she 
took 420 mEq of potassium per day. The case-detection test for primary aldosteronism was positive, with a plasma aldosterone concentration (PAC) of
34 ng/dL and low plasma renin activity (PRA) at less than 0.6 ng/mL/h (PAC-PRA ratio >56). The confirmatory test for primary aldosteronism was also pos-
itive, with 24-hour urinary excretion of aldosterone of 77 μg on a high-sodium diet (urinary sodium, 205 mEq/24 h).  A. Adrenal CT axial image showing a 
15-mm low-density mass (arrow) within the right adrenal gland. She underwent laparoscopic right adrenalectomy.  B . Right adrenal gland (6.2 g, 6.1 cm × 
3.7 cm × 1.4 cm) with a 1.8-cm cortical adenoma arising from the surface.  C. Cut sections of the yellow adrenal cortical adenoma forming a 1.8 cm × 
1.7 cm × 1.3 cm nodule. The postoperative plasma aldosterone concentration was less than 1.0 ng/dL. Hypokalemia was resolved. Four years after sur-
gery, her blood pressure was normal without the aid of antihypertensive medications. 
338    CHAPTER 10 Endocrine Hypertension
 suppressed PRA, and excess production of 18-hydroxycorti-
sol and 18-oxycortisol. GRA is caused by a chimeric gene 
duplication that results from unequal crossing over between 
the promoter sequence of  CYP11B1 gene (encoding 11β-
hydroxylase) and the coding sequence of  CYP11B2 (encod-
ing aldosterone synthase). This chimeric gene contains the 
3′ ACTH-responsive portion of the promoter from the  11β-
hydroxylase gene fused to the 5′ coding sequence of the 
aldosterone synthase gene. The result is ectopic expression of 
aldosterone synthase activity in the cortisol-producing zona 
fasciculata. Thus, mineralocorticoid production is regulated 
by ACTH instead of the normal secretagogue, angiotensin 
II. Aldosterone secretion can be suppressed by glucocorti-
coid therapy. In the absence of glucocorticoid therapy, this 
mutation results in overproduction of aldosterone and the 
hybrid steroids 18-hydroxycortisol and 18-oxycortisol, 
which can be measured in the urine to make the diagnosis. 
 Genetic testing is a sensitive and specific means of diag-
nosing GRA and obviates the need to measure the urinary 
levels of 18-oxocortisol and 18-hydroxycortisol or to per-
form dexamethasone suppression testing. Genetic testing for 
GRA should be considered for primary aldosteronism 
patients with a family history of primary aldosteronism or 
onset of primary aldosteronism at a young age (eg, 
<20 years), or in primary aldosteronism patients who have a 
family history of strokes at a young age. Cerebrovascular 
complications (eg, hemorrhagic stroke) associated with 
intracranial aneurysms affect approximately 20% of all 
patients with GRA—a frequency of cerebral aneurysm simi-
lar to that found in adult polycystic kidney disease. 
 d. Familial hyperaldosteronism type II— FH type II is auto-
somal dominant and may be monogenic. The hyperaldoster-
onism in FH type II does not suppress with dexamethasone, 
and GRA mutation testing is negative. FH type II is more 
common than FH type I, but it still represents less than 2% of 
all patients with primary aldosteronism. The molecular basis 
for FH type II is unclear, although a recent linkage analysis 
study showed an association with chromosomal region 7p22. 
A
B
*R adrenal vein A/C ratio divided by L adrenal vein A/C ratio.
Vein
R adrenal
vein
L adrenal
vein
Inferior
vena cava
Aldosterone
(A), ng/dL
Bilateral adrenal venous sampling
8450
923
13
Cortisol
(C), μg/dL
1669
1599
22
A/C
ratio
5.1
0.6
0.6
Aldosterone
ratio*
8.5
C
 FIGURE 10–8  A 48-year-old man had a 7-year history of hypertension that was not optimally controlled on four antihypertensive drugs 
(β-adrenergic blocker, peripheral α 1 -antagonist, angiotensin receptor blocker, and a thiazide diuretic). He was not hypokalemic. Resistant hyperten-
sion prompted case-detection testing for primary aldosteronism with a plasma aldosterone concentration (PAC) of 15 ng/dL and low plasma renin 
activity (PRA) at less than 0.6 ng/mL/h (PAC-PRA ratio >25). The confirmatory test for primary aldosteronism was also positive, with 24-hour urinary 
excretion of aldosterone of 16 μg on a high-sodium diet (urinary sodium, 356 mEq/24 h).  A. Adrenal CT split section axial images show a 12-mm 
thickening (large arrow) in the inferior aspect of the left adrenal gland and a tiny nodule (small arrow) in the right adrenal gland. The patient wanted 
to pursue a surgical approach to the resolution of or improvement in hypertension.  B . Adrenal venous sampling images showing the catheter in the 
right and left adrenal veins. The delicate venous architecture is demonstrated.  C . Adrenal venous sampling lateralized aldosterone secretion to the 
right adrenal gland, and a 3-mm yellow cortical adenoma was found at laparoscopic right adrenalectomy. The postoperative plasma aldosterone 
concentration was less than 1.0 ng/dL. One year after surgery, his blood pressure was in the normal range with the aid of one antihypertensive medi-
cation. (Reproduced with permission from: Young WF. Endocrine Hypertension: Then and Now. Endocr Pract. 2010;16:888-902.) 
CHAPTER 10 Endocrine Hypertension     339
 Treatment 
 The treatment goal is to prevent the morbidity and mortality 
associated with hypertension, hypokalemia, and cardiovascular 
damage. The cause of the primary aldosteronism helps to deter-
mine the appropriate treatment. Normalization of blood pressure 
should not be the only goal in managing a patient who has pri-
mary aldosteronism. In addition to the kidney and colon, miner-
alocorticoid receptors occur in the heart, brain, and blood vessels. 
Excessive secretion of aldosterone is associated with increased risk 
of cardiovascular disease and morbidity. Therefore, normalization 
of circulating aldosterone or mineralocorticoid receptor blockade 
should be part of the management plan for all patients with pri-
mary aldosteronism. However, clinicians must understand that 
most patients with long-standing primary aldosteronism have 
some degree of renal insufficiency that is masked by the glomeru-
lar hyperfiltration associated with aldosterone excess. The true 
degree of renal insufficiency may only become evident after effec-
tive pharmacologic or surgical therapy. 
 A. Surgical treatment of aldosterone-producing adenoma 
and unilateral hyperplasia 
 Unilateral laparoscopic adrena-
lectomy is an excellent treatment option for patients with APA or 
PAH (unilateral hyperplasia). Although blood pressure control 
improves in nearly 100% of patients postoperatively, average long-
term cure rates of hypertension after unilateral adrenalectomy for 
APA range from 30% to 60%. Persistent hypertension following 
adrenalectomy is correlated directly with having more than one 
first-degree relative with hypertension, use of more than two anti-
hypertensive agents preoperatively, older age, increased serum 
creatinine level, and duration of hypertension. 
 Laparoscopic adrenalectomy is the preferred surgical approach 
and is associated with shorter hospital stays and less long-term 
morbidity than the open approach. Because APAs are small and 
may be multiple, the entire adrenal gland should be removed. To 
decrease the surgical risk, hypokalemia should be corrected with 
potassium supplements and/or a mineralocorticoid receptor 
antagonist preoperatively. The mineralocorticoid receptor antago-
nist and potassium supplements should be discontinued postop-
eratively. PAC should be measured 1 to 2 days after the operation 
to confirm a biochemical cure. Serum potassium levels should be 
monitored weekly for 4 weeks after surgery and a generous sodium 
diet should be followed to avoid the hyperkalemia of hypoaldos-
teronism that may occur because of the chronic suppression of the 
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis. In approximately 5% of APA 
patients clinically significant hyperkalemia may develop after sur-
gery and short-term fludrocortisone supplementation may be 
required. Typically, the component of hypertension that was 
associated with aldosterone excess resolves in 1 to 3 months 
postoperatively. 
 B. Pharmacologic treatment 
 IHA and GRA should be 
treated medically. In addition, APA patients may be treated medi-
cally if the medical treatment includes mineralocorticoid receptor 
blockade. A sodium-restricted diet (<100 mEq of sodium per 
day), maintenance of ideal body weight, tobacco avoidance, and 
regular aerobic exercise contribute significantly to the success of 
pharmacologic treatment. No placebo-controlled randomized tri-
als have evaluated the relative efficacy of drugs in the treatment of 
primary aldosteronism. Spironolactone, available as 25-, 50-, and 
100-mg tablets, has been the drug of choice to treat primary aldos-
teronism for more than four decades. The initial dosage is 12.5 to 
25 mg/d and is increased to 400 mg/d if necessary to achieve a 
high-normal serum potassium concentration without the aid of 
oral potassium chloride supplementation. Hypokalemia responds 
promptly, but hypertension may take as long as 4 to 8 weeks to 
correct. After several months of therapy, this dosage often can be 
decreased to as little as 25 to 50 mg/d; dosage titration is based on 
a goal serum potassium level in the high-normal range. Serum 
potassium and creatinine should be monitored frequently during 
the first 4 to 6 weeks of therapy (especially in patients with renal 
insufficiency or diabetes mellitus). Spironolactone increases the 
half-life of digoxin, and for patients taking this drug, the dosage 
may need to be adjusted when treatment with spironolactone is 
started. Concomitant therapy with salicylates should be avoided 
because they interfere with the tubular secretion of an active 
metabolite and decrease the effectiveness of spironolactone. 
Spironolactone is not selective for the mineralocorticoid receptor. 
For example, antagonism at the testosterone receptor may result in 
painful gynecomastia, erectile dysfunction, and decreased libido in 
men; agonist activity at the progesterone receptor results in men-
strual irregularity in women. 
 Eplerenone is a steroid-based antimineralocorticoid that acts as 
a competitive and selective mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist. 
It has a marked reduction in progestational and antiandrogenic 
actions compared with spironolactone. Treatment trials compar-
ing the efficacy of eplerenone versus spironolactone for the treat-
ment of primary aldosteronism have not been published. 
Eplerenone is available as 25- and 50-mg tablets. For primary 
aldosteronism, it is reasonable to start with a dose of 25 mg twice 
daily (twice daily because of the shorter half-life of eplerenone 
compared to spironolactone) and titrated upward for a target 
high-normal serum potassium concentration without the aid of 
potassium supplements. Potency studies with eplerenone show 
50% less milligram per milligram potency when compared with 
spironolactone. As with spironolactone, it is important to follow 
blood pressure, serum potassium, and serum creatinine levels 
closely. 
 Patients with IHA frequently require a second antihypertensive 
agent to achieve adequate blood pressure control. Hypervolemia is 
a major reason for resistance to drug therapy, and low doses of a 
thiazide (eg, 12.5-50 mg of hydrochlorothiazide daily) or a related 
sulfonamide diuretic are effective in combination with the miner-
alocorticoid receptor antagonist. Because these agents often 
lead to further hypokalemia, serum potassium levels should be 
monitored. 
 Before initiating treatment, GRA should be confirmed with 
genetic testing. In the GRA patient, chronic treatment with 
physiologic doses of a glucocorticoid normalizes blood pressure 
and corrects hypokalemia. The clinician should avoid iatrogenic 
Cushing syndrome with excessive doses of glucocorticoids, 
340    CHAPTER 10 Endocrine Hypertension
 especially with the use of dexamethasone in children. The smallest 
effective dose of shorter acting agents such as prednisone or hydro-
cortisone should be prescribed in relation to body surface area (eg, 
hydrocortisone, 10-12 mg/m 2 /d). Target blood pressure in chil-
dren should be guided by age-specific blood pressure percentiles. 
Children should be monitored by pediatricians with expertise in 
glucocorticoid therapy, with careful attention paid to preventing 
retardation of linear growth by overtreatment. Treatment with 
mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists in these patients may be 
just as effective and avoids the potential disruption of the hypo-
thalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and risk of iatrogenic side effects. 
In addition, glucocorticoid therapy or mineralocorticoid receptor 
blockade may even have a role in normotensive GRA patients. 
 OTHER FORMS OF MINERALOCORTICOID 
EXCESS OR EFFECT 
 The medical disorders associated with excess mineralocorticoid 
effect from 11-deoxycorticosterone (DOC) and cortisol are listed 
in  Table 10–2 . These diagnoses should be considered when PAC 
and PRA are low in patients with hypertension and hypokalemia. 
 Hyperdeoxycorticosteronism 
 A. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia 
 Congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia (CAH) is caused by enzymatic defects in adrenal ste-
roidogenesis that result in deficient secretion of cortisol (see 
Chapter 14). The lack of inhibitory feedback by cortisol on the 
hypothalamus and pituitary produces an ACTH-driven buildup 
of cortisol precursors proximal to the enzymatic deficiency. A 
deficiency of 11β-hydroxylase (CYP11B) or 17α-hydroxylase 
(CYP17) causes hypertension and hypokalemia because of hyper-
secretion of the mineralocorticoid DOC. The mineralocorticoid 
effect of increased circulating levels of DOC also decreases PRA 
and aldosterone secretion. These defects are autosomal recessive in 
inheritance and typically are diagnosed in childhood. However, 
partial enzymatic defects have been shown to cause hypertension 
in adults. 
 a. 11β-Hydroxylase deficiency— Approximately 5% of all 
cases of CAH are due to 11β-hydroxylase deficiency; the 
prevalence in Caucasians is 1 in 100,000. More than 40 
mutations have been described in  CYP11B1 , the gene 
encoding 11β-hydroxylase. There is an increased prevalence 
among Sephardic Jews from Morocco, suggestive of a 
founder effect. The impaired conversion of DOC to corti-
costerone results in high levels of DOC, 11-deoxycortisol, 
and adrenal androgens (see Chapter 14). Females present in 
infancy or childhood with hypertension, hypokalemia, acne, 
hirsutism, and virilization. Males present with pseudopreco-
cious puberty. Approximately two-thirds of patients have 
mild to moderate hypertension. Markedly increased levels of 
DOC, 11-deoxycortisol, and adrenal androgens confirm the 
diagnosis. Glucocorticoid replacement normalizes the ste-
roid abnormalities and hypertension. 
 b. 17α-Hydroxylase deficiency— 17α-Hydroxylase deficiency is 
a rare cause of CAH. 17α-Hydroxylase is essential for the 
synthesis of cortisol and gonadal hormones, and deficiency 
results in decreased production of cortisol and sex hor-
mones. Genetic 46,XY males present with either pseudoher-
maphroditism or as phenotypic females, and 46,XX females 
present with primary amenorrhea. Therefore, a person with 
this form of CAH may not come to medical attention until 
puberty. Patients present with eunuchoid proportions and 
appearance. The biochemical findings include low concen-
trations of plasma adrenal androgens, plasma 17α-
hydroxyprogesterone and cortisol. The plasma concentrations 
of DOC, corticosterone, and 18-hydroxycorticosterone (all 
produced in the zona fasciculata) are increased. Aldosterone 
(produced in zona glomerulosa) and PRA are suppressed. 
Although rare, there is an increased prevalence among 
Dutch Mennonites. As with 11β-hydroxylase deficiency, 
glucocorticoid replacement normalizes the steroid abnor-
malities and hypertension. 
 B. Deoxycorticosterone-producing 
tumor 
 DOC- 
prod ucing adrenal tumors are usually large and malignant. Some 
of them secrete androgens and estrogens in addition to DOC, 
which may cause virilization in women and feminization in men. 
A high level of plasma DOC or urinary tetrahydrodeoxycorticos-
terone and a large adrenal tumor seen on CT confirm the diagno-
sis. Aldosterone secretion in these patients is typically suppressed. 
Optimal treatment is complete surgical resection. 
 C. Primary cortisol resistance 
 Increased cortisol secretion 
and plasma cortisol concentrations without evidence of Cushing 
syndrome are found in patients with primary cortisol resistance 
(or glucocorticoid resistance), a rare familial syndrome. Cortisol 
resistance leads to elevations in ACTH secretion which, in turn, 
increases adrenal steroid production. The syndrome is character-
ized by hypokalemic alkalosis, hypertension, increased plasma 
concentrations of DOC, as well as cortisol, and increased adrenal 
androgen secretion. The hypertension and hypokalemia are likely 
due to the combined effects of excess DOC and increased cortisol 
access to the mineralocorticoid receptor (high rates of cortisol 
production that overwhelm 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 
type 2 [11β-HSD2] activity). Primary cortisol resistance is caused 
by defects in glucocorticoid receptors and assembly of the steroid–
receptor complex. The treatment for the mineralocorticoid- 
dependent hypertension is blockade of the mineralocorticoid 
receptor with a mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist or suppres-
sion of ACTH secretion with dexamethasone. 
 Apparent Mineralocorticoid Excess 
Syndrome 
 Type 1 apparent mineralocorticoid excess (AME) is the result of 
impaired activity of the microsomal enzyme 11β-HSD2, which 
normally inactivates cortisol in the kidney by converting it to 
cortisone ( Figure 10–9 ). Cortisol can be a potent mineralocorti-
coid, and as a result of the enzyme deficiency, high levels of corti-
sol accumulate in the kidney. Thus, 11β-HSD2 normally excludes 
physiologic glucocorticoids from the nonselective mineralocorti-
coid receptor by converting them to the inactive 11-keto compound, 
cortisone. The characteristic abnormal urinary cortisol-cortisone 
CHAPTER 10 Endocrine Hypertension     341
metabolite profile seen in apparent mineralocorticoid excess 
reflects decreased 11β-HSD2 activity (ratio of cortisol to cortisone 
increased 10-fold from normal). 
 Decreased 11β-HSD2 activity may be hereditary or secondary 
to pharmacologic inhibition of enzyme activity by glycyrrhizic 
acid, the active principle of licorice root ( Glycyrrhiza glabra ) and 
some chewing tobaccos. The congenital form is a rare autosomal 
recessive disorder, and children present with low birth weight, 
failure to thrive, hypertension, polyuria and polydipsia, and poor 
growth. The clinical phenotype of patients with AME includes 
hypertension, hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, low PRA, low 
PAC, and normal plasma cortisol levels. The diagnosis is con-
firmed by demonstrating an abnormal ratio of cortisol to cortisone 
in a 24-hour urine collection. Treatment includes blockade of the 
mineralocorticoid receptor with a mineralocorticoid receptor 
antagonist or suppression of endogenous cortisol secretion with 
dexamethasone. 
 Carbenoxolone (18β-glycyrrhetinic acid sodium hemisucci-
nate) is a glycyrrhizic acid metabolite that is used in some coun-
tries to treat gastroesophageal reflux disorder. Carbenoxolone acts 
by protecting the gastrointestinal mucosal barrier from acid-pepsin 
attack and increasing mucosal mucin production. However, car-
benoxolone is also an inhibitor of 11β-HSD2 and side effects 
include sodium retention, hypokalemic alkalosis, suppressed 
plasma renin, and hypertension. 
 Type 2 AME caused by ectopic ACTH secretion, seen in 
patients with Cushing syndrome, is related to the high rates of 
cortisol production that overwhelm 11β-HSD2 activity. DOC 
levels may also be increased in severe ACTH-dependent Cushing 
syndrome and contribute to the hypertension and hypokalemia in 
this disorder. 
 Liddle Syndrome—Abnormal Renal 
Tubular Ionic Transport 
 In 1963, Liddle described an autosomal dominant renal disorder 
that appeared to be primary aldosteronism with hypertension, 
hypokalemia, and inappropriate kaliuresis. However, PAC and 
PRA were very low in patients with Liddle syndrome; thus, 
another name for this disorder is “pseudoaldosteronism.” Liddle 
syndrome is caused by mutations in the β or γ subunits of the 
amiloride-sensitive epithelial sodium channel—resulting in 
enhanced activity of the epithelial sodium channel with increased 
sodium reabsorption, potassium wasting, hypertension, and 
hypokalemia. Clinical genetic testing is available (www.genetests.org). 
As would be predicted, amiloride and triamterene are very effec-
tive agents to treat the hypertension and hypokalemia. However, 
spironolactone is ineffective in these patients. Liddle syndrome 
can easily be distinguished from AME based on a good clinical 
response to amiloride or triamterene, lack of efficacy of 
 spironolactone and dexamethasone, and normal 24-hour urine 
 cortisone-cortisol ratio. 
 Hypertension Exacerbated by Pregnancy 
 Hypertension exacerbated by pregnancy is a rare autosomal domi-
nant disorder found in women with early-onset hypertension with 
suppressed levels of aldosterone and renin. During pregnancy, 
both the hypertension and hypokalemia are severely exacerbated. 
These patients have an activating mutation in the gene encoding 
the mineralocorticoid receptor which allows progesterone and 
other mineralocorticoid antagonists to become agonists. 
 OTHER ENDOCRINE DISORDERS 
ASSOCIATED WITH HYPERTENSION 
 Cushing Syndrome 
 Hypertension occurs in 75% to 80% of patients with Cushing 
syndrome (see Chapter 9). Most patients with endogenous 
Cushing syndrome have ACTH-dependent disease due to a corti-
cotroph pituitary adenoma (see  Table 10–2 ). Ectopic ACTH secretion 
is the second most common cause of endogenous Cushing syn-
drome. The ACTH-independent causes (eg, adrenal cortisol-se-
creting adenoma or carcinoma) of Cushing syndrome are less 
common. ACTH-independent macronodular hyperplasia is asso-
ciated with massive hyperplasia of both adrenal glands—usually a 
result of activation of one or several G protein–coupled receptors 
aberrantly expressed in the adrenal cortex. ACTH-independent 
primary pigmented nodular adrenal disease (PPNAD) is a bilateral 
form of micronodular adrenal hyperplasia that leads to Cushing 
syndrome. Germline mutations in  PRKAR1A cause PPNAD in 
the setting of Carney complex (see Chapter 9). The mechanisms 
of hypertension in the setting of Cushing syndrome include 
increased production of DOC, enhanced pressor sensitivity to 
endogenous vasoconstrictors (eg, epinephrine and angiotensin II), 
O
OH
HO
O
O
O
C
Cortisone
Cortisol
11β-HSD2
11β-HSD1
CH2OH
O
OH
C
CH2OH
 FIGURE 10–9  Interconversion of hormonally active cortisol to inactive cortisone is catalyzed by two isozymes of 11β-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase (11β-HSD). 11β-HSD1 converts cortisone to cortisol and 11β-HSD2 inactivates cortisol to cortisone. 
342    CHAPTER 10 Endocrine Hypertension
increased cardiac output, activation of the renin-angiotensin sys-
tem by increasing the hepatic production of angiotensinogen, and 
overload of the cortisol inactivation system with stimulation of the 
mineralocorticoid receptor. The source of excess glucocorticoids 
may be exogenous (iatrogenic) or endogenous. Mineralocorticoid 
production is usually normal in endogenous Cushing syndrome; 
aldosterone and renin levels are usually normal and DOC levels 
are normal or mildly increased. In patients with adrenal carci-
noma, DOC and aldosterone may be elevated. 
 The case-detection studies for endogenous cortisol excess 
include: (a) measurement of free cortisol in a 24-hour urine col-
lection; (b) midnight salivary cortisol measurement; and (c) 1-mg 
overnight dexamethasone suppression test. Further studies to con-
firm Cushing syndrome and to determine the cause of the cortisol 
excess state are outlined in Chapter 9. 
 The hypertension associated with Cushing syndrome should 
be treated until a surgical cure is obtained. Mineralocorticoid 
receptor antagonists, at dosages used to treat primary aldoster-
onism, are effective in reversing the hypokalemia. Second-step 
agents (eg, thiazide diuretics) may be added for optimal control of 
blood pressure. The hypertension associated with the hypercorti-
solism usually resolves over several weeks after a surgical cure, and 
antihypertensive agents can be tapered and withdrawn. 
 Thyroid Dysfunction 
 A. Hyperthyroidism 
 When excessive amounts of circulating 
thyroid hormones interact with thyroid hormone receptors on 
peripheral tissues, both metabolic activity and sensitivity to circu-
lating catecholamines increase. Thyrotoxic patients usually have 
tachycardia, high cardiac output, increased stroke volume, 
decreased peripheral vascular resistance, and increased systolic 
blood pressure. The initial management of patients with hyperten-
sion who have hyperthyroidism includes a β-adrenergic blocker to 
treat hypertension, tachycardia, and tremor. The definitive treat-
ment of hyperthyroidism is cause specific (see Chapter 7). 
 B. Hypothyroidism 
 The frequency of hypertension, usually 
diastolic, is increased three fold in hypothyroid patients and may 
account for as much as 1% of cases of diastolic hypertension in the 
population. The mechanisms for the elevation in blood pressure 
include increased systemic vascular resistance and extracellular vol-
ume expansion. Treatment of thyroid hormone deficiency decreases 
blood pressure in most patients with hypertension and normalizes 
blood pressure in one-third of them. Synthetic levothyroxine is the 
treatment of choice for hypothyroidism (see Chapter 7). 
 Acromegaly 
 Chronic growth hormone (GH) excess from a GH-producing 
pituitary tumor results in the clinical syndrome of acromegaly. 
The effects of chronic excess of GH include acral and soft tissue 
overgrowth, progressive dental malocclusion, degenerative arthri-
tis related to chondral and synovial tissue overgrowth within 
joints, low-pitched sonorous voice, excessive sweating and oily 
skin, perineural hypertrophy leading to nerve entrapment (eg, 
carpal tunnel syndrome), cardiac dysfunction, and hypertension 
(see Chapter 4). Hypertension occurs in 20% to 40% of the 
patients and is associated with sodium retention and extracellular 
volume expansion. Pituitary surgery is the treatment of choice; if 
necessary, it is supplemented with medical therapy or irradiation 
or both. The hypertension of acromegaly is treated most effec-
tively by eliminating GH excess. If a surgical cure is not possible, 
the hypertension usually responds well to diuretic therapy. 
 REFERENCES 
 Primary Aldosteronism 
 Funder JW, Carey RM, Fardella C, et al. Case detection, diagnosis, and treatment 
of patients with primary aldosteronism: an endocrine society clinical practice 
guideline.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2008;93:3266. [PMID: 18552288] 
 Kempers MEJ, Lenders JWM, van Outheusden L, et al. Systematic review: diag-
nostic procedures to differentiate unilateral from bilateral adrenal abnormal-
ity in primary aldosteronism.  Ann Intern Med . 2009;151:329. [PMID: 
19721021] 
 Reincke M, Rump LC, Quinkler M, et al. Risk factors associated with a low glom-
erular filtration rate in primary aldosteronism.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2009;94:869. [PMID: 19116235] 
 Sechi LA, Novello M, Lapenna R, et al. Long-term renal outcomes in patients with 
primary aldosteronism.  JAMA . 2006;295:2638. Erratum in:  JAMA . 
2006;296:1842. [PMID: 16772627] 
 Stowasser M. Update in primary aldosteronism.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2009;94:3623. [PMID: 19737921] 
 Young WF, Jr. Primary aldosteronism—one picture is not worth a thousand words. 
 Ann Intern Med . 2009;151:357. Comment on:  Ann Intern Med . 
2009;151:329-337. [PMID: 19721025] 
 Young WF. Primary aldosteronism: renaissance of a syndrome.  Clin Endocrinol 
(Oxf) . 2007;66:607. [PMID: 17492946] 
 Young WF, Stanson AW. What are the keys to successful adrenal venous sampling 
(AVS) in patients with primary aldosteronism?  Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) . 
2009;70:14. [PMID: 19128364] 
 Other Forms of Mineralocorticoid Excess or Effect 
 Charmandari E, Kino T, Souvatzoglou E, Vottero A, Bhattacharyya N, Chrousos 
GP. Natural glucocorticoid receptor mutants causing generalized glucocorti-
coid resistance: molecular genotype, genetic transmission, and clinical phe-
notype.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2004;89:1939. [PMID: 15070967] 
 Geller DS, Farhi A, Pinkerton N, et al. Activating mineralocorticoid receptor 
mutation in hypertension exacerbated by pregnancy.  Science . 2000;289:119. 
[PMID: 10884226] 
 Hammer F, Stewart PM. Cortisol metabolism in hypertension.  Best Pract Res Clin 
Endocrinol Metab . 2006;20:337. [PMID: 16980198] 
 Merke DP, Bornstein SR. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia.  Lancet . 2005;365:2125. 
[PMID: 15964450] 
 Morineau G, Sulmont V, Salomon R, et al. Apparent mineralocorticoid excess: 
report of six new cases and extensive personal experience.  J Am Soc Nephrol . 
2006;17:3176. [PMID: 17035606] 
 New MI, Geller DS, Fallo F, Wilson RC. Monogenic low renin hypertension. 
 Trends Endocrinol Metab . 2005;16:92. [PMID: 15808805] 
 Stewart PM, Corrie JE, Shackleton CH, et al. Syndrome of apparent mineralocor-
ticoid excess. A defect in the cortisol-cortisone shuttle.  J Clin Invest . 
1988;82:340. [PMID: 303514] 
 Snyder PM. Minireview: regulation of epithelial Na + channel trafficking. 
 Endocrinology . 2005;146:5079. [PMID: 16150899] 
 Warnock DG. Liddle’s syndrome: genetics and mechanisms of Na + channel 
defects.  Contrib Nephrol . 2001;136:1-10. [PMID: 11688373] 
 Other Endocrine Disorders Associated with Hypertension 
 Danzi S, Klein I. Thyroid hormone and blood pressure regulation.  Curr Hypertens 
Rep . 2003;5:513. [PMID: 14594573] 
CHAPTER 10 Endocrine Hypertension     343
 Magiakou MA, Smyrnaki P, Chrousos GP. Hypertension in Cushing’s syn-
drome.  Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2006;20:467. [PMID: 
16980206] 
 Sacerdote A, Weiss K, Tran T, Rokeya Noor B, McFarlane SI. Hypertension in 
patients with Cushing’s disease: pathophysiology, diagnosis, and manage-
ment.  Curr Hypertens Rep . 2005;7:212. [PMID: 15913497] 
 Streeten DH, Anderson GH Jr, Howland T, Chiang R, Smulyan H. Effects of 
thyroid function on blood pressure. Recognition of hypothyroid hyperten-
sion.  Hypertension . 1988;11:78. [PMID: 3338842] 
 Terzolo M, Matrella C, Boccuzzi A, et al. Twenty-four hour profile of blood pres-
sure in patients with acromegaly. Correlation with demographic, clinical and 
hormonal features.  J Endocrinol Invest . 1999;22:48. [PMID: 10090137] 
 
This page intentionally left blank
345
1
1
 Adrenal Medulla and 
Paraganglia 
 Paul A. Fitzgerald, MD 
ACE
Angiotensin-converting enzyme
ACTH
Adrenocorticotropic hormone
AM
Adrenomedullin
APMO
Adnexal cystadenomas of probable 
mesonephric origin
ARDS
Acute respiratory distress syndrome
ATP
Adenosine triphosphate
cAMP
Cyclic adenosine monophosphate
CgA
Chromogramin A
CGRP
Calcitonin gene–related peptide
COMT
Catecholamine-O-methyltransferase
DBH
Dopamine-β-hydroxylase
FDG
Fluorodeoxyglucose
DHMA
Dihydroxymandelic acid
DHPG
Dihydroxyphenylglycol
ECD
Electrochemical detection
HIF
Hypoxia-inducible factor
HPLC
High-pressure liquid chromatography
IP3
Inositol triphosphate
MAO
Monoamine oxidase
MEN
Multiple endocrine neoplasia
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
MHBA
3-methoxy-4-hydroxybenzylamine
MIBG
Metaiodobenzylguanidine
NF-1
Neurofibromatosis type 1
NSE
Neuron-specific enolase
PBSC
Peripheral blood stem cell
PNMT
Phenylethanolamine- 
N-methyltransferase
PTHrP
Parathyroid hormone–related peptide
RECIST
Response evaluation criteria in solid 
tumors
SDH
Succinate dehydrogenase
SDHB
Succinate dehydrogenase subunit B
SDHC
Succinate dehydrogenase subunit C
SDHD
Succinate dehydrogenase subunit D
SPECT
Single photon emission computed 
tomography
SRI
Somatostatin receptor imaging
VEGF
Vascular endothelial growth factor
VHL
Von Hippel-Lindau
VIP
Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide
VMA
Vanillylmandelic acid (3-methoxy-4- 
hydroxymandelic acid)
 The adrenal medulla and paraganglia are part of the autonomic/
sympathetic nervous system. The endocrine and nervous systems 
are alike in that they exert their actions by releasing hormones/
neurotransmitters that bind to cell surface receptors in the target 
tissue, thereby inducing an effect. 
 Autonomic nerves are not under conscious control. They inner-
vate the heart, adrenal medulla, vascular smooth muscle, and 
smooth muscle in visceral organs, thereby controlling cardiac rate 
and output, adrenal medullary secretion of catecholamines, blood 
pressure, the genitourinary tract, and intestinal motility. Autonomic 
nerves originate within the central nervous system and have two 
major divisions according to their anatomic locations: 
 (1)  Parasympathetic preganglionic nerves exit the central ner-
vous system via the cranial nerves and sacral spinal nerves. 
They terminate in nonchromaffin paraganglia that are most 
numerous in the neck and associated with the glossopharyn-
geal and vagus nerves. These ganglia serve as chemoreceptors 
that are involved in the control of respiration. An important 
paraganglion at the carotid bifurcation is known as the 
 carotid body . They are also found along the jugular vein 
and in the jugulo-tympanic region. Head-neck paragan-
gliomas are tumors that arise from these parasympathetic 
paraganglia. 
 (2)  Sympathetic preganglionic nerves exit the central nervous 
 system via the thoracic and lumbar spinal nerves. The 
346    CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia
 sympathetic nervous system coordinates the body’s automatic 
 fight-flight response by stimulating the adrenal medulla to 
secrete catecholamines and by directly stimulating cardiac 
output and blood flow to muscles while diverting blood flow 
away from visceral organs. 
 Sympathetic preganglionic nerves terminate mainly in paraver-
tebral and prevertebral nerve ganglia where they secrete acetylcho-
line as their neurotransmitter; they are, therefore, known as 
 cholinergic nerves. These nerve ganglia are collectively known as 
 paraganglia and contain neuroendocrine cells that are similar to 
adrenal medullary cells on light microscopy by chromaffin and 
immunohistochemical staining. Paraganglia are also found in the 
mediastinum, particularly adjacent to the cardiac atria, and in the 
abdomen along the sympathetic nerve chains in paravertebral and 
prevertebral positions. Paraganglia are plentiful along the aorta, 
particularly around the celiac axis, adrenal glands, renal medullae, 
and aortic bifurcation (organ of Zuckerkandl). Paraganglia are also 
abundant in the pelvis, particularly adjacent to the bladder. 
Preganglionic nerves also terminate in the adrenal medulla, which 
is basically a sympathetic ganglion that is surrounded by adrenal 
cortex. 
 Sympathetic postganglionic nerve fibers originate from the 
paraganglia and run to the tissues being innervated. They secrete 
norepinephrine as their neurotransmitter at synaptic junctions. 
Adrenal medullary cells are basically modified postganglionic 
nerves that lack axons and secrete their neurotransmitter (mainly 
epinephrine) directly into the blood; thus, the bloodstream acts 
like a giant synapse, carrying epinephrine to receptors throughout 
the body. Synonyms for epinephrine and norepinephrine are 
 adrenalin and  noradrenaline , respectively (see later). 
 Although the adrenal medulla is not essential for survival, its 
secretion of epinephrine and other compounds helps maintain the 
body’s homeostasis during stress. Investigations of the adrenal 
medulla and the sympathetic nervous system have led to the dis-
covery of different catecholamine receptors and the production of 
a wide variety of sympathetic agonists and antagonists with diverse 
clinical applications. 
 Pheochromocytomas are tumors that arise from the adrenal 
medulla, whereas non–head-neck  paragangliomas arise from 
extra-adrenal sympathetic ganglia. Pheochromocytomas can 
secrete excessive amounts of both epinephrine and norepineph-
rine, whereas paragangliomas secrete only norepinephrine. The 
excessive secretion of catecholamines can result in a dangerous 
exaggeration of the stress response. 
 ANATOMY 
 Embryology ( Figure 11–1 ) 
 The sympathetic nervous system arises in the fetus from the 
primitive cells of the neural crest (sympathogonia). At about the 
fifth week of gestation, these cells migrate from the spinal ganglia 
in the thoracic region to form the sympathetic chain posterior to 
the dorsal aorta. They then begin to migrate anteriorly to form the 
remaining ganglia. 
 At 6 weeks of gestation, groups of these primitive cells migrate 
along the central vein and enter the fetal adrenal cortex to form 
the adrenal medulla, which is detectable by the eighth week. The 
adrenal medulla at this time is composed of sympathogonia and 
pheochromoblasts, which then mature into pheochromocytes. 
The cells appear in rosette-like structures, with the more primitive 
cells occupying a central position. Storage granules can be found 
in these cells at 12 weeks. The adrenal medullas are very small and 
amorphous at birth but develop into recognizable adult form by 
the sixth month of postnatal life. 
 Pheochromoblasts and pheochromocytes also collect on both 
sides of the aorta to form the paraganglia. These cells collect prin-
cipally at the origin of the mesenteric arteries and at the aortic 
bifurcation where they fuse anteriorly to form the organ of 
Zuckerkandl, which is quite prominent during the first year of 
life. Pheochromocytes (chromaffin cells) also are found scattered 
throughout the abdominal sympathetic plexi as well as in other 
parts of the sympathetic nervous system. 
 Gross Structure 
 The anatomic relationships between the adrenal medulla and the 
adrenal cortex differ in different species. In mammals, the medulla 
is surrounded by the adrenal cortex, and in humans, the adrenal 
medulla occupies a central position in the widest part of the gland, 
with only small portions extending into the narrower parts. The 
mass of adrenal medullary tissue in both adult adrenal glands aver-
ages about 1000 mg (about 15% of the total weight of both adre-
nal glands), although the proportions vary from individual to 
individual. There is no clear demarcation between cortex and 
medulla. A cuff of adrenal cortical cells usually surrounds the 
central vein within the adrenal medulla, and there may be islands 
of cortical cells elsewhere in the medulla. 
 Microscopic Structure 
 The  chromaffin cells or  pheochromocytes of the adrenal 
medulla are large ovoid columnar cells arranged in nests, alveoli, 
Sympathogonia
Neuroblast
(Neuroblastoma)
Ganglioneuroblast
(Ganglioneuroblastoma)
Sympathetic
ganglion cell
(Ganglioneuroma)
Pheochromoblast
(Pheochromoblastoma)
Pheochromocyte
(Pheochromocytoma)
 FIGURE 11–1  The embryonic development of adrenergic cells 
and tumors that develop from them (in parentheses). Sympathogonia 
are primitive cells derived from the neural crest. Neuroblasts are also 
called sympathoblasts; ganglion cells are the same as sympathocytes; 
and pheochromocytes are mature chromaffin cells. 
CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia     347
or cords around a rich network of capillaries and venous sinusoids 
that drain blood from the adrenal cortex. Pheochromocytes have 
large nuclei and a well-developed Golgi apparatus. Their cyto-
plasm contains large numbers of vesicles (granules) that measure 
100 to 300 nm in diameter and appear similar to the neurosecre-
tory granules seen in peripheral sympathetic nerves. Catecholamines 
(epinephrine and/or norepinephrine) comprise about 20% of the 
mass of neurosecretory vesicles. Vesicles containing norepineph-
rine appear darker than those containing epinephrine. The vesicles 
also contain proteins, lipids, and adenosine triphosphate (ATP), as 
well as chromogranins, neuropeptide Y, enkephalins, and proopi-
omelanocortin (along with related peptides such as adrenocortico-
tropic hormone [ACTH] and β-endorphin). 
 Nerve Supply 
 The cells of the adrenal medulla are innervated by preganglionic 
fibers of the sympathetic nervous system, which release acetylcho-
line and enkephalins at the synapses. Most of these fibers arise 
from a plexus in the capsule of the posterior surface of the gland 
and enter the adrenal glands in bundles of 30 to 50 fibers without 
synapsing. They follow the course of the blood vessels into the 
medulla without branching into the adrenal cortex. Some reach 
the wall of the central vein, where they synapse with small auto-
nomic ganglia. However, most fibers end in relationship to the 
pheochromocytes. 
 Blood Supply 
 The adrenal gland is perfused by the superior, middle, and infe-
rior adrenal branches of the inferior phrenic artery, directly from 
the aorta and from the renal arteries. On reaching the adrenal 
gland, these arteries branch to form a plexus under the capsule 
supplying the adrenal cortex. A few of these vessels, however, 
penetrate the cortex, passing directly to the medulla. The medulla 
is also nourished by branches of the arteries supplying the central 
vein and cuff of cortical tissue around the central vein. Capillary 
loops passing from the subcapsular plexus of the cortex also sup-
ply blood as they drain into the central vein. Most of the blood 
supply to adrenal medullary cells is via a portal vascular system 
that arises from the capillaries in the cortex. There is also a capil-
lary network of lymphatics that drain into a plexus around the 
central vein. 
 Norepinephrine is converted to epinephrine by the enzyme 
phenylethanolamine- N -methyltransferase (PNMT). In mammals, 
the expression of PNMT is induced by cortisol. Chromaffin cells 
that produce epinephrine are exposed to higher concentrations of 
cortisol from capillaries draining adrenocortical cells, whereas 
chromaffin cells containing norepinephrine are supplied by arter-
ies that course directly to the adrenal medulla (see sections on 
biosynthesis and decretion, later). 
 The central vein of the right adrenal is short and drains directly 
into the vena cava with about 5% having multiple veins. About 
5% of right adrenal veins drain into the hepatic vein. For the left 
adrenal gland, the vein is somewhat longer and drains into the left 
renal vein. 
 HORMONES OF THE ADRENAL 
MEDULLA AND PARAGANGLIA 
 CATECHOLAMINES 
 Biosynthesis ( Figure 11–2 ) 
 Catecholamines are molecules that have a catechol nucleus con-
sisting of benzene with two hydroxyl side groups plus a side-chain 
amine. Catecholamines include dopamine, norepinephrine, and 
epinephrine (see  Figure 11–2 ). 
Tyrosine
HO
Tyrosine
hydroxylase
C
H
H
H
C
C
O
OH
NH2
DOPA
HO
HO
DOPA
decarboxylase
C
H
H
H
C
C
O
OH
NH2
Dopamine
HO
HO
Dopamine-
β-hydroxylase
C
H
H
H
C
H
NH2
Norepinephrine
HO
HO
PNMT
C
H
O
H
H
C
H
NH2
Epinephrine
HO
HO
C
H
O
H
H
C
H
NH
CH3
 FIGURE 11–2  Biosynthesis of catecholamines (DOPA:
L-dihydroxyphenylalanine; PNMT: phenylethanolamine- N -methyl-
transferase). Epinephrine is not produced in paraganglia.
348    CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia
 Epinephrine is the main hormone secreted by the normal adre-
nal medulla. The proportions of epinephrine and norepinephrine 
found in the adrenal medulla vary with the species; in humans, the 
adrenal medulla contains 15% to 20% norepinephrine. 
 Norepinephrine is found primarily in the central nervous sys-
tem and in peripheral sympathetic paraganglia and nerves. 
Dopamine is found in the adrenal medulla and in sympathetic 
neurons as a precursor to norepinephrine. It is present in high 
concentrations in the brain, in specialized neurons in the sympa-
thetic ganglia, and in the carotid body, where it serves as a neu-
rotransmitter. Dopamine is also present in the proximal renal 
tubule where it promotes sodium excretion and in the gastrointes-
tinal tract where it serves a paracrine function. 
 Chromogranin A (CgA) is a peptide that is stored and released 
with catecholamines during exocytosis; catestatin is a fragment of 
the CgA prohormone that inhibits further catecholamine release 
by acting as an antagonist at the neuronal cholinergic receptor. 
CgA levels tend to be somewhat higher in patients with hyperten-
sion than in matched normotensive individuals. CgA has become 
a valuable tumor marker, particularly for patients with paragan-
gliomas that are otherwise nonsecretory. 
 A. Conversion of tyrosine to DOPA 
 The catecholamines 
are synthesized from tyrosine, which may be derived from ingested 
food or synthesized from phenylalanine in the liver. Tyrosine cir-
culates at a concentration of 1 to 1.5 mg/dL of blood. It enters 
neurons and chromaffin cells by an active transport mechanism 
and is converted to L-dihydroxyphenylalanine (L-DOPA). The 
reaction is catalyzed by  tyrosine hydroxylase , which is transported 
via axonal flow to the nerve terminal. Tyrosine hydroxylase is the 
rate-limiting step in catecholamine synthesis. It is transcriptionally 
activated by acetylcholine through the nicotinic cholinergic recep-
tor, which in turn activates protein kinase A via cAMP. Tyrosine 
hydroxylase activity may be inhibited by a variety of compounds; 
alpha methyltyrosine (metyrosine) is an inhibitor that is some-
times used in the therapy of metastatic or unresectable pheochro-
mocytomas. 
 B. Conversion of DOPA to dopamine 
 DOPA is converted 
to dopamine by the enzyme aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase 
(DOPA decarboxylase). This enzyme is found in all tissues, with 
the highest concentrations in liver, kidney, brain, and vas deferens. 
The various enzymes have different substrate specificities depend-
ing on the tissue source. Competitive inhibitors of DOPA decar-
boxylase, such as methyldopa, are converted to substances (an 
example is α-methylnorepinephrine) that are then stored in gran-
ules in the nerve cell and released in place of norepinephrine. 
These products (false transmitters) were thought to mediate the 
antihypertensive action of drugs at peripheral sympathetic syn-
apses but are now believed to stimulate the alpha receptors of the 
inhibitory corticobulbar system, reducing sympathetic discharge 
peripherally. 
 C. Conversion of dopamine to norepinephrine 
 Dopa-
mine enters granulated storage vesicles where it is hydroxylated to 
norepinephrine by the enzyme dopamine-β-hydroxylase (DBH), 
which is found within the vesicle membrane. Norepinephrine is 
then actively transported into the vesicle by vesicular monoamine 
transferase (VMAT), which is located in the lipid bilayer of the 
vesicle wall. Norepinephrine constantly diffuses out of the vesicle, 
so it is best to consider it being concentrated in the vesicle, rather 
than being stored there. The granulated storage vesicle migrates to 
the cell surface and secretes its contents via exocytosis; both nor-
epinephrine and DBH are released during exocytosis. After secre-
tion, most norepinephrine is avidly recycled back into the nerve. 
Normally, about 93% of circulating norepinephrine originates 
from diffusion out of nonadrenal sympathetic nerve cells and 
synapses, while only 7% originates from the adrenal medulla. 
 D. Conversion of norepinephrine to epinephrine 
 Nore-
pinephrine constantly diffuses out from storage granules into the 
cytoplasm. In most cells of the adrenal medulla, cytoplasmic nor-
epinephrine is converted to epinephrine, catalyzed by PNMT. 
Epinephrine can then return to the vesicle, diffuse from the cell, 
or undergo catabolism. High concentrations of cortisol enhance 
the expression of the gene encoding PNMT. Cortisol is present in 
high concentrations in most areas of the adrenal medulla due to 
venous blood flow from the adjacent adrenal cortex. This accounts 
for the fact that in the normal human adrenal medulla, about 80% 
of the catecholamine content is epinephrine and only 20% is 
norepinephrine. In mouse models, the administration of exoge-
nous corticosteroids appears to increase adrenal medullary PNMT 
expression, despite suppression of ACTH and endogenous adrenal 
cortisol production. 
 Paragangliomas rarely secrete epinephrine, because they do not 
have high local concentrations of cortisol to induce PNMT 
expression. Pheochromocytomas secrete epinephrine and norepi-
nephrine in various ratios. Interestingly, after adrenalectomy, 
recurrent pheochromocytoma can secrete epinephrine without 
any surrounding adrenal cortex, indicating that the induction of 
PNMT may continue in subsequent cell lineages without high 
local levels of cortisol. After both adrenal glands are resected, 
serum epinephrine levels abruptly fall to nearly zero, whereas nor-
epinephrine concentrations do not decline significantly, since 
most circulating norepinephrine originates from leakage out of 
sympathetic nerves and synapses. 
 The enzyme PNMT is found in many tissues outside the adre-
nal medulla. PNMT that is identical to adrenal PNMT has been 
found in the lung, kidney, pancreas, and cancer cells. Therefore, 
nonadrenal tissue is capable of synthesizing epinephrine if norepi-
nephrine is available as a substrate. However, nonadrenal produc-
tion of epinephrine usually contributes minimally to circulating 
levels. PNMT is found in human lung, and glucocorticoids 
increase its expression, thereby increasing lung epinephrine. This 
may possibly contribute to the bronchial dilation that is induced 
by glucocorticoids (inhaled or systemic). PNMT activity is also 
found in red blood cells, where its activity is increased in hyperthy-
roidism and decreased in hypothyroidism. Renal PNMT activity is 
such that up to one-half of the epinephrine found in normal urine 
may be the product of renal conversion from norepinephrine. 
CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia     349
 In the adrenal medulla, catecholamine stores can be depleted 
during prolonged hypoglycemia. Biosynthesis of catecholamines 
increases during nerve stimulation by activation of tyrosine 
hydroxylase. Prolonged stimulation leads to the induction of 
increased amounts of this rate-limiting enzyme. 
 Storage of Catecholamines 
 Catecholamines are not truly stored in intracellular vesicles. 
Rather, they exist in a dynamic equilibrium between the vesicle 
and the surrounding cytoplasm. Catecholamines continuously 
leak out of the vesicles into the cytoplasm but reenter and become 
concentrated in the vesicles by the action of two vesicular mono-
amine transporters: VMAT-1 and VMAT-2. Both are expressed in 
the adrenal medulla, but only VMAT-2 is expressed in sympa-
thetic nerves. 
 In the adrenal medulla, the percentage of stored epinephrine 
(vs total catecholamines) varies widely among different species. In 
the human adrenal medulla, epinephrine comprises about 80% of 
stored catecholamines. Epinephrine and norepinephrine are stored 
in different cells. Morphologic differences in epinephrine and 
norepinephrine storage vesicles are visible on light microscopy 
after proper staining. Cells that store predominantly epinephrine 
tend to be adjacent to intramedullary sinusoidal vessels that bathe 
the cells in blood from the adrenal cortex; such blood contains 
cortisol that induces the enzyme PNMT that catalyzes the conver-
sion of norepinephrine to epinephrine in the cytoplasm such that 
these vesicles contain predominantly epinephrine. Adrenal medul-
lary cells that contain predominantly norepinephrine tend to be 
farther away from such vessels. 
 Norepinephrine is also found in the synaptic vesicles of post-
ganglionic autonomic nerves in organs that have rich sympathetic 
innervations: the heart, salivary glands, vascular smooth muscle, 
liver, spleen, kidneys, and muscles. A single sympathetic nerve cell 
may have up to 25,000 synaptic bulges along the length of its 
axon; each synapse synthesizes norepinephrine and stores it in 
adrenergic synaptic vesicles adjacent to target cells. 
 Catecholamine biosynthesis is coupled to secretion, so that the 
stores of norepinephrine at the nerve endings remain relatively 
unchanged even in the presence of marked nerve activity. The 
adrenal medulla contains catecholamines at a concentration of 
about 0.5 mg/g; the spleen, vas deferens, brain, spinal cord, and 
heart contain 1 to 5 µg/g; and the liver, gut, and skeletal muscle 
contain 0.1 to 0.5 µg/g. Catecholamines are stored in electron-
dense granules approximately 1 µm in diameter that contain cat-
echolamines and ATP in a 4:1 molar ratio, as well as several 
neuropeptides, calcium, magnesium, and water-soluble proteins 
called  chromogranins (see earlier). The interior surface of the 
membrane contains DBH and ATPase. The Mg 2+ -dependent 
ATPase facilitates the uptake and inhibits the release of cate-
cholamines by the granules. Adrenal medullary granules appear to 
contain and release a number of active peptides including 
adrenomedullin, ACTH, vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), 
chromogranins, and enkephalins. The peptides derived from chro-
mogranins are physiologically active and may modulate cate-
cholamine release. 
 Secretion of Catecholamines ( Figure 11–3 
and  Table 11–1 ) 
 Preganglionic nerve fibers terminate in adrenal medullary cells, 
where they release acetylcholine at synapses and stimulate adre-
nal medullary receptors. Activation of the receptors depolarizes 
the cell membranes and causes an influx of calcium ions. The 
increased intracellular concentration of calcium triggers exocy-
tosis of the neurosecretory vesicles with consequent release of 
their contents: catecholamines, chromogranins, and soluble 
DBH. Vesicular membrane-bound DBH is not released during 
exocytosis. 
 Adrenal medulla. 
 In the adrenal medulla, exocytosis of the 
neurosecretory vesicles releases epinephrine and norepinephrine 
into the circulation. In normals, over 90% of circulating epineph-
rine is derived from the adrenal medulla, whereas adrenal medul-
lary secretion accounts for only about 7% of circulating 
norepinephrine. Catecholamines also diffuse out of the neurose-
cretory vesicles into the cytoplasm. Catecholamines in the cyto-
plasm may reenter a vesicle via VMAT or may be metabolized by 
COMT into catecholamine metabolites: metanephrine and 
normetanephrine, which gradually diffuse out of the cell and enter 
the circulation. 
 Adrenal medullary catecholamine secretion increases with 
exercise, angina pectoris, myocardial infarction, hemorrhage, 
ether anesthesia, surgery, hypoglycemia, anoxia and asphyxia, and 
many other stressful stimuli. The rate of secretion of epinephrine 
increases more than that of norepinephrine in the presence of 
hypoglycemia and most other stimuli. However, during hypoxia, 
the adrenal medullary cells preferentially release norepinephrine. 
Such release is mainly not by exocytosis but rather by leakage of 
norepinephrine from neurosecretory vesicles into the cytoplasm 
and out of the cell into the circulation. The preferential release of 
norepinephrine may be because the adrenal medullary cells that 
concentrate norepinephrine are located farther from blood vessels 
and may be more susceptible to hypoxic injury. (See Storage of 
Catecholamines, earlier.) 
 Sympathetic neurons. 
 In sympathetic neurons, exocytosis of 
the neurosecretory vesicle releases norepinephrine into the syn-
apse. Norepinephrine that has been secreted into a synapse by 
exocytosis is either reabsorbed via norepinephrine transporters 
(NETs) or leaks out of the synapse into the circulation. Such syn-
aptic leakage accounts for the majority of circulating norepineph-
inre in normal individuals. 
 Metabolism and Excretion of 
Catecholamines ( Figure 11–4 ) 
 A. Catecholamine metabolism in cells of origin 
 Adrenal medulla. 
 In the adrenal medulla, catecholamines are 
metabolized to metanephrines primarily by membrane-bound 
catecholamine- O -methyltransferase (COMT): epinephrine to 
metanephrine and norepinephrine to normetanephrine. The 
metanephrine metabolites subsequently leak into the circulation. 
350    CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia
Na+
Ca2+
Calcium
channel
Tyrosine
Axon
Nerve
terminal
VAMPs
SNAPs
Other
receptors
Presynaptic
receptors
Hetero-
receptor
Bretylium,
guanethidine
NE
H+
NE
ATP, P
Tyr
VMAT
A
Dopamine
DOPA
Postsynaptic cell
Diffusion
Metyrosine
Adrenoceptors
Autoreceptor
Reserpine
Cocaine,
tricyclic
antidepressants
Tyrosine
hydroxylase
NE,
ATP, P
NET
 FIGURE 11–3  Schematic diagram of a noradrenergic junction of the peripheral sympathetic nervous system (not to scale). The neural 
axons form synaptic junctions with cells in target organs. The neurotransmitter is norepinephrine, which originates through de novo synthesis 
from tyrosine or from norepinephrine that has been secreted and reabsorbed by a norepinephrine transporter (NET). Tyrosine is transported 
into the noradrenergic endings or varicosities by a sodium-dependent carrier (A). In the cytoplasm, tyrosine hydroxylase converts tyrosine to 
DOPA that is converted by DOPA decarboxylase to dopamine. Dopamine, as well as norepinephrine (NE) is transported into the vesicles by 
vesicular monoamine transferase (VMAT). Dopamine is converted to NE in the vesicle by dopamine-β-hydroxylase. Exocytosis of the neurosecre-
tory vesicle with release of transmitter occurs when an action potential opens voltage-sensitive calcium channels and increases intracellular cal-
cium. Fusion of vesicles with the surface membrane results in expulsion of norepinephrine, cotransmitters, and dopamine-β-hydroxylase. After 
release, norepinephrine diffuses out of the cleft or is transported into the cytoplasm of the nerve itself (uptake 1) or transported into the 
postjunctional target cell (uptake 2). Regulatory receptors are present on the presynaptic terminal (SNAPs, synaptosome-associated proteins; 
VAMPs, vesicle-associated membrane protein).  Not shown: In adrenal medullary and pheochromocytoma cells, norepinephrine constantly dif-
fuses from the vesicle into the cytoplasm where it may be converted to epinephrine by phenylethanolamine- N -methyltransferase (PNMT). 
Alternatively, cytoplasmic membrane-bound catecholamine- O -methyltransferase (COMT) can metabolize epinephrine and norepinephrine 
directly into metanephrine and normetanephrine, respectively, which are then released.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Katzung BJ, ed. 
 Basic & Clinical Pharmacology . 11th ed. McGraw-Hill; 2009.) 
CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia     351
Over 90% of circulating metanephrine and about 40% of circulat-
ing normetanephrine is produced by the adrenal medulla. 
 Sympathetic nerves. 
 Catecholamines that are released at the 
synapse bind to their receptors with relatively low affinity and dis-
sociate rapidly (see  Figure 11–4 ). About 10% of norepinephrine 
escapes from synapses into the systemic circulation (see later). 
About 90% of synaptic norepinephrine is reabsorbed by the nerves 
from which they were released or by the target cells. Cytoplasmic 
norepinephrine is metabolized to 3,4-dihydroxyphenylglycol 
(DHPG) at the outer mitochondrial membrane by the enzyme 
monoamine oxidase (MAO) that regulates the norepinephrine 
content of neurons. DHBG leaks from the neuron and is absorbed 
by the liver and other tissues that convert it to VMA (see later) that 
is excreted in the urine. In normals, most urinary VMA is derived 
from DHPG that leaks from sympathetic nerves. 
 Sympathetic nerves in abdominal organs, particularly the intes-
tines and pancreas, account for nearly half the body’s production 
of norepinephrine. Intestinal cells contain sulfatases that conju-
gate norepinephrine to norepinephrine-SO 4 that enters the portal 
vein and bypasses the liver to be excreted in the urine. Intestinal 
cells also conjugate normetanephrine to normetanephrine-SO 4 . 
TABLE 11–1  Range of plasma catecholamine levels 
observed in healthy subjects and 
patients.
Norepinephrine
Epinephrine
Healthy 
Subjects
Basal
Ambulatory
Exercise
Symptomatic 
 hypoglycemia
150-400 pg/mL 
(0.9-2.4 nmol/L)
200-800 pg/mL 
(1.2-4.8 nmol/L)
800-4000 pg/mL 
(4.8-24 nmol/L)
200-1000 pg/mL 
(1.2-6 nmol/L)
25-100 pg/mL (0.1-0.6 
nmol/L)
30-100 pg/mL
(0.1-1 nmol/L)
100-1000 pg/mL (0.5-5 
nmol/L)
1000-5000 pg/mL (5-25 
nmol/L)
Patients
Hypertension
Surgery
Myocardial 
 infarction
200-500 pg/mL 
(1.2-3 nmol/L)
500-2000 pg/mL 
(3-12 nmol/L)
1000-2000 pg/mL 
(6-12 nmol/L)
20-100 pg/mL (0.1-0.6 
nmol/L)
199-500 pg/mL (0.5-3 
nmol/L)
800-5000 pg/mL (4-25 
nmol/L)
Epinephrine
Metanephrine
HO
HO
CH
OH
CH2
NHCH3
HO
CH3O
CH
OH
NHCH3
HO
HO
CH
OH
CH2
NH2
3,4-Dihydroxyphenylglycol
(DHPG)
HO
HO
CH
CH2
OH
3-Methoxy-4-hydroxymandelic acid
(Vanillylmandelic acid, VMA)
HO
CH3O
CH
OH
C   O
OH
OH
OH
OH
Normetanephrine-sulfate
O4S
CH3O
CH
CH2
NH2
Metanephrine sulfate
O4S
CH3O
CH
CH2
NHCH3
COMT1,3
COMT1,3
COMT3
AD3
Norepinephrine
MAO3
PST4
PST4
MAO2
MAO3
CH2
Normetanephrine
HO
CH3O
CH
OH
NH2
CH2
 FIGURE 11–4  Metabolism of catecholamines by catechol- O -methyltransferase (COMT), monoamine oxidase (MAO), aldehyde dehydroge-
nase (AD), and phenol-sulfotransferase (PST). (1) Adrenal medulla or pheochromocytoma; (2) sympathetic nerves; (3) liver and kidneys; (4) GI, 
platelets, lungs. 
352    CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia
 Pheochromocytomas. 
 In pheochromocytomas, catecholamines 
that leak out of the neurosecretory vesicles are methylated by 
membrane-bound COMT: epinephrine to metanephrine and nor-
epinephrine to normetanephrine. These metanephrine metabolites 
continuously leak directly into the circulation, in contrast to cate-
cholamines that are secreted intermittently. The pheochromocyto-
ma’s continuous excretion of metanephrines accounts for the 
superior sensitivity of plasma or urine-fractionated free metaneph-
rine testing in the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma. In patients with 
pheochromocytoma, over 90% of circulating total metanephrines 
are derived from the tumor itself, rather than from peripheral 
metabolism. 
 B. Circulating catecholamine uptake and metabolism 
 Following release into the circulation, catecholamines bind to albu-
min and other proteins with low affinity and high capacity. 
Catecholamines are quickly removed from the bloodstream and 
have a circulating half-life of less than 2 minutes. Although some 
free catecholamines are excreted directly into the urine, most are 
actively transported from the circulation into other cells where they 
are metabolized. Organic cation transporters (OCTs) are largely 
responsible for removing catecholamines from the circulation; they 
are expressed in many tissues, particularly the liver. Following 
active transport into a cell, catecholamines and their immediate 
metabolites undergo further metabolism. The main extra-adrenal/
neuronal catecholamine metabolic pathway is initially via the 
enzyme MAO that converts both epinephrine and norepinephrine 
to DHPG. DHPG is further metabolized by soluble COMT to 
3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylglycol (MHPG) that is converted by 
aldehyde dehydrogenase (AD) to vanillylmandelic acid (VMA) 
that is excreted in the urine. 
 Catecholamines, metanephrines, and MHPG also undergo 
conjugation of their phenolic hydroxyl group with sulfate or 
glucuronide; this reaction occurs mainly in gastrointestinal cells. 
To a lesser extent, catecholamines are also converted to 
 metanephrines via a soluble form of COMT, an enzyme found 
in most tissues, especially blood cells, liver, kidney, and vascular 
smooth muscle. The soluble form of COMT is less active than 
the membrane-bound form of COMT found in the adrenal 
medulla and  pheochromocytomas. 
 Catecholamines, their metabolites, and conjugates are excreted 
in the urine. Normally, the proportions of urine catecholamines 
and metabolites are approximately 50% metanephrines, 35% 
VMA, 10% conjugated catecholamines and other metabolites, 
and less than 5% free catecholamines. 
 CATECHOLAMINE (ADRENERGIC) 
RECEPTORS (TABLES 11–2 AND 11–3; 
FIGURES 11–5 AND 11–6) 
 The adrenergic receptors are G protein–coupled receptors acti-
vated by norepinephrine and epinephrine. They mediate the 
sympathetic  fight or flight response. The finding that most cells in 
the body have adrenergic receptors has led to an appreciation of 
the important regulatory role of the peripheral sympathetic ner-
vous system and circulating catecholamines. 
 Adrenergic receptors were originally classified into two groups: 
α and β. This classification has been expanded as subtypes of the 
α and β receptors have been discovered and includes α 1A , α 1B , α 1C , 
α 2A , α 2B , α 2C as well as β 1 and β 2 , and β 3 . Each receptor subtype is 
encoded by a different gene. Adrenergic receptors are variably 
distributed in the central nervous system and peripheral tissues. 
 Norepinephrine and epinephrine are roughly equipotent in 
activating α and β 1 receptors. Epinephrine is much more potent 
in activating β 2 receptors and norepinephrine is more potent in 
activating β 3 receptors ( Table 11–2 ). The physiologic effects medi-
ated by them are summarized in  Table 11–3 . 
 Adrenergic receptors are transmembrane proteins with an 
extracellular amino terminus and an intracellular carboxyl termi-
nus. Each of their seven hydrophobic regions spans the cell mem-
brane. Although these regions of the adrenergic receptor subtypes 
exhibit significant amino acid homology, differences in the fifth 
and sixth segments determine the specificity of agonist binding. 
Differences in the fifth and seventh segments determine which of 
the guanylyl nucleotide binding proteins (G proteins) is coupled 
to the receptor. G proteins consist of α, β, and γ subunits. When 
a hormone binds to the receptor, the β and γ subunits dissociate 
from the α subunits, allowing GDP to be replaced by GTP on the 
α subunits and causing the β and γ subunits to dissociate from it. 
The GTP-bound α subunits activate the postreceptor pathways 
(see  Figure 11–5 ). 
 A. Alpha-adrenergic receptors 
 Alpha 1 receptors are 
G q -coupled receptors with three homologous subtypes: α 1A , α 1B , and 
α 1C. When an agonist binds to the α 1 receptor, the alpha subunit 
TABLE 11–2  Catecholamine receptor types and 
subtypes.
Receptor
Relative Agonist Potency
Effects
Alpha1 Type
Norepinephrine > epinephrine
↑IP3, DAG 
common to all
Alpha1A
Alpha1B
Alpha1D
Alpha2 Type
Norepinephrine > 
epinephrine; clonidine
↓cAMP; ↑K+ 
channels; ↓Ca2+ 
channels
Alpha2A
Alpha2B
Norepinephrine > epinephrine
↓cAMP; ↓Ca2+ 
channels
Alpha2C
↓cAMP
Beta Type
Epinephrine = norepinephrine
↑cAMP
Beta1
Beta2
Epinephrine >>> norepinephrine
↑cAMP
Beta3 
Norepinephrine > epinephrine
↑cAMP
Adapted, with permission, from Katzung B, ed. Basic and Clinical Pharmacology.
9th ed. McGraw-Hill; 2004.
CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia     353
of the guanylyl nucleotide-binding protein, G q , is released and 
activates phospholipase C. This enzyme catalyzes the conversion 
of phosphatidylinositol phosphate to 1,4,5-inositol triphosphate 
(IP 3 ) and diacylglycerol. IP 3 releases calcium ion from intracellular 
stores to stimulate physiologic responses. Diacylglycerol activates 
protein kinase C, which in turn phosphorylates a series of other 
proteins that initiate or sustain effects stimulated by the release of 
IP 3 and calcium ion (see  Figure 11–5 ). Prazosin and phenoxyben-
zamine are selective antagonists of the α 1 receptor. 
 Alpha 1 receptors are postsynaptic (target organ) receptors that 
mediate diverse effects, particularly arteriolar vasoconstriction. 
Hepatic α 1 receptors stimulate glycogenolysis and gluconeogene-
sis. In the eye, α 1 receptors stimulate contraction of the radial 
muscle of the iris that dilates the pupil. In the skin, α 1 receptors 
mediate apocrine sweating and pilomotor contraction. In the 
genitourinary tract, α 1 receptors mediate ejaculation, gravid uter-
ine contraction, and contraction of the bladder sphincter and 
trigone. In the intestines, α 1 receptors reduce smooth muscle con-
traction and increase sphincter tone, thereby promoting 
 constipation. Alpha 1 receptors are also found in the splenic capsule 
and mediate the contraction of the capsule (particularly during 
hypoxia), which contracts the splenic volume up to 20% and can 
expel up to 125 mL of packed red blood cells into the circulation 
within 3 seconds of apnea. 
 Sympathetic nerves secrete norepinephrine into synaptic junc-
tions where the concentration of norepinephrine is high, thereby 
stimulating synaptic effector organ α 1 receptors. Epinephrine has 
a similar effect upon α 1 receptors but is secreted only by the adre-
nal medulla such that circulating concentrations are usually much 
lower than concentrations of synaptic norepinephrine. At low 
plasma concentrations, epinephrine predominantly stimulates 
β 2 -adrenergic receptors (causing vasodilation, see later), whereas at 
higher plasma concentrations, epinephrine stimulates α 1 receptors 
sufficiently to override vasodilation and cause vasoconstriction. 
 Alpha 2 receptors are G i coupled receptors with three highly 
homologous subtypes: α 2A , α 2B , and α 2C . Agonist binding to the 
α 2 receptor releases G i alpha, which inhibits the enzyme adenylyl 
cyclase and reduces the formation of cAMP ( Figure 11–6 ). 
TABLE 11–3 Catecholamine receptors: location and actions.
Catecholamine Receptor
Tissue Location
Action Following Receptor Activation
Alpha1
Vascular smooth muscle
Liver
Eye
Skin
Prostate
Uterus
Intestines
Spleen capsule
Increases vasoconstriction (increases blood pressure)
Increases glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis
Increases ciliary muscle contraction (pupil dilation)
Increases pilomotor smooth muscle contraction (erects hairs)
Increases contraction and ejaculation
Increases gravid uterus contraction
Increases sphincter tone and relaxes smooth muscle
Contracts spleen volume, expelling blood
Alpha2
Preganglionic nerves
Vascular smooth muscle
Pancreatic islet cells
Blood platelets
Adipose cells
Brain
Decreases release of neurotransmitter
Increases vasoconstriction (increases blood pressure)
Decreases release of insulin and glucagon
Increases platelet aggregation
Decreases lipolysis
Decreases norepinephrine release
Beta1
Myocardium
Kidney (juxtaglomerular apparatus)
Adipose cells
Most tissues
Nerves
Increases force and rate of contraction
Increases secretion of renin
Increases lipolysis
Increases calorigenesis
Increases conduction velocity
Beta2
Vascular smooth muscle
Bronchiolar smooth muscle
Liver
Intestinal smooth muscle
Pancreatic islet cells
Adipose tissue
Muscles
Liver and kidney
Uterus smooth muscle
Decreases vasoconstriction (increases blood flow)
Decreases contraction (bronchial dilation)
Increases glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis
Decreases intestinal motility; increases sphincter tone
Increases release of insulin and glucagon
Increases lipolysis
Increases muscle contraction speed and glycogenolysis
Increases peripheral conversion of T4 to T3
Decreases nongravid uterine contraction (uterine relaxation)
Beta3
Adipose cells
Intestinal smooth muscle
Increases lipolysis
Increases intestinal motility
Dopamine1
Vascular smooth muscle
Renal tubule
Decreases vasoconstriction (vasodilation);
Enhances natriuresis
Dopamine2
Sympathetic nerves
Pituitary lactotrophes
Gastrointestinal tract
Inhibits synaptic release of norepinephrine
Inhibits prolactin release
Paracrine functions
354    CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia
 Presynaptic (nerve) α 2 receptors are located near the synapses 
of sympathetic nerves. Synaptic norepinephrine binds to this 
receptor, resulting in feedback inhibition of its own release. Alpha 2 
receptors are also found in vascular smooth muscle where they 
mediate vasoconstriction. Alpha 2 receptors in platelets stimulate 
platelet aggregation and clotting. In the brain, α 2 receptors are 
found in the locus ceruleus, cerebral cortex, and limbic system. 
Although their location is postsynaptic, stimulation of the α 2 
receptors results in reduced release of norepinephrine. Clonidine 
is a central α 2 agonist. Yohimbine is a selective antagonist for the 
α 2 receptor. Phentolamine is an antagonist for both α 1 and α 2 
receptors. 
 In the pancreatic beta cells, activation of α 2 receptors inhibits 
insulin secretion. This causes glucose intolerance in patients with 
pheochromocytoma. The gene  Adra2a encodes the adrenergic α 2A 
receptor. A polymorphism in  Adra2a increases the number of α 2A 
receptors on beta cells, which reduces insulin secretion and 
increases the risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus. 
 B. Beta-adrenergic receptors 
 Beta-adrenergic receptors 
are postsynaptic (target organ) cell surface glycoproteins. Agonist 
binding to β-adrenergic receptors activates adenylyl cyclase via the 
G s alpha subunit to increase the production of cAMP, which in 
turn converts protein kinase A to its active form. Kinase A then 
phosphorylates a variety of proteins, including enzymes, ion chan-
nels, and receptors (see  Figure 11–6 ). 
 Beta 1 -adrenergic receptors are located primarily in the heart, 
kidneys, and adipose tissue. In the heart, β 1 receptors are located 
in the SA and AV nodes, atrium, ventricle, and conduction sys-
tem; activation of these receptors mediates an increase in heart rate 
and cardiac contraction with an overall increase in cardiac output. 
Stimulation of β 1 receptors in the ventricles also increases the fir-
ing of idioventricular pacemakers such that excessive stimulation 
predisposes to ventricular ectopy. Triiodothyronine (T 3 ) increases 
the total number of cardiac β 1 receptors; this may contribute to 
the forceful cardiac contraction and tachyarrhythmias that are 
characteristic of hyperthyroidism. Beta 1 receptors in the renal 
juxtaglomerular apparatus stimulate the release of renin that, in 
turn, activates the renin-angiotensin system. In fat cells, activation 
of β 1 receptors increases lipolysis. In nerve cells, activation of 
β 1 receptors increases nerve conduction velocity. In the brain, 
β 1 receptors are found particularly in the nucleus accumbens and 
the ventral putamen (striatum). 
 Beta 2 -adrenergic receptors are particularly activated by epi-
nephrine. They are located mainly in the smooth muscles of arte-
rioles, veins, and bronchi where they mediate relaxation. In the 
Alpha1
receptor
Phospholipase C
Agonist
Gq
GDP
Ca2+-dependent
       protein kinase
IP3
GTP
+
β
γ
*
αq
αq
Free
calcium
Stored
calcium
{
Activated 
protein kinase
Activated 
PKC
PKC
DAG
Ptdlns 4,5P2
+
+
 FIGURE 11–5  Activation of α 1 -adrenergic responses. Stimulation of α 1 receptors by catecholamines leads to the activation of a G q -
coupling protein. The activated α q subunit of this G protein activates phospholipase C, which catalyzes the conversion of PtdIns 4,5-P 2 (phos-
phatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate) to IP 3 (inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate) and DAG (diacylglycerol). IP 3 stimulates the release of sequestered stores 
of calcium, leading to an increased concentration of cytoplasmic Ca 2+ that may then activate Ca 2+ -dependent protein kinases that phosphory-
late their substrates. DAG activates protein kinase C (PKC) (GDP, guanosine diphosphate; GTP, guanosine triphosphate). See  Table 11–3 and text 
for physiologic effects of α 1 receptor activation.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Katzung BG, ed.  Basic & Clinical Pharmacology . 11th ed. 
McGraw-Hill; 2009.) 
CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia     355
heart, β 2 receptors are located in the same locations as β 1 receptors 
(see earlier) and likewise mediate increases in cardiac rate and 
contraction. β 2 Receptors are also located in smaller coronary 
arteries where they mediate dilation of the coronaries, thereby 
increasing blood flow to cardiac muscle. Vascular β 2 receptors 
mediate vasodilation of arterioles, particularly in skeletal muscle 
and the hepatic artery. Stimulation of venous β 2 receptors medi-
ates venous dilation. Stimulation of β 2 receptors also causes relax-
ation of other smooth muscles, resulting in bronchial dilation and 
relaxation of the nonpregnant uterus. During exercise or hypogly-
cemia, epinephrine is secreted and activates hepatic β 2 receptors. 
This stimulates glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis for the 
increased glucose production that is needed for increased cardiac 
and skeletal muscle activity. Beta 2 receptors in skeletal muscle 
promote increased contraction speed, glycogenolysis, and tremor. 
The net effect of β 2 agonists (eg, epinephrine) upon liver and 
skeletal muscle is to increase serum glucose. Beta 2 -adrenergic 
receptors are also expressed in various areas of the brain, 
 particularly the right hippocampus, which normally has a higher 
density of β 2 receptors than the left hippocampus. 
 Beta 2 receptor polymorphisms have been associated with obe-
sity in women and differences in sensitivity to albuterol in asth-
matics. Other β 2 receptor polymorphisms appear to account for 
individual differences in the vascular response to stress and 
increased risk for development of hypertension-induced left ven-
tricular hypertrophy. 
 Beta 3 -adrenergic receptors are expressed mainly in adipose 
tissue but also in the gallbladder, colon, central nervous system, 
and heart. Activation of this receptor increases energy expendi-
ture, lipolysis, and intestinal motility. β 3 receptor activation 
promotes lipolysis in adipose tissue and increased thermogenesis 
in skeletal muscle. Although β 3 -adrenergic receptors are found 
in the brains of infants, by adulthood their concentration 
decreases by 100-fold. Pima Indians, who are homozygous for 
inactivating mutations in the  β 3 gene, have an earlier onset of 
type 2 diabetes. 
Beta
receptor
Alpha2
receptor
GDP
GDP
GDP
GDP
GTP
Enzyme
Enzyme-PO4
Biologic effect
R2C2 protein kinase
ADP
ATP
2R
GTP
GTP
ATP
cAMP
αS
αS
αi
αi
βγ
β
γ
2C
*
GTP
*
{
GS
{
Gi
GS
Adenylyl
cyclase
Agonist
+
+
+
–
Agonist
 FIGURE 11–6  Activation of β- and α 2 -adrenergic responses: activation vs inhibition of adenyl cyclase. Beta receptor ligands activate the 
stimulatory G protein, G s , which leads to the dissociation of its Gα s subunit, charged with GTP. The activated Gα s subunit directly activates ade-
nyl cyclase, resulting in increased cAMP that binds to the regulatory subunit (R) of the cAMP-dependent protein kinase, leading to the liberation 
of active catalytic subunits (C) that phosphorylate specific enzyme substrates and modify their activity. These catalytic units also phosphorylate 
the cAMP response element–binding protein (CREB), which modifies gene expression. Alpha 2 adrenoreceptor ligands inhibit adenyl cyclase by 
causing dissociation of the inhibitory G protein (G i ) into its subunits; that is, the α i subunit charged with GTP and a βγ unit. The mechanism by 
which these subunits inhibit adenyl cyclase is uncertain. See  Table 11–3 and text for physiologic effects of β and α 2 receptor activation. 
 (Reproduced, with permission, from Katzung BG, ed.  Basic and Clinical Pharmacology . 11th ed. McGraw-Hill; 2009.) 
356    CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia
 C. Dopamine receptors 
 Five different dopamine receptors 
have been identified (D 1 to D 5 ), each encoded by a different gene. 
Dopamine receptors are found throughout the brain (including 
the anterior pituitary), arteries, proximal renal tubules, and gastro-
intestinal tract. D 1 and D 2 receptors are the predominant 
 subtypes. 
 D 1 -like family of receptors  (D 1 and D 5 ) couples to G s that 
activates adenyl cyclase, thereby increasing intracellular cyclic 
AMP (cAMP). D 1 receptors mediate vasodilation in the coronary, 
renal, cerebrovascular, and mesenteric arteries. D 1 receptors in the 
proximal renal tubule enhance natriuresis. The D 1 receptor is the 
most abundant dopamine receptor in the brain. Intravenous 
therapeutic dopamine at low doses predominantly stimulates D 1 
receptors, causing vasodilation. (However, high-dose therapeutic 
dopamine sufficiently occupies α and β receptors to cause vaso-
constriction and increase blood pressure.) The A48G polymor-
phism of the D 1 receptor gene has been associated with essential 
hypertension, with the 48G allele being found more frequently in 
hypertensive patients, presumably through a negative effect on the 
proximal renal tubule’s excretion of sodium. 
 D 2 -like family of receptors  (D 2 , D 3 , D 4 ) couple to a different 
G protein, G i that inhibits adenyl cyclase, thereby reducing intra-
cellular cAMP, opening potassium channels, and decreasing the 
influx of calcium. D 2 receptors are predominately presynaptic 
receptors that are located on sympathetic nerves. Activation of D 2 
receptors inhibits the synaptic release of norepinephrine and also 
inhibits the transmission of nerve impulses at sympathetic ganglia. 
Pituitary lactotroph cells also express D 2 receptors, whose activa-
tion inhibits the secretion of prolactin. Activation of other D 2 
receptors in the brain causes vomiting. D 2 receptors are also found 
throughout the stomach, small intestines, and proximal colon, 
where the dopaminergic system is believed to work in a paracrine 
fashion. 
 Regulation of Sympathoadrenal Activity 
 The rate of catecholamine secretion largely determines sym-
pathoadrenal activity. However, adrenergic receptors and post-
receptor events are sites of fine regulation. 
 As noted earlier, norepinephrine and epinephrine released dur-
ing nerve stimulation bind to presynaptic alpha 2 receptors and 
reduce the amount of norepinephrine released. CgA is secreted 
from neurosecretory vesicles, along with catecholamines. 
Catestatin, a fragment of CgA, blocks postreceptor cells’ cholin-
ergic receptors, thereby inhibiting sympathoadrenal activity. 
 The binding of a catecholamine agonist to its receptor reduces 
the number of receptors on the effector cell surface by a process 
called down regulation. Catecholamine receptor antagonists do not 
cause down regulation of receptor expression. The mechanisms 
involved in some of these changes are known. For example, phos-
phorylation of the β-adrenergic receptor by β-adrenergic receptor 
kinase results in sequestration of the receptors into membrane 
vesicles, where they are internalized and degraded. The phosphory-
lated receptor also has a greater affinity for β-arrestin, another 
regulatory protein, which prevents its interaction with G s α. 
 Thyroid hormone increases the number of β receptors in the 
myocardium. Estrogen, which increases the number of alpha 
receptors in the myometrium, also increases the affinity of some 
vascular alpha receptors for norepinephrine. 
 Actions of Circulating Catecholamines 
( Tables 11–3 and 11–4) 
 Norepinephrine activates α 1 -adrenergic receptors, increasing the 
influx of calcium into the target cell. Vascular α 1 -adrenergic recep-
tors are found in the heart, papillary dilator muscles, and smooth 
muscle. Activation of α 1 -adrenergic receptors causes hypertension, 
increased cardiac contraction, and dilation of the pupils. Alpha 1 -
adrenergic activation stimulates sweating from nonthermoregula-
tory apocrine stress sweat glands, which are located on the palms, 
axillae, and forehead. Norepinephrine also activates β 1 -adrenergic 
receptors that increase cardiac contraction and rate; stimulation of 
the heart rate is opposed by simultaneous vagal stimulation. 
Norepinephrine has less affinity for β 2 -adrenergic receptors. 
However, with higher circulating norepinephrine levels, hyperme-
tabolism and hyperglycemia are noted. Norepinephrine also acti-
vates β 3 -adrenergic receptors on fat cells, causing lipolysis and an 
increase in serum levels of free fatty acids. 
 Epinephrine also stimulates α 1 - and β 1 -adrenergic receptors, 
with the same effects noted above for norepinephrine. However, 
epinephrine also activates β 2 receptors, causing vasodilation in 
skeletal muscles. Epinephrine thus has a variable effect on blood 
pressure ranging from hypertension to hypotension (rare). 
Hypoglycemia is a strong stimulus for the adrenal medulla to 
secrete epinephrine, which increases hepatic glycogenolysis. 
Epinephrine stimulates lipolysis, resulting in increased serum lev-
els of free fatty acids. Epinephrine also increases the basal meta-
bolic rate. Epinephrine does not cross the blood–brain barrier 
well. However, high serum levels of epinephrine do stimulate the 
hypothalamus, resulting in unpleasant sensations ranging from 
nervousness to an overwhelming sense of impending doom. 
TABLE 11–4  Plasma levels of catecholamines 
required to produce hemodynamic and 
glucose effects.
Norepinephrine
Epinephrine
Systolic blood 
 pressure
↑ at 2500 pg/mL 
(15 nmol/L)
↑ at 500 pg/mL (3 nmol/L)
Diastolic 
 blood 
 pressure
↑ at 2500 pg/mL 
(15 nmol/L)
↓ at 500 pg/mL (3 nmol/L)
Pulse
↓ at 2500 pg/mL 
(15 nmol/dL)
↑ at 250 pg/mL (1.5 nmol/L)
Plasma 
 glucose
↑ at 2500 pg/mL 
(15 nmol/L)
↑ at 250-500 pg/mL (1.5-3 
nmol/L)
Data from Silverberg AB, et al. Am J Physiol. 1978;234:E252; and from Clutter WE, 
et al. J Clin Invest. 1980;66:94.
CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia     357
 Dopamine is an important central neurotransmitter and a 
precursor to norepinephrine and epinephrine. However, most 
circulating dopamine is actually derived from the gastrointestinal 
tract from local synthesis and dietary sources. Dopamine that is 
synthesized by the intestines does not function as a neurotransmit-
ter but rather as a paracrine hormone, affecting intestinal motility, 
blood flow, and sodium transport. Dopamine is also synthesized 
in the proximal renal tubule where it is a natriuretic hormone. 
Dopamine synthesis is increased by a high-salt diet. The renal 
dopamine-paracrine system accounts for the relatively large 
amounts of dopamine that are normally found in the urine. 
Circulating dopamine is not normally a significant catecholamine. 
High serum concentrations of dopamine stimulate vascular D 1 
receptors, causing vasodilation and increased renal blood flow. 
Extremely high serum levels of dopamine are required to suffi-
ciently activate vascular α1 receptors to cause vasoconstriction. 
 Physiologic Effects of Catecholamines 
 A. Cardiovascular effects 
 The release or injection of cate-
cholamines generally increases heart rate and cardiac output and 
causes peripheral vasoconstriction, leading to an increase in blood 
pressure. The infusion of catecholamines also leads to a rapid 
reduction in plasma volume. These events are modulated by reflex 
mechanisms, so that, as the blood pressure increases, reflex vagal 
parasympathetic stimulation may slow the heart rate and tend to 
reduce cardiac output. Although norepinephrine usually has these 
effects, the effect of epinephrine may vary depending on the 
smooth muscle tone of the vascular system at the time. For 
example, in an individual with increased vascular tone, the net 
effect of small amounts of epinephrine may be to reduce the mean 
blood pressure through vasodilation, despite an increase in heart 
rate and cardiac output. In an individual with a reduction in vas-
cular tone, epinephrine increases blood pressure. In addition car-
diovascular function is integrated by the central nervous system, 
so that, under appropriate circumstances, one vascular bed may be 
dilated while others remain unchanged. The central organization 
of the sympathetic nervous system is such that its basal regulatory 
effects are quite discrete—in contrast to periods of stress, when 
stimulation may be rather generalized and accompanied by release 
of catecholamines into the circulation. 
 B. Effects on extravascular smooth muscle 
 Catecho-
lamines have effects on smooth muscle in tissues other than blood 
vessels. These effects include contraction (α 1 ) and relaxation (β 2 ) 
of uterine myometrium, relaxation of intestinal and bladder 
smooth muscle (β 2 ), contraction of the smooth muscle in the 
bladder (α 1 ) and intestinal sphincters, relaxation of tracheal 
smooth muscle (β 2 ), and pupillary dilation (α 1 ). 
 C. Metabolic effects 
 Catecholamines increase oxygen con-
sumption and heat production. This effect is mediated by β 1 
receptors. Catecholamines also regulate glucose and fat mobiliza-
tion from storage depots. Glycogenolysis in heart muscle and liver 
leads to an increase in available carbohydrate for utilization. 
Stimulation of adipose tissue leads to lipolysis and the release of 
free fatty acids and glycerol into the circulation. In humans, these 
effects are mediated by the β receptor. Both α 1 and β 2 receptors 
stimulate hepatic glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis, which 
causes the release of glucose into the circulation. Both receptors 
are activated by epinephrine, which is particularly effective in rais-
ing hepatic glucose production. Plasma levels of catecholamines 
required to produce some cardiovascular and metabolic effects in 
humans are shown in  Table 11–5 . 
 Catecholamines have effects on water, sodium, potassium, 
calcium, and phosphate excretion in the kidney. Stimulation of 
the β 1 receptor increases the secretion of renin from the renal 
juxtaglomerular apparatus, thereby activating the renin-angio-
tensin system. This leads to stimulation of aldosterone secretion. 
 DISORDERS OF THE ADRENAL 
MEDULLA AND PARAGANGLIA 
 EPINEPHRINE AND NOREPINEPHRINE 
DEFICIENCY 
 Epinephrine is the major catecholamine secreted by the normal 
adrenal medulla, and its secretion is unique to the adrenal medulla. 
Epinephrine is usually deficient in cortisol deficiency of any cause, 
because high local concentrations of cortisol in the adrenal 
medulla are necessary for transcription of the enzyme PNMT, 
which catalyzes the conversion of norepinephrine to epinephrine 
in the catecholamine biosynthetic pathway. Primary autoimmune 
adrenal cortical insufficiency produces epinephrine deficiency. 
Hypothalamic/pituitary ACTH deficiency also causes cortisol 
deficiency and consequently epinephrine deficiency. 
 Autonomic Insufficiency ( Table 11–5 and 
 Figure 11–6 ) 
 Autonomic insufficiency is also know as dysautonomia. It refers to 
a general reduction in autonomic activity. Since the adrenal 
medulla is part of the autonomic nervous system, there is usually 
an associated deficiency in circulating epinephrine. Autonomic 
TABLE 11–5  Disorders causing epinephrine or 
norepinephrine deficiency.
Diabetes mellitus autonomic neuropathy (glucose toxicity or 
 autoimmunity): serum norepinephrine low
Recurrent hypoglycemia-associated autonomic failure: 
 serum norepinephrine low
Wolfram syndrome: diabetes insipidus, diabetes mellitus, optic 
 atrophy, deafness (DIDMOAD): serum norepinephrine low
Neurological diseases associated with autonomic neuropathy: serum 
 norepinephrine low
Pure autonomic failure: serum norepinephrine and epinephrine low
Primary adrenocortical insufficiency: serum epinephrine low
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia: serum epinephrine low
Allgrove syndrome: achalasia, ACTH resistance, alacrima (AAA 
 syndrome): serum epinephrine low
358    CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia
insufficiency most commonly occurs in patients with long-stand-
ing type 1 diabetes mellitus. Diabetic autonomic neuropathy may 
be due to glucose neurotoxicity, but may also be due to autoim-
munity. In one study of middle-aged patients with type 1 diabetes 
mellitus, 52% had complement-fixing antibodies against the sym-
pathetic ganglia and 35% had antibodies against the adrenal 
medulla. They have minor defects in recovery from insulin-in-
duced hypoglycemia ( Figure 11–7 ), but in patients with diabetes 
mellitus in whom the glucagon response is also deficient, the addi-
tional loss of adrenal medullary response leaves them more suscep-
tible to bouts of severe hypoglycemia. This is the result of a 
decrease in the warning symptoms as well as an impaired response 
to the hypoglycemia (see Chapters 17 and 18). Patients with gen-
eralized autonomic insufficiency usually have orthostatic hypoten-
sion. Familial dysautonomia can manifest as orthostatic tachycardia; 
norepinephrine transporter deficiency has been determined to be 
one cause of this condition. The causes of disorders associated 
with autonomic insufficiency are listed in  Table 11–5 . 
 When a normal individual stands, a series of physiologic 
adjustments occur that maintain blood pressure and ensure 
 adequate circulation to the brain. The initial lowering of the blood 
pressure stimulates the baroreceptors, which then activate central 
reflex mechanisms that cause arterial and venous constriction, 
increase cardiac output, and activate the release of renin and vaso-
pressin. Interruption of afferent, central, or efferent components 
of this autonomic reflex results in autonomic insufficiency. 
 Patients with generalized autonomic insufficiency usually have 
orthostatic hypotension; the reduction in blood pressure on 
standing that causes visual disturbances, lightheadedness, and 
even syncope. Symptoms tend to be worse upon awakening, after 
meals, in hot weather, and at high altitude. Many patients have 
supine hypertension, even when not taking hypertensive medica-
tion. Affected patients often have a fixed heart rate, sinus tachy-
cardia, diminished sweating, reduced metabolic rate, heat 
intolerance, nocturia, and erectile dysfunction. Angina pectoris 
can sometimes occur in the absence of coronary atherosclerosis. 
Patients frequently have a neurogenic bladder with associated 
symptoms of frequency, nocturia, hesitancy, reduced urine 
stream, and recurrent urinary tract infections. Patients may also 
have gastroparesis and disordered gastrointestinal motility. Sleep 
apnea is common and death can occur during sleep from reduced 
respiratory drive. 
 The diagnosis of autonomic insufficiency can usually be made 
clinically in patients with typical symptoms and orthostatic blood 
pressure changes on examination. Additionally, plasma and urine 
norepinephrine levels are usually very low, sometimes only 10% of 
average normal in severely affected individuals. Plasma epineph-
rine levels are often low as well. 
 The treatment of symptomatic orthostatic hypotension is 
dependent on maintenance of an adequate blood volume. 
Physical measures should be employed, such as raising the foot of 
the bed at night, crossing the legs when sitting, and wearing full-
leg fitted support stockings. Adequate hydration is important. 
Volume expansion with fludrocortisone is the most effective drug 
treatment. However, fludrocortisone can cause hypokalemia, 
supine hypertension, and edema. Midodrine is an α 1 -receptor 
agonist that must be administered every 8 hours, due to its short 
half-life of 3 to 4 hours. Midodrine’s use is limited by common 
side effects that include severe supine hypertension, bradycardia, 
and erythema multiforme. Therefore, midodrine should only be 
used for patients with very symptomatic orthostatic hypotension 
who have failed other therapies. Octreotide has been used, either 
alone or in combination with midodrine, for patients with severe 
autonomic failure where other treatment measures have failed. 
 PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA AND 
PARAGANGLIOMA 
 Both pheochromocytoma and non–head-neck paraganglioma are 
tumors of the sympathetic nervous system. Although they are simi-
lar tumors, they warrant distinction from each other to emphasize 
their differences in the following: (1) locations, (2) manifestations, 
(3) secretion profiles, (4) genetic syndromes, (5) difficulty of 
 surgical resection, and (6) propensity to metastasize. 
Minutes after insulin
Plasma
norepinephrine
(pg/mL)
Plasma
epinephrine
(pg/mL)
Plasma
glucose
(mg/dL−1)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
200
400
600
800
200
400
600
1000
800
1400
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
1200
Normal
Adrenergic insufficiency
Phase I
Phase I = 1.03 mg/dL/min
Phase II = 0.42 mg/dL/min
Phase II
 FIGURE 11–7  Plasma glucose, epinephrine, and norepinephrine 
levels after insulin administration in 14 normal subjects (
) and 7 
patients with idiopathic orthostatic hypotension (
) with low or 
absent epinephrine responses. Results are expressed as mean ± SEM. 
 (Reproduced, with permission, from Polinsky RJ, et al. The adrenal 
medullary response to hypoglycemia in patients with orthostatic 
hypotension.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 1980;51:1404.) 
CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia     359
 Pheochromocytomas are tumors that arise from the adrenal 
medulla, whereas non–head-neck paragangliomas arise from the 
ganglia of the sympathetic nervous system. Pheochromocytomas 
are more common (85%), and may be bilateral (17%). Patients 
with adrenal pheochromocytomas are less likely to develop detect-
able metastases (11%) compared to paragangliomas (30%). 
 Incidence 
 The yearly incidence of diagnosed pheochromocytoma/paragan-
glioma tumors is about 2 to 8 per million; nearly half of these 
present as an unexplained death. The National Cancer Registry in 
Sweden has reported that pheochromocytomas/paragangliomas 
are discovered in about 2 patients per million people yearly. 
However, autopsy series suggest a higher incidence. The reported 
incidence in autopsy series has varied from about 
250 cases per million to 1300 cases per million in a Mayo Clinic 
autopsy series. Retrospectively, 61% of pheochromocytoma/
paraganglioma tumors at autopsy occurred in patients who were 
known to have had hypertension; about 91% had the nonspecific 
symptoms associated with secretory pheochromocytoma/paragan-
glioma tumors. In one autopsy study, a large number of patients 
with these tumors had nonclassic symptoms such as abdominal 
pain, vomiting, dyspnea, heart failure, hypotension, or sudden 
death ( Table 11–6 ). Considering these autopsy data, it is clear that 
the majority of pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma tumors are 
not diagnosed during life. Tumors occur in both sexes and at any 
age but are most commonly diagnosed in the fourth and fifth 
decades. 
 Pheochromocytomas are chromaffin tumors that arise from 
the adrenal medulla. They account for 90% of all pheochromocy-
toma/paraganglioma tumors in adults and 70% in children. 
Adrenal pheochromocytomas are usually unilateral (90%). 
Unilateral pheochromocytomas occur more frequently in the right 
(65%) versus the left adrenal (35%). Right-sided pheochromocy-
tomas have been described as producing paroxysmal hypertension 
more often than sustained hypertension, whereas the opposite was 
true for tumors arising from the left adrenal. Adrenal pheochro-
mocytomas are bilateral in about 10% of adults and 35% of 
children. Bilateral pheochromocytomas are particularly common 
(24% overall) in patients with familial pheochromocytoma syn-
dromes caused by certain germline mutations (see later). 
 Basically, the adrenal medulla is a sympathetic ganglia whose 
neurons secrete neurotransmitters (epinephrine and norepi-
nephrine) into capillaries instead of synapses. The adrenal 
medulla is surrounded by the adrenal cortex, with which it 
shares a portal system that bathes it in high concentrations of 
cortisol. Cortisol stimulates expression of the gene encoding 
PNMT, the enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of norepi-
nephrine to epinephrine. Adrenal pheochromocytomas nearly 
always secrete catecholamines with variable amounts of 
 epinephrine as well as norepinephrine and their metanephrine 
metabolites. Metastases from adrenal pheochromocytomas usually 
secrete only norepinephrine and its metabolite normetanephrine; 
they may rarely secrete epinephrine. 
 Pheochromocytomas are typically encapsulated by a true cap-
sule or a pseudocapsule, the latter being the adrenal capsule. 
Pheochromocytomas are firm in texture. Hemorrhages that occur 
within a pheochromocytoma can give the tumor a mottled or dark 
red appearance. A few  black pheochromocytomas have been 
described, with the dark pigmentation believed to be due to an 
accumulation of neuromelanin, a catecholamine metabolite. 
Larger tumors frequently contain large areas of hemorrhagic 
necrosis that have undergone cystic degeneration; viable tumor 
may be found in the cyst wall. Calcifications are often present. 
Pheochromocytomas can invade adjacent organs, and tumors may 
extend into the adrenal vein and the vena cava, resulting in pul-
monary tumor emboli. Pheochromocytomas vary tremendously in 
size, ranging from microscopic to 3600 g. The average pheochro-
mocytoma weighs about 100 g and is 4.5 cm in diameter. 
 Non–head-neck paragangliomas arise from sympathetic gan-
glia ( Figure 11–8 ). They account for about 10% of all pheochro-
mocytoma/paraganglioma tumors in adults and about 30% in 
TABLE 11–6  Causes of death in patients with 
unsuspected pheochromocytomas.
Myocardial infarction
Cerebrovascular accident
Arrhythmias
Irreversible shock
Renal failure
Dissecting aortic aneurysm
Acute respiratory distress syndrome
 FIGURE 11–8  Left: Anatomic distribution of extra-adrenal chro-
maffin tissue in the newborn.  Right: Locations of extra-adrenal pheo-
chromocytomas reported before 1965.  (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Coupland R.  The Natural History of the Chromaffin 
Cell. Longmans Green; 1965). 
360    CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia
children. About 75% are intra-abdominal where they are often 
mistaken for adrenal pheochromocytomas. Paragangliomas are 
sometimes nonsecretory and may be confused with other neu-
roendocrine tumors. They arise most commonly in the peri-
nephric, periaortic, and bladder regions but often found in the 
chest (25%), arising in the anterior or posterior mediastinum or 
the heart. Pelvic paragangliomas may involve the bladder wall, 
obstruct the ureters, and metastasize to regional lymph nodes. 
About 36% to 60% of paragangliomas are functional, secreting 
norepinephrine and normetanephrine. Functional status is not 
known to affect survival. Nonfunctional paragangliomas can often 
concentrate metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) or secrete CgA. 
Paragangliomas of the bladder can cause symptoms associated 
with micturition. Large perinephric tumors can cause renal artery 
stenosis and elevations in plasma renin activity. Vaginal tumors 
may cause dysfunctional vaginal bleeding. Paragangliomas can 
rarely arise in central nervous system locations, including the sella 
turcica, petrous ridge, and pineal region. Cauda equina paragan-
gliomas can cause increased intracranial pressure. 
 Paragangliomas commonly metastasize (30%-50%) and pres-
ent with pain or a mass. They tend to metastasize to the liver, 
lungs, lymph nodes, and bone. PGLs can be locally invasive and 
may destroy adjacent vertebrae and cause spinal cord and nerve 
root compression. PGL metastases usually secrete norepinephrine 
and normetanephrine. They do not secrete epinephrine and there-
fore do not typically cause significant weight loss, hyperglycemia, 
anxiety, or tremor. 
 Nonchromaffin parasympathetic paragangliomas are typi-
cally found in the head and neck. Unlike chromaffin sympathetic 
paragangliomas, only about 5% of these tumors secrete cate-
cholamines.  Carotid body tumors are paragangliomas that arise 
near the carotid bifurcation. They usually present as a painless 
neck mass, but can injure the vagus or hypoglossal nerves.  Glomus 
tympanicum paragangliomas arise in the middle ear and cause 
tinnitus and hearing loss. The tumor may be seen as a reddish 
mass behind an intact tympanic membrane ( red drum ) that 
blanches when pressure is applied with a pneumatic ear speculum 
(Brown sign). Glomus jugulare paragangliomas arise in the 
jugular foramen. They often cause tinnitus and hearing loss as well 
as compression of cranial nerves, resulting is dysphagia. Vagal 
paragangliomas are rare, usually presenting as a painless neck mass 
often associated with hoarseness or dysphagia. Head-neck para-
gangliomas can also arise in the larynx, nasal cavity, nasal sinuses, 
and thyroid gland. Head-neck PGLs themselves are of more inter-
est to otolaryngologists than endocrinologists. But they may be 
seen along with sympathetic paragangliomas in familial paragan-
glioma syndromes, particularly those with germline succinate 
dehydrogenase subunit D (SDHD) mutations (see later). 
 Nonchromaffin paragangliomas behave differently from sym-
pathetic paragangliomas and pheochromocytomas, although they 
are embryologically related to chromaffin sympathetic paragan-
gliomas and may arise concurrently with sympathetic paragan-
gliomas in familial paraganglioma syndromes. These tumors are 
less likely to be malignant, although their indolence can be deceiv-
ing; recurrence and metastases may not appear for many years. 
Metastases to local nodes, lungs, and bone can occur. Long-term 
surveillance for recurrence or metastases is recommended for all 
patients. These tumors can produce CgA, and preoperative deter-
mination of CgA is recommended to determine if it will be a good 
serum marker for tumor recurrence. Patients with cervical para-
gangliomas often have an underlying germline mutation in the 
gene encoding succinate dehydrogenase (SDH);  SDHD ,  SDHC , 
and  SDHB gene sequencing is recommended for all these patients 
(see later). Individuals harboring a germline mutation must be 
screened for the existence of other paragangliomas and pheochro-
mocytomas (see “Genetic Conditions Associated with 
Pheochromocytomas and Paragangliomas,” later). 
 Neuroblastomas, ganglioneuroblastomas, and  ganglioneu-
romas are sympathetic nervous system tumors that are related to 
pheochromocytomas and likewise arise from embryonal sym-
pathogonia (see  Figure 11–1 ). Neuroblastoma is the most com-
mon malignant disease of infancy and the third most common 
pediatric cancer, accounting for 15% of childhood cancer deaths. 
Neuroblastomas are embryonal cancers of the postganglionic sym-
pathetic nervous system and develop from sympathetic tissue in 
the adrenal gland, neck, posterior mediastinum, retroperitoneum, 
or pelvis. These tumors differ in their degree of maturation and 
malignancy. Neuroblastoma tumors derive from immature neuro-
blasts, are generally aggressive, tend to occur in very young chil-
dren, and display clinical heterogeneity. The prognosis for 
neuroblastoma depends on age at diagnosis, with infants under 
age 1 year having a high likelihood of cure with surgical excision. 
Similarly, children with a localized neuroblastoma may be cured 
surgically. Some tumors can regress spontaneously or differentiate 
into benign ganglioneuromas. However, older children with wide-
spread hematogenous metastases have a very poor prognosis, as do 
those whose neuroblastoma harbors an amplification of the Myc 
proto-oncogene. Some neuroblastomas are more indolent, depend-
ing on the nature of their oncogene mutations. 
 Ganglioneuroblastomas are composed of a mixture of neuro-
blasts and more mature gangliocytes; these develop in older chil-
dren and tend to run a more benign course. Ganglioneuromas are 
the most benign of these tumors and are composed of gangliocytes 
and mature stromal cells. 
 Despite catecholamine secretion, children with neuroblasto-
mas tend to be more symptomatic from their primary tumor or 
metastases than from catecholamine secretion. Tumors tend to 
concentrate radiolabeled MIBG, making it a useful imaging and 
therapeutic agent. Treatment of malignant tumors consists of sur-
gery, chemotherapy, external beam radiation to skeletal metastases, 
and high-dose  131 I-MIBG therapy for patients with MIBG-avid 
tumors. 
 Screening for Pheochromocytomas
and Paraganglioma s
 Hypertension, defined as either a systolic or diastolic blood pres-
sure over 140/90 mm Hg, is an extremely common condition, 
affecting about 20% of all American adults and over 50% of 
adults over 60 years of age. The incidence of pheochromocytoma 
is estimated to be less than 0.1% of the entire hypertensive popu-
lation, but it is higher in certain subgroups whose hypertension is 
CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia     361
labile or severe. Screening for pheochromocytomas should be 
considered for such patients with severe hypertension and also for 
hypertensive patients with suspicious symptoms (eg, headaches, 
palpitations, sweating episodes, or unexplained bouts of abdomi-
nal or chest pains;  Table 11–7 ). 
 Genetic Conditions Associated with 
Pheochromocytomas and Paragangliomas 
(Tables 11–8 through 11–11) 
 Most pheochromocytomas occur sporadically, although a substan-
tial proportion of these tumors are found to have developed a 
somatic mutation similar to those germline mutations that give 
rise to familial syndromes. Based on family history, it was formerly 
thought that only about 10% of patients with these tumors devel-
oped it as part of a genetic syndrome. With genetic testing, it is 
TABLE 11–7  Patients to be screened for 
pheochromocytoma and 
paraganglioma.
Young hypertensives
Hypertensive patients with:
 Symptoms listed in Table 11–13
 Weight loss
 Seizures
 Orthostatic hypotension
 Unexplained shock
 Family history of pheochromocytoma or medullary carcinoma of 
  thyroid
 Neurofibromatosis and other neurocutaneous syndromes
 Mucosal neuromas
 Hyperglycemia
 Cardiomyopathy
Marked lability of blood pressure
Family history of pheochromocytoma
Shock or severe pressor responses with:
 Induction of anesthesia
 Parturition
 Surgery
 Invasive procedures
Radiologic evidence of adrenal mass
Radiologic evidence of mass in area of paraganglia
TABLE 11–8  Surveillance protocol for individuals carrying a RET protooncogene mutation.
Twice yearly: physical examination with blood pressure and neck examination; plasma free metanephrine; serum calcium and albumin (serum PTH if 
 
RET codon 634 mutation); serum calcitonin (patients with intact thyroid or with medullary thyroid carcinoma)
Prophylactic thyroidectomy: by age 5 years for MEN 2A and by 6 months for codon 918 mutations (MEN 2B)
Yearly thyroid ultrasound for patients with an intact thyroid
For rising or elevated serum calcitonin levels after thyroidectomy: close surveillance for medullary thyroid carcinoma is required. 18FDG-PET-CT fusion 
 scans are particularly helpful
For suspicious symptoms and before major surgical procedures and pregnancy: biochemical screening for pheochromocytoma with plasma free 
 metanephrine
For abnormal biochemical screening for pheochyromocytoma: MRI or CT scan of the abdomen (nonionic contrast) with thin-section adrenal cuts; 
 
123I-MIBG SPECT or 18F-FDA PET scan to confirm the identity of small masses
now clear that about 26% of patients with pheochromocytomas or 
paragangliomas carry a germline mutation associated with a famil-
ial syndrome. About 19% of patients with an apparently sporadic 
single pheochromocytoma and no known family history of pheo-
chromocytoma harbor a germline mutation. For example, about 
9% of patients with apparently sporadic, unilateral pheochromo-
cytoma have been found to have von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) 
mutations. Genetic testing is advisable for all patients with a pheo-
chromocytoma or paraganglioma. Genetic testing is strongly rec-
ommended for patients with extra-adrenal paragangliomas or 
multifocal tumors; onset of symptoms before age 45 years; prior 
history of head-neck paraganglioma; family history of paragan-
glioma, pheochromocytoma, or other tumors associated with 
MEN 2 or VHL. Genetic screening is also performed for patients 
with other manifestations of genetic syndromes noted later. 
Genetic screening can be done for MEN 2  RET proto-oncogene 
mutations,  VHL mutations, and  SDH ( SDHB ,  SDHD , and  SDHC ) 
gene mutations. Neurofibromatosis is usually diagnosed clinically with-
out genetic testing, since the NF-1 gene is very large.
 A. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2: RET proto- 
oncogene (10q11.2) 
 The first description of a pheochromo-
cytoma was in a patient with MEN 2. In 1882, Felix Fränkel 
described pheochromocytomas in an 18-year-old woman with 
bilateral adrenal tumors; genetic testing of four living relatives has 
revealed a germline RET mutation. 
 The prevalence of MEN 2 has been estimated at 1 in 30,000. 
MEN 2 is an autosomal dominant disorder that causes a predispo-
sition to medullary thyroid carcinoma, pheochromocytoma, and 
other abnormalities described later. MEN 2 is caused by an acti-
vating mutation in the  RET proto-oncogene on chromosome 
10q11.2. RET consists of 21 exons that encode a transmembrane 
receptor tyrosine kinase that is expressed in neural crest tissues. 
The constitutive activation of RET causes hyperplasia in affected 
tissues, including the adrenal medulla. Additional mutation(s) are 
believed to be required for a pheochromocytoma to develop. The 
somatic loss of a tumor suppressor gene on chromosome 1p 
appears to be necessary for pheochromocytoma formation. 
Additionally, reduced expression of NF-1 has been reported in a 
minority of pheochromocytomas arising in patients with MEN 2 
mutations. 
362    CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia
 MEN 2 kindreds can be grouped into two distinct subtypes: 
MEN 2A (90%) and MEN 2B (10%). Patients with MEN 2A 
have various single amino acid missense mutations affecting the 
extracellular  RET domain that cause  RET homodimerization and 
constitutive activation of its tyrosine kinase. Patients with MEN 
2B have a particular missense mutation (codon 918, exon 16) 
affecting the intracellular domain at the  RET tyrosine kinase’s 
catalytic site, causing constitutive activation. In either subtype, 
pheochromocytomas usually develop in the adrenals (96%); extra-
adrenal paragangliomas are rare (4%). About 42% of patients with 
pheochromocytoma in MEN 2 have hypertension, usually parox-
ysmal. Overall, only about 53% exhibit symptoms of pheochro-
mocytoma. Each specific type of mutation in the  RET codon 
determines each kindred’s idiosyncrasies, such as the age at onset 
and the aggressiveness of medullary thyroid carcinoma. 
 A limited number of  RET gene exons have been found to har-
bor mutations that are capable of causing constitutive activation 
of the tyrosine kinase.  RET exons 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, and 16 are 
usually involved. Therefore, routine genetic screening searches for 
mutations only in these exons. If no mutation is found in these 
exons, the remaining 15 exons can be sequenced in a research 
laboratory. When an affected kindred’s  RET mutation is already 
known, an individual in the kindred is screened for that specific 
mutation. 
 Pheochromocytomas arise in the adrenals, and extra-adrenal 
paragangliomas are rare in MEN 2. In patients with MEN 2, only 
about 4% of pheochromocytomas are found to be metastatic, pos-
sibly because of earlier detection. When pheochromocytomas 
develop in patients with MEN 2, they are bilateral in about two-
thirds of cases; however, with close surveillance of affected kin-
dreds, pheochromocytomas are discovered earlier and are more 
likely to be unilateral. After a unilateral adrenalectomy for pheo-
chromocytoma in a patient with MEN 2, a contralateral pheo-
chromocytoma develops in about 50% of patients an average of 
12 years after the first adrenalectomy. In patients with MEN 2, 
adrenal pheochromocytomas produce norepinephrine and epi-
nephrine (with its metabolite metanephrine). When screening for 
small pheochromocytomas, plasma catecholamine concentrations 
may be normal but plasma metanephrine concentrations are usu-
ally elevated, making plasma free metanephrines the screening test 
of choice for these patients. However, some pheochromocytomas 
are detected only by a 24-hour urine determination for fraction-
ated metanephrines, catecholamines, and creatinine. 
 1. MEN 2A (Sipple syndrome)— Patients with this genetic con-
dition develop medullary thyroid carcinoma (95%-100%), 
hyperparathyroidism due to multiglandular hyperplasia 
(35%), and pheochromocytoma (50%; range 6%-100% 
depending on the kindred) or adrenal medullary hyperplasia. 
Patients with MEN 2A also have an increased incidence of 
cutaneous lichen amyloidosis and Hirschsprung disease. 
Pheochromocytomas tend to present in middle age, often 
without hypertension. The incidence of hyperparathyroidism 
has also varied, averaging 35%. 
 Individuals belonging to an MEN 2A kindred should have 
genetic testing for  RET proto-oncogene mutations by 5 years 
of age to determine if they carry the genetic mutation that will 
require prophylactic thyroidectomy and close surveillance for 
pheochromocytoma and hyperparathyroidism. 
 More than 85% of the mutations in MEN 2A families 
affect codon 634 in exon 11 of the  RET proto-oncogene. 
Individuals with mutations in RET codon 630 also have a high 
incidence of pheochromocytoma. Pheochromocytomas also 
occur in most other kindreds with MEN 2A. Screening for 
pheochromocytoma should commence with the routine blood 
pressure measurements that are performed during examina-
tions in childhood for medullary thyroid carcinoma and fol-
low-up of hypothyroidism following thyroidectomy. At about 
age 15 years, affected individuals should commence yearly 
screening for pheochromocytoma with plasma free metaneph-
rine determinations. 
 Certain  RET mutations (codons 609, 768, val804met, and 
891) rarely produce pheochromocytomas. Less intense screen-
ing for pheochromocytomas is required in patients with these 
mutations. 
 2. MEN 2B— Over 90% of patients with MEN 2B have a single 
amino acid substitution of methionine to threonine on codon 
918 in exon 16 that affects the intracellular domain of tyrosine 
kinase. About 50% of such mutations are familial while the rest 
arise de novo and are sporadic. Patients with this genetic 
 condition are prone to develop mucosal neuromas, pheochro-
mocytoma, adrenal medullary hyperplasia, and aggressive med-
ullary thyroid carcinoma. About 50% of affected patients 
develop all three manifestations of the syndrome. Mucosal neu-
romas tend to develop first and occur in most patients. They 
appear as small bumps on the tongue, lips and buccal mucosa, 
eyelids, cornea, and conjunctivae. The lips and eyelids may 
become diffusely thickened. Intestinal ganglioneuromatosis 
occurs and alters intestinal motility, causing diarrhea or consti-
pation and occasionally megacolon. Affected individuals have a 
marfanoid habitus with associated spinal scoliosis or kyphosis, 
pectus excavatum, a high-arched foot and talipes equinovarus 
(club foot) deformities. In patients with MEN 2B, medullary 
thyroid carcinoma tends to be aggressive and occurs at an earlier 
age than in patients with MEN 2A. Members of kindred with 
MEN 2B should immediately have genetic testing for their fam-
ily’s  RET proto-oncogene mutation. If an individual is found to 
carry the family’s  RET mutation, early prophylactic thyroidec-
tomy is advisable. In kindreds with MEN 2B, infants are 
screened for the mutation at birth. For affected infants, prophy-
lactic thyroidectomy is performed by 6 months of age. 
 All individuals carrying a  RET proto-oncogene mutation must 
have close medical surveillance ( see Table 11–8 ). See Chapter 22: 
Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia. 
 B. Von Hippel-Lindau disease: VHL gene (3p25-26) 
 VHL 
disease is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait that predis-
poses its carriers to develop tumors in multiple tissues. Although 
certain VHL kindreds are predisposed to develop pheochromocy-
tomas, it is not the dominant tumor of this syndrome. 
Pheochromocytomas develop only in patients with type 2 VHL 
(see later), and these are different from sporadic pheochromocy-
tomas in that they are less likely to be malignant, more likely to be 
bilateral, and more likely to present at an earlier age. Although 
most VHL-associated pheochromocytomas arise in the adrenal, 
extra-adrenal paragangliomas sometimes arise; these usually occur 
CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia     363
along the sympathetic chain, but head-neck parasympathetic para-
gangliomas have been described. The mean age of presentation for 
a pheochromocytoma in type 2 VHL is 28 years; the youngest 
reported patient was 5 years old. 
 The different types and subtypes of VHL are as follows: 
 1. Type 1 VHL— Affected members of families with type 1 VHL 
do not develop pheochromocytomas. They tend to have loss-
of-function  VHL gene mutations, particularly gene deletions, 
frameshifts, or truncations. 
 2. Type 2 VHL— Affected members of families with type 2  VHL 
mutations are prone to develop pheochromocytomas. These 
patients carry VHL missense mutations. Type 2 VHL may be 
divided into subtypes as follows:
 a. Type 2A VHL— Pheochromocytomas, hemangioblastomas, 
 low risk of renal cell carcinoma. 
 b. Type 2B VHL— Pheochromocytomas, hemangioblasto-
mas,  high risk of renal cell carcinoma. 
 c. Type 2C VHL— Pheochromocytomas,  no hemangioblasto-
mas,  no renal cell carcinomas. 
 The prevalence of VHL is about 1 in 30,000 persons. VHL 
disease carriers are predisposed to multicentric hemangioblasto-
mas in the retina (retinal angiomas), cerebellum, and spinal cord. 
Renal cysts and renal clear-cell carcinoma commonly develop. 
 Multiple cysts and nonfunctional neuroendocrine tumors may 
develop in the pancreas. Endolymphatic sac tumors may occur, 
resulting in hearing loss, vertigo, or ataxia. Adnexal cystadenomas 
of probable mesonephric origin (APMO) are found in many 
women with VHL. APMOs may develop in the ovary, broad liga-
ment, vagina, uterine cervix, and vulva. Equivalent epididymal 
cystadenomas occur in men with VHL. 
 Genetic testing for VHL disease should be done in children 
born to a parent with known VHL disease. If VHL disease is sus-
pected, but the family’s VHL mutation is not known, the patient 
must be screened for point mutations by direct  VHL gene 
sequencing of the entire coding region and splice junctions. 
 The clinical diagnosis of VHL disease is made when a patient 
with a known  VHL gene mutation develops one tumor typical of 
VHL. In patients without a known family history of VHL, a pre-
sumptive diagnosis of VHL is made when they develop two or 
more hemangioblastomas or a hemangioblastoma in association 
with a pheochromocytoma or clear-cell renal carcinoma. Similarly, 
VHL disease should be suspected in patients with multiple VHL-
associated tumors or one VHL-associated tumor that presents at a 
young age (<50 years for pheochromocytoma or hemangioblas-
toma; <30 years for clear-cell renal carcinoma). Such patients 
should have  VHL gene sequencing. 
 The  VHL gene is a tumor suppressor gene whose locus is 
3p25/26. It encodes two different proteins (pVHL) of 213 and 
160 amino acids. Both gene products have a role in the degrada-
tion of the hypoxia-inducible factors (HIF-1α and HIF-2α) as 
follows: The pVHL proteins have an α domain that binds with 
the protein elongin. The β domain of pVHL is open to bind HIF 
that has been hydroxylated, a reaction that requires oxygen. This 
complex then binds ubiquitin that targets HIF for intracellular 
destruction by proteases. In this manner, well-oxygenated cells 
destroy HIF. Conversely, cells that are either oxygen-deprived or 
that lack functional pVHL cause an intracellular accumulation of 
HIF. HIF is a transcription factor that induces the production of 
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), erythropoietin, eryth-
ropoietin receptor, glucose transporter-1, and platelet-derived 
growth factor-B; these proteins allow an adaptation to hypoxia, 
but, in excess, they are believed to enhance tumorigenesis. 
 For a tumor to develop in a patient harboring a VHL germline 
mutation, an additional somatic mutation must develop in the 
patient’s remaining wild-type VHL allele. This second-hit muta-
tion must occur in a cell in susceptible somatic tissue (eg, vascular 
tissue) in order for the cell to grow into a VHL-associated tumor. 
 In patients with VHL disease, vascular tumors, particularly 
hemangioblastomas, renal cysts, and renal cell carcinomas, develop 
when there is a somatic second-hit on the wild-type allele in one 
cell; this can be caused by various spontaneous mutations (loss of 
heterozygosity) or promoter hypermethylation of the wild-type 
VHL allele. In these vascular tumors, a second-hit is usually neces-
sary to cause sufficient accumulation of HIF to promote tumorigen-
esis. In contrast, pheochromocytomas that develop in patients with 
type 2 VHL typically have a normal wild-type VHL allele. However, 
most VHL-associated pheochromocytomas also demonstrate a 
somatic loss of chromosome 3 (94%) or chromosome 11 (86%). 
 A germline mutation in the VHL tumor suppressor gene has 
been identified in most families with VHL disease. About 60% of 
affected families have loss-of-function mutations (30% with trun-
cated pVHL and 30% with large  VHL gene deletions), resulting 
in type 1 VHL. About 40% have missense mutations, resulting in 
an amino acid substitution in pVHL, causing type 2 VHL. 
 In a French series of 36 patients with pheochromocytomas and 
VHL disease, pheochromocytomas were the presenting tumor in 
53%. Pheochromocytomas tended to develop at an early age and 
were bilateral in 42%; concurrent paragangliomas were present in 
11%. Three of the 36 patients had a malignant pheochromocy-
toma. In 18% of these patients with VHL disease, pheochromo-
cytoma was the only known manifestation. Approximately 9% of 
patients with apparently sporadic, unilateral pheochromocytoma 
have been found to harbor a germline VHL mutation. In certain 
regions of Europe, the percentage is up to 20%, due to a founder 
effect for the Tyr98His  black forest mutation that is more common 
in kindreds with German ancestry. 
 Pheochromocytomas in VHL disease produce exclusively nor-
epinephrine. Therefore, the metabolite of norepinephrine (norme-
tanephrine) is also produced in these tumors. Plasma 
normetanephrine levels are usually elevated when patients with 
VHL disease develop a pheochromocytoma. Therefore, it is advis-
able for patients with a type 2  VHL gene missense mutation to be 
screened regularly with plasma normetanephrine levels. 
 In patients with VHL, a major risk to life is the development of 
a renal cell carcinoma. When an abdominal computed tomography 
(CT) scan detects a solid renal lesion, it must be removed. Even 
simple cystic renal lesions are considered premalignant, and their 
removal is advisable if renal function can be preserved. If renal cysts 
are observed, they must be followed every 6 months with dynamic 
thin-section CT scanning to search for characteristics of malig-
nancy: growth, wall irregularity, or septation. Individuals carrying 
364    CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia
a VHL mutation must have close medical surveillance. A surveil-
lance protocol is recommended in  Table 11–9 . 
 C. Von Recklinghausen (type 1) neurofibromatosis: 
NF-1 gene (17q11.2) 
 Pheochromocytomas are ultimately 
diagnosed in 0.1–5.7% of patients with von Recklinghausen 
neurofibromatosis type 1 ( NF-1 ). Most of these pheochromocy-
tomas are not diagnosed during life, since the autopsy incidence 
of pheochromocytoma in NF-1 patients is 3.3% to 13%. 
Pheochromocytomas that develop in patients with NF-1 are 
similar to sporadic pheochromocytomas: 84% have solitary 
adrenal tumors, 10% have bilateral adrenal tumors, 6% have 
extra-adrenal paragangliomas, and 12% have metastases or local 
invasion. 
 Pheochromocytomas are present in 20% to 50% of NF-1 
patients with hypertension, and all NF-1 patients with hyperten-
sion must be screened for pheochromocytoma. It is prudent to 
screen all patients with NF-1 for pheochromocytoma yearly, 
with interval testing if hypertension or symptoms develop that 
are suggestive of pheochromocytoma (headache, perspiration, 
palpitations). Similarly, all patients with NF-1 should be 
screened for pheochromocytoma before major surgical proce-
dures and pregnancy. 
 In patients with NF-1, pheochromocytomas can present any-
time during life, from infancy to old age, with a mean age of 
42 years at diagnosis. These pheochromocytomas can grow to 
large size. Although patients with pheochromocytomas may 
develop hypertension, many patients are surprisingly asymptom-
atic despite increased catecholamine secretion. Patients with NF-1 
are prone to develop vascular anomalies such as coarctation of the 
aorta and renal artery dysplasia, which can produce hypertension 
and mimic a pheochromocytoma. 
 Von Recklinghausen disease is caused by a mutation in the 
NF-1 tumor suppressor gene mapped to chromosome 17q11.2. 
The  NF-1 gene encodes a 2818 amino acid protein called neuro-
fibromin, which inhibits Ras oncogene activity; loss of neurofibro-
min leads to Ras activation and tumor formation. It is a common 
autosomal dominant genetic disorder (although 50% of cases 
seem sporadic), with an approximate incidence of 300 to 400 
cases per million population. Although genetic testing for NF-1 is 
available, the diagnosis is usually made clinically during childhood 
or adolescence. 
 Patients with NF-1 can present in childhood with optic 
gliomas that impair vision or in adolescence with plexiform neu-
rofibromas. Patients develop visible subcutaneous neurofibromas 
and schwannomas of cranial and vertebral nerve roots. Skeletal 
abnormalities are common. Hypothalamic hamartomas may 
occur and cause precocious puberty. Iris hamartomas may occur 
and are known as Lisch nodules. NF-1 patients have an increased 
risk of developing other tumors, especially malignant peripheral 
nerve sheath tumors and leukemia (particularly juvenile chronic 
myelogenous leukemia). Patients may also have freckles in their 
axillae and skin folds. Multiple cutaneous pigmented café au lait 
spots develop and grow in size and number with age; most patients 
ultimately develop more than six spots (smooth bordered) measur-
ing more than 1.5 cm in diameter. 
 Individuals carrying an NF-1 mutation must have close 
 medical surveillance. A surveillance protocol is recommended in 
 Table 11–10 . 
 D. Familial paraganglioma/pheochromocytoma syn-
dromes: succinate dehydrogenase gene mutations 
 Cer tain kindreds have a proclivity to develop multicentric head-
neck paragangliomas, sympathetic paragangliomas, and adrenal 
pheochromocytomas. These autosomal dominant syndromes were 
originally called familial paraganglioma syndromes, although 
some patients develop adrenal pheochromocytomas. The paragan-
glioma syndromes are caused by mutations in three of the four 
genes encoding mitochondrial complex II: SDH subunit B 
( SDHB ,  PGL 4 ), SDH subunit C ( SDHC ,  PGL 3 ), and SDH 
subunit D ( SDHD ,  PGL 1 ). (Note that  PGL 2 is not caused by an 
 SDH mutation.) SDHB encodes a catalytic subunit, while  SDHC 
and  SDHD encode membrane-anchoring subunits involved in 
electron transport.  SDHC and  SDHD (paternal) have an auto-
somal dominant proclivity to develop paragangliomas; those with 
 SDHB and  SDHD mutations can also develop adrenal pheochro-
mocytomas. Individuals with  SDHD mutations develop paragan-
gliomas only if the mutated gene is inherited from the father (see 
later). Overall, about 12% of patients with paragangliomas and 
TABLE 11–10  Surveillance protocol for individuals 
carrying a NF-1 gene mutation.
Twice yearly: physical and neurologic examination and blood 
 pressure, and a careful examination of the skin for development or 
 growth of neurofibromas
Yearly: CBC with WBC differential; plasma-fractionated free 
 metanephrines; complete eye examination with visual fields
Before major surgical procedures and pregnancy: plasma-fractionated 
 free metanephrines to screen for pheochromocytoma
For abnormal biochemical screening: MRI or CT scan of the abdomen 
 (nonionic contrast); 123I-MIBG SPECT or 18F-FDA PET scan
TABLE 11–9  Surveillance protocol for individuals 
carrying a type 2 VHL mutation.
Yearly: retinal examination; plasma free normetanephrine levels 
 yearly from age 10 to 15 years
Twice yearly: physical examination with blood pressure beginning at 
 age 5 years; plasma free normetanephrine levels beginning at age 
 15 years
Every 2 years: MRI scanning (with intravenous contrast) of the entire 
 brain and spinal cord (VHL types 2A and 2B VHL); MRI scanning of 
 the abdomen
For suspicious symptoms and before major surgical procedures and 
 pregnancy: biochemical screening for pheochromocytoma with 
 plasma free metanephrine
For abnormal biochemical screening: MRI or CT scan of the abdomen 
 (nonionic contrast) with thin-section adrenal cuts; 123I-MIBG SPECT 
 or 18F-FDA PET scan to confirm the identity of small masses
CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia     365
pheochromocytomas have been found to have germline  SDH gene 
mutations. 
 Head-neck paragangliomas occur with an incidence of 10 to 
33 cases per million persons. In one series of 34 patients with 
head-neck paragangliomas, 41% were found to have  SDH ger-
mline mutations. Of those patients with germline mutations, 79% 
had  SDHD mutations, and 21% had  SDHB mutations. 
 These syndromes are caused by mutations in nuclear genes that 
encode three of the four subunits that comprise mitochondrial 
complex II ( SDH ) that oxidizes succinate to fumarate (Krebs 
cycle). The four subunits of the tetrameric  SDH consist of a 
70-kDa flavoprotein ( SDHA ), a 30-kDa iron-sulfur protein 
( SDHB ), a 15-kDa subunit of cytochrome b ( SDHC ), and a 
12-kDa subunit of cytochrome b ( SDHD ). SDHC and SDHD 
components of cytochrome b are integral mitochondrial mem-
brane subunits anchoring the catalytic subunits  SDHA and  SDHB 
that are involved with the electron transport chain, transferring an 
electron to coenzyme Q (ubiquinone).  SDH is essential for aerobic 
energy production and the tricarboxylic acid cycle. Genetic defects 
cause mitochondrial dysfunction making the cells functionally 
hypoxic. This leads to increased secretion of VEGF that is neces-
sary for tumor growth. (SDHA germline mutations do not cause 
paragangliomas but rather cause Leigh syndrome, a fatal early-
onset mitochondrial neurodegenerative disease.) 
 All patients with paragangliomas and pheochromocytomas ide-
ally should be tested for germline mutations in  SDH ; such testing 
is highly recommended for patients with neck paragangliomas 
(>15% have germline mutations), other paragangliomas (particu-
larly multifocal paragangliomas or pheochromocytomas), a family 
history of paraganglioma or pheochromocytoma, and paragan-
gliomas arising in patients with Dutch ancestry. 
 Carney-Stratakis syndrome: Some patients with loss-of- 
function mutations in SDHB, SDHC, or SDHD can develop the 
dyad of paragangliomas and gastric stromal sarcomas, which is 
known as  Carney-Stratakis syndrome . Tumors present relatively 
early, with an average age of 24 years at diagnosis. Women and 
men are affected equally. The paragangliomas that develop in this 
syndrome are usually functional and develop in the abdomen, 
rather than head-neck region. In this syndrome, the condition is 
familial and affected kindreds do not develop pulmonary chon-
dromas, factors that distinguish it from Carney triad. 
 1.  SDHB gene mutations— The  SDHB gene has been mapped 
to chromosome 1p36. This has also been described as familial 
paraganglioma syndrome type 4 or  PGL 4 . Affected individuals 
are prone to develop paragangliomas all along the sympathetic 
chains, from the neck to the pelvis, and can develop pheochro-
mocytomas as well; they are less prone to glomus tumors of the 
neck than individuals with  SDHD mutations. Paragangliomas 
that arise in patients with  SDHB germline mutations are much 
more likely to be metastatic (35%) at the time of diagnosis 
than tumors seen in patients with  SDHD germline mutations. 
In one kindred with a large  SDHB exon 1 deletion, the pheno-
typic penetrance of paraganglioma was 35% by age 40. There 
have been no clear genotype-phenotype correlations with dif-
ferent  SDHB mutations. However, certain kindreds have a 
distinctly higher penetrance. Also, some point  SDHB  mutations 
may be relatively benign genetic polymorphisms rather than 
pathological mutations. Due to the rarity of these tumors, the 
precise penetrance for each  SDHB mutation has not been fully 
determined. Other malignancies may possibly be more com-
mon in patients with  SDHB mutations. In one series of 
53 patients, renal cell carcinoma was detected in two patients. 
Pediatric neuroblastoma has been described in a child with an 
 SDHB exon deletion. 
 2.  SDHC gene mutations— The  SDHC gene has been mapped 
to chromosome 1q2. Affected individuals are prone to develop 
parasympathetic head-neck paragangliomas, but not pheochro-
mocytomas. This is the least common  SDH mutation. About 
4% of patients with head-neck paragangliomas harbor an 
 SDHC germline mutation. 
 3.  SDHD gene mutations— The  SDHD gene has been mapped 
to chromosome 11q23. Only patients with paternally inherited 
 SDHD gene mutations are predisposed to develop paragan-
gliomas and pheochromocytomas. Affected individuals are 
particularly prone to develop parasympathetic head-neck para-
gangliomas that do not typically secrete catecholamines. About 
15% of patients with head-neck paragangliomas harbor this 
germline mutation. 
 In kindreds with  SDHD gene mutations, only paternal trans-
mission of the mutated gene causes the susceptibility to paragan-
gliomas and pheochromocytomas; this phenomenon is known as 
 maternal genomic imprinting , meaning that the maternally 
inherited mutant gene does not cause the syndrome in the moth-
er’s offspring. A male who inherits an  SDHD mutation from his 
mother does not express the phenotype (ie, no paragangliomas) 
but can pass on the gene to his children, who can express the 
phenotype (paragangliomas). A female who inherits an  SDHD 
mutation from her father develops paragangliomas, but her chil-
dren who inherit the  SDHD mutation are not affected. 
 Head-neck paragangliomas : Individuals with  SDHD germline 
mutations are particularly prone to develop head-neck paragan-
gliomas that arise from parasympathetic ganglia that are embryo-
logically related to sympathetic paraganglia. These tumors do not 
usually secrete catecholamines and are known as  nonchromaffin 
paragangliomas.  Carotid body tumors are also known as  chemod-
ectomas and arise near the carotid bifurcation. They usually present 
as a painless neck mass but can injure the vagus or hypoglossal 
nerves.  Glomus tympanicum paragangliomas arise in the middle 
ear and cause tinnitus and hearing loss. The tumor may be seen as a 
reddish mass behind an intact tympanic membrane.  Glomus jugu-
lare paragangliomas arise in the jugular foramen that often causes 
tinnitus and hearing loss as well as compression of cranial nerves, 
resulting is dysphagia.  Vagal paragangliomas are rare, usually pre-
senting as a painless mass in the neck that may cause hoarseness or 
dysphagia. Head-neck paragangliomas can also arise in the larynx, 
nasal cavity, nasal sinuses, and thyroid gland. Multicentric tumors 
have been reported in about 74% of paraganglioma patients with 
 SDHD mutations. About 50% of patients with seemingly isolated 
pheochromocytomas and a germline  SDHD mutation harbor a hid-
den paraganglioma. Sympathetic paragangliomas and adrenal pheo-
chromocytomas (8%) also occur in affected individuals. 
 A founder  SDHD mutation has been noted in families of 
Italian descent:  Q109X . Three  SDHD founder mutations have 
366    CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia
been discovered in families of Dutch ancestry:  Leu95Pro ,  Asp92Tyr , 
and  Asp92Tyr . An investigation of 243 family members with a 
paternally inherited  Asp92Tyr mutation in SDHD reported the 
following. The risk of developing a paraganglioma or pheochro-
mocytoma was 54% by age 40 years, 68% by 60 years, and 87% 
by 70 years. Most patients had head-neck paragangliomas, while 
some had sympathetic paragangliomas and 8% had pheochromo-
cytomas. Multiple tumors were found in 65%. 
 Malignancy appears to be uncommon in patients with SDHD-
associated paragangliomas. However, cervical paragangliomas can 
be indolent, and metastases to neck nodes, lungs, and bones may 
not be clinically evident for many years. Therefore, lifelong sur-
veillance is necessary ( Table 12–11 ). 
 E. Other genetic syndromes associated with pheochro-
mocytoma or paraganglioma 
 1. Carney triad— Multicentric paragangliomas occur in patients 
with Carney triad. While this is not a familial syndrome, it is 
believed to be genetic in origin. The underlying genetic defect 
is not known. Affected individuals can develop indolent gas-
tric leiomyosarcomas, pulmonary chondromas, and paragan-
gliomas (or adrenal pheochromocytomas). Only one-fifth of 
reported cases have had all three tumors, while most patients 
have had two of the three tumors, usually gastric sarcomas and 
pulmonary chondromas. Other tumors can develop in this 
syndrome, including adrenocortical adenomas (12%) and 
esophageal leiomyomas. Women account for 86% of the cases. 
Tumors tend to develop early in life, with an average age of 
21 years at diagnosis. 
 2. Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome— Pheochromocytomas 
have been reported in patients with Beckwith-Wiedemann 
syndrome and may be bilateral. Affected individuals also have 
other abnormalities, particularly neonatal hypoglycemia, 
omphalocele, umbilical hernia, macroglossia, and gigantism, 
and they are prone to develop malignancies. 
 3.  Prolyl hydroxylase domain 2 ( PHD2 ) gene mutations— -
PDH proteins regulate HIF. Germline mutations in  PHD2 cause 
congenital erythrocytosis. An  additional mutation of the wild-
type  PHD2 allele in paraganglia can give rise to a sympathetic 
paraganglioma. This gene mutation is different from  VHL gene 
mutations, although both gene mutations cause an increase in HIF 
as a probable mechanism for paraganglioma tumor production. 
 4.  KIF1B gene mutations— KIF1B is a gene that is believed to 
be a proapoptotic factor for sympathetic cell precursors. The 
gene is located on 1p36, where gene deletions have been noted 
in neural crest tumors. Mutations in  KIF1B have been associ-
ated with pheochromocytomas, paragangliomas, and neuro-
blastomas, as well as other tumors that are not of neural crest 
origin. These tumors are transcriptionally related to  NF-1 and 
 RET  tumors. 
 5. Familial paraganglioma syndrome type 2 —One known 
kindred has a familial paraganglioma syndrome that has been 
labeled  PGL2 , but which is not due to an SDH mutation. This 
kindred harbors a mutation in the succinate dehydrogenase 
assembly factor 2 (SDHAF2  ) gene at 11q13.1. 
 Physiology of Pheochromocytoma and 
Paraganglioma 
 Pheochromocytomas are tumors that arise from the adrenal 
medulla, whereas paragangliomas arise from sympathetic nerve 
ganglia. Although some pheochromocytomas do not secrete cate-
cholamines, most synthesize catecholamines at increased rates that 
may be up to 27 times the synthetic rate of the normal adrenal 
medulla ( Figure 11–9 ). The persistent hypersecretion of cate-
cholamines by most pheochromocytomas is probably due to lack 
of feedback inhibition at the level of tyrosine hydroxylase. 
Catecholamines are produced in quantities that greatly exceed the 
vesicular storage capacity and accumulate in the cytoplasm. 
Catecholamines that are in the cytoplasm are subject to intracel-
lular metabolism to metanephrines; excess catecholamines and 
their metabolites diffuse out of the pheochromocytoma cell into 
the circulation. 
 In contrast to the normal adrenal medulla, most adrenal pheo-
chromocytomas produce more norepinephrine than epinephrine, 
while many produce both hormones. Some pheochromocytomas 
produce epinephrine almost exclusively. Most paragangliomas 
produce mostly norepinephrine with some dopamine and no epi-
nephrine. Paragangliomas that produce large amounts of dop-
amine tend to be metastatic. Some paragangliomas secrete no 
catecholamines or metanephrines. 
 Serum levels of catecholamines correlate only modestly with 
tumor size. On average, large tumors secrete more catecholamines 
than smaller tumors. However, large tumors are much more vari-
able in their secretion of tumor markers. This may be due to 
the fact that larger tumors tend to develop hemorrhagic necrosis 
and cysts that are not functional. Additionally, about 20% of 
large, malignant paragangliomas are less differentiated and are 
 nonsecretory. 
 Severe hypertensive episodes occur in most patients with pheo-
chromocytomas. Exocytosis of catecholamines from the pheo-
chromocytoma can play a role in such paroxysms, but most 
pheochromocytomas have minor sympathetic innervation. Instead, 
hypertensive crises are often caused by spontaneous hemorrhages 
within the tumor or by pressure on the tumor causing the release 
of blood from venous sinusoids that are rich in catecholamines. 
TABLE 11–11  Surveillance protocol for individuals 
carrying a SDHB, SDHC, or paternally-
inherited SDHD mutation.
Twice yearly: physical examination and blood pressure; 
 plasma-fractionated free metanephrines and serum chromogranin A
Yearly: scanning with ultrasound of the neck and abdomen on odd 
 years and MRI or CT (nonionic contrast) of the neck, chest, 
 abdomen, and pelvis on even years
For suspicious symptoms and before major surgical procedures and 
 pregnancy: complete biochemical screening for 
 pheochromocytoma with fractionated plasma metanephrines and 
 serum chromogranin A
For abnormal biochemical screening: CT scan (nonionic contrast) of 
 the chest, abdomen, and pelvis or 18F-FDG-PET with CT fusion scan; 
 to confirm ambiguous results: 123I-MIBG SPECT or 18F-FDA PET scan
CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia     367
Thus, catecholamines can be released by physical stimuli such as 
bending or twisting or by micturition in patients with bladder 
paragangliomas. Of course, surgical manipulation of such tumors 
releases catecholamines and can cause life-threatening hyperten-
sive crises. 
 Chronically high circulating levels of catecholamines may 
cause normal sympathetic axons to become saturated with cate-
cholamines due to active catecholamine neuronal uptake. This 
may account for the paroxysms of hypertension that are triggered 
by pain, emotional upset, intubation, anesthesia, or surgical skin 
incisions. Adrenergic catecholamine saturation may also explain 
the elevations in plasma and urine catecholamines that can occur 
for 10 days or longer after a successful surgical resection of a 
 pheochromocytoma. 
 Secretion of Other Peptides by 
Pheochromocytomas and Paragangliomas 
( Table 11–12 ) 
 Although pheochromocytomas secrete mainly catecholamines and 
their metabolites, they also secrete many other peptide hormones, 
many of which contribute to a patient’s clinical symptoms. 
Secretion of parathyroid hormone–related peptide (PTHrP) can 
cause hypercalcemia. Ectopic ACTH production can cause 
Cushing syndrome. Erythropoietin secretion can cause erythrocy-
tosis. Leukocytosis is frequently seen in patients with pheochro-
mocytoma, probably caused by cytokine release from the tumor. 
Above right
adrenal vein
Inferior
vena cava
Superior
vena cava
Left adrenal
vein
Tumor
Left renal
vein
Iliac vein
Adrenal
Heart
Kidney
Norepinephrine
(nl <500 pg/mL)
Epinephrine
(nl <250 pg/mL)
5500
100
5700
530
6000
1200
6400
47,000
32,000
2300
5000
150
pg/mL
 FIGURE 11–9  Plasma norepinephrine and epinephrine levels in venous samples of blood from a patient with a secretory left perinephric 
paraganglioma. Note that the level of epinephrine is very high in the left adrenal vein sample, distinguishing it from the drainage of the paragan-
glioma that secretes norepinephrine into the left renal vein. Note the relatively normal peripheral levels of epinephrine (seen in the iliac vein or 
the superior vena cava). Such venous sampling is rarely required for diagnosis and localization of pheochromocytoma or paraganglioma. 
TABLE 11–12  Other proteins and peptides that may 
be secreted by pheochromocytomas, 
in addition to catecholamines and 
metanephrines.a
Adrenocorticotropic hormone
Adrenomedullin
Atrial natriuretic factor
Beta-endorphin
Calbindin
Calcitonin
Cholecystokinin
Chromogranin A
Cytokines
Enkephalins
Erythropoietin
Galanin
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone
Growth hormone
Interleukin-6
Motilin
Neuron-specific enolase
Neuropeptide Y
Neurotensin
Parathyroid hormone–related peptide
Peptide histidine-isoleucine
Renin
Serotonin
Somatostatin
Substance P
Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide
aPheochromocytomas variably secrete different peptides. Not all peptides have been 
documented to produce clinical manifestations. See text.
368    CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia
Interleukin-6 secretion can cause fevers and acute respiratory dis-
tress syndrome (ARDS). 
 Chromogranin A : Chromogranins are acidic single-chain gly-
coproteins that are found in neurosecretory granules. They have 
been categorized into three classes: chromogranins A (CgA), CgB 
(secretogranin I), and CgC (secretogranin II). In humans, the 
gene for CgA is on chromosome 14 and encodes a molecule with 
431 to 445 amino acids. CgA molecules aggregate with low pH or 
high calcium concentrations and promote the formation of secre-
tory vesicles and the concentration of hormones within these 
vesicles. 
 CgA also acts as a prohormone. It is cleaved by endopeptidases 
into smaller peptides. CgA is the prohormone for the amino ter-
minal fragments vasostatin I (CgA 1-76) and vasostatin II (CgA 
1-115), which appear to inhibit vasoconstriction. CgA is also the 
prohormone for catestatin (CgA 352-372), which blocks acetyl-
choline receptors and thus inhibits adrenosympathetic activity. 
 Most pheochromocytomas secrete CgA, and serum CgA 
levels may be assayed as a tumor marker for pheochromocy-
toma. However, CgA is not unique to the adrenal medulla. It is 
produced in neuroendocrine cells outside the adrenal medulla 
that secrete peptide hormones. CgA is found in the pituitary 
gland, parathyroid gland, central nervous system, and pancre-
atic islet cells. 
 Neuropeptide Y (NPY) : Many pheochromocytomas secrete 
significant amounts of NPY. The molecule is a 36 amino acid 
peptide (see primary sequence later) that is found in neurosecre-
tory granules and is secreted along with catecholamines. It is a very 
potent nonadrenergic vasoconstrictor that contributes to hyper-
tension in some patients with pheochromocytoma. 
 Tyr-Pro-Ser-Lys-Pro-Asp-Asn-Pro-Gly-Glu-Asp-AlaPro-Ala-Glu-
Asp-Met-Ala-Arg-Tyr-Tyr-Ser-Ala-LeuArg-His-Tyr-Ile-Asn-Leu-
Ile-Thr-Arg-Gln-Arg-Tyr-NH 2 
 NPY acts on G protein–coupled receptors, which belong to the 
pancreatic polypeptide family of cell-surface receptors called pep-
tide YY (PYY). Six subtypes of these receptors have been identified 
(Y 1 R-Y 6 R). NPY has particular affinity for the Y 1 -R, Y 2 -R, Y 3 -R, 
and Y 5 -R receptors. Some PYY receptors are found in vascular 
smooth muscle and mediate NPY-induced vasoconstriction. 
Other PYY receptors are found on the pheochromocytes them-
selves and mediate NPY’s autocrine effects: NPY appears to 
inhibit catecholamine synthesis via Y 3 R, a receptor which blocks 
L-type Ca 2+ channels. It inhibits catecholamine release via Y 2 R, a 
receptor which blocks N-type Ca 2+ channels. 
 NPY also has paracrine effects, stimulating endothelial cell 
proliferation and angiogenesis that may foster tumor growth. 
Patients with essential hypertension have normal levels of NPY. 
However, in a series of eight patients with pheochromocytomas, 
NPY levels were elevated 2- to 465-fold above the normal refer-
ence range. In another series, 59% of adrenal pheochromocy-
tomas were found to secrete NPY during surgical resection; high 
serum levels of NPY were observed to correlate with vascular 
resistance, independent of norepinephrine. NPY appears to con-
tribute to hypertension and left ventricular hypertrophy in most 
patients with pheochromocytoma. In contrast, few paragan-
gliomas secrete NPY. 
 Adrenomedullin (AM): It was originally isolated from a 
pheochromocytoma, thus its misleading name. Although AM is 
produced by the adrenal medulla, it is also produced in the 
adrenal cortex (zona glomerulosa). It is produced by so many 
other tissues that the adrenal gland is actually a minor source 
for circulating AM. 
 AM is a 52 amino acid peptide cleavage product of a prohor-
mone, preproadrenomedullin, encoded on chromosome 11. AM 
has some homology with  calcitonin gene–related peptide (CGRP), 
and exerts its effects as a ligand for CGRP1 receptors and specific 
AM receptors. Ligand binding to the G protein–coupled receptors 
causes adenylate cyclase activation and an elevation of cellular 
cAMP levels. 
 AM is a pluripotent hormone. In the adrenal, AM appears to 
suppress aldosterone secretion. It is also secreted by the heart, 
lung, kidney, and brain as well as vascular endothelium, where it 
causes vasodilation. AM is also a natriuretic peptide and is secreted 
by the heart in congestive heart failure. AM is expressed in pheo-
chromocytomas and a variety of other tumors, where it appears to 
stimulate tumor growth, reduce apoptosis, and suppress the 
immune response to the tumor. 
 Neuron-specific enolase (NSE): It is a neuroendocrine glyco-
lytic enzyme. Serum levels of NSE have been reported to be nor-
mal in patients with benign pheochromocytoma but are elevated 
in about half of patients with malignant pheochromocytomas. 
Therefore, an elevated serum level of NSE increases the likelihood 
that a given pheochromocytoma is malignant. 
 Manifestations of Pheochromocytoma and 
Paraganglioma ( Table 11–13 ) 
 More than one-third of pheochromocytomas cause death prior to 
diagnosis. Death usually results from a fatal cardiac arrhythmia, 
myocardial infarction, or stroke. Adult patients with a pheochromo-
cytoma usually have paroxysmal symptoms, which may last minutes 
or hours; symptoms usually begin abruptly and subside slowly. 
The particular constellation of symptoms varies considerably among 
patients. One cause for the differences in symptoms is the variable 
production of epinephrine and norepinephrine by these tumors. 
Pheochromocytomas that produce epinephrine tend to cause parox-
ysmal β-adrenergic manifestations, particularly anxiety, tremor, 
diaphoresis, tachycardia, palpitations, and hyperglycemia. Epinephrine 
and cytokine secretion can cause pulmonary edema and ARDS. 
Paragangliomas do not secrete  epinephrine but most secrete norepi-
nephrine that causes hypertension. Paragangliomas are more likely to 
metastasize. 
 Manifestations and their approximate incidence include hyper-
tension (90%), headaches (80%), diaphoresis (70%), and palpita-
tions or tachycardia (60%). Other common symptoms include 
episodic anxiety (60%), tremor (40%), abdominal or chest pain 
(35%), pallor (30%), and nausea or vomiting (30%). Hyperglycemia 
occurs in about 30% but is usually asymptomatic; diabetic ketoaci-
dosis has been reported but is very rare. Patients may also  experience 
fever (28%), fatigue (25%), flushing (18%), and dyspnea (15%). 
CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia     369
Change in bowel habits occurs frequently with either constipation 
(13%) or diarrhea (6%). Visual changes occur in 12% with either 
transient blurring or field loss during attacks; metastases to the 
orbit or skull base may directly impinge on the optic nerve. See 
 Table 11–13 . 
 Triggers for paroxysms :  Episodic paroxysms may not recur 
for months or may recur many times daily. Each patient tends to 
have a different pattern of symptoms, with the frequency or sever-
ity of episodes usually increasing over time. Attacks can occur 
spontaneously or may occur with bladder catheterization, anesthe-
sia, and surgery. Acute attacks may also be triggered by eating 
foods containing tyramine (the precursor to catecholamines): aged 
cheeses, meats, fish, beer, wine, chocolate, or bananas. Hypertensive 
crises can also be triggered by certain drugs: ionic radiocontrast 
media, MAO inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, sympathomi-
metics, decongestants, glucagon, chemotherapy, prednisone, 
ACTH, opiates, methyldopa, metoclopramide, nicotine, and 
cocaine. Phenothiazines have been reported to cause shock and 
pulmonary edema in patients with pheochromocytoma. 
 Paroxysms can be induced by seemingly benign activities such as 
bending, rolling over in bed, exertion, abdominal palpation, or mic-
turition (with bladder paragangliomas). There is an amazing interin-
dividual variability in the manifestations of pheochromocytomas. 
Most patients have dramatic symptoms, but other patients with 
incidentally discovered secretory pheochromocytomas are completely 
asymptomatic. Patients who develop pheochromocytomas as part of 
MEN 2 or VHL disease are especially prone to be normotensive and 
asymptomatic. 
 Blood pressure :  Hypertensive crisis is the quintessential 
manifestation of pheochromocytoma. Blood pressure that exceeds 
200/120 mm Hg is an immediate threat to life, being associated 
with encephalopathy or stroke, cardiac ischemia or infarction, 
pulmonary edema, aortic dissection, rhabdomyolysis, lactic acido-
sis, and renal insufficiency. 
 Definition of hypertension : In adults, hypertension is consid-
ered to be present when blood pressure exceeds 140 mm Hg sys-
tolic or 90 mm Hg diastolic. In children, blood pressure increases 
with age, such that maximal normal ranges are age dependent; 
hypertension is considered to be present when blood pressure mea-
surements exceed the following: younger than 6 months, 110/60 mm 
Hg; 3 years, 112/80 mm Hg; 5 years, 115/84 mm Hg; 10 years, 
130/90 mm Hg; and 15 years, 138/90 mm Hg. 
 Presentation of hypertension: Hypertension is present in 90% of 
patients in whom a pheochromocytoma is diagnosed. Hypertension 
occurs primarily from the secretion of norepinephrine. Epinephrine 
secretion variably increases blood pressure. Also, pheochromocytomas 
TABLE 11–13 Clinical manifestations of pheochromocytomas and paraganglioma.
Blood pressure
Hypertension: severe or mild, paroxysmal or sustained; orthostasis; hypotension/shock; normotension
Vasospasm
Cyanosis, Raynaud syndrome, gangrene; severe radial artery vasospasm with thready pulse; falsely low blood 
pressure by radial artery transducer
Multisystem crisis
Severe hypertension/hypotension, fever, encephalopathy, renal failure, ARDS, death
Cardiovascular
Palpitations, dysrhythmias, chest pain, acute coronary syndrome, cardiomyopathy, heart failure, cardiac 
paragangliomas
Gastrointestinal
Abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, weight loss, intestinal ischemia; pancreatitis, cholecystitis, jaundice; 
rupture of abdominal aneurysm; constipation, toxic megacolon
Metabolic
Hyperglycemia/diabetes; lactic acidosis; fevers
Neurologic
Headache, paresthesias, numbness, dizziness, CVA, TIA, hemiplegia, hemianopsia, seizures, hemorrhagic 
stroke; skull metastases may impinge on brain structures, optic nerve, or other cranial nerves; spinal metasta-
ses may impinge on cord or nerve roots
Pulmonary
Dyspnea; hypoxia from ARDS
Psychiatric
Anxiety (attacks or constant); depression; chronic fatigue; psychosis
Renal
Renal insufficiency, nephrotic syndrome, malignant nephrosclerosis; large tumors often involve the kidneys 
and renal vessels
Skin
Apocrine sweating during paroxysms, drenching sweats as attack subsides; eczema; mottled cyanosis during 
paroxysm
Ectopic hormone production
ACTH (Cushing syndrome); VIP (Verner-Morrison syndrome); PTHrP (hypercalcemia)
Children
More commonly have sustained hypertension, diaphoresis, visual changes, polyuria/polydipsia, seizures, 
edematous or cyanotic hands; more commonly harbor germline mutations, multiple tumors, and paragan-
gliomas
Women
More symptomatic than men: more frequent headache, weight loss, numbness, dizziness, tremor, anxiety, 
and fatigue
Pregnancy
Hypertension mimicking eclampsia; hypertensive multisystem crisis during vaginal delivery; postpartum 
shock or fever; high mortality
General laboratory
Leukocytosis, erythrocytosis, eosinophilia
370    CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia
often secrete neuropeptide Y that is a potent vasoconstrictor. Some 
tumors may grow so large that they impinge upon the renal artery, 
causing increased renin production and secondary renovascular 
hypertension. Blood pressure patterns vary among patients with 
pheochromocytomas. Adults most commonly have sustained but 
variable hypertension, with severe hypertension during symptomatic 
episodes. Paroxysms of severe hypertension occur in about 50% of 
adults and in about 8% of children with pheochromocytoma. Other 
patients may be completely normotensive, may be normotensive 
between paroxysms, or may have stable sustained hypertension. 
 Hypertension can be mild or severe and resistant to treatment. 
Severe hypertension may be noted during induction of anesthesia 
for unrelated surgeries. Although hypertension usually accompa-
nies paroxysmal symptoms and may be elicited by the above 
activities, this is not always the case. 
 Orthostasis: Patients with sustained hypertension frequently 
exhibit orthostatic changes in blood pressure, often with orthos-
tatic tachycardia. Patients may complain of orthostatic faintness. 
Blood pressure may drop, even to hypotensive levels, after the 
patient arises from a supine position and stands for 3 minutes; 
such orthostasis, especially when accompanied by a rise in heart 
rate, is suggestive of pheochromocytoma. Epinephrine secretion 
from a pheochromocytoma may cause episodic hypotension and 
even syncope. 
 Hypotension and shock: Although hypertension is usually the 
key symptom in pheochromocytoma patients, hypotension and 
shock can occur. Some pheochromocytomas produce purely epi-
nephrine that can produce mild hypertension from alpha stimula-
tion but can also produce hypotension from predominantly 
beta-stimulated vasodilation. After a especially intense and pro-
longed attack of hypertension, shock may ultimately occur. This 
may be due to loss of vascular tone, low plasma volume, arrhyth-
mias, or cardiac damage. Spontaneous necrosis within a pheochro-
mocytoma can lead to severe hypotension when norepinephrine 
levels suddenly drop. Similarly, surgical resection of a pheochro-
mocytoma often precipitates sudden and severe intraoperative 
hypotension, particularly in the presence of alpha blockade and 
other antihypertensives. Cardiogenic shock can occur as a result of 
cardiac ischemia or infarction as well as catecholamine cardiomyo-
pathy. (See “Cardiac Manifestations,” later.) 
 Peripheral vasospasm and gangrene: Vasoconstriction is 
responsible for the pallor and mottled cyanosis that can occur with 
paroxysms of hypertension. Raynaud phenomenon can occur. 
Peripheral pulses may become thready or even nonpalpable during 
paroxysms. Catheters inserted into the radial artery and connected 
to continuous blood pressure monitoring transducers can give 
misleadingly low-pressure readings during paroxysms of vasos-
pasm, a condition known as  pseudoshock . Prolonged severe 
peripheral vasospasm has rarely caused gangrene of the skin, fin-
gers, or toes. Reflex vasodilation usually follows an attack and can 
cause facial flushing. 
 Multisystem crisis : Massive release of catecholamines can 
occur spontaneously during tumor necrosis or can be triggered by 
any of the factors noted earlier. This can cause multisystem crisis 
that can be the presenting manifestation of pheochromocytoma, 
with hypertension or hypotension, high fever, encephalopathy, 
renal failure, ARDS, and death. Multisystem crisis resembles sep-
tic shock, so the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma may be missed 
entirely. 
 Cardiac manifestations : The heart is affected in most patients 
with pheochromocytoma, either directly from excessive cate-
cholamines or indirectly from hypertension. Palpitation is one of 
the most frequent complaints. 
 Dysrhythmias: Tachycardia or dysrhythmias occur in about 
60% of patients with pheochromocytoma. Patients may note pal-
pitations, described variably as episodes of excessive heart pound-
ing at rest or a fluttering sensation, during which they may 
become lightheaded. Supraventricular tachycardia is common, 
particularly in patients with epinephrine-secreting pheochromo-
cytomas. The heart rate will often increase when standing. There 
can be an initial tachycardia during a paroxysm, followed by a 
reflex bradycardia. Atrial fibrillation may occur. Other dysrhyth-
mias described with pheochromocytoma include nodal tachycar-
dia, torsades de pointes, sick sinus syndrome, and 
Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome. Atrioventricular dis-
sociation can occur and right bundle branch block has been 
reported. Ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation can 
occur suddenly and is a common cause of death. 
 Acute coronary syndrome (ACS): During a paroxysm, severe 
coronary vasospasm can cause myocardial ischemia or infarction, 
even in the absence of coronary atherosclerosis. This typically 
occurs simultaneously with increased myocardial oxygen demand 
caused by catecholamine-induced increases in heart rate and con-
tractility. Patients may experience crushing chest pain or pressure 
with referred pain, usually to the jaw or the left shoulder or arm. 
Acute heart failure may occur along with severe hypotension or 
shock. 
 It can be difficult to distinguish ACS due to coronary stenosis/
thrombosis from ACS due to a pheochromocytoma. Changes in 
the electrocardiogram and serum levels of troponin and creatine 
kinase-MB (CK-MB) are the same for both conditions. Patients 
with coronary disease can have tachycardia, cardiomyopathy, 
hypertension, dysrhythmias, diaphoresis, anxiety, and increased 
plasma catecholamine levels. However, patients with pheochro-
mocytoma usually do not have critical coronary artery stenosis on 
coronary angiogram and usually have severe hypertension, head-
ache, and other paroxysmal symptoms. 
 Cardiomyopathy: Left ventricular hypertrophy and hyperten-
sive cardiomyopathy can occur in patients with chronic hyperten-
sion from pheochromocytoma. High levels of catecholamines can 
also directly cause myocarditis and a dilated cardiomyopathy. This 
is known as  catecholamine cardiomyopathy . Takotsubo cardio-
myopathy is the term used to describe asymmetric cardiac contrac-
tility with apical and midventricular akinesis or dyskinesis with 
hyperkinesis at the base. Other patterns of cardiac hypokinesis can 
occur. Most patients with catecholamine cardiomyopathy develop 
pulmonary edema and die. However, full recovery from cardio-
myopathy may occur after treatment and surgical resection of a 
pheochromocytoma. In some patients, myocardial scarring and 
fibrosis lead to irreversible cardiomyopathy and heart failure. Fatal 
Takotsubo cardiomyopathy has been reported after dobutamine 
stress echocardiography. 
CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia     371
 There can be multiple causes of cardiomyopathy in patients 
with pheochromocytoma: hypertensive, ischemic, and cate-
cholamine. The underlying pathophysiology of catecholamine 
cardiomyopathy appears to involve high levels of intracellular 
calcium in cardiac myocytes. Postmortem histopathology typically 
reveals intracardiac hemorrhages, edema, and concentrations of 
lymphocytes and leukocytes in cardiac muscle with areas of myo-
cardial fibrosis. 
 Cardiac paragangliomas: These are rare tumors that arise at 
the base of the heart near the trunks of the aortic and pulmonary 
arteries and may be asymptomatic or cause hypertension and pal-
pitations. They typically involve the left atrium or interatrial 
groove and often protrude into the atrium, resembling an atrial 
myxoma. Cardiac paragangliomas often have an invasive intramu-
ral component, making tumor resection difficult. 
 Diaphoresis and fever : During a paroxysm, sweating usu-
ally occurs initially from apocrine glands, affecting the palms, 
axillae, head, and shoulders. Reflex thermoregulatory eccrine 
sweating occurs later in an attack, dissipating the heat that was 
acquired during the prolonged vasoconstriction that occurred 
during the paroxysm. This can cause drenching sweats, usually 
as a paroxysm subsides. Patients with pheochromocytoma com-
monly develop fevers that may be mild or severe, even as high 
as 41°C. Up to 70% of patients have unexplained low-grade 
elevations in temperature of 0.5°C or more. Such fevers have 
been attributed to the secretion of interleukin-6 and respond to 
NSAID therapy. 
 Gastrointestinal manifestations : Many patients with pheo-
chromocytoma exhibit gastrointestinal symptoms such as 
abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. Most patients lose 
some weight, even if appetite is preserved. More severe weight 
loss (>10% of basal weight) occurs in about 15% of patients 
overall and in 41% of those with sustained and prolonged 
hypertension. Abdominal pain may be due to splanchnic vaso-
constriction ( intestinal angina ) and prolonged vasospasm can 
cause ischemic enterocolitis. Vasospasm can rarely cause isch-
emic gangrene of the bowel. Pain may also be caused by the 
growth of a large intra-abdominal tumor. Intestinal motility 
disorders are also common. Catecholamines relax gastrointesti-
nal smooth muscle while increasing contraction of the pyloric 
and ileocecal sphincters. Constipation is common, and abdom-
inal distention and even toxic megacolon can occur. Other 
abdominal emergencies can be seen with pheochromocytoma, 
including the rupture of an aortic aneurysm, acute cholecysti-
tis, and acute pancreatitis. 
 Neurologic manifestations : Headache is a common manifes-
tation during an acute paroxysms. Patients frequently complain of 
paresthesia, numbness, or dizziness. Affected patients have an 
increase risk of experiencing a cerebrovascular accident (CVA) or 
transient ischemic attack (TIA). Hemiplegia can occur, sometimes 
with homonymous hemianopsia, and may be transient or perma-
nent. Although most CVAs are ischemic in origin, hemorrhagic 
stroke can also occur during hypertensive paroxysms. Rupture of 
the internal carotid artery into the cavernous sinus can occur, 
causing a third nerve palsy. Some patients develop confusion or 
even psychosis during paroxysms. Paresthesias can occur. 
 Pulmonary manifestations : Patients may complain of dysp-
nea during a paroxysm. Patients with catecholamine cardiomyopa-
thy may also present with dyspnea. Some patients develop ARDS, 
which can develop acutely or over several days. This is a life-
threatening condition but may be self-limited during an attack. 
Isolated adrenal pheochromocytomas can produce ARDS. Patients 
with large hepatic metastases may be more prone to develop this 
complication. It may be mistaken for pneumonia, pulmonary 
edema, pulmonary emboli, or congestive heart failure. It is 
hypothesized that ARDS is caused by interleukin-6 produced by 
the tumor. Congestive heart failure may also cause pulmonary 
edema and can be distinguished from ARDS by echocardiogram. 
 Renal manifestations : Some degree of renal insufficiency is 
common in patients with pheochromocytoma. Hypertensive 
nephrosclerosis occurs in patients with a long history of severe 
hypertension. Nephrotic syndrome may occur with significant 
proteinuria, possibly due to secretion of interleukin-6 by the 
tumor. Malignant nephrosclerosis can occur with severe hyperten-
sion damaging renal arterioles, resulting in rapidly progressive 
renal failure. Large pheochromocytomas and perirenal paragan-
gliomas can impinge upon the renal artery, causing increased renin 
production and a Goldblatt kidney, resulting in renovascular 
hypertension that is additive to norepinephrine-induced hyper-
tension. The tumor may directly invade the renal vein and extend 
into the inferior vena cava, causing pulmonary emboli and an 
increased risk of lower extremity deep vein thrombosis. Severe 
hypertensive paroxysms can cause muscle ischemic damage and 
rhabdomyolysis with release of myoglobin that causes myoglobi-
nuric renal failure. Acute tubular necrosis can occur after a severe 
hypotensive episode. 
 Ectopic hormone production : Pheochromocytomas can 
rarely produce ACTH that stimulates the adrenal cortex to pro-
duce excessive cortisol, resulting in Cushing syndrome. Tumors 
can also produce VIP that can cause watery diarrhea, 
hypokalemia, and achlorhydria, the WHDA (Verner-Morrison) 
syndrome. Some tumors produce PTHrP that causes hypercal-
cemia. Although pheochromocytomas can secrete renin directly, 
elevated plasma renin levels are usually derived from the juxta-
glomerular apparatus, whose β 1 receptors are stimulated by 
both epinephrine and norepinephrine. 
 Manifestations in children : The symptoms of pheochromo-
cytomas in children are different from those in adults. Over 80% 
of children exhibit hypertension that is usually sustained and less 
frequently (10%) paroxysmal. Children are more prone to diapho-
resis and visual changes. Children are more likely to have parox-
ysms of nausea, vomiting, and headache, which often occur after 
exertion. They are also prone to weight loss, polydipsia, polyuria, 
and convulsions. Affected children may also exhibit reddish-blue 
mottled skin along with edematous and cyanotic-appearing hands, 
a symptom rarely seen in adults. Children are more likely to have 
multiple tumors and extra-adrenal paragangliomas. In one series, 
39% of affected children had bilateral adrenal pheochromocy-
tomas, an adrenal pheochromocytoma plus a paraganglioma, or 
multiple paragangliomas; a single paraganglioma occurred in an 
additional 14% of children. Affected children often have genetic 
conditions associated with pheochromocytomas and paragan-
372    CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia
gliomas. Thus, they may harbor the other tumors associated with 
these conditions. All affected children should have genetic testing 
for mutations in VHL, RET, SDHB, and SDHD (see earlier). 
 Manifestations in women : There are sex differences in pheo-
chromocytoma symptomatology, with women tending to be more 
symptomatic than men. Women report significantly more headache 
(80% vs 52%), weight change (88% vs 43%), numbness (57% vs 
24%), dizziness (83% vs 39%), tremor (64% vs 33%), anxiety 
(85% vs 50%), and changes in energy level (89% vs 64%). 
 Manifestations in pregnancy : A pheochromocytoma dur-
ing pregnancy can cause sustained hypertension or paroxysmal 
hypertension that is typically mistaken for eclampsia. 
Hypertensive paroxysms tend to occur more frequently as the 
uterus enlarges, triggered by direct pressure upon the tumor by 
shifts in position or movement of the fetus. Hypertensive crisis 
typically occurs at the time of vaginal delivery and is commonly 
associated with cardiac arrhythmia, ARDS, and death. 
Postpartum women may develop shock or fever that can mimic 
uterine rupture, amniotic fluid embolus, or infection (puerperal 
sepsis). A tumor that is unrecognized carries a grave prognosis, 
with a reported 40% maternal mortality and a 56% fetal mor-
tality. If the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma is made before 
delivery, the maternal mortality rate drops to about 10%. (See 
“Pregnancy and Pheochromocytoma,” later in the chapter.) 
 Manifestations of malignancy : Metastases occur in about 
10% of pheochromocytomas and 30% of non–head-neck sympa-
thetic paragangliomas. Since histopathology cannot distinguish 
whether a given pheochromocytoma is malignant, the term malig-
nant is dependent upon whether metastases are detectable at pre-
sentation (50%) or months to years later (50%). Metastases are 
usually (80%) functional and can cause recurrent hypertension 
and symptoms many months or years after an operation that had 
been thought to be curative. (See “Metastatic Pheochromocytoma 
and Paraganglioma” discussed later.) 
 Normotension 
despite 
high 
plasma 
levels 
of 
norepinephrine 
 Interestingly, about 14% of patients with 
pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas have no hypertension 
despite having chronically elevated serum norepinephrine levels. 
This phenomenon has been variably called desensitization, 
 tolerance, or tachyphylaxis. 
 Patients can be genetically prone to adrenergic desensitization. 
Adrenergic desensitization is caused by adrenergic receptors 
undergoing sequestration, downregulation, or phosphorylation. 
Adrenergic desensitization appears to be one cause of the cardio-
vascular collapse that can occur abruptly following the removal of 
a pheochromocytoma in some patients. 
 Desensitization does not account for all patients who are nor-
motensive in the face of elevated serum levels of norepinephrine, 
because some such patients can still have hypertensive responses to 
norepinephrine. Secretion of epinephrine can have a hypotensive 
effect and may account, at least in part, for this phenomenon. 
Some patients are homozygous for certain polymorphisms of 
β 2 -adrenergic receptors that allow continued β 2 -adrenergic-
mediated vasodilation, thus counteracting the pressor effects of 
circulating epinephrine and norepinephrine caused by stimulation 
of vascular α 1 -adrenergic receptors. 
 Cosecretion of DOPA may reduce blood pressure through a 
central nervous system action. Similarly, cosecretion of dopamine 
may directly dilate mesenteric and renal vessels and thus modulate 
the effects of norepinephrine. 
 Biochemical Testing for 
Pheochromocytoma 
 No single test is absolutely sensitive and specific for pheochromo-
cytoma. Plasma-fractionated free metanephrines or urinary 
24-hour metanephrines have a sensitivity of about 97%. 
Sensitivities of other tests are somewhat lower: urinary norepi-
nephrine 93%, plasma norepinephrine 92%, urinary VMA 90%, 
plasma epinephrine 67%, urinary epinephrine 64%, and plasma 
dopamine 63%. However, some malignant tumors secrete only 
dopamine and no catecholamines and no metanephrines at all. 
Also, the determination of plasma catecholamines-metanephrine 
ratios can be of value in discriminating false-positive from true-
positive results (see later). Therefore, assays for plasma cate-
cholamines, dopamine, and serum chromogranin A are often 
warranted. 
 Pheochromocytomas are deadly tumors and missing the diag-
nosis can be disastrous, so screening tests must be very sensitive. 
The secretion of catecholamines can be paroxysmal, with low 
secretion rates between paroxysms. In contrast, the secretion of 
metanephrine or normetanephrine metabolites is relatively high 
and constant. Tumors secrete metanephrines in their unconju-
gated (free) form. Thus, plasma-fractionated free metanephrines is 
the single most sensitive screening tests for these tumors. Urinary 
24-hour fractionated metanephrines has a similar sensitivity but is 
less convenient. Some rare tumors (usually malignant) have a 
defect in the conversion of dopamine to norepinephrine by DBH, 
such that serum dopamine levels are very high while cate-
cholamines are normal or mildly elevated and metanephrines are 
totally normal. Additionally, some paragangliomas secrete no cat-
echolamines or metanephrines but do secrete chromogranin A. 
 The establishment of normal reference ranges is problematic 
for catecholamines and metanephrines, since levels vary with sex, 
age, and medical conditions: 
 1. Sex—Women have lower plasma epinephrine and metaneph-
rine levels than men; their urinary excretion of catecholamines 
and metanephrines is also lower. 
 2. Age—Children, especially boys, have somewhat higher levels 
of plasma epinephrine and metanephrine than do adults. 
Conversely, children’s average 24-hour urine epinephrine and 
norepinephrine excretion rates are lower than those of adults 
and increase through childhood as weight increases. Therefore, 
children’s 24-hour urine tests are best assessed by using ratios 
of catecholamines to creatinine and metanephrines to  creatinine. 
In adults, plasma norepinephrine and normetanephrine levels 
increase with advancing age. 
 3. Medical conditions—On average, hospitalized patients and 
those with essential hypertension have higher levels of cate-
cholamines and metanephrines (plasma and urine) than do 
CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia     373
matched nonhospitalized and normotensive individuals. 
Therefore, many laboratories have separate reference ranges for 
hypertensives and nonhypertensives. 
 Patients with illness, trauma, or sleep apnea have increased 
excretion of both catecholamines and metanephrines. Patients 
with renal failure on dialysis have elevated levels of plasma cate-
cholamines (58%), plasma free metanephrines (25%), and plasma 
total (deconjugated) metanephrines (100%). Patients with partial 
renal insufficiency also have misleadingly elevated levels of plasma 
catecholamines (32%), plasma free metanephrines (26%), and 
plasma total metanephrines (50%). Thus, in patients with renal 
failure, the best screening test is plasma free metanephrines, but 
the test still lacks specificity when elevated. Serum chromogranin 
A levels are also elevated in renal insufficiency. 
 Misleading elevations of at least one metanephrine or cate-
cholamine determination occur in 10% to 20% of tested indi-
viduals without pheochromocytoma. These elevations are typically 
less than 50% above the maximum normal and often normalize 
on retesting. Patients with pheochromocytomas usually have ele-
vations of metanephrines or catecholamines that are more than 
three times normal. In one large series, a false-positive elevation in 
at least one test occurred in 22% and marked elevations in at least 
one test occurred in 3.5% of patients with no pheochromocy-
toma. False-positive test results were judged to have occurred from 
physiologic variation (33%), laboratory errors (29%), or drug 
interference (21%). 
 Plasma normetanephrines reflect disease activity in patients 
with secretory paragangliomas or metastases. Normal ranges for 
plasma metanephrines in children are different from those of 
adults and have been reported by Weise et al, 2002. Plasma 
normetanephrine levels typically increase with age; about 16% of 
older patients being evaluated for pheochromocytoma have levels 
above the published normal range for young adults (false posi-
tives); only 3% of young adults have false-positive plasma norme-
tanephrine 
concentrations. 
Plasma 
concentrations 
of 
norepinephrine do not correlate with blood pressure. Stimulation 
tests are not recommended (see later). 
 A. Metanephrines and catecholamines 
 Plasma-fractionated free metanephrines. 
 The most sensi-
tive test for pheochromocytoma is an assay for plasma-fractionated 
(metanephrine and normetanephrine) free metanephrines. This 
assay is particularly useful when screening for a small pheochro-
mocytoma in patients with established MEN 2 (metanephrine) or 
VHL disease (normetanephrine). For younger children, plasma 
testing is preferred to urine testing due to the relative ease of 
 collection. 
 Normal references ranges for plasma-fractionated metaneph-
rines vary by sex (children), age, and laboratory. For boys ages 5 
to 17 years, the upper limit of normal (ULN) for plasma free 
metanephrine is ≤0.52 nmol/L and the ULN for plasma free 
normetanephrine is ≤0.53 nmol/L. For girls ages 5 to 17 years, the 
ULN for plasma free metanephrine is ≤0.37 nmol/L and the ULN 
for plasma free normetanephrine is ≤0.42 pmol/L. For adults, the 
reported ULN for plasma free metanephrine has ranged from 0.30 
to 0.47 nmol/L and the reported ULN for plasma free normeta-
nephrine has ranged from 0.60 to 1.1 nmol/L. In conventional 
units, the adult ULN reported by Quest Diagnostics Laboratory is 
≤57 pg/mL for plasma free metanephrine and ≤148 pg/mL for 
plasma free normetanephrine. 
 In the United States, most reference laboratories assays for 
metanephrines use high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) 
with tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). This test is 97% sensi-
tive and about 87% specific for pheochromocytoma in a referred 
patient population. MS/MS reduces drug interference that can be 
a problem with assays that employ HPLC with electrochemical 
detection (ECD). Metanephrine assays are more sensitive and 
specific for pheochromocytoma than plasma or urinary cate-
cholamine determinations. 
 The 3% of affected patients with normal plasma-fractionated 
free metanephrines usually have very small tumors, nonsecreting 
tumors, or dopamine-secreting tumors such that they are not 
hypertensive. Since the test’s specificity is much lower than its 
sensitivity, most patients with levels above the reference range do 
not harbor a tumor. This is particularly true when plasma levels 
are less than three times higher than the upper limit of the refer-
ence range. Conversely, it is extremely likely that a patient harbors 
a pheochromocytoma when the plasma metanephrine is above 
236 pg/mL (1200 nmol/mL) or the plasma normetanephrine is 
above 400 pg/mL (2200 nmol/mL). 
 Normally, about 90% of circulating metanephrine and about 
50% of circulating normetanephrine originate directly from the 
adrenal medulla. The term  total metanephrines refers to both 
normetanephrine and metanephrine. There are two circulating 
forms of normetanephrine and metanephrines: free and sulfate-
conjugated metanephrines. The free metanephrines produced in 
the adrenal medulla and paraganglia are sulfate conjugated by 
intestinal tissue; the sulfated form represents 97% of circulating 
metanephrines. Only 3% of total circulating metanephrine is free. 
Plasma metanephrine levels are sometimes measured after a 
deconjugation step, such that both free and conjugated metaneph-
rines are measured; this assay is termed  deconjugated metaneph-
rines and reflects mostly the sulfate-conjugated species. The 
plasma free metanephrines assay is superior to the total (deconju-
gated) metanephrine assay. 
 In the United States, when plasma metanephrines are requested, 
most reference laboratories test for free (nondeconjugated) meta-
nephrines. Most reference laboratories assay metanephrines using 
MS/MS, which avoids interference by drugs and foods. Blood 
specimens for plasma-fractionated free metanephrines can be col-
lected at any time, but are best drawn after an overnight fast while 
the patient is seated and relaxed. 
 The sensitivity of the plasma free metanephrines is due to the 
tumor’s continuous secretion of metanephrines. Catecholamines 
in secretory vesicles exist in a dynamic equilibrium with the sur-
rounding cytoplasm, with catecholamine uptake into the vesicles 
being balanced by their leakage into the cytoplasm. In the cyto-
plasm, the enzyme COMT converts epinephrine to metanephrine 
and converts norepinephrine to normetanephrine. The cate-
cholamine metabolites then leak out of the cell continuously to 
374    CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia
become free metanephrines. While catecholamines are secreted in 
bursts associated with exocytosis of neurosecretory vesicles, free 
metanephrines are produced continuously. This eliminates the 
need to catch a paroxysmal hypertensive event. Plasma free meta-
nephrine levels are within the reference range in 75% of patients 
on dialysis and 74% of patients with renal insufficiency. In con-
trast, plasma deconjugated metanephrines are within the reference 
range in 0% of patients on dialysis and in 50% of patients with 
renal insufficiency. 
 Factors causing misleading plasma free metanephrine 
levels. 
 Smoking can elevate plasma free metanephrine assays. 
The patient must not smoke for at least 4 hours before collection. 
Epinephrine-like drugs should be discontinued for at least 7 days 
before the test. Other drugs that can interfere with the plasma free 
metanephrine assay include local anesthetics, cocaine, lidocaine, 
halothane anesthesia, MAO inhibitors, and acetaminophen. Drug 
withdrawal and severe stress can also increase plasma free meta-
nephrine levels. Misleading elevations in plasma free metaneph-
rines occur in children (especially boys), renal failure, and stressful 
illness. Physical exercise raises plasma free metanephrine and 
normetanephrine by over 80%. Assumption of a supine resting 
position reduces plasma metanephrine by an average of 34% and 
reduces normetanephrine by 19%, compared to standing at rest. 
Coffee increases plasma normetanephrine by 20% and food 
increases plasma normetanephrine by 8%; but they have no effect 
upon metanephrine levels. Blood samples should ideally be drawn 
from an indwelling heparin-locked intravenous line while the 
patient is fasting and resting supine. Blood should be centrifuged 
immediately and stored at 4 o C to improve stability. 
 In patients with adrenal pheochromocytoma, over 90% of 
circulating metanephrine originates from the tumor, while vari-
able percentages of circulating normetanephrine originate from 
the tumor. Patients with elevated plasma metanephrine are likely 
to have an adrenal pheochromocytoma, since paragangliomas do 
not secrete epinephrine or metanephrine. Metastases from epi-
nephrine-secreting pheochromocytomas may sometime continue 
to secrete epinephrine and metanephrine. 
 24-Hour urine-fractionated metanephrines. 
 This assay, which 
measures the sum of both conjugated and free urinary metanephrines, 
rivals plasma free metanephrines in sensitivity. In the United States, 
most reference laboratories employ tandem mass spectrometry (MS/
MS), which eliminates interference by drugs and foods. Urinary meta-
nephrines are rather stable compounds, so it is not necessary to collect 
the specimen with acid preservative. Conversely, acid preservative 
(used for collection of urinary catecholamines) does not adversely 
affect metanephrines. The disadvantages of 24-hour urine collections 
include: (1) the inconvenience to the patient; (2) the likelihood that 
there will be an error in the patient’s collection or in the laboratory’s 
handling of the specimen; (3) the inaccuracy for patients with renal 
failure. (See Appendix for normal reference ranges for 24-hour meta-
nephrines.) 
 Like plasma-fractionated metanephrines, urinary metaneph-
rines are much more sensitive than they are specific. Most patients 
with elevated levels of fractionated metanephrines do not harbor a 
pheochromocytoma if their levels are less than three times the 
upper limit of the reference range. Conversely, patients are very 
likely to have a pheochromocytoma if the 24-hour urine meta-
nephrine excretion is above 600 µg/d (3.0 µmol/d) or normeta-
nephrine excretion is above 1500 µg/d (8.2 µmol/d). 
 As with plasma metanephrines, patients with elevated uri-
nary metanephrine are likely to harbor an adrenal pheochromo-
cytoma, since paragangliomas do not secrete epinephrine or 
metanephrine. 
 Plasma-fractionated catecholamines. 
 Misleading eleva-
tions in plasma catecholamines commonly occur from the stress of 
having the phlebotomy. Normal plasma levels of catecholamines 
are listed in the Appendix. 
 Although plasma metanephrines are more sensitive than plasma 
catecholamines for detecting a pheochromocytoma, plasma cate-
cholamines are of value in helping distinguish true-positive from false-
positive results. In normal individuals, about 100% of circulating 
epinephrine originates from the adrenal medulla, while over 90% of 
circulating norepinephrine originates from peripheral sympathetic 
synapses. In both normals and those with pheochromocytomas, 
plasma norepinephrine levels fluctuate with the degree of peripheral 
sympathetic activation and both epinephrine and norepinephrine lev-
els can increase during pheochromocytoma paroxysms. In patients 
with pheochromocytomas, the tumor’s production of metanephrine 
metabolites is rather constant and relatively unrelated to peripheral 
sympathetic activity or a tumor’s paroxysmal catecholamine secretion. 
Patients with false-positive test results due to sympathetic activation 
tend to have the following pattern: a higher percentage increase of 
plasma norepinephrine above the upper limit of the reference range 
compared to plasma normetanephrine; a higher percentage increase of 
plasma epinephrine above the upper limit of the reference range com-
pared to plasma metanephrine. 
 Plasma catecholamines are of limited value in patients on 
dialysis and in those with renal insufficiency. About 58% of dialy-
sis patients have plasma catecholamines above the normal refer-
ence range; about 32% of renal insufficiency patients have 
catecholamines above the normal reference range. 
 Most assays for plasma catecholamines currently employ 
HPLC with ECD; assays using tandem mass spectrometry (MS/
MS) have not become generally available. 
 Urine-fractionated catecholamines and dopamine. 
 Adult normal maximal urinary concentrations for catecholamines 
and their metabolites are listed in the Appendix. A single 24-hour 
urine specimen is collected for fractionated catecholamines, frac-
tionated metanephrines, dopamine, and creatinine. The container 
is acidified with 10 to 25 mL of 6 N HCl for preservation of the 
catecholamines; the acid does not interfere with metanephrine 
and creatinine assays. The acid preservative may be omitted for 
children for safety reasons, in which case the specimen should be 
kept cold and processed immediately. The laboratory requisition 
form should request that assays for fractionated catecholamines, 
fractionated metanephrines, and creatinine be performed on the 
same specimen. 
CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia     375
 A single-void urine specimen may be collected on first morn-
ing void or following a paroxysm. No acid preservative is used 
on single-void specimens, because it dilutes the specimen and is 
not required. For single-void collections, patients are instructed 
to void and discard the urine immediately at the onset of a 
paroxysm and then collect the next voided urine. The labora-
tory requisition should request spot urine for total metaneph-
rine (by HPLC and ECD) and creatinine concentrations. It is 
prudent to contact the laboratory technician and explain that 
the specimen is meant to be a single-void urine and not a 
24-hour specimen or else the specimen may be rejected. Patients 
with pheochromocytomas generally excrete over 2.2 µg total 
 metanephrine/mg creatinine. 
 Urinary dopamine determination is not a sensitive test for 
pheochromocytomas. However, in patients with established pheo-
chromocytomas, a normal urine dopamine is fairly predictive of 
benignity, whereas elevated urine dopamine excretion is seen in 
both benign and malignant pheochromocytomas. 
 B. Serum chromogranin A 
 Some tumors (mostly paragan-
gliomas) fail to secrete catecholamines or metanephrines. Serum 
chromogranin A (CgA) is a useful test to diagnose and monitor 
such nonsecretory tumors. CgA may be determined by immuno-
radiometric assays. The serum CgA assay has become useful for 
the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma. However, CgA undergoes 
extensive tumor-specific cleavages so that only certain serum 
assays are useful for clinical diagnosis. 
 Serum CgA levels have a circadian rhythm in normal individuals, 
with lowest levels found at 8 AM and higher levels in the afternoon 
and at 11 PM. CgA levels are not elevated in essential hypertension. 
CgA is also secreted from extra-adrenal sympathetic nerves. Serum 
CgA levels are elevated in the great majority of patients with pheo-
chromocytomas. The serum levels of CgA correlate with tumor 
mass, making CgA a useful tumor marker. However, smaller tumors 
may not be diagnosed. Serum CgA levels tend to be particularly 
elevated in patients with metastatic pheochromocytoma. 
 Serum CgA can be elevated even in patients with biochemi-
cally silent tumors. In patients with normal renal function, 
serum CgA has a sensitivity of 83% to 90% and a specificity of 
96% for diagnosis of these tumors. However, the usefulness of 
serum CgA levels is negated by any degree of renal failure 
because of its excretion by the kidneys; even mild azotemia 
causes serum levels to be elevated. However, in patients with 
normal renal function, a high serum level of CgA along with 
high urine or plasma catecholamines or metanephrines is virtu-
ally diagnostic of pheochromocytoma. 
 Since CgA is also cosecreted with gastrin, serum CgA levels are 
also elevated in conditions with elevated serum gastrin: atrophic 
gastritis, pernicious anemia, postvagotomy, gastrinoma, gastric 
carcinoma, carcinoid tumor, and small cell lung carcinoma. CgA 
levels are elevated in about 60% of patients taking proton pump 
inhibitors (PPIs), but not H 2 blockers. Serum CgA levels rise vari-
ably after meals, so blood for CgA should be drawn after an over-
night fast or repeated fasting if a nonfasting level is elevated. 
False-positive testing has also occurred in patients with inflamma-
tory bowel disease, liver disease, hepatocellular carcinoma, pros-
tate cancer, pituitary tumors, rheumatoid arthritis, and stress. 
False-positives have been reported to be due to heterophile anti-
body interference with the assay. Serum CgA levels can also be 
elevated without any discernable cause. 
 C. Suppression and stimulation testing 
 Glucagon stim-
ulation testing is no longer used since it can cause dangerous 
hypertension. 
Clonidine suppression test: This test may help distinguish 
patients with pheochromocytoma from normals with elevated 
normetanphrine levels. Clonidine is a central a 2-adrenergic blocker 
that suppresses the release of norepinephrine at sympathetic nerve 
synapses, thereby reducing circulating levels of norepinephrine and its 
metabolite, normetanephrine.  In contrast, in patients with pheochro-
mocytoma, most circulating normetanephrine  is derived from con-
tinuous leakage from the tumor, such that clonidine is less able to 
suppress it. This test is most accurate when free normetanephrine is 
assayed, rather than norepinephrine.
To perform the clonidine suppression test, the patient must be 
fasting overnight and avoid smoking or interfering medications 
such as phenoxybenzamine, b-blockers, tricyclics and diuretics for 
at least 48 hours. An indwelling venous catheter is inserted, and 
the patient should remain recumbent. Thirty minutes later, blood 
is drawn for baseline plasma free normetanephrine. Clonidine is 
then given orally in a dose of 0.3 mg/kg; 3 hours afterward, blood 
is again drawn for plasma free normetanephrine. 
In 1 study of 49 normals without pheochromocytoma, cloni-
dine suppressed plasma normetanephrine levels more than 40% or 
to below 112 pg/mL in 100%.  However, clonidine failed to sup-
press normetanephrine in 46 of 48 patients with pheochromocy-
toma. Despite the potential helpfulness of the clonidine suppression 
test, it cannot be completely relied upon.  Unnecessary surgeries 
have been performed on the basis of misleading clonidine suppres-
sion testing. 
 D. Other laboratory tests 
 1. Urine VMA— Urinary VMA determinations have an overall 
diagnostic sensitivity for pheochromocytoma of only about 63% 
and do not improve the sensitivity or specificity of other tests for 
the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma. However, some centers 
have traditionally used a combination of 24-hour urinary VMA, 
metanephrine, and creatinine determinations with good results. 
VMA is stable for 5 days at room temperature; 6 N HCl is used 
to preserve urine specimens that are stored for longer than 5 days 
before analysis. Before urine collections for VMA testing, patients 
must avoid salicylates, caffeine, phenothiazines, and antihyper-
tensive drugs for 72 hours. Coffee, tea, chocolate, bananas, and 
vanilla must also be avoided. Normal ranges for VMA vary by age 
(see Appendix). 
 2. Plasma renin activity— Levels of plasma renin activity are not 
typically suppressed in patients with pheochromocytomas 
because catecholamines stimulate renin release, and some 
tumors may secrete renin ectopically. 
 3. Other tests— Patients with pheochromocytoma are fre-
quently found to have an increased white blood count with 
a high absolute neutrophil count. Counts as high as 23,600/µL 
376    CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia
have been reported. Marked eosinophilia may sometimes 
occur. Hyperglycemia is noted in about 35% of patients with 
pheochromocytoma, but frank diabetes mellitus is uncom-
mon. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate is elevated in some 
patients. Hypercalcemia is common and may be caused by 
bone metastases or tumoral secretion of PTHrP. Hypocalcemia 
occurs rarely. Erythrocytosis sometimes occurs, usually due 
to volume contraction and rarely due to ectopic secretion of 
erythropoietin. 
 Factors That May Cause Misleading 
Biochemical Testing for 
Pheochromocytoma 
 Several different methods may be employed for assay of urine and 
plasma catecholamines and metanephrines. Each assay uses differ-
ent methods and internal standards. Most assays for catecholamines 
now employ HPLC with ECD. Such assays can be affected by 
interference from a diverse range of drugs and foods. These sub-
stances cause unusual shapes in the peaks on the chromatogram. 
Not all of these assays are the same, and the potential for interfer-
ence depends on the particular method employed. Therefore, it is 
best to check with the reference laboratory that runs the test or 
provides the test kit. 
 A. Drugs (see  Table 11–14 ) 
 Certain radiopaque contrast 
media, including those that contain meglumine acetrizoate or 
meglumine diatrizoate (eg, Renografin, Hypaque-M, Renovist, 
Cardiografin, Urografin, and Conray), can falsely lower urinary 
metanephrine determinations in some assays for up to 12 hours 
following administration. However, diatrizoate sodium is an intra-
venous contrast agent that does not cause such interference and 
should be requested if a CT scan must be performed prior to test-
ing for metanephrines. Many other drugs cause interference in the 
older fluorometric assays for VMA and metanephrines. Tandem 
mass spectrometry for metanephrines virtually eliminates direct 
drug interference in the assay. 
 B. Foods 
 Even while using HPLC-ECD assay techniques, 
certain foods can cause misleading results in assays for cate-
cholamines and metanephrines (see  Table 11–16 ). Coffee (even if 
decaffeinated) contains substances that can be converted into a 
catechol metabolite (dihydrocaffeic acid) that may cause confus-
ing peaks on HPLC. Caffeine inhibits the action of adenosine; one 
action of adenosine is to inhibit the release of catecholamines. 
Heavy caffeine consumption causes a persistent elevation in norepi-
nephrine production and raises blood pressure an average of 4 mm 
Hg systolic. Bananas contain considerable amounts of tyrosine, 
which can be converted to dopamine by the central nervous sys-
tem; dopamine is then converted to epinephrine and norepineph-
rine. Dietary peppers contain 3-methoxy-4-hydroxybenzylamine 
(MHBA), a compound that can interfere with the internal stan-
dard used in some assays for metanephrines. 
 C. Diseases 
 Any severe stress can elicit increased production 
of catecholamines and metanephrines. Urinary excretion of cate-
cholamines and metanephrines is reduced in renal failure. 
 Differential Diagnosis of 
Pheochromocytoma ( Table 11–15 ) 
 Pheochromocytomas have such protean manifestations that many 
conditions enter into the differential diagnosis. Essential hyper-
tension is extremely common, and it is not practical to screen for 
pheochromocytoma in all patients with elevated blood pressure. 
However, pheochromocytoma should enter the differential diag-
nosis for any hypertensive patient having blood pressures above 
180 mm Hg systolic and for any hypertensive patient who has one 
of the following symptoms: headaches, palpitations, sweating epi-
sodes, or unexplained bouts of abdominal or chest pains. 
 Anxiety (panic) attacks begin abruptly and can be associated 
with tachycardia, tachypnea, and chest discomfort, symptoms that 
TABLE 11–14  Factors that can cause misleading 
catecholamine or metanephrine 
results.a
Drugs
Foods
Conditions
Acetaminophenb
Aldometb
Amphetaminesc
Bronchodilatorsc
Buspironeb
Captoprilb
Cimetidineb
Cocainec
Codeineb
Contrast media 
 (meglumine 
 acetrizoate, 
 meglumine 
 diatrizoate)e
Decongestantsc
Ephedrinec
Fenfluramined
Isoproterenolc
Labetalolb,c
Levodopab
Mandelamineb
Metoclopramideb
Monoamine oxidase 
 inhibitorsf
Nitroglycerinc
Phenoxybenzaminec
Smokingf
Tricyclic 
 antidepressantsc
Viloxazineb
Bananasc
Caffeinec
Coffeeb
Peppersb
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosisc
Brain lesionsc
Carcinoidc
Eclampsiac
Emotion (severe)c
Exercise (vigorous)c
Guillain-Barré syndromec
Hypoglycemiac
Lead poisoningc
Myocardial infarction (acute)c
Pain (severe)c
Porphyria (acute)c
Psychosis (acute)c
Quadriplegia
Renal failured
Sleep apneac
aNote that assays for metanephrine employing tandem mass spectroscopy (MS/MS) 
are not prone to interference from drugs or foods, except those that increase cate-
cholamine excretion. Reproduced, with permission, from McPhee SJ, Papadakis MA, 
ed. Current Medical Diagnosis & Treatment 2010. McGraw Hill; 2010.
bMay cause confounding peaks on HPLC chromatograms.
cIncreases catecholamine excretion.
dDecreases catecholamine excretion.
eMay decrease urine metanephrine excretion.
fIncreases plasma and urinary normetanephrine and metanephrine.
CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia     377
are commonly seen with pheochromocytomas. However, patients 
with panic attacks are more likely to have a precipitating social 
situation, tend to be exhausted for more than 2 hours following an 
attack, live in dread of the next attack, and often change their 
activities to avoid situations that might trigger anxiety. 
 Renal artery stenosis and renal parenchymal disease can cause 
increased secretion of renin resulting in severe hypertension. 
However, a detectable serum renin level does not exclude pheo-
chromocytoma, because catecholamines can stimulate renin secre-
tion and pheochromocytomas can secrete renin ectopically. 
Furthermore, large pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas aris-
ing near the renal hilum can occlude the renal artery, causing 
concomitant renovascular hypertension. 
 Hypogonadism can cause vasomotor instability in both women 
and men; attacks of flushing, sweating, and palpitations can 
mimic symptoms seen with pheochromocytoma. Factitious symp-
toms may be caused by surreptitious self-administration of various 
drugs such as epinephrine. Hyperthyroidism can cause heat intol-
erance, sweating, palpitations, and systolic hypertension with a 
widened pulse pressure. Carcinoid syndrome causes flushing dur-
ing attacks but usually without pallor, hypertension, palpitations, 
or diaphoresis. 
 Obstructive sleep apnea can cause systemic hypertension; 
recurrent nocturnal hypoxia results in repeated episodes of stress-
ful arousal that cause bursts of secretion of catecholamines, par-
ticularly epinephrine. Sleep apnea has been reported to cause 
misleading increases in the urinary excretion of catecholamines. 
 Patients with erythromelalgia can have episodic hypertension, 
but it is associated with flushing of the face and legs during the 
attack; patients with pheochromocytoma typically have facial pal-
lor during attacks. With erythromelalgia, patients have painful 
erythema and swelling in the legs that is relieved by application of 
ice; such symptoms are not characteristic of pheochromocytoma. 
 Patients who have intermittent bizarre symptoms may have 
their blood pressure and pulse checked during a symptomatic 
episode with a home blood pressure meter or an ambulatory blood 
pressure monitor. Those who are normotensive during an attack 
are not likely to harbor a pheochromocytoma. 
 Pheochromocytomas often present with abdominal pain and 
vomiting. Such symptoms are similar to those of an intra-abdom-
inal emergency, particularly in the presence of leukocytosis and 
fever, which can also be seen with pheochromocytomas. Abdominal 
pain usually prompts a CT scan of the abdomen, which generally 
shows the pheochromocytoma or paraganglioma. Even after 
detection on CT scan, pheochromocytomas and juxtarenal para-
gangliomas may be mistaken for renal carcinoma. Large left-sided 
pheochromocytomas are often mistaken for carcinoma of the tail 
of the pancreas. 
 Neuroblastoma is the most common extra-cranial solid malig-
nancy of childhood. It is also the most common malignancy in 
infants under 18 months old. Neuroblastomas are derived from 
the embryonic neural crest of the peripheral sympathetic nervous 
system. They most often arise in the adrenal gland, but can also 
develop in sympathetic nerve ganglia near the cervical or thoracic 
vertebrae or in the pelvis. They metastasize to bones, lymph nodes, 
liver, and skin. Symptoms depend upon the age of the patient, site 
of origin, degree of metastatic involvement, and the systemic 
response to the tumor. Infants usually present with localized dis-
ease (Stage 1 or 2) or with a special disseminated pattern of disease 
(Stage 4S—infants with metastatic disease to liver and/or skin) 
associated with a favorable outcome. In contrast, most children 
over 1 year of age present with advanced disease (Stage 3 or 4). 
Unfavorable biologic features include amplification of myeloma-
tosis viral-related oncogene, neuroblastoma (MYCN), deletion 
or loss of heterozygosity of chromosome 1p or 11q and gains 
at 17q. Favorable biologic features include hyperdiploidy and 
 overexpression of the gene encoding the nerve growth factor 
receptor, tyrosine kinase A (TrkA). About 85% of affected chil-
dren secrete excessive catecholamines—but rarely in sufficient 
amounts to cause symptomatic hypertension or the paroxysms 
typical of pheochromocytomas. Most neuroblastomas concentrate 
 123 I-MIBG but they can be distinguished from pheochromocy-
tomas and paragangliomas by clinical and histologic criteria. 
 Localization Studies for 
Pheochromocytoma 
 There are several available imaging modalities for pheochromocy-
toma and paraganglioma, each having unique sensitivity and 
specificity. There is no single imaging study that is 100% sensitive 
and specific. Generally, when a pheochromocytoma or paragan-
glioma is suspected, the initial diagnosis is best made biochemi-
cally. The initial localization scan is with CT or MRI of the 
abdomen and pelvis, which will detect about 95% of these tumors. 
However, since paragangliomas can arise in the chest, further scan-
ning of the chest may be required. Diagnostic confirmation that 
TABLE 11–15  Differential diagnosis of 
pheochromocytoma.
Acute intermittent porphyria
Autonomic epilepsy
Cardiac arrhythmias
Clonidine withdrawal
Coronary vasospasm
Encephalitis
Erythromelalgia
Essential hypertension
Hypertensive crisis associated with:
 Cerebrovascular accidents
 Surgery
 Acute pulmonary edema
 Severe pain
 Hypertensive crisis of MAO inhibitors
Hypoglycemia
Hypogonadal hot flushes
Lead poisoning
Mastocytosis
Migraine and cluster headache
Renovascular hypertension
Sleep apnea
Sympathomimetic drug ingestion
Thyrotoxicosis
Toxemia (eclampsia) of pregnancy
378    CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia
the tumor is a pheochromocytoma or paraganglioma may be done 
with either  123 I-MIBG or  18 F-FDA positron emission tomography 
(PET) scanning; unfortunately, these scans are only 78% sensitive 
for these tumors. Scanning with  18 F-FDG or  18 F-FDA PET is 
more sensitive for detecting metastases than is  123 I-MIBG. 
 A. Computed tomography ( Figure 11–10 ) 
 After a pheo-
chromocytoma has been diagnosed by clinical and biochemical 
criteria, hypertension must first be controlled (see later), 
because intravenous ionic contrast can precipitate a hyperten-
sive crisis. The pheochromocytoma must then be localized. It is 
useful to perform an initial nonenhanced (without intravenous 
contrast) CT of the adrenals because the density of an adrenal 
tumor can be better approximated without intravenous con-
trast. An adrenal mass with a density of less than 10 Hounsfield 
units (HU) is unlikely to be a pheochromocytoma. CT scan-
ning of the entire abdomen (from the diaphragm through the 
pelvis) is obtained with intravenous contrast-enhanced and 
delayed contrast-enhanced imaging. Thin-section (2-5 mm) 
cuts should be obtained through the adrenals with an adrenal 
protocol that specifically looks for a vascular tumor blush and 
determines rate of contrast washout. Pheochromocytomas tend 
to have a tumor blush and slower contrast washout than adre-
nocortical adenomas. Hypertensive crises have been provoked 
in pheochromocytoma patients receiving ionic intravenous con-
trast agents; this has prompted the tradition of initiating an 
alpha-blocking agent before the CT scan. However, nonionic 
intravenous contrast poses much less of threat. No increases in 
blood pressure or plasma catecholamines were noted in a series 
of 10 pheochromocytoma patients who received iohexol intra-
venous nonionic contrast. Glucagon should not be used during 
a CT because it may provoke a hypertensive crisis. 
 If no mass is discovered,  123 I-MIBG imaging may be obtained 
or the CT scan may be extended into the chest in search of a 
paraganglioma—or both procedures may be employed. The great 
majority of pheochromocytomas are over 2 cm in diameter, well 
within the resolution capacity of the CT scan. 
 The overall sensitivity of CT scanning for an adrenal pheo-
chromocytoma is about 90%—and over 95% for pheochromocy-
tomas that are over 0.5 cm in diameter. However, CT scanning is 
less sensitive for the detection of small adrenal pheochromocy-
tomas or adrenal medullary hyperplasia; this becomes an impor-
tant issue in patients with MEN 2 or VHL disease. CT is also less 
sensitive for detecting extra-adrenal paragangliomas and early 
recurrent tumors in the adrenal surgical bed. CT will not detect 
small metastases or some metastases that strictly involve the bone 
marrow without osteoclastic activity. Metal surgical clips pose 
problem for CT scanning, causing distortion artifact and reducing 
the resolution of the scan. 
 B. Magnetic resonance imaging 
 MRI is useful in the diag-
nosis of adrenal pheochromocytomas, paragangliomas, and meta-
static disease. It may be used with or without gadolinium contrast. 
Intravenous gadolinium contrast does not cause hypertensive cri-
sis. MRI scanning with intravenous gadolinium contrast is also 
useful for patients with a known allergy to intravenous iodinated 
CT contrast agents. MRI is the scanning technique of choice in 
children and during pregnancy, because it involves no radiation 
exposure. Since MRI scanning delivers no radiation, it is preferred 
for serially scanning patients known to harbor a gene mutation 
predisposing them to PHEO/PGL. 
 MRI can help determine whether an adrenal mass is a pheo-
chromocytoma when biochemical studies are inconclusive. On 
MRI T1-weighted images, pheochromocytomas have a dull sig-
nal (due to lack of fat cells), similar to kidney and muscle, dis-
tinguishing it from adrenal cortical adenomas, which contain fat 
and therefore have an intensely bright signal on T1-weighted 
images. The hypervascularity of pheochromocytomas makes 
them appear bright on MRI T2-weighted images, without 
signal loss on opposed phase imaging. However, other adrenal 
Aorta and
vena cava
Tumor
Bowel
Kidney
Vertebrae
Ureter
Bowel
 FIGURE 11–10  Left infrarenal paraganglioma shown by CT scanning. The diagram on the right identifies many of the visible structures. 
CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia     379
malignancies, adrenal adenomas, and hemorrhages can also 
appear bright on MRI T2-weighted images. Therefore, MRI 
scanning cannot definitively identify an adrenal mass as a pheo-
chromocytoma. MRI of the abdomen has a sensitivity of about 
95% for adrenal pheochromocytomas over 0.5 cm in diameter. 
Like CT scanning, MRI is less sensitive for the detection of 
extra-adrenal paragangliomas, metastatic disease, and recurrent 
small tumors in the adrenal surgical bed. MRI is helpful in visu-
alizing paragangliomas that are intracardiac, juxtacardiac, or 
juxtavascular; MRI is particularly important for patients with 
paragangliomas adjacent to the vena cava or renal vein to detect 
vascular invasion. MRI is superior to CT in visualizing paragan-
gliomas of the bladder wall. MRI can visualize some metastases 
to bone suspected on  123 I-MIBG imaging or PET scanning. 
Another advantage of MRI scanning is that retained internal 
metallic surgical clips do not cause the distorting reflection arti-
facts that occur with CT scanning. 
 The disadvantages of MRI scanning include expense and its 
inability to crisply image lungs (due to movement artifact). Also, 
morbidly obese patients may not be able to fit into a standard 
helical MRI scanner; open MRI scanners can be used but are 
generally less sensitive. Claustrophobic patients require a sedative 
before the scan or an open MRI. Patients with internal pacemak-
ers or defibrillators may not have MRI scans; nor may patients 
with implanted neural stimulators, cochlear implants, Swan-Ganz 
catheters, insulin pumps, cerebral aneurysm clips, ocular metallic 
foreign bodies, or retained metal shrapnel or bullets. Patients with 
retained surgical clips, artificial heart valves and joints may have 
MRI imaging; the spine may be imaged in patients with spinal 
hardware, but the imaging can be distorted. 
 C. Metaiodobenzylguanidine scanning ( Figure 11–11 
and  Table 11–16 ) 
 MIBG is a guanidine derivative that resem-
bles norepinephrine and is actively transported into adrenal med-
ullary cells via the norepinephrine transporter system, selectively 
accumulating in neurosecretory granules. Unlike norepinephrine, 
MIBG has low affinity for catecholamine receptors and is not 
metabolized. 
 Scintigraphy using  123 I-MIBG or  131 I-MIBG is useful for 
determining whether an adrenal mass is a pheochromocytoma, for 
imaging occult paragangliomas, and for confirming whether a 
certain extra-adrenal mass is a paraganglioma or neuroblastoma. 
MIBG scanning is also useful for screening patients for metastases. 
MIBG uptake can often be seen in apparently nonfunctioning 
pheochromocytomas. 
 The isotope that is preferable for precise imaging is  123 I-MIBG, 
because  123 I emits γ radiation at lower energy (159 keV) than does 
 131 I (364 keV). The lower-energy γ emissions allows crisper images 
with  123 I-MIBG scanning as well as single photon emission com-
puted tomography (SPECT).  123 I-MIBG SPECT scanning is 
more sensitive than  123 I-MIBG planar imaging for detecting small 
metastases and has the advantage of being able to do the scanning 
on the day following injection of the isotope. SPECT scanning 
with  123 I-MIBG can be combined with CT to produce a three-
dimensional fusion scan; the resultant combined images can help 
distinguish whether a given mass has  123 I-MIBG uptake. 
 123 I-MIBG is administered intravenously in doses of 3 mCi 
(children) to 10 mCi (adults), whereas  131 I-MIBG is administered 
intravenously in doses of 0.5 to 1 mCi.  123 I emits lower energy γ 
radiation and less heavy particle radiation over a shorter period 
than  131 I, so  123 I-MIBG scanning results in a somewhat lower 
absorbed radiation dose than  131 I-MIBG scanning. However, most 
centers still use  131 I-MIBG due to its longer half-life, lower 
expense, and better commercial availability. 
 FIGURE 11–11  123 I-metaiodobenzylguanidine ( 123 I-MIBG) scan 
of a woman with a large left pheochromocytoma. Normal  123 I-MIBG 
uptake is seen in the liver, salivary glands, and heart.  123 I-MIBG is 
renally excreted and is visible in the bladder. 
TABLE 11–16  Drugs that inhibit MIBG uptake 
by pheochromocytomas (time that 
inhibition persists after stopping 
drug).
Inhibitors of type I catecholamine uptake: cocaine, tricyclic drugs, 
 labetalol (2-6 wk), renlafaxine, mirtazapine, reboxetine, bupropion
Stimulants of catecholamine discharge: reserpine (2 wk)
Displacement of catecholamines from intracellular stores and 
 competition with uptake of MIBG: all amphetamines; nasal 
 decongestants, oral or nasal (2 wk)
Others: phenothiazines, haloperidol, thiothixene (2 wk)
380    CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia
 123 I-MIBG scanning has an overall sensitivity of 82% and a 
specificity of 82% for pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas 
combined. The sensitivity of  123 I-MIBG scanning is 88% for pri-
mary adrenal pheochromocytomas and 67% for paragangliomas, 
with an overall sensitivity of 78% for primary PHEO/PGL 
tumors. The sensitivity of  123 I-MIBG scanning for metastases is 
lower at only 57%. Scanning with  123 I-MIBG is more sensitive for 
pheochromocytomas that are benign, unilateral, adrenal, capsule-
invasive, and sporadic. Scanning with  123 I-MIBG is less sensitive 
for bilateral, malignant, extra-adrenal, noninvasive, and MEN 
2-related or VHL-related pheochromocytomas. 
 To block the thyroid’s uptake of free radioiodine, saturated 
solution of potassium iodide, five drops orally three times daily, 
is given before the injection and daily for 4 days after 
 123 I-MIBG and for 7 days after  131 I-MIBG. Scanning is per-
formed 24 to 48 hours after  123 I-MIBG infusion and 48 to 
72 hours after 131 I-MIBG infusion. 
 False-negative MIBG scans are seen in about 15% of cases of 
either benign or malignant pheochromocytoma. False-negative 
scans can occur in patients who have taken certain drugs (eg, tri-
cyclic antidepressants or cyclobenzaprine) within 6 weeks. Other 
drugs that can cause false-negative scans when taken within 
2 weeks include amphetamines, phenylpropanolamine, haloperi-
dol, phenothiazines, thiothixene, reserpine, nasal decongestants, 
cocaine, and diet pills. Labetalol reduces MIBG uptake, but 
the scan can still be done, albeit with suboptimal sensitivity 
( Table 11–16 ). When plasma norepinephrine levels are over 
500 pg/mL (3 nmol/L), cardiac visualization is reduced on 
 18 F-dopamine PET scanning. This phenomenon is believed due to 
competitive inhibition of uptake-1 by high levels of circulating nor-
epinephrine. Therefore, it is likely that very high endogenous norepi-
nephrine levels may reduce the sensitivity of  123 I-MIBG scanning as 
well as PET scanning that employs  18 F-DA or  19 F-DOPA because 
these compounds are transported into pheochromocytomas, para-
gangliomas, and their metastases by the same uptake mechanism. 
 False-positive MIBG scans occur infrequently. Following 
 123 I-MIBG, some uptake in a normal adrenal medulla is seen in 
32% to 75% of patients at 24 hours. Following  131 I-MIBG, 
uptake in a normal adrenal medulla is seen in 16% of normals at 
48 hours. Adrenal uptake is often asymmetric and can be misin-
terpreted as showing a tumor. MIBG has renal excretion, so the 
renal pelvis and bladder are usually visualized on scanning and 
must be distinguished from tumor. If a patient is being evaluated 
for a bladder mass (ie, to exclude a paraganglioma), a bladder 
catheter may be inserted and the bladder flushed with saline to 
distinguish tumor from renal excretion of isotope. Urine con-
tamination with  123 I-MIBG can also cause a false-positive scan. 
False-positive results have been reported with adrenal carcinomas 
and infections such as actinomycosis. The salivary glands are typi-
cally visualized since they are richly innervated. The heart, liver, 
and spleen normally take up some  123 I-MIBG. Some isotope is 
excreted in the stool, and intracolonic collections can be mistaken 
for tumor. When there is doubt about whether an area of uptake 
is a tumor, scanning can be repeated the next day, preceded by a 
laxative if required. 
 D. Positron emission tomography ( Figure 11–12 ) 
 PET 
scanning can be performed shortly after the intravenous infusion 
of short-lived isotopes that are tagged to a compound that is pref-
erentially absorbed by tumor tissue. These isotopes emit positrons 
(anti-matter) during their decay, causing positron-electron colli-
sions that emit γ photons traveling in precisely opposite directions 
(180 degrees out of phase). In the PET scanner, sensitive gamma 
detectors surround the patient; simultaneous activation of two 
gamma detectors indicates that the source is located directly 
between them. Multiple such detections of this nature allow three-
dimensional imaging of tumors and can accurately determine 
their location. Advanced scanners can perform PET and CT scan-
ning simultaneously to produce particularly sensitive and accurate 
three-dimensional anatomic imaging. 
 PET scanning has certain advantages over MIBG scanning. 
PET scanning can be done almost immediately. This gives it some 
advantage over MIBG scanning, which must be delayed for 24 to 
48 hours after the injection to allow dissipation of background 
radiation. PET scanning does not require pretreatment with 
iodine to protect the thyroid, as is necessary with MIBG scanning. 
However, PET scanning is very expensive. The isotope  18 F has a 
 FIGURE 11–12  18 F-deoxyglucose ( 18 FDG) PET/CT fusion scan. 
Patient had a retroperitoneal paraganglioma that was resected. 
 18 FDG-PET/CT fusion scan shows a large metastasis involving the left 
acetabulum and inferior pubic ramus. The metastasis had negligible 
 123 I-MIBG uptake. A metastasis causing an L4 compression had been 
treated previously with radiation therapy. 
CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia     381
half-life of just 2 hours and must be produced in a cyclotron, so 
 18F-FDG or  18 F-FDA PET scanning is practical only at medical 
centers that have a cyclotron nearby. 
 1. PET scanning with  18F-FDG— Deoxyglucose (DG) is 
absorbed by tissues with active metabolism, including tumors. 
For PET scanning, DG is tagged with  18 F to produce fluorode-
oxyglucose, or  18 F-FDG. This scan is widely available as a 
fusion scan with CT,  18 F-FDG PET/CT. This scan’s sensitivity 
is 88% for nonmetastatic pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma 
and 76% for metastatic pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma. 
The sensitivity of  18 F-FDG-PET/CT is lower for indolent 
tumors and for patients who are diabetic or who are not fasting 
before the scan.  18 F-FDG-PET localizes in other tissues with a 
high metabolic rate, including areas of inflammation, brown 
fat, shivering muscles, but such areas of PET uptake can be 
distinguished from tumors by the lack of a CT correlate. 
However,  18 F-FDG-PET/CT detects other tumors besides 
pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma and is, therefore, less spe-
cific 
for 
pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma 
than 
is
 18 F-FDA-PET or  123 I-MIBG scanning. 
 2. PET scanning with  18 F-FDA— PET scanning may also be 
performed using radioisotope-tagged dopamine: 6-[ 18 F] fluo-
rodopamine ( 18 F-FDA-PET). This scan is more specific for 
paraganglioma and metastatic pheochromocytoma than is 
 18 F-FDG-PET/CT, because dopamine is a substrate for the 
norepinephrine transporter in tumor tissue. The sensitivity of 
 18 F-FDA-PET is 78% for nonmetastatic pheochromocytoma/
paraganglioma and 76% for metastatic pheochromocytoma/
paraganglioma. It is widely available and is generally more 
sensitive than  123 I-MIBG scanning, particularly in patients 
who harbor VHL or MEN 2 germline mutations. 
 3. PET scanning with  18 F-DOPA— PET scanning may be per-
formed using radioisotope-tagged DOPA: 6-[ 18 F]fluoro-L-di-
hydroxyphenylalanine ( 18 F-DOPA ) . The sensitivity of 
 18 F-DOPA-PET is about 81% for nonmetastatic PHEO/PGL 
and 45% for metastatic pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma. 
For SDHB-associated metastatic paraganglioma, its sensitivity 
is only 20%. This scan is not widely available and is not recom-
mended because of its lack of sensitivity for metastatic pheo-
chromocytoma or paraganglioma. 
 E. Somatostatin 
receptor 
imaging 
with 
111In- 
octreotide  Somatostatin receptors are cell surface, transmembrane, 
and G protein–coupled receptors, and there are five subtypes. 
About 70% of pheochromocytomas express somatostatin recep-
tors, particularly types 2 and 4. Octreotide is a stable 8 amino acid 
analog of somatostatin with a high affinity for type 2 receptors. 
For imaging, octreotide is coupled with  111 In-diaminetriamine-
pentacetate (DTPA).  111 In has a half-life of 2.8 days and γ emis-
sions of 173 keV and 247 keV. Scanning with  111 In-labeled 
octreotide, known as somatostatin receptor imaging (SRI), has a 
sensitivity of only 25% for adrenal pheochromocytomas and jux-
tarenal paragangliomas. This low sensitivity is due to high uptake 
of  111 In-octreotide by the kidneys as well as renal excretion. 
However, SRI detects 87% of pheochromocytoma metastases and 
is also a sensitive technique for detecting paragangliomas of the 
head and neck (chemodectomas). SRI also detects some metasta-
ses not visible on MIBG scanning, and vice versa. SRI has been 
reported to detect a cardiac paraganglioma that was not visible on 
MIBG scanning. When paragangliomas or metastases are sus-
pected, SRI may be useful, particularly when MIBG scanning is 
negative. 
 111 In-octreotide has physiologic uptake in the kidneys, thyroid, 
pituitary, salivary glands, gallbladder, bowels, spleen, liver, and 
mammary glands. Infection and recent surgery sites can also have 
misleading uptake of  111 In-octreotide. 
 F. Ultrasound imaging 
 On transabdominal ultrasound, an 
adrenal pheochromocytoma typically appears as a well-defined 
mass. Large pheochromocytomas tend to develop internal hemor-
rhagic necrotic cysts, making the tumor appear heterogenous. 
Transabdominal ultrasound is most sensitive in slender individu-
als, in whom 85% of adrenal pheochromocytomas can be visual-
ized. However, ultrasound lacks specificity, such that a 
pheochromocytoma is not distinguishable from an adrenal ade-
noma or a mass in the superior pole of a kidney. Likewise, a left 
adrenal pheochromocytoma may be mistaken for a pancreatic tail 
tumor, and a right adrenal pheochromocytoma may be mistaken 
for a hepatic mass. Ultrasound may be used for initial imaging for 
pheochromocytomas in pregnant women, infants, and young 
children, although MRI is superior. Ultrasound is also useful for 
imaging and surveillance of neck paragangliomas. Ultrasound 
examinations have also been performed endoscopically, from the 
stomach and duodenum, with a longitudinal sector array, yielding 
sensitive detection of small adrenal pheochromocytomas, lymp-
hangitic metastases, and local recurrences. For pelvic and bladder 
paragangliomas, pelvic transvaginal ultrasound is very helpful for 
tumor localization and surveillance. 
 G. Venous sampling for catecholamines (see  Figure 
11–9 ) 
 Selective venous sampling for catecholamines is danger-
ous, since the required venography can provoke a pheochromocy-
toma crisis. Venous sampling can help distinguish whether a mass 
is a secretory pheochromocytoma or paraganglioma. However, 
venous sampling it is rarely required and seldom indicated. 
 INCIDENTALLY DISCOVERED
ADRENAL MASSES 
 Clinically inapparent adrenal nodules are commonly discovered 
incidentally on abdominal CT or MRI scans that are performed 
for unrelated reasons. (See “Computed Tomography,” earlier.) 
Such nodules are known as  adrenal incidentalomas . The inci-
dence of adrenal nodules is about 3% in middle-aged, rising to 
10% in the elderly. Most such nodules are small, benign adrenal 
adenomas, with densities below 10 HU on noncontrast CT. 
However, pheochromocytomas can produce nonspecific symp-
toms of abdominal pain, nausea, and weight loss, for which CT 
scans may be performed. Pheochromocytomas account for about 
4% of incidentally discovered adrenal masses. In the United States 
nearly half of the pheochromocytomas diagnosed during life are 
detected incidentally on an abdominal or chest CT scan per-
formed for other reasons. Therefore, all patients with adrenal 
382    CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia
nodules, even normotensives, should be screened for pheochro-
mocytoma with plasma-fractionated free metanephrines. A prob-
lem arises with metanephrines that are marginally elevated. Such 
patients with metanephrines that are one to two times higher than 
the reference range’s ULN have about a 30% chance of harboring 
a pheochromocytoma. Those with metanephrines more than 
twice the ULN have a very high risk of having a pheochromocy-
toma. For apparently nonfunctioning adrenal nodules, it is gener-
ally reasonable to observe those that are under 3 cm in maximum 
diameter. Nonfunctioning nodules that are 3 to 5 cm in maxi-
mum diameter require especially close surveillance. Adrenal nod-
ules that are over 5 cm in diameter are generally resected, except 
for obvious myelolipomas. When pheochromocytoma has been 
ruled out, patients with an adrenal nodule should be screened for 
hyperaldosteronism and Cushing syndrome. 
 Adrenal Percutaneous Fine-Needle
Aspiration Biopsy 
 Most pheochromocytomas can be readily diagnosed on the basis 
of their clinical, biochemical, and radiologic presentation. Fine- 
needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) is not usually required for the 
diagnosis of a pheochromocytoma. However, some pheochromo-
cytomas are discovered incidentally on abdominal CT or ultra-
sound and may be clinically or biochemically silent. Although 
there may be a temptation to biopsy such masses, patients with a 
suspicious adrenal or retroperitoneal mass require testing for 
pheochromocytoma before any biopsy. There is a 70% risk of 
complications after percutaneous FNAB of pheochromocytomas 
and paragangliomas. Such complications include: increased dif-
ficulty in the tumor’s resection (41%), severe hypertension 
(15%), hematoma (30%), severe pain (25%), and incorrect or 
inadequate biopsy (25%). FNAB cytology can be misinterpreted 
as a different primary malignancy or a metastasis from another 
malignancy; this potential for confusion is due to the fact that 
pheochromocytomas are rare tumors and have pleomorphic and 
hyperchromic nuclei. Large left-sided pheochromocytomas have 
been misdiagnosed as carcinoma of the tail of the pancreas based 
on CT scanning and biopsy. Percutaneous biopsy can also disrupt 
the pheochromocytoma capsule and cause seeding of the tumor 
within the peritoneum. 
 Medical Management of 
Pheochromocytoma and Paraganglioma 
 Patients need to be treated with oral antihypertensives and stabi-
lized hemodynamically prior to surgery. Patients receiving 
increasing doses of antihypertensive medications should have 
daily measurements of blood pressure and pulse rate in the lying, 
sitting, and standing positions. Additionally, patients are taught 
to determine their own blood pressure and pulse rate during any 
paroxysmal symptoms. Most clinicians gradually increase anti-
hypertensive medications over 2 or more weeks. However, pro-
longed preoperative preparation has not proven more effective 
for preventing intraoperative hypertension than are shorter 
preparation periods. Some hypertensive patients have been 
admitted  emergently for hypertension control and hydration, 
stabilized, and operated on successfully with intravenous infu-
sion of a vasodilator drug (eg, nicardipine, nitroprusside, nitro-
glycerin; see discussed later). Ideally, the blood pressure should 
be reduced to an average of 130/85 mm Hg or less prior to sur-
gery, while avoiding symptomatic orthostasis. 
 A. Alpha-adrenergic blockers 
 Alpha-adrenergic blockers 
have historically been used for most patients with pheochromocy-
toma in preparation for surgical resection. Patients who are nor-
motensive are also usually treated (carefully) preoperatively. 
Phenoxybenzamine (10-mg capsules) is an oral nonselective alpha 
blocker that is the most commonly used alpha-blocking agent. It 
has a long half-life of about 24 hours. Patients with mild 
hypertension may be given phenoxybenzamine at a starting 
dosage of 10 mg once daily, while those with more severe hyper-
tension may receive a starting dosage of 10 mg twice daily. The 
dose of phenoxybenzamine may be increased by 10 mg every 
2 days until the blood pressure falls to an average of 130/85 mm 
Hg sitting or until symptomatic orthostatic hypotension occurs. 
Patients who have been normotensive between paroxysms are 
particularly prone to develop hypotension with phenoxyben-
zamine. Phenoxybenzamine does not block the synthesis of cate-
cholamines; in fact, the synthesis of catecholamines and 
metanephrines tends to increase during alpha blockade. Therapy 
with phenoxybenzamine increases the heart rate but decreases the 
frequency of ventricular arrhythmias. Patients are encouraged to 
hydrate themselves well. Patients must be monitored daily for 
symptomatic orthostatic hypotension. Certain adverse effects are 
common, including dry mouth, headache, diplopia, inhibition of 
ejaculation, and nasal congestion. Nasal decongestants should not 
be used if urinary catecholamine determinations or  123 I-MIBG 
scanning is planned, but antihistamines are acceptable. 
Phenoxybenzamine is not well tolerated as chronic therapy for 
hypertension in patients with unresectable or metastatic pheo-
chromocytoma, and such patients are better treated with calcium 
channel blockers (see later), sometimes together with low-dose 
phenoxybenzamine. 
 Phenoxybenzamine crosses the placenta and accumulates to 
levels that are 60% higher in the fetus than in the maternal 
circulation; this can cause hypotension and respiratory depres-
sion in the newborn for several days following birth. Most 
patients require 30 to 60 mg/d, but the dosage is sometimes 
escalated to as high as 140 mg/d. Excessive alpha blockade with 
phenoxybenzamine is undesirable because it worsens postopera-
tive hypotension. Furthermore, excessive alpha blockade may 
deny a critical surgical indicator (ie, a drop in blood pressure 
after complete resection of the tumor and aggravation of hyper-
tension during palpation of the abdomen in case of multiple 
tumors or metastases). 
 Doxazosin is another alpha blocker with a half-life of about 
22 hours. It is effective in the medical management of pheo-
chromocytomas when given orally in doses of 2 to 16 mg daily. 
In one series, there was no difference in hemodynamic instabil-
ity during surgery in patients pretreated with doxazosin versus 
CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia     383
phenoxybenzamine. Alternatively, prazosin is a short-acting 
selective alpha blocker with a half-life of about 3 hours. It 
appears to cause less reflex tachycardia and less postoperative 
hypotension. With chronic use, it has been reported to cause 
less ejaculatory disturbance in men, compared to phenoxyben-
zamine. The starting dose of prazosin is 0.5 mg/d, increasing up 
to 10 mg twice or three times daily, if necessary. 
 B. Calcium channel blockers 
 Calcium channel blockers are 
excellent antihypertensive agents for patients with pheochromocy-
tomas. Patients tend to tolerate calcium channel blockers better 
than alpha blockers. Patients who are normotensive between par-
oxysms are less likely to become hypotensive with calcium channel 
blockers compared to alpha blockers. Patients with angina from 
coronary vasospasm are also best treated with calcium channel 
blockers. Perioperative fluid requirements have been lower among 
patients who were pretreated with calcium channel blockers 
instead of alpha blockers. In a French series, 70 patients with 
pheochromocytoma were successfully prepared for surgery using 
oral calcium channel blockers (usually nicardipine). Nicardipine 
may be given in doses of 20 to 40 mg orally every 8 hours; nicar-
dipine is also available as a sustained-release preparation that may 
be given in doses of 30 to 60 mg orally every 12 hours. 
 Nifedipine is a calcium channel blocker that is administered as 
a slow-release preparation in doses of 30 to 60 mg orally once or 
twice daily. For hypertensive paroxysms, nifedipine 10 mg (chewed 
pierced capsule) is usually a fast and effective treatment. Chewed 
nifedipine is generally safe for use by patients with pheochromo-
cytoma, who may self-administer the drug at home during parox-
ysms but only with close blood pressure monitoring. In one small 
study, nifedipine therapy appeared to improve the uptake of 
MIBG into pheochromocytomas in four of eight patients at scan-
ning doses. It is possible that nifedipine might reduce the growth 
of pheochromocytomas and metastases, because in vitro nife-
dipine added to cultured pheochromocytoma cells reduces their 
mitotic index and proliferation. The effect of nifedipine on pheo-
chromocytoma tumor growth in vivo has not been studied. 
Amlodipine may also be used for patients with pheochromocy-
toma in doses of 10 to 20 mg daily. 
 Other calcium channel blockers are reported to be less effective 
for patients with pheochromocytoma. Verapamil has been used in 
a sustained-release preparation, but has been reported to be associ-
ated with postoperative pulmonary edema after pheochromocy-
toma resection. Diltiazem has been reported to provide inadequate 
intraoperative blood pressure control. 
 Intravenous calcium channel blockers are useful for hyperten-
sive crisis, particularly during surgery. Nicardipine and clevidipine 
are both available as intravenous preparations. (See “Surgical 
Management of Pheochromocytoma and Paraganglioma” later.) 
 C. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors 
 ACE 
inhibitors have successfully treated hypertension in patients with 
pheochromocytomas but not as the sole agent. Angiotensin recep-
tor blockers have also been successfully added to multidrug anti-
hypertensive therapy. Catecholamines stimulate renin production. 
In turn, renin stimulates the production of angiotensin I, which is 
converted by ACE to angiotensin II; this can be blocked by ACE 
inhibitors. Furthermore, pheochromocytomas have been demon-
strated to have angiotensin II–binding sites. ACE inhibitors are 
contraindicated in pregnancy, because their use in the second and 
third trimesters has been associated with fetal malformations, 
including skull hypoplasia, renal failure, limb and craniofacial 
deformation, lung hypoplasia, intrauterine growth retardation, 
patent ductus arteriosus, and death. 
 D. Beta-adrenergic blockers 
 These agents are generally 
not prescribed for patients with pheochromocytomas until treat-
ment has been started with antihypertensive medications such as 
α-adrenergic blockers or calcium channel blockers. Beta-adrenergic 
blockade should then be used for treatment of β-adrenergic symp-
toms such as flushing, pounding heart, or tachycardia. It is impor-
tant to institute alpha blockade first, because blocking vasodilating 
β 2 receptors without also blocking vasoconstricting α 1 receptors 
can lead to hypertensive crisis if serum norepinephrine levels 
are high. 
 Nonselective beta blockers block both β 1 - and β 2 -adrenergic 
receptors. The inhibition of vasodilating arterial β 2 receptors 
causes unopposed vasoconstrictive α-adrenergic stimulation that 
aggravates hypertension. Therefore, nonselective beta blockers 
should ordinarily not be administered to patients with pheochro-
mocytoma or paraganglioma. Nonselective beta blockers include: 
nadolol, pindolol, propranolol, and timolol. Labetalol and carve-
dilol are different nonselective β blockers that additionally block 
α 1 receptors. Labetalol has been used to treat patients with pheo-
chromocytoma; however, it can initially aggravate hypertension, 
produce false elevations of catecholamines in some assays, and 
reduce MIBG uptake. 
 Selective beta blockers specifically block β 1 -adrenergic recep-
tors at low doses. This leads to a rather selective reduction in heart 
rate without unopposed alpha receptor dependent hypertension. 
However, at higher doses, these beta blockers also block β 2 -
adrenergic receptors and can cause a paradoxical worsening of 
hypertension. Selective beta blockers include: atenolol, betaxolol, 
bisoprolol, nebivolol, esmolol, and metoprolol. Atenolol has a 
half-life of only 6 hours, so it does not produce satisfactory 
24-hour blockade. Nebivolol has vasodilating activity through 
enhancement of nitric oxide release. Esmolol is the preferred intra-
venous preparation. Extended-release metoprolol (metoprolol ER) 
is the preferred oral preparation. 
 E. Metyrosine (α-methylparatyrosine) 
 Metyrosine inhib-
its the enzyme tyrosine hydroxylase, which catalyzes the first reac-
tion in catecholamine biosynthesis. Because of its potential side 
effects, it is usually used only to treat hypertension in patients with 
metastatic pheochromocytoma. Metyrosine is administered orally 
as 250-mg capsules, beginning with one every 6 hours; the dose is 
titrated upward every 3 to 4 days according to blood pressure 
response and side effects. Most patients can tolerate 2 g/d, but higher 
doses usually cause side effects. The maximum dosage is 4 g/d. 
Catecholamine excretion is usually reduced by 35% to 80%. 
384    CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia
Preoperative treatment with metyrosine tends to reduce intraop-
erative hypertension and arrhythmias; however, postoperative 
hypotension is likely to be more severe for several days. Side effects 
of metyrosine include sedation, psychiatric disturbance, extrapyra-
midal symptoms, and potentiation of sedatives and phenothiaz-
ines. Crystalluria and urolithiasis can occur, so adequate hydration 
is mandatory. Metyrosine does not inhibit MIBG uptake by the 
tumor, allowing concurrent  123 I-MIBG scanning or treatment 
with high-dose  131 I-MIBG. 
 F. Octreotide 
 Octreotide has not been formally studied or 
approved for use in patients with pheochromocytoma. However, 
octreotide (100 µg subcutaneously three times daily), has been 
reported to reduce hypertensive episodes and catecholamine excre-
tion in a man with pheochromocytoma whose hypertensive par-
oxysms were uncontrolled using other means. Octreotide therapy 
has been observed to reduce bone pain in a woman with a malig-
nant paraganglioma whose skeletal metastases were avid for 
111 In-labeled octreotide. Octreotide therapy is usually begun at a 
dose of 50 to 100 µg injected subcutaneously every 8 hours. Side 
effects are common and may include nausea, vomiting, abdominal 
pain, and dizziness. If the drug is tolerated, the dose can be 
titrated upward to a maximum of 1500 µg daily. Octreotide LAR 
can be given as subcutaneous injections in doses of 10 to 30 mg 
every 4 weeks. 
 G. Activities to avoid 
 Vigorous exercise, particularly involv-
ing bending or heavy lifting, can aggravate hypertension in some 
individuals with pheochromocytoma, so mild exertion or rest is 
best during preparation for surgery. Emotional stress can provoke 
hypertensive attacks, so arguments and stressful situations are best 
avoided. 
 H. Foods to avoid 
 Tyramine is a precursor to cate-
cholamines and intravenous tyramine causes hypertension in 
most patients with pheochromocytoma. While dietary tyramine 
has not been studied in patients with pheochromocytoma, it is 
known that dietary tyramine can provoke hypertensive crisis in 
patients taking MAO inhibitor antidepressants. Therefore, 
although strict dietary precautions are not required, it is rea-
sonable for patients with a known pheochromocytoma to avoid 
consuming large amounts of foods with high tyramine content 
during preparation for surgery such as red wine, tap beers, aged 
dairy products, aged meats, fermented or pickled fish, liver, 
protein extracts, overripe fruit, soybeans, tofu, fava bean pods, 
bean pastes, brewer’s yeast pills, marmite, and vegemite. 
 Surgical Management of 
Pheochromocytoma and Paraganglioma 
 A. Perioperative preparation 
 Prior to surgery, patients 
should be reasonably normotensive on medication, with an aver-
age blood pressure of 130/85 mm Hg or less, without symptom-
atic orthostasis (see earlier). They should also be well hydrated. 
It is ideal for patients to be admitted for administration of intra-
venous fluids at least 1 day prior to surgery. Patients may predo-
nate blood for autologous transfusion. The transfusion of two 
units of blood within 12 hours before surgery reduces the risk of 
postoperative hypotension. Blood pressure must be monitored 
continuously during surgery. This requires placement of an arterial 
line, preferably in a large artery that is not prone to spasm (eg, 
femoral artery). A central venous pressure line helps determine the 
volume of fluid replacement. For certain high-risk patients with 
congestive heart failure or coronary artery disease, a pulmonary 
artery (Swan-Ganz) line may be inserted preoperatively to further 
optimize fluid replacement. Constant electrocardiographic moni-
toring is mandatory. Severe hypertension can occur—even in fully 
blocked patients—during bladder catheterization, intubation, or 
surgical incision. During laparoscopic surgery, catecholamine 
release is typically stimulated by pneumoperitoneum and by 
tumor manipulation. However, laparoscopic procedures cause less 
fluctuation of catecholamine levels and blood pressure than do 
open surgeries. All antihypertensive medications (see later) that 
might be required should be available and should be in the operat-
ing room well in advance. 
 Arterial embolization of the tumor can be performed immedi-
ately prior to surgery. This may be beneficial to the surgeon, par-
ticularly for the open resection of very large paragangliomas that 
tend to be extremely vascular and difficult to resect, due to blood 
loss and venous oozing. Embolization of neck paragangliomas is 
an established intervention. Secretory paragangliomas can also be 
embolized preoperatively. An experienced interventional radiolo-
gist must perform such embolizations with full monitoring and an 
anesthesia team in attendance. 
 The major problem during surgery for pheochromocytoma is 
hemodynamic instability. Serious blood pressure variations are 
more common in patients whose blood pressure has not been 
adequately pretreated. Intraoperative hemodynamic instability is 
also more common in patients with higher plasma norepinephrine 
levels and larger tumor size. 
 B. Antihypertensive and antiarrhythmic drugs 
 1. Calcium channel blockers— These are effective therapies for 
intraoperative hypertension. They can cause reflex tachycardia 
that can be controlled with intravenous beta blockers (eg, 
esmolol). Nicardipine is administered as an intravenous infu-
sion, starting at a dose of 5 mg/h and increasing by 2.5 mg/h 
every 5 to 15 minutes up to 15 mg/h. Nicardipine was success-
fully used as the sole intraoperative vasodilating agent in one 
French series of 70 patients and in another series of 19 patients. 
Its half-life is 9 hours. Clevidipine has a shorter half-life of 1 to 
15 minutes. It is available for intravenous infusion at a dose of 
1 to 2 mg/h, doubling the dose after 90 seconds, then increas-
ing in smaller increments at longer intervals (5-10 minutes) up 
to 4 to 6 mg/h or a maximum of 16 mg/h. 
 2. Phentolamine— It is a parenteral α-adrenergic blocker that 
has a short half-life of 19 minutes. It can be given intrave-
nously in bolus doses, starting with 5 mg (children, 1-3 mg) 
and repeating in doses of 5 to 15 mg as needed for blood pres-
sure control. Phentolamine may also be given by intravenous 
infusion at a rate of 0.5 to 1 mg/min. Side effects include 
CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia     385
hypotension, tachycardia, cardiac arrhythmias, nasal stuffiness, 
nausea, and vomiting. 
 3. Nitroprusside— It is given by intravenous infusion and is an 
effective drug for managing hypertensive episodes; advantages 
include widespread familiarity with its use and its short half-
life of 2 minutes. Nitroprusside is initiated at 0.25 to 0.3 µg/
kg/min and titrated for the desired effect. The maximum infu-
sion rate is 10 µg/kg/min for 10 minutes. High infusion rates 
should not be given for prolonged periods; long-duration (over 
6 hours) nitroprusside infusion rates above 2 µg/kg/min cause 
cyanide accumulation and toxicity. Cyanide toxicity causes 
metabolic acidosis and an increase in venous oxygen saturation 
(>90%) in severe cases. If cyanide toxicity is suspected, the 
nitroprusside infusion must be stopped or slowed. In the 
United States, there are two different cyanide antidote kits 
available. (1) The conventional kit contains amyl nitrite, 
sodium nitrite, and thiosulfate. Administer an amyl nitrite 
crushed ampule at the end of the endotracheal tube or under 
the patient’s nose and give 10 mL 3% sodium nitrite intrave-
nously. Also administer 25% sodium thiosulfate solution 
(50 mL) intravenously. (2) Additionally, hydroxocobalamin 
(Cyanokit) is available for intravenous administration at a dose 
of 5 g (children, 70 mg/kg). Coadministration of sodium thio-
sulfate (1 g/100 mg nitroprusside) prevents cyanide accumula-
tion. Nitroprusside must be administered cautiously, since it 
can cause precipitous and profound hypotension, resulting in 
irreversible ischemic injuries. 
 4. Nitroglycerin— It is given by intravenous infusion and is 
effective therapy for perioperative hypertension. Nitroglycerin 
infusions are initiated at 5 µg/min and increased by 5 µg/min 
every 3 to 5 minutes until target blood pressure is achieved or 
a dose of 20 µg/min is reached; if the response has been insuf-
ficient, the dose can be increased by 10 to 20 µg/min every 
5 minutes to a maximum of 100 µg/min. Because nitroglycerin 
adheres to polyvinyl chloride tubing, non-PVC infusion sets 
must be used. Nitroglycerin infusions can cause headache and 
hypotension. Methemoglobinemia has occurred during pro-
longed high-dose infusions and is manifested by cyanosis in the 
presence of a normal arterial pO 2 . The therapy for methemo-
globinemia consists of immediately stopping the nitroglycerin 
and giving methylene blue, 1 to 2 mg/kg intravenously. 
 5. Magnesium sulfate— It is given intravenously in a bolus of 
4 g over 15 minutes and has been reported to be effective in 
managing hypertension during resection of a pheochromocy-
toma during pregnancy. 
 6. Lidocaine— It may be used to treat cardiac ventricular 
arrhythmias. In adults, lidocaine is administered with a load-
ing dose of 150 to 200 mg over about 15 minutes, or as a 
series of smaller boluses. This is followed by a maintenance 
infusion of 2 to 4 mg/min in order to achieve a therapeutic 
plasma level of 2 to 6 µg/mL. 
 7. Beta blockers— Atrial tachyarrhythmias may be treated with 
intravenous atenolol in 1-mg boluses or by constant intrave-
nous infusion of esmolol, a short-acting beta blocker. Esmolol 
is given as an initial dose of 500 µg/kg intravenously over 
1 minute, then continued at 50 µg/kg/min. If required, the infu-
sion rate may be increased by 50 µg/kg/min every 4 minutes. 
 8. Drugs to avoid— Atropine should not be used as preopera-
tive medication for patients with pheochromocytomas 
because it can precipitate arrhythmias and severe hyperten-
sion. Metoclopramide and glucagon can also precipitate a 
hypertensive crisis.  MAO inhibitor antidepressants can 
provoke hypertensive crisis by blocking the metabolism of 
catecholamines. Other medications that can elicit hyper-
tensive crisis include decongestants (eg, pseudoephedrine), 
epinephrine, amphetamines and amphetamine derivatives, 
and cocaine. 
    Labetalol is not recommended for preoperative or intraopera-
tive management of pheochromocytomas because it aggra-
vates postresection hypotension as a consequence of its long 
half-life. It can also paradoxically initially aggravate hyperten-
sion, because its beta-blocking effect may occur initially, 
allowing a brief period of unopposed α-receptor stimula-
tion. Labetalol also inhibits MIBG uptake and causes mis-
leading elevations in catecholamine determinations in certain 
assays. Diazoxide is ineffective against hypertension caused by 
pheochromocytoma. 
 C. Anesthesia 
 Anesthetic agents such as intravenous propo-
fol, enflurane, isoflurane, sufentanil, alfentanil, and nitrous oxide 
appear to be safe and effective. Atropine should not be used. 
Muscle relaxants with the least hypertensive effect should be 
employed (eg, vecuronium). Intraoperative hypertension can be 
managed by increasing the depth of anesthesia and by intravenous 
vasodilators for blood pressures over 160/90 mm Hg. Serum cat-
echolamine levels drop sharply after adrenal vein ligation and 
profound hypotension can occur suddenly after resection of a 
pheochromocytoma. Therefore, it is prudent to stop the vasodila-
tor infusion just prior to adrenal vein ligation. 
 D. Operative management  Perioperative mortality is about 
2.4% overall, but morbidity rates of up to 24% have been reported. 
Surgical complications do occur and include splenectomy, which is 
more common with open abdominal exploration than with laparo-
scopic surgery. Reported surgical complication rates have been 
higher in patients with severe hypertension and in patients having 
reoperations. Surgical morbidity and mortality risks can be mini-
mized by adequate preoperative preparation, accurate tumor local-
ization, and meticulous intraoperative care. 
 1. Laparoscopy— Most pheochromocytomas can be resected 
laparoscopically, which has become the procedure of choice 
for removing most adrenal neoplasms that are under 6 cm in 
diameter. Adrenal laparoscopic surgery is usually performed 
through 4 subcostal ports of 10 to 12 mm. Laparoscopic 
surgery is widely used now that preoperative localization of 
the tumor is possible. However, tumors that are invasive or 
over 6 cm in diameter are more difficult to resect laparo-
scopically and may require open surgery. For larger pheo-
chromocytomas, a lateral laparoscopic approach can be used, 
because it affords greater opportunity to explore the abdo-
men and inspect the liver for metastases. For patients with 
small adrenal pheochromocytomas and for those who have 
had prior abdominal surgery, a posterior laparoscopic 
approach may be preferred. 
 The laparoscope allows unsurpassed magnified views of 
the 
pheochromocytoma 
and 
its 
vasculature. 
Pheochromocytomas are bagged to reduce the risk of frag-
mentation and spread of tumor cells within the peritoneum 
or at the port site. Larger tumors can be removed through 
laparoscopic incisions that can be widened for the surgeon’s 
386    CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia
hand (laparoscopic-assisted adrenalectomy). With laparo-
scopic surgery, hypotensive episodes are less frequent and 
less severe. Laparoscopic adrenalectomy has other advan-
tages also compared with open adrenalectomy: less postop-
erative pain, faster return to oral foods, and shorter hospital 
stays (median 3 days vs 7 days for the open approach). This 
approach is the least invasive for the patient, who can usu-
ally begin eating and ambulating the next day. The laparo-
scopic approach may be used during pregnancy. The 
technique has also been used successfully for certain extra-
adrenal paragangliomas. Surgical mortality is under 3% at 
referral centers. 
 2. Needlescopic adrenalectomy— This procedure uses three 
subcostal ports of 3 mm, with a larger umbilical port for tumor 
removal. In one series of 15 patients, this technique reduced 
surgical times and recovery time compared with the standard 
laparoscopic approach. However, more extensive experience 
with this technique is required. 
 3. Adrenal cortex-sparing surgery— All patients undergoing 
bilateral total adrenalectomies require life-long glucocorti-
coid and mineralocorticoid hormone replacement. To avoid 
adrenal insufficiency, patients with benign familial or bilat-
eral pheochromocytomas have had successful selective lap-
aroscopic resection of small pheochromocytomas, sparing 
the adrenal cortex. Such adrenal-sparing surgery has unfor-
tunately resulted in a pheochromocytoma recurrence rate of 
about 24%. 
 4. Open laparotomy— Open laparotomy is indicated for patients 
with particularly large pheochromocytomas or paragangliomas, 
or for those with intra-abdominal metastases that require deb-
ulking. Large vascular paragangliomas can be considered for 
preoperative arterial embolization, but its efficacy is uncertain. 
An open anterior midline or subcostal approach usually yields 
adequate exposure. For patients with paragangliomas of the 
urinary bladder, a partial cystectomy can sometimes be cura-
tive. Other patients with larger bladder paragangliomas require 
a total cystectomy and construction of a diverting ureteroen-
terostomy if the tumor has not been fully resected. For patients 
with a curative total cystectomy, construction of a new ileal 
neobladder is possible. 
 E. Therapy for shock occurring after pheochromocytoma 
resection 
 Severe shock and cardiovascular collapse can occur 
immediately following ligation of the adrenal vein during resec-
tion of a pheochromocytoma, particularly in patients having 
norepinephrine-secreting tumors. Such hypotension may be due 
to desensitization of α 1 -adrenergic receptors, persistence of antihy-
pertensives, and low plasma volume. Preoperative preparation 
with calcium channel blockers or alpha blockade plus intravenous 
hydration or blood transfusions reduces the risk of shock. 
Intravenous antihypertensives are held just prior to ligation of the 
adrenal vein. Treatment of shock consists of large volumes of intra-
venous saline or colloid. Intravenous norepinephrine is sometimes 
required in very high doses. 
 F. Intravenous dextrose  Immediately following removal of a 
pheochromocytoma, intravenous 5% dextrose should be infused 
at a constant rate of about 100 mL/h to prevent the postoperative 
hypoglycemia that is otherwise frequently encountered. 
 Pregnancy and Pheochromocytoma 
 Pheochromocytomas occur in about 1 in every 50,000 pregnancies 
and are unrecognized antepartum in about 50% of cases. Such 
unsuspected pheochromocytomas result in a maternal mortality of 
40% and a fetal mortality of 56%. However, if the diagnosis is made 
antepartum, the mortality is much lower. Hypertension is often 
misdiagnosed as eclampsia. Hypertensive crisis usually occurs during 
labor and can be associated with cardiac arrhythmias or pulmonary 
edema. Although maternal catecholamines do not cross the placenta, 
maternal hypertensive crisis is very dangerous for the fetus, causing 
uteroplacental insufficiency and fetal death. 
 Pregnant hypertensive patients are often treated with meth-
yldopa that can cause false-positive testing for catecholamines 
by older fluorometric methodologies, but not by HPLC. 
Methyldopa does not cause interference with plasma or urine 
metanephrine measurements performed with tandem mass 
spectrometry. The localization of a pheochromocytoma in preg-
nancy is best done with MRI. 
 As soon as a pheochromocytoma is diagnosed, alpha blockade 
is commenced. Phenoxybenzamine is usually used. However, phe-
noxybenzamine crosses the placenta and accumulates in the fetus. 
After 26 days of maternal phenoxybenzamine therapy, cord blood 
levels in the newborn are 60% higher than the mother’s serum 
levels. Therefore, some perinatal depression and hypotension may 
occur in newborns of mothers receiving phenoxybenzamine. For 
maternal treatment near term, a short-acting selective alpha 
blocker (eg, prazosin) would have an obvious theoretical advan-
tage over long-acting alpha blockers; chronic use increases the risk 
of fetal demise. The starting dose of prazosin is 0.5 mg/d orally, 
increasing up to 10 mg orally twice daily if necessary. 
 There has been little experience with the use of calcium chan-
nel blockers to treat hypertension in pregnant women with pheo-
chromocytoma. However, calcium channel blockers can be safely 
used during pregnancy and are not teratogenic in the first trimes-
ter. Therefore, nifedipine or nicardipine may be used to supple-
ment or replace alpha blockade as needed. 
 If possible, beta blockade should not be used at all during 
pregnancy. Propranolol crosses the placenta and can cause intra-
uterine growth restriction. Newborns of mothers taking propra-
nolol at delivery exhibit bradycardia, respiratory depression, and 
hypoglycemia. Therefore, during cesarean delivery, serious atrial 
tachyarrhythmias should be controlled by a short infusion of 
esmolol, a beta blocker with a very short half-life. 
 During the first 6 months of pregnancy, it is often possible to 
treat a woman with alpha blockade, followed by laparoscopic 
resection of the tumor. Although the fetus usually survives, 
spontaneous abortion is common despite a successful resection 
of the tumor. If a pheochromocytoma is not discovered until the 
last trimester, treatment consists of alpha blockade followed by 
elective cesarean delivery as early as feasible. Intravenous magne-
sium sulfate is a useful antihypertensive during surgery. 
Intravenous calcium channel blockers may be used to treat 
patients with hypertensive crisis caused by pheochromocytoma 
in pregnancy. The tumor is resected after the cesarean delivery. 
In the presence of an active pheochromocytoma, vaginal delivery 
CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia     387
should never be allowed, since life-threatening hypertensive cri-
sis will predictably occur. 
 Pathology of Pheochromocytoma
and Paraganglioma 
 On histopathology, pheochromocytomas are extremely vascular 
tumors with neurosecretory granules. Central necrosis is often 
present. The cells may be arranged in nests (zellballen pattern), 
anastomosing cords (trabecular pattern), or a combination of 
both. Cells vary in size with pleomorphic and eccentric nuclei that 
are often large and bizarre in appearance. The cells exhibit immu-
nofluorescence staining for CgA and synaptophysin. 
 No single characteristic of pheochromocytoma or paragan-
glioma can determine whether a given tumor is malignant. 
Therefore, the definition of malignancy is based upon whether 
metastases are present. Metastases must be distinguished from 
additional paragangliomas by their location (liver, lung, bone) 
where sympathetic paraganglia are rare. Metastases must also be 
distinguished from intraperitoneal seeding, a phenomenon known 
as pheochromocytomatosis. Metastases can vary in virulence from 
relatively indolent to extremely aggressive (see discussion on 
malignant pheochromocytoma later). 
 Overall, about 26% of these tumors arise in patients with iden-
tifiable germline mutations. Individuals with no known family 
history of these tumors have about a 17% risk of harboring a 
known germline mutation. About 18% of cases develop in chil-
dren. The earlier a tumor presents, the more likely that individual 
harbors a germline mutation. (See discussion on genetics of pheo-
chromocytoma and paraganglioma, earlier.) 
 Adrenal pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas appear very 
similar on microscopy. Paragangliomas are often large and arise 
near the adrenal, making the distinction particularly difficult 
based upon preoperative localization scans. But it is important to 
distinguish these two tumors because paragangliomas are more 
likely to metastasize. One way to distinguish these tumors preop-
eratively is to evaluate their secretions. Tumors that secrete epi-
nephrine (or its metabolite, metanephrine) are predictably adrenal 
pheochromocytoma. However, tumors that secrete strictly norepi-
nephrine (or its metabolite normetanephrine) may be either pheo-
chromocytoma or paraganglioma. Intraoperatively, the surgeon 
may be able to identify the adrenal gland as separate from the 
tumor. On pathology, it is often possible to visualize the adrenal 
cortex lying in close proximity to the pheochromocytoma or even 
arising out of the adrenal medulla. An intact adrenal gland may be 
included in the surgical specimen, indicating that the tumor was 
a juxta-adrenal paraganglioma. On microscopy, paragangliomas 
may have visible nerve ganglia. 
 Composite pheochromocytomas are rare tumors that exhibit 
histopathologic features of both pheochromocytoma and 
 neuroblastoma. Such tumors have generally not recurred and 
have not exhibited  N-myc amplification, which distinguishes 
them from typical neuroblastomas. Therefore, composite pheo-
chtomoctyomas are considered to be a histological variant of 
pheochromocytomas. 
 Metastatic Pheochromocytoma and 
Paraganglioma ( Table 11–17 ) 
 No pheochromocytoma or paraganglioma should be labeled 
 benign . Histopathology cannot reliably determine whether a given 
tumor has metastasized. Such metastases can be microscopic and 
indolent, eluding detection with the most sensitive scanning and 
biochemical screening. Therefore, it is best to think of these 
tumors as either having detectable metastases (metastatic pheo-
chromocytoma) or having  no  detectable metastases. 
 It is conceivable that  all pheochromocytomas and paragan-
gliomas metastasize single cells but that such cells will only grow 
if certain genes are downregulated and other genes upregulated. 
This concept is supported by genome-wide expression profiling of 
pheochromocytomas. These profiles have identified candidate 
genes that are differentially expressed in tumors with detectable 
metastases versus those with no detectable metastases. Gene 
expression arrays of pheochromocytomas with detectable metasta-
ses have demonstrated that five genes are differentially upregulated 
in these tumors. 
 Research in malignant pheochromocytoma has been hampered 
by the absence of a viable human cell line. However, a highly 
malignant mouse pheochromocytoma model has been developed 
in which a gene expression array has demonstrated the upregula-
tion of 8 genes and the downregulation of 38 genes. 
 The risk for detectable metastases is higher under the following 
circumstances: extra-adrenal location (paraganglioma) or extensive 
local invasion. One surgical observation is that tumors that 
are stickier and more difficult to dissect from adjacent tissue are 
more likely to recur or metastasize. Tumors are also more likely to 
metastasize if they contain high levels of Ki-67, a protein expressed 
in proliferating cells that can be detected by the monoclonal anti-
body MIB-1 and quantified as a high MIB-1 score. Metastatic 
pheochromocytomas also have increased activity of telomerase. 
Tumors with high c- myc gene expression are more likely to be 
malignant. In one series, 50% of patients with malignant pheo-
chromocytoma were found to have high serum levels of NSE, but 
in none of 13 patients in another series with benign pheochromo-
cytomas. 
 Metastases are evident at the time of diagnosis in about 10% of 
patients with an adrenal pheochromocytoma. Another 5% to 10% 
are found to have metastatic disease or local recurrence within 
20 years. In genetic syndromes, pheochromocytomas have been 
found to be metastatic or locally invasive at the time of diagnosis 
as follows: MEN 2A, 4%; VHL, 8%; and NF-1, 12%. Extra-
adrenal paragangliomas commonly metastasize. In a Mayo Clinic 
series of paragangliomas, 15% had local invasion and 21% had 
detectable distant metastases at the time of initial surgery, with an 
overall 36% risk of local or distant metastasis. 
 Malignancy is determined only by the presence of metastases. 
CT or MRI scanning may not detect small metastases within their 
field and will certainly not visualize metastases outside their field. 
Therefore, following the resection of an apparently benign PHEO 
or PGL, long-term surveillance is required because metastases may 
not become clinically apparent for years or decades. Such surveil-
lance includes regular lifetime clinical assessment and biochemical 
388    CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia
testing as indicated. Plasma-fractionated metanephrines is the most 
sensitive test to detect early recurrence or metastases. However, 
screening for metastases from nonsecretory paragangliomas should 
include serum CgA determinations. Plasma metanephrines and 
serum CgA usually fall into the normal range by 2 weeks following 
successful resection of a single benign pheochromocytoma. However, 
normal postoperative tests are not reliable indicators of benignancy, 
because small or nonsecretory metastases may still be present. 
 The differential diagnosis for apparent metastases includes 
second paragangliomas, multicentric paragangliomas, second 
pheochromocytomas, false-positive scanning, and intraperitoneal 
seeding of tumor (pheochromocytomatosis). 
 Sites of metastasis ( see Table 11–17 ) : Metastases from pheo-
chromocytomas or paragangliomas typically involve bones (82%), 
liver (30%), lungs (36%), lymph nodes, the contralateral adrenal, 
and sometimes muscle. The bones most frequently involved 
include vertebrae, pelvis and ischium, clavicles, cranium, and 
proximal femurs and humeri. Tibia, radius, and ulna are occasion-
ally involved. Patients with metastases and an SDHB mutation 
have a higher prevalence of metastases involving long bones com-
pared to those without the mutation. PHEO/PGL metastases 
have a proclivity for the skull where they may form a dumbbell-
type lesion, sometimes being palpable as a soft cyst-like bump; 
they also may grow inside the skull to impinge upon the brain. 
Prevertebral paragangliomas may destroy adjacent vertebrae, and 
spinal cord compression may occur. Most bone metastases affect 
the cortical bone; they may be indolent, but are often osteolytic 
and cause progressive bone destruction. Other bone metastases 
primarily involve trabecular bone and marrow; such metastases are 
usually visible on MRI but may be invisible on CT. Metastases to 
lymph nodes outside the abdomen are most frequent in the 
supraclavicular and inguinal regions. Metastases to muscle are usu-
ally indolent. These tumors have not been reported to metastasize 
to brain, although metastases to the cranium and skull base may 
impinge upon the brain, pituitary, and cranial nerves. 
 Metastases usually secrete norepinephrine and normetaneph-
rine. Some metastases secrete predominantly dopamine. Metastases 
rarely secrete epinephrine or metanephrine, with the exception of 
some metastases from epinephrine-secreting adrenal pheochromo-
cytomas. About 20% of primary paragangliomas and their metas-
tases do not secrete catecholamines or metanephrines, but most 
continue to secrete CgA, which becomes a valuable tumor 
marker. 
 Assessing the growth rate of PHEO/PGL metastases : 
Treatment can be tailored to the tumor’s rate of growth. Knowledge 
of the growth rate of a patient’s metastases may be obtained 
through close biochemical surveillance and serial volumetric imag-
ing with CT or MRI. Patients who are asymptomatic with a few 
indolent osseous metastases may elect to receive bisphosphonate 
therapy and delay life-threatening chemotherapy or radioisotope 
therapy, as long as they remain under close surveillance. Even 
patients with a symptomatic osteolytic metastasis may elect to 
receive targeted therapy rather than systemic treatment if their 
overall tumor burden is low. 
 Surveillance : A series of 110 Swedish patients with PHEO/
PGL, treated surgically, found an unexpectedly high relative risk 
for developing non-PHEO/PGL malignancies (RR ≅2.0). 
Therefore, additional tumors should not be presumed to be 
metastases unless they have uptake on MIBG scanning or  18 FDA-
PET scanning. Suspicious lesions without such uptake should be 
considered for biopsy. Patients with hereditary forms of PHEO or 
PGL can present with bilateral disease or develop second prima-
ries, distinct from metastatic disease. 
 Biochemical surveillance: Such screening is best done with 
plasma-fractionated metanephrines and catecholamines (with 
dopamine), along with serum CgA. While this is sensitive for 
secretory metastases, false-positive testing occurs commonly. 
Adrenal PHEOs usually secrete both norepinephrine and 
 epinephrine; metastases from adrenal PHEOs may sometimes 
continue to produce epinephrine, but more commonly produce 
norepinephrine and its metabolite normetanephrine. Extra-adrenal 
PGLs ordinarily produce only norepinephrine and normetaneph-
rine and sometimes only CgA; their metastases do likewise. 
 Scan surveillance : CT or MRI scanning is the most sensitive 
for recurrence; however, they will not detect metastases that are 
outside their field and obtaining full-body CT or MRI scanning 
is logistically difficult. Radionuclide scanning is advantageous in 
that the entire body may be included in the scan. However, no 
radionuclide scan is 100% sensitive. PHEO/PGL metastases have 
variable avidity for MIBG. Even when the primary tumor is avid 
for MIBG, some or all of the metastases may not be visible on 
MIBG scanning. Some metastases are deficient in norepinephrine 
transporter (NET) expression and are invisible on  123 I-MIBG 
scanning, such that the scan’s sensitivity for metastasis is only 
57%. In a given individual, some metastases may be avid for 
MIBG, while others show virtually no uptake. When patients 
have a recurrence or progression of metastases after  131 I-MIBG 
therapy, metastases with less MIBG-avid are usually the ones that 
emerge or progress in size. When such imaging is negative, metas-
tases may be detected with MRI or CT scanning. Metabolically 
active metastases are usually visible with 18F-FDG-PET scanning, 
TABLE 11–17  Distribution of metastases in 50 cases 
of metastatic pheochromocytoma.
Region of Metastasis
Percentage
Bones
Abdomen (nodes, peritoneum, local recurrence)
Lung parenchyma
Liver
Pelvis (soft tissue)
Mediastinum and lung hila
Lymph nodes (extra-abdominal) especially 
 supraclavicular and inguinal
Chest wall
Muscle
Brain
82%
56%
36%
30%
20%
18%
14%
12%
6%
0%
Gonias S, et al. Phase II study of high-dose [131I]metaiodobenzylguanidine therapy for 
patients with metastatic pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma. J Clin Oncol. 
2009;27:6162. 
Note: One case of abdominal recurrence was peritoneal seeding (pheochromocy-
tomatosis).
CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia     389
which has the additional advantage of being a whole-body scan 
with a sensitivity of about 76% for metastases.  18 F-FDA-PET has 
a sensitivity of about 78% for metastases. Octreoscan will often 
detect metastases that are not visible with other scans. 
 A. Surgery 
 It is usually best to resect the primary tumor as well 
as large metastases. This is especially true of secretory tumors that 
are causing hypertension and other symptoms that can be a threat 
to life. Even lung metastases may be resected. However, the deci-
sion about whether to resect metastases is a difficult one and must 
be based upon very thorough staging of the patient’s tumor. Of 
course, when resecting secretory metastases, preoperative prepara-
tion is mandatory and hypertension must be adequately 
 controlled. 
 B. Chemotherapy 
 Due to the rarity of pheochromocytoma 
and paraganglioma, there have been no large-scale series compar-
ing available chemotherapies. However, there have been small 
series of patients and case reports from which to derive recom-
mendations. 
 In vitro studies have found that cultured pheochromocytoma 
cells are protected from cytotoxic insult by amitriptyline and flu-
oxetine, possibly through upregulation of superoxide dismutase. 
Therefore, patients being treated for metastatic pheochromocy-
toma or paraganglioma should probably not take tricyclic antide-
pressants or selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, although there 
have been no in vivo studies of their effect on survival. 
 Cyclophosphamide, vincristine, dacarbazine (CVD) : In one 
series, 8 of 14 patients responded to this regimen, with a median 
remission of 21 months. CVD was delivered over 2 days and the 
cycles repeated every 3 to 4 weeks, indefinitely. After controlling 
symptoms of catecholamine excess, cycles of CVD were adminis-
tered as follows: cyclophosphamide 750 mg/m 2 , vincristine 
1.4 mg/m 2 , and dacarbazine 600 mg/m 2 on day 1, followed by 
dacarbazine 600 mg/m 2 on day 2. Metastases progressed in 9 of 
the 14 patients, and there were 6 deaths with short-term 
follow-up. About one-third of patients appear to have a sustained 
remission or stable disease, as long as CVD is continued. When 
chemotherapy is stopped, the tumors usually recur. Many patients 
cannot tolerate such a long-term regimen, due to fatigue, cytope-
nias, neuropathy, and other adverse reactions. However, some 
patients tolerate it reasonably well and may experience a complete 
biochemical remission. Once in remission, CVD cycles are con-
tinued at gradually increasing intervals. If complete biochemical 
remission is achieved, chemotherapy may be stopped, while the 
patient is kept under close surveillance for progressive disease. 
 Sunitinib : Partial remissions in metastatic pheochromocytoma 
have been reported with sunitinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor. 
Sunitinib is administered orally, usually in a dose of 50 mg daily 
in cycles of 4 weeks on, then 2 weeks off. The dosage may be 
adjusted in 12.5-mg increments according to response and toxic-
ity. Sunitinib is metabolized in the liver by CYP3A4, so dose 
adjustments should be made for patients taking the wide variety 
of drugs that are inhibitors or inducers of CYP3A4. Sunitinib can 
cause serious adverse reactions, including heart failure, cardiac 
arrhythmias, marrow suppression, pancreatitis, hypo- or hyper-
thyroidism, nephrotic syndrome, and rhabdomyolysis with acute 
renal failure. Patients treated with sunitinib also commonly expe-
rience nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, hypertension, skin discolor-
ation, mucositis, asthenia, dyspnea, myalgias, and arthralgias. The 
use of sunitinib has been limited by its expense. 
 C. Bisphosphonates 
 No controlled clinical trials have 
assessed the efficacy of bisphosphonates against osteolytic bone 
metastases from paragangliomas and pheochromocytomas. 
However, bisphosphonates have demonstrated effectiveness in 
other osteolytic solid tumors to reduce skeletal-related adverse 
events. Zoledronic acid is usually administered every 1 to 
2 months as an intravenous infusion to patients with osteolytic 
bone metastases. Patients unable to tolerate zoledronic acid may 
tolerate intravenous pamidronate. 
 D. Radiation therapy 
 When administered to patients with 
symptomatic spinal or cranial metastases, radiation therapy can 
reduce pain and produce neurologic improvement. Although con-
ventional radiation therapy is usually administered, Gamma Knife 
can be given to smaller symptomatic bone metastases. Conventional 
radiation therapy to large primary tumors or intra-abdominal 
metastases is not advisable, because it is usually ineffective and 
causes morbidity such as radiation enteritis and a proclivity to 
later surgical complications such as wound dehiscence, infections, 
and fistulas. However, small recurrent tumors can be treated with 
CyberKnife stereotactic radiosurgery. Radiation therapy to tumors 
reduces their uptake of  131 I-MIBG. Surgical debulking of large 
abdominal or thoracic tumors (or other therapies) is usually pref-
erable to radiation therapy. 
 E. Arterial embolization and radiofrequency ablation 
 Before arterial embolization or radiofrequency ablation, patients 
with secretory pheochromocytomas or paragangliomas must be 
fully prepared such that their blood pressure is near normal as 
described earlier. Pretreatment includes alpha blockade and/or 
other measures such as beta blockade, calcium channel blockers, 
or metyrosine. Patients are monitored with arterial blood pressure 
transducers and given a central line before endotracheal general 
anesthesia. Anesthesia standby is necessary in case severe hyperten-
sion occurs, and it becomes necessary to administer intravenous 
antihypertensive drugs. 
 Arterial embolization has been used on rare occasions to reduce 
blood flow to paragangliomas and pheochromocytomas, either in 
preparation for surgery or for inoperable cases. These tumors are 
usually very vascular and preoperative embolization may reduce 
intraoperative hemorrhage. Also, embolizing the tumor’s blood 
supply may slow its growth. However, there have been no con-
trolled clinical trials as to its effectiveness. A major potential risk 
of embolization is that of pheochromocytoma crisis. However, 
embolization has been used successfully on secretory tumors 
where the patient has been fully prepared with alpha blockade 
and/or other measures. Localization arteriograms should use non-
ionic contrast. 
390    CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia
 Radiofrequency (RF) thermal ablation has been used success-
fully for patients with metastatic PHEO/PGL, particularly for 
liver and bone metastases. Most reported RF ablations of bone 
metastases have targeted rib or ischial/pelvic lesions. Before RF 
ablations, the RF electrode(s) is guided into the tumor with ultra-
sound and CT guidance. Single electrodes may be used for small 
lesions, while metastases over 2.5 cm diameter usually require 
triple parallel cluster needle electrodes. 
 F. 131I-MIBG therapy ( Figure 11–13 ) 
 131 I-MIBG is a treat-
ment option for patients with metastatic or unresectable pheo-
chromocytoma or paraganglioma whose tumors are avid for the 
isotope.  131 I-MIBG therapy was developed at the University of 
Michigan and first administered to patients with metastatic pheo-
chromocytomas in 1983. Subsequently, many other patients have 
been treated with  131 I-MIBG. Treatment protocols have employed 
repeated doses of 100 to 200 mCi (3.7-7.4 GBq) or larger single 
doses of 500 to 1000 mCi (18.5-37 GBq). Uptake occurs in many 
nonfunctioning pheochromocytomas and metastases, and such 
treatment can be effective for these tumors as long as scanning 
demonstrates that they are avid for MIBG. Following therapy 
with  131 I-MIBG, once background radiation has dissipated, a 
posttreatment whole-body scan is obtained. 
 High-dose  131 I-MIBG therapy (≥500 mCi) is available at sev-
eral medical centers in the United States and Europe. Precautions 
must be taken before giving  131 I-MIBG that exceeds 500 mCi or 
12 mCi/kg body weight, since high doses of radioactive isotope 
can cause serious bone marrow suppression. Before  131 I-MIBG 
therapy, patients are premedicated with potassium iodide to 
reduce the risk of thyroid damage that could be caused by any free 
 131 I generated through metabolism of  131 I-MIBG. Patients are 
pretreated with nonphenothiazine antiemetics; they remain hospi-
talized in lead-shielded rooms until the emitted gamma radiation 
declines to acceptable levels, which usually requires about 5 to 
7 days. 
 Complete or partial remissions, defined by strict RECIST 
(Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors), occur in about 
22% of patients treated with  131 I-MIBG, while an additional 35% 
have minor responses and 8% have stable disease. However, 35% 
of patients experience progressive disease within a year after ther-
apy. High-dose  131 I-MIBG appears to improve 5-year survival. It 
predictably causes some degree of bone marrow suppression that 
commences about 2.5 weeks after therapy. Other adverse reactions 
include nausea, occasional sialadenitis, and transient hair, hypogo-
nadism, infertility, and an increased lifetime risk of second malig-
nancies, particularly myelodysplasia and leukemia. ARDS and 
bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia (BOOP) are rare 
complications of treatment with  131 I-MIBG that have rarely 
occurred in patients treated with doses over 800 mCi. Repeated 
treatments may be required. 
 About 30% to 40% of patients with metastatic PHEO or PGL 
have insufficient uptake of MIBG for treatment to be effective. 
Also, there can be variable MIBG uptake into metastases in a 
given patient. So, theoretically, therapy with  131 I-MIBG could be 
 FIGURE 11–13  Posttherapy scan 1 week after administration of 500 mCi  131 I-MIBG. Patient is a 22-year-old woman with a large unresect-
able pheochromocytoma in the left adrenal that has central hemorrhagic necrosis. There are widespread metastases to liver and bones. A 
metastasis to the left orbit has caused optic nerve compression and a visual field defect. A large metastasis to the left pelvis has caused pain 
and required prior external beam radiation therapy.  A. Anterior image;  B. Posterior image. 
A
B
CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia     391
made more effective if the tumor’s uptake of MIBG could be 
increased. Pretreatment with nifedipine increased MIBG retention 
in four of eight patients in one report. Some patients with 
good uptake of MIBG on diagnostic scanning have disappoint-
ingly poor uptake of large therapeutic doses of  131 I-MIBG, possi-
bly caused by competitive inhibition by large amounts of 
nonradioactive  127 I-MIBG that are present in most formulations 
of  131 I-MIBG. 
 Prognosis 
 The mortality rate for patients undergoing pheochromocytoma 
resection has dropped to under 3% due to improved medical 
preparation and surgical technique. Laparoscopic resections have 
reduced perioperative morbidity and shortened the length of hos-
pitalization. However, even after complete resection of the pheo-
chromocytoma, hypertension persists or recurs in 25% of patients. 
Recurrent hypertension is an indication for reevaluation for pheo-
chromocytoma. 
 Following surgical resection of a benign pheochromocytoma, 
patients have a 5-year survival rate of 96%. Risk factors for death 
from pheochromocytoma include tumor size over 5 cm, meta-
static disease, and local tumor invasion. However, the long-term 
mortality rate is much higher than expected. In a Swedish long-
term outcome study of 121 patients with pheochromocytoma, 
there was no perioperative mortality, but 50% of patients 
remained hypertensive postoperatively. Of the 121 patients, 42 
died during an observation period averaging 15 years, versus an 
expected 24 deaths in an age-matched control population. Thus, 
their relative risk of mortality was increased 78% (1.78). Of the 
42 patients who died, 20 deaths were due to cardiovascular dis-
ease, 6 from associated neuroectodermal tumors, 5 from other 
malignancies, 7 from unrelated causes, and 4 from malignant 
pheochromocytoma. 
 Patients with pheochromocytoma or paraganglioma metasta-
ses have an average 5-year survival of about 50% from the time 
that metastases are detected. However, for patients in whom 
close surveillance and scanning find presymptomatic metasta-
ses, the average 5-year survival is probably longer, simply 
because the metastases are diagnosed at an earlier stage. Also, 
metastases are variably aggressive, between patients and within 
a given patient. Some metastases are quite indolent and may 
present clinically one or two decades after resection of the pri-
mary tumor. However, other metastases are exceptionally 
aggressive. Asymptomatic patients with only a few bone metas-
tases tend to have the best prognosis, while those with a heavy 
burden of liver and lung metastases tend to have the most 
malignant disease. 
 Pheochromocytoma: Postoperative 
Long-Term Surveillance 
 All patients with pheochromocytomas require long-term postop-
erative surveillance. They require lifetime surveillance and aggres-
sive treatment of all cardiovascular risk factors, due to their 
increased long-term risk of death from cardiovascular causes. 
Additionally, patients should be tested for familial genetic syn-
dromes and appropriately screened for associated malignancies 
(see “Genetic Conditions Associated with Pheochromocytomas 
and Paragangliomas,” Tables 11–8 through 11–11). Persistent 
symptoms or hypertension can signify recurrence at the surgical 
site, seeding of the peritoneum, a contralateral pheochromocy-
toma, a paraganglioma, or possibly metastatic disease. About 10% 
of pheochromocytomas have metastasized at the time of diagnosis 
or soon postoperatively. However, occult metastatic disease is 
detected up to 20 years later in another 5%. Other patients 
develop multiple recurrent intra-abdominal tumors (pheochromo-
cytomatosis) probably caused by tumor seeding that may occur 
spontaneously from the original tumor or during surgery. 
 Patients with secretory tumors are usually followed with plas-
ma-fractionated free metanephrine determinations. Plasma-
fractionated catecholamines and dopamine may also be obtained 
if they were predominantly secreted by the primary tumor. 
The first determination of postoperative plasma-fractionated free 
metanephrines is obtained at least 2 weeks after surgery, because 
catecholamine excretion often remains high for up to 10 days after 
successful surgery. Testing is obtained quarterly during the first 
year following surgery, then annually or semiannually for at least 
5 years. Serum CgA is a useful tumor marker for patients with 
pheochromocytomas whose primary tumor secreted CgA and 
whose renal function is normal; elevated and rising levels of CgA 
usually indicate tumor recurrence or metastases. (See Chromogranin 
A, earlier.) Rarely, nonfunctioning tumors may later develop func-
tioning metastases. Lifetime medical follow-up is required. Patients 
should continue to have annual physical examinations for life. 
Long-term biochemical follow-up is tailored to the individual 
patient. 
 For hypertensive patients, weekly home blood pressure moni-
toring is recommended for the first year postoperatively and 
monthly afterward. A rising blood pressure or recurrence of symp-
toms should trigger a full work-up for recurrent or metastatic 
pheochromocytoma. 
 A postoperative  123 I-MIBG scan or PET scan is recommended 
for all patients—but especially for those in whom there is any 
doubt about complete resection of the pheochromocytoma and 
for any patients with paraganglioma or multiple tumors. The 
postoperative scan is usually obtained several months after surgery. 
PET scanning is particularly useful for patients with metastatic 
PHEO/PGL or nonsecreting paragangliomas. 
 REFERENCES 
 Adrenal Medulla and Adrenergic Physiology 
 Biaggioni I, Robertson D. Adrenoceptor agonists and sympathomimetic drugs. In: 
Katzung BG, ed.  Basic and Clinical Pharmacology . 11th ed. New York: 
McGraw Hill; 2009. 
 Bylund DB. Alpha- and beta-adrenergic receptors: Ahlquist’s landmark hypothesis 
of a single mediator with two receptors.  Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab . 
2007;29:E1479. [PMID: 17957033] 
 Goldstein DS, Eisenhofer G, Kopin IJ. Clinical catecholamine neurochemistry: a 
legacy of Julius Axelrod.  Cell Mol Neurobiol . 2006;26:695. [PMID: 
16871444] 
 Katzung BG. Introduction to autonomic pharmacology. In: Katzung BG, ed.  Basic 
and Clinical Pharmacology . 11th ed. New York: McGraw Hill; 2009. 
392    CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia
 Rosengren AH, Jokubka R, Tojjar D, et al. Overexpression of alpha2A-adrenergic 
receptors contributes to type 2 diabetes.  Science . 2010;327:217. [PMID: 
19965390] 
 Autonomic Insufficiency 
 Bornstein SR, Breidert M, Ehrhart-Bornstein M, Kloos B, Scherbaum WA. Plasma 
catecholamines in patients with Addison’s disease.  J Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) . 
1995;42:215. [PMID: 7704967] 
 Granberg V, Ejskjaer N, Peakman M, Sundkvist G. Autoantibodies to autonomic 
nerves associated with cardiac and peripheral autonomic neuropathy. 
 Diabetes Care . 2005;28:1959. [PMID: 16043739] 
 Gupta V, Lipsitz LA. Orthostatic hypotension in the elderly: diagnosis and treat-
ment.  Am J Med . 2007;120:841. [PMID: 17904451] 
 Pheochromocytoma and Paranglioma Reviews 
 Cohade C, Broussaud S, Louiset E, Bennet A, Huyghe E, Caron P. Ectopic 
Cushing’s syndrome due to a pheochromocytoma: a new case in the post-
partum and review of literature.  Gynecol Endocrinol . 2009;10:1. [PMID: 
19591016] 
 Guerrero MA, Schreinemakers JM, Vriens MR, et al Clinical spectrum of pheo-
chromocytoma.  J Am Coll Surg . 2009;209:727. [PMID: 19959041] 
 Lai EW, Perera SM, Havekes B, et al. Gender-related differences in the clinical 
presentation of malignant and benign pheochromocytoma.  Endocrine . 
2008;34:96. [PMID: 18982461] 
 Manger WM. The protean manifestations of pheochromocytoma.  Horm Metab 
Res . 2009;41:658. [PMID: 19242899] 
 Pacak K, Lenders JWM, Eisenhofer G, eds. Pheochromocytoma: Diagnosis, 
Localization, and Treatment. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing; 2007. 
 Sutton MG, Sheps SG, Lie JT. Prevalence of clinically unsuspected pheochromo-
cytoma. review of a 50-year autopsy series.  Mayo Clin Proc . 1981;56:354. 
[PMID: 6453259] 
 Pheochromocytoma Pathophysiology 
 Kantorovich V, Pacak K. A new concept of unopposed beta-adrenergic overstimu-
lation in a patient with pheochromocytoma.  Ann Intern Med . 2005;142:1026. 
[PMID: 15968023] 
 Knauf F, Desir GV, Perazella MA. A case of extreme hemodynamic lability and 
hypocalcemia.  Am J Med Sci . 2009;338:241. [PMID: 19590425] 
 Olson SW, Deal LE, Piesman M. Epinephrine-secreting pheochromocytoma pre-
senting with cardiogenic shock and profound hypocalcemia.  Ann Intern 
Med . 2004;140:849. [PMID: 15148085] 
 Schifferdecker B, Kodali D, Hausner E, Aragam J. Adrenergic shock—an over-
looked clinical entity?  Cardiol Rev . 2005;13:69. [PMID: 15705255] 
 Genetic Aspects of Pheochromocytoma and Paraganglioma 
 Boedeker CC, Erlic Z, Richard S, et al. Head and neck paragangliomas in von 
Hippel-Lindau and multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 2.  J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab . 2009;94:1938. [PMID: 19336503] 
 Ladroue C, Carcenac R, Leporrier M, et al. PHD2 mutation and congenital eryth-
rocytosis with paraganglioma.  N Engl J Med . 2008;359:25. [PMID: 
19092153] 
 McNeill A, Rattenberry E, Barber R, Killick P, MacDonald F, Maher ER. 
Genotype-phenotype correlations in VHL exon deletions.  Am J Med Genet 
A . 2009;149A:2147. [PMID: 19764026] 
 Neumann HP, Vortmeyer A, Schmidt D, et al. Evidence of MEN-2 in the original 
description of classic pheochromocytoma.  N Engl J Med . 2007;357:1311. 
[PMID: 17898100] 
 Neumann HP, Eng C. The approach to the patient with paraganglioma.  J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab . 2009;94:2677. [PMID: 19657044] 
 Pasini B, McWhinney SR, Bei T, et al. Clinical and molecular genetics of patients 
with the Carney-Stratakis syndrome and germline mutations of the genes 
coding for the succinate dehydrogenase subunits SDHB, SDHC, and 
SDHD.  Eur J Hum Genet . 2008;16:79. [PMID: 17667967] 
 Ricketts CJ, Forman JR, Rattenberry E, et al. Tumour risks and genotype-pheno-
type-proteotype analysis in 358 patients with germline mutations in SDHB 
and SDHD.  Hum Mutat . 2010;31:41. [PMID: 19802898] 
 Rybicki EZ, Rybicki L, Peczkowska M, et al. Clinical predictors and algorithm for 
the genetic diagnosis of pheochromocytoma patients.  Clin Cancer Res . 
2009;15:6378. [PMID: 19825962] 
 Solis DC, Burnichon N, Timmers HJ, et al. Penetrance and clinical consequences 
of a gross SDHB deletion in a large family.  Clin Genet . 2009;75:354. 
[PMID: 19389109] 
 Timmers HJ, Kozupa A, Eisenhofer G, et al. Clinical presentations, biochemical 
phenotypes, and genotype-phenotype correlations in patients with succinate 
dehydrogenase subunit B-associated pheochromocytomas and paragan-
gliomas.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2007;92:779. [PMID:17200167] 
 Yeh IT, Lenci RE, Qin Y, et al. A germline mutation of the KIF1B beta gene on 
1p36 in a family with neural and nonneural tumors.  Hum Genet . 
2008;124:279. [PMID:18726616] 
 Diagnostic Tests and Differential Diagnosis for 
Pheochromocytoma 
 De Jong WH, Eisenhofer G, Post WJ, et al. Dietary influences on plasma and 
urinary metanephrines: implications for the diagnosis of catecholamine-
producing tumors.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2009;94:2841. [PMID: 
19567530] 
 Deutschbein T, Unger N, Jaeger A, Broecker-Preuss M, Mann K, Petersenn S. 
Influence of various confounding variables and storage conditions on meta-
nephrine and normetanephrine levels in plasma.  Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) . 
2009;Dec 18. [PMID: 20039892] 
 Eisenhofer G, Goldstein DS, Walther MM, et al. Biochemical diagnosis of pheo-
chromocytoma: how to distinguish true- from false-positive test results. 
J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003;88:2656. [PMID: 12788870] 
 Kim BW, Lee BI, Kim HK, et al. Influence of long-term gastric acid suppression 
therapy on the expression of serum gastrin, chromogranin A, and ghrelin. 
 Korean J Gastroenterol . 2009;53:126. [PMID: 19237833] 
 Sethi PS, Hiser W, Gaffar H, et al. Fatal pheochromocytoma crisis precipitated by 
dobutamine stress echocardiography.  Eur J Echocardiogr . 2008;9:819. 
[PMID: 18579490] 
 Vanderveen KA, Thompson SM, Callstrom MR, et al. Biopsy of pheochromocy-
toma and paraganglioma: potential for disaster.  Surgery . 2009;146:1158. 
[PMID: 19958944] 
 Weise M, Merke DP, Pacak K, Walther MM, Eisenhofer G. et al. Utility of plasma 
free metanephrines for detecting childhood pheochromocytoma.  J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab . 2002;87:1955. [PMID: 11994324] 
 Yu R, Weu N. False positive test results for pheochromocytoma from 2000 to 
2008. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2009;Dec 8. [PMID: 19998239] 
 Localizing Scans for Pheochromocytoma and Paraganglioma 
 Baid SK, Lai EW, Wesley RA, et al. Brief communication: radiographic contrast 
infusion and catecholamine response in patients with pheochromocytoma. 
 Ann Intern Med . 2009;150:27. [PMID: 19124817] 
 Havekes B, Lai EW, Corssmit EP, Romijn JA, Timmers HJ, Pacak K. Detection 
and treatment of pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas: current standing 
of MIBG scintigraphy and future role of PET imaging.  Q J Nucl Med Mol 
Imaging . 2008;52:419. [PMID: 19088695] 
 Imani F, Agopian VG, Auerbach MS, et al. 18F-FDOPA PET and PET/CT accu-
rately localize pheochromocytoma.  J Nucl Med . 2009;50:513. [PMID: 
19289420] 
 Kaji P, Carrasquillo JA, Linehan WM, et al. The role of 6-[18F]fluorodopamine 
positron emission tomography in the localization of adrenal pheochromocy-
toma associated with von Hippel-Lindau syndrome.  Eur J Endocrinol . 
2007;156:483. [PMID: 17389464] 
 Koopmans KP, Jager PL, Kema IP, Kerstens MN, Albers F, Dullaart RP.  111 In-oct-
reotide is superior to  123 I-metaiodobenzylguanidine for scintigraphic detec-
tion of head and neck paragangliomas.  J Nucl Med . 2008;48:1232. [PMID: 
18632829] 
 Timmers HY, Chen CC, Carrasquillo JA, et al. Comparison of  18 F-fluro-L-DOPA, 
 18 F-fluoro-deoxyglucose, and  18 F-fluorodopamine PET and  123 I-MIBG scin-
tigraphy in the localization of pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma.  J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab . 2009;94:4757. [PMID: 19864450] 
 Wiseman GA, Pacak K, O’Dorisio MS, et al. Usefulness of  123 I-MIBG scintigraphy 
in the evaluation of patients with known or suspected primary or metastatic 
pheochromocytoma or paraganglioma: results from a prospective multi-
center trial.  J Nucl Med . 2009;50:1448. [PMID: 19690028] 
CHAPTER 11 Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia     393
 Incidental Adrenal Tumors 
 Gross MD. Contemporary imaging of incidentally discovered adrenal masses.  Nat 
Rev Urol . 2009;6:363. [PMID: 19506582] 
 Johnson PT, Horton KM, Fishman EK. Adrenal mass imaging with multidetector 
CT: pathologic conditions, pearls, and pitfalls.  Radiographics . 2009;29:1333. 
[PMID: 19755599] 
 Kopetschke R, Slisko M, Kilisli A, et al. Frequent incidental discovery of phaeo-
chromocytoma: data from a German cohort of 201 phaeochromocytoma. 
 Eur J Endocrinol . 2009;16:355. [PMID:19497985] 
 Mazzaglia PJ, Monchik JM. Limited value of adrenal biopsy in the evaluation of 
adrenal neoplasm: a decade of experience.  Arch Surg . 2009;144:465. [PMID: 
19451490] 
 Vanderveen KA, Thompson SM, Callstrom MR, et al. Biopsy of pheochromocy-
toma and paragangliomas: potential for disaster.  Surgery . 2009;146:1158. 
[PMID: 19958944] 
 Wagnerova H, Dudasova D, Lazurova I. Hormonal and metabolic evaluation of 
adrenal incidentalomas.  Neoplasma . 2009;56:521. [PMID: 19728761] 
 Medical Therapy for Pheochromocytoma 
 Che Q, Schreiber MJ Jr, Rafey MA. Beta-blockers for hypertension: are they going 
out of style?  Curr Drug Ther . 2009;76:533. [PMID: 19726558] 
 Pacak K. Approach to the patient. Preoperative management of the pheochromocy-
toma patient.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2007;92:4069. [PMID: 17989126] 
 Westaby S, Shahir A, Sadler G, Flynn F, Ormerod O; Medscape. Mechanical 
bridge to recovery in pheochromocytoma myocarditis.  Nat Rev Cardiol . 
2009;6:482. [PMID: 19554007] 
 Pheochromocytoma in Pregnancy 
 Desai AS, Chutkow WA, Edelman E, Economy KE, Dec GW Jr. Clinical problem-
solving. A crisis in late pregnancy.  N Engl J Med . 2009;361:2271. [PMID: 
19955528] 
 Oliva R, Angelos P, Kaplan E, Bakris G. Pheochromocytoma in pregnancy: a case 
series.  Hypertension . 2010; 55:600. [PMID: 20083723] 
 Ross JJ, Desai AS, Chutkow WA, Economy KE, Dec GW Jr. Interactive medical case. 
A crisis in late pregnancy.  N Engl J Med . 2009;361:e45. [PMID: 19916244] 
 Sarathi V, Lila AR, Bandgar TR, Menon PS, Shah NS. Pheochromocytoma and 
pregnancy: a rare but dangerous combination.  Endocr Pract . 2010;16:300. 
[PMID: 20061281] 
 Surgery for Pheochromocytoma and Paraganglioma 
 Berber E, Tellioglu G, Harvey A, Mitchell J, Milas M, Siperstein A. Comparison 
of laparoscopic transabdominal lateral versus posterior retroperitoneal 
adrenalectomy.  Surgery . 2009;146:621. [PMID: 19789020] 
 Bruynzeel H, Feelders RA, Groenland TH, et al. Risk factors for hemodynamic 
instability during surgery for pheochromocytoma.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2010;95:678. [PMID: 19965926] 
 Kazaryan AM, Marangos IP, Rosseland AR, et al. Laparoscopic adrenalectomy: 
Norwegian single-center experience of 242 procedures.  J Laparoendosc Adv 
Surg Tech A . 2009;19:181. [PMID: 19216698] 
 Liao CH, Lai MK, Li HY, Chen SC, Chueh SC. Laparoscopic adrenalectomy 
using needlescopic instruments for adrenal tumors less than 5 cm in 112 
cases.  Eur Urol . 2008;54:640. [PMID: 18164803] 
 Meyer-Rochow GY, Soon PS, Delbridge LW, et al. Outcomes of minimally inva-
sive surgery for phaeochromocytoma.  ANZ J Surg . 2009;79:367. [PMID: 
19566519] 
 Zhou J, Chen HT, Xiang J, Qu XH, Zhou YQ, Zang WF. Surgical treatment of 
cardiac pheochromocytoma: a case report.  Ann Thorac Surg . 2009;88:278. 
[PMID: 19559246] 
 Radiation, Embolization and Radiofrequency Ablation of 
Paragangliomas, Pheochromocytomas, and Metastases 
 Baguet JP, Hammer L, Tremel F, Mangin L, Mallion JM. Metastatic phaeochromo-
cytoma: risks of diagnostic needle puncture and treatment by arterial embo-
lization.  J Hum Hypertens . 2001;15:209. [PMID: 11317207] 
 Beland MD, Mayo-Smith WW. Ablation of adrenal neoplasms.  Abdom Imaging . 
2009;34:588. [PMID: 18830736] 
 Guss ZD, Batra S, Li G, et al. Radiosurgery for glomus jugulare: history and recent 
progress.  Neurosurg Focus . 2009;27:E5. [PMID: 19951058] 
 Huy PT, Kania R, Duet M, Dessard-Diana B, Mazeron JJ, Benhamed R. Evolving 
concepts in the management of jugular paraganglioma: a comparison of 
radiotherapy and surgery in 88 cases.  Skull Base . 2009;19:83. [PMID: 
19568345] 
 Tasar M, Yetiser S. Glomus tumors: therapeutic role of selective embolization.
  J Craniofac Surg . 2004;15:497. [PMID: 15111818] 
 Venkatesan AM, Locklin J, Lai EW, et al. Radiofrequency ablation of metastatic 
pheochromocytoma.  J Vasc Interv Radiol . 2009;20:1483. [PMID: 
19875067] 
 Metastatic Pheochromocytoma and Paraganglioma 
 Adjallé R, Plouin PF, Pacak K, Lehnert H. Treatment of malignant pheochromo-
cytoma.  Horm Metab Res . 2009;41:687. [PMID: 19672813] 
 Coleman RE, Stubbs JB, Barrett JA, de la Guardia M, Lafrance N, Babich JW. 
Radiation dosimetry, pharmacokinetics, and safety of ultratrace iobenguane 
I-131 in patients with malignant pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma or 
metastatic carcinoid.  Cancer Biother Radiopharm . 2009;24:469. [PMID: 
19694582] 
 Goldsby R, Fitzgerald P. Meta[ 131 I]iodobenzylguanidine therapy for patients with 
metastatic and unresectable pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma.  Nuc 
Med Biol . 2008;35:S1:49. 
 Gonias S, Goldsby R, Matthay KK, et al. Phase II study of high-dose [ 131 I]
metaiodobenzylguanidine therapy for patients with metastatic pheochromo-
cytoma and paraganglioma.  J Clin Oncol . 2009;27:6162. [PMID: 
19636009] 
 He J, Makey D, Fojo T, et al. Successful chemotherapy of hepatic metastases in a 
case of succinate dehydrogenase subunit B-related paraganglioma.  Endocrine . 
2009;36:189. [PMID: 19618298] 
 Huang H, Abraham J, Hung E, et al. Treatment of malignant pheochromocytoma/
paraganglioma with cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and dacarbazine: recom-
mendation from a 22-year follow-up of 18 patients.  Cancer . 2008;113:2020. 
[PMID: 18780317] 
 Jimenez C, Cabanillas ME, Santarpia L, et al. Use of the tyrosine kinase inhibitor 
sunitinib in a patient with von Hippel-Lindau disease: targeting angiogenic 
factors in pheochromocytoma and other Hippel-Lindau disease-related 
tumors.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2009;94:386. [PMID: 19017755] 
 Joshua AM. Rationale and evidence for sunitinib in the treatment of malignant 
paraganglioma/pheochromocytoma.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2009;94:5. 
[PMID: 19001511] 
 Lai EW, Joshi BH, Martiniova L, et al. Overexpression of interleukin-13 
receptor-α2 in neuroendocrine malignant pheochromacytoma: a novel tar-
get for receptor directed anti-cancer therapy.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2009;94:2952. [PMID: 19491224] 
 Martiniova L, Lai EW, Elkahloun AG, et al. Characterization of an animal model 
of aggressive pheochromocytoma linked to a specific gene signature.  Clin 
Exp Metastasis . 2009;26:239. [PMID:19169894] 
 Park KS, Lee JL, Ahn H, et al. Sunitinib, a novel therapy for anthracycline- and 
cisplatin-refractory malignant pheochromocytoma.  Jpn J Clin Oncol . 
2009;39:327. [PMID: 19264767] 
 Wu D, Tischler AS, Lloyd RV, et al. Observer variation in the application of the 
Pheochromocytoma of the Adrenal Gland Scaled Score.  Am J Surg Pathol . 
2009;33:599. [PMID: 19145205] 
 Zelinka T, Timmers HJ, Kozupa A, et al. Role of positron emission tomography and 
bone scintigraphy in the evaluation of bone involvement in metastatic pheo-
chromocytoma and paraganglioma: specific implications for succinate dehy-
drogenase enzyme subunit B gene mutations.  Endocr Relat Cancer . 
2008;15:311. [PMID: 18310297] 
 
 
This page intentionally left blank
395
2
1
 Testes 
 Glenn D. Braunstein, MD 
ACTH
Adrenocorticotropic hormone
cAMP
Cyclic adenosine monophosphate
DHEA
Dehydroepiandrosterone
DHT
Dihydrotestosterone
FSH
Follicle-stimulating hormone
GnRH
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone
hCG
Human chorionic gonadotropin
ICSI
Intracytoplasmic sperm injection
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
IVF
In vitro fertilization
LH
Luteinizing hormone
mRNA
Messenger ribonucleic acid
PDE5
Type 5 phosphodiesterase
PRL
Prolactin
SHBG
Sex hormone–binding globulin
TGFβ
Transforming growth factor β
 
 The testes contain two major components that are structurally 
separate and serve different functions. The  Leydig cells , or  inter-
stitial cells , comprise the major endocrine component. The pri-
mary secretory product of these cells, testosterone, is responsible 
either directly or indirectly for embryonic differentiation along 
male lines of the external and internal genitalia, male secondary 
sexual development at puberty, and maintenance of libido and 
potency in the adult male. The  seminiferous tubules comprise 
the bulk of the testes and are responsible for the production of 
approximately 30 million spermatozoa per day during male repro-
ductive life (puberty to death). 
 Both of these testicular components are interrelated, and both 
require an intact hypothalamic-pituitary axis for initiation and main-
tenance of their function. In addition, several accessory genital struc-
tures are required for the functional maturation and transport of 
spermatozoa. Thus, disorders of the testes, hypothalamus, pituitary, 
or accessory structures may result in abnormalities of androgen or 
gamete production, infertility, or a combination of these problems. 
 ANATOMY AND STRUCTURE-
FUNCTION RELATIONSHIPS 
(FIGURE 12–1) 
 TESTES 
 The adult testis is a prolate spheroid with a mean volume of 18.6 
± 4.8 mL. The average length is 4.6 cm (range, 3.6-5.5 cm), and 
the average width is 2.6 cm (range, 2.1-3.2 cm). The testes are 
located within the scrotum, which not only serves as a protective 
envelope but also helps to maintain the testicular tempera-
ture approximately 2°C (35.6°F) below abdominal temperature. 
Three layers of membranes—visceral tunica vaginalis, tunica 
albuginea, and tunica vasculosa—comprise the testicular capsule. 
Extensions of the tunica albuginea into the testicle as fibrous septa 
result in the formation of approximately 250 to 300 pyramidal 
lobules, each of which contains coiled seminiferous tubules. 
Within each testis there are over 400 meters of seminiferous 
tubules, and these structures account for about half of the testicu-
lar mass. The approximately 200 million androgen-producing 
Leydig cells, as well as the blood and lymphatic vessels, nerves, and 
fibroblasts, are interspersed between the seminiferous tubules. 
 The blood supply to the testes is derived chiefly from the tes-
ticular arteries, which are branches of the internal spermatic arter-
ies. After traversing a complicated capillary network, blood enters 
multiple testicular veins that form an anastomotic network, the 
pampiniform plexus. The pampiniform plexuses coalesce to form 
the internal spermatic veins. The right spermatic vein drains 
directly into the vena cava; the left enters the renal vein. 
 The seminiferous tubules in the adult average 165 µm in diam-
eter and are composed of Sertoli cells and germinal cells. The 
Sertoli cells line the basement membrane and form tight junctions 
with other Sertoli cells. These tight junctions prevent the passage 
of proteins from the interstitial space into the lumens of the 
seminiferous tubules, thus establishing a  blood–testis barrier . 
Through extension of cytoplasmic processes, the Sertoli cells sur-
round developing germ cells and provide an environment essential 
for germ cell differentiation. In addition, these cells have been 
shown to be responsible for the movement of germ cells from the 
396    CHAPTER 12 Testes
Urethra
Penis
Corpus cavernosum
of the penis
Corpus cavernosum
of the urethra
Prepuce
Glans penis
Testicular lobules
Tunica albuginea
Tubuli recti
Rete testis
Bladder
Prostate
Ampulla
Seminal vesicle
Bulbourethral gland
Ejaculatory duct
Ductus deferens
Ductuli efferentes
Epididymis
Seminiferous
tubles
Primary
spermatocyte
Spermato-
gonium
Leydig cell
Cytoplasmic bridges
Late spermatids
Spermiogenesis
Mitosis
Basal
lamina
Fibroblast
Capillary
Capillary
Interstitial cells
Early
spermatids
Secondary
spermatocytes
Primary
spermatocyte
Spermatogonium
Myoid cells
Sertoli
cell
A
B
C
 FIGURE 12–1  Male genital system.  A. The testis and the epididymis are in different scales from the other parts of the reproductive system. 
Observe the communication between the testicular lobules.  B. Structural organization of the human seminiferous tubule and interstitial tissue. 
This figure does not show the lymphatic vessels frequently found in the connective tissue.  (A and  B reproduced, with permission, from 
Junqueira LC, Carneiro J, Kelley RO.  Basic Histology . 9th ed. McGraw-Hill; 1999.) 
 C. Section of human testis.  (C reproduced, with permission, from Ganong WF.  Review of Medical Physiology . 20th ed. McGraw-Hill; 2001.) 
CHAPTER 12 Testes     397
base of the tubule toward the lumen and for the release of mature 
sperm into the lumen. These cells also actively phagocytose dam-
aged germ cells and residual bodies, which are portions of the 
germ cell cytoplasm not used in the formation of spermatozoa. 
Finally, in response to follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) or tes-
tosterone, the Sertoli cells secrete androgen-binding protein, a 
molecule with high affinity for androgens. This substance, which 
enters the tubular lumen, provides a high concentration of testos-
terone to the developing germinal cells during the process of 
spermatogenesis. 
 More than a dozen different types of germ cells have been 
described in males. Broadly, they can be classified as spermatogo-
nia, primary spermatocytes, secondary spermatocytes, spermatids, 
and spermatozoa. Spermatogenesis occurs in an orderly fashion, 
with the spermatocytes being derived from the spermatogonia via 
mitotic division. Through meiotic (or reduction) division, the 
spermatids are formed; they contain a haploid number of chromo-
somes (23). The interval from the beginning of spermatogenesis to 
release of mature spermatozoa into the tubular lumen is approxi-
mately 64 days. Although there is little variation in the duration 
of the spermatogenic cycle, a cross-section of a seminiferous 
tubule demonstrates several stages of germ cell development. 
 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES 
 The seminiferous tubules empty into a highly convoluted anasto-
motic network of ducts called the  rete testis . Spermatozoa are 
then transported through efferent ductules and into a single duct, 
the epididymis, by testicular fluid pressure, ciliary motion, and 
contraction of the efferent ductules. During the approximately 12 
to 14 days required for transit through the epididymis, spermato-
zoa undergo morphologic and functional changes essential to 
confer on the gametes the capacity for fertilizing an ovum. The 
epididymis also serves as a reservoir for sperm. Spermatozoa stored 
in the epididymis enter the vas deferens, a muscular duct 35 to 
50 cm long that propels its contents by peristaltic motion into the 
ejaculatory duct. 
 In addition to the spermatozoa and the secretory products of 
the testes, retia testis, and epididymides, the ejaculatory ducts 
receive fluid from the seminal vesicles. These paired structures, 4.5 
to 5.5 cm long, are composed of alveolar glands, connective tissue, 
and muscle. They are the source of seminal plasma fructose, which 
provides nourishment to the spermatozoa. In addition, the seminal 
vesicles secrete seminogelin I, phosphorylcholine, ergothioneine, 
flavins, prostaglandins, and antioxidants, including superoxide 
dismutase, catalase, and ascorbic acid. About 60% of the total 
volume of seminal fluid is derived from the seminal vesicles. 
 The ejaculatory ducts terminate in the prostatic urethra. There 
additional fluid (~20% of total volume) is added by the prostate, 
a tubuloalveolar gland with a fibromuscular stroma that weighs 
about 20 g and measures 4 cm × 2 cm × 3 cm. The constituents 
of the prostate fluid include spermine, citric acid, cholesterol, 
phospholipids, fibrinolysin, fibrinogenase, zinc, acid phosphatase, 
and prostate-specific antigen, a 34-kDa kallikrein-like serine protease. 
Fluid is also added to the seminal plasma by the bulbourethral 
(Cowper) glands and urethral (Littre) glands during its transit 
through the penile urethra. 
 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE MALE 
REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM 
 GONADAL STEROIDS ( FIGURE 12–2 ) 
 The three steroids of primary importance in male reproductive 
function are testosterone, dihydrotestosterone, and estradiol. From 
a quantitative standpoint, the most important androgen is testos-
terone. Over 95% of the testosterone is secreted by the testicular 
Leydig cells. In addition to testosterone, the testes secrete small 
amounts of the potent androgen dihydrotestosterone and the weak 
androgens dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) and androstenedione. 
The Leydig cells also secrete small quantities of estradiol, estrone, 
pregnenolone, progesterone, 17α-hydroxypregnenolone, and 17α-
hydroxyprogesterone. The steps in testicular androgen biosynthesis 
are illustrated in  Figure 12–2 . 
 Dihydrotestosterone and estradiol are derived not only by 
direct secretion from the testes but also by conversion in periph-
eral tissues of androgen and estrogen precursors secreted by both 
the testes and the adrenals. Thus, about 80% of the circulating 
concentration of these two steroids is derived from such peripheral 
conversion.  Table 12–1 summarizes the approximate contribu-
tions of the testes, adrenals, and peripheral tissues to the circulat-
ing levels of several sex steroid hormones in men. 
 In the blood, androgens and estrogens exist in either a free 
(unbound) state or as bound to serum proteins. Although about 
38% of testosterone is weakly bound to albumin, the major bind-
ing protein is  sex hormone–binding globulin (SHBG), a high affin-
ity, low capacity binding protein, which binds 60% of the 
testosterone. This glycosylated dimeric protein is homologous to, 
yet distinct from, the androgen-binding protein secreted by the 
Sertoli cells. SHBG is synthesized in the liver, with the gene located 
on the short arm of chromosome 17. The serum concentrations of 
this protein are increased by estrogen, tamoxifen, phenytoin, or 
thyroid hormone administration and by hyperthyroidism and cir-
rhosis and are decreased by exogenous androgens, glucocorticoids, 
or growth hormone and by hypothyroidism, acromegaly, obesity, 
and hyperinsulinemic states. About 2% of the circulating testoster-
one is not bound to serum proteins and is able to enter cells and 
exert its metabolic effects. In addition, some of the albumin-bound 
testosterone may dissociate from the protein and enter target tis-
sues; thus, the amount of bioavailable testosterone may be greater 
than just the amount of non–protein-bound testosterone. 
 As noted later, testosterone may be converted to dihydrotestos-
terone within specific androgen target tissues. Most circulating 
testosterone is converted primarily by the liver into various metab-
olites such as androsterone and etiocholanolone, which, after 
conjugation with glucuronic or sulfuric acid, are excreted in the 
urine as 17-ketosteroids. However, it should be noted that only 
20% to 30% of the urinary 17-ketosteroids are derived from tes-
tosterone metabolism. The majority of the 17-ketosteroids are 
398    CHAPTER 12 Testes
formed from the metabolism of adrenal steroids. Therefore, 
17-ketosteroid determinations do not reliably reflect testicular 
steroid secretion. 
 Testosterone leaves the circulation and rapidly traverses the cell 
membrane ( Figure 12–3 ). In most androgen target cells, testoster-
one is enzymatically converted to the more potent androgen 
dihydrotestosterone by the microsomal isoenzyme 5α-reductase-2, 
which has a pH optimum of 5.5. Another isoenzyme, 
5α-reductase-1, has a pH optimum near 8.0 and may involve 
androgen action in the skin, but it is not active in the urogenital 
tract. Dihydrotestosterone as well as testosterone then binds to the 
same specific intracellular receptor protein (R c in  Figure 12–3 ) 
that is distinct from both androgen-binding protein and SHBG. 
The genes that encode for this protein are located on the X chro-
mosome. The androgen receptor is a member of the steroid-thy-
roid hormone nuclear superfamily. It is synthesized in the 
cytoplasm and is associated with several heat shock proteins and 
immunophilins. When testosterone or dihydrotestosterone binds 
to the receptor, it dissociates from the multiprotein complex, and 
conformational changes take place that allow it to form a 
 homodimer with another hormone-androgen receptor molecule 
and to be translocated into the nucleus through binding to 
OH
HO
O
CH3
O
O
CH3
HO
O
HO
O
O
O
O
OH
C
Pregnenolone
C
O
O
CH3
C
OH
HO
O
CH3
C
Progesterone
17α-Hydroxyprogesterone
17α-Hydroxypregnenolone
HO
OH
Dehydroepiandrosterone
HO
OH
Androstenediol
O
H
OH
Dihydrotestosterone
Testosterone
Estradiol
Androstenedione
Estrone
Cholesterol
1
2
2
2
2
7
7
4
3
5
5
6
4
5
3
 FIGURE 12–2  Pathways for testicular androgen and estrogen biosynthesis. Heavy arrows indicate major pathways. Circled numbers repre-
sent enzymes as follows: c, CYP11A1 (20,22-desmolase; P450scc); d, 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase and Δ 5 ,Δ 4 -isomerase II (3βHSDII); e, 
CYP17 (17α-hydroxylase; P450c17); f, CYP17 (17,20-lyase; P450c17); g, 17α-HSD3 (17α-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 3; 17-ketoreductase); 
h, 5α-reductase; i, CYP19 (aromatase). StAR, steroidogenic acute regulatory protein. (See also Figures 9–4, 13–4, and 14–13.) 
CHAPTER 12 Testes     399
 importins (R n in  Figure 12–3 ). In the nucleus, the androgen–an-
drogen receptor complex binds to androgen response elements in 
DNA through the DNA-binding domain of the receptor and inter-
acts with protein coactivators, which allows the polymorphic trans-
activating domain of the receptor to initiate transcriptional activity. 
This results in the synthesis of messenger RNA (mRNA), which is 
eventually transported to the cytoplasm, where it directs new pro-
tein synthesis and other changes that together constitute androgen 
action. In addition to this classical genomic pathway of androgen 
action, which brings about action in hours to days, androgens may 
exhibit a rapid effect through nonclassical signaling pathways 
involving cell surface actions that alter cellular calcium influx. 
 A variety of biologic effects of androgens have been defined in 
males. As discussed in Chapter 14, they are essential for appropriate 
differentiation of the internal and external male genital system dur-
ing fetal development. During puberty, androgen-mediated growth 
of the scrotum, epididymis, vas deferens, seminal vesicles, prostate, 
and penis occurs. The functional integrity of these organs requires 
androgens. Androgens stimulate skeletal muscle growth and growth 
of the larynx, which results in deepening of the voice, and of the 
epiphysial cartilaginous plates, which results in the pubertal growth 
spurt. Both ambisexual (pubic and axillary) hair growth and sexual 
(beard, mustache, chest, abdomen, and back) hair growth are 
stimulated, as is sebaceous gland activity. Other effects include 
stimulation of erythropoiesis and social behavioral changes. 
 CONTROL OF TESTICULAR FUNCTION 
 Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Leydig Cell Axis 
( Figure 12–4 ) 
 The hypothalamus synthesizes a decapeptide, gonadotropin- 
releasing hormone (GnRH), and secretes it in pulses every 30 to 
120 minutes into the hypothalamohypophysial portal blood. After 
TABLE 12–1  Relative contributions (approximate 
percentages) of the testes, adrenals, and 
peripheral tissues to circulating levels 
of sex steroids in men.
Hormone
Testicular 
Secretion
Adrenal 
Secretion
Peripheral 
Conversion of 
Precursors
Testosterone
Dihydrotestosterone
Estradiol
Estrone
DHEA sulfate
  95
<20
<20
  <2
<10
<1
<1
<1
<1
90
<5
80
80
98
—
Bloodstream
Cell
Protein-T
Free T
DHT
DHT-Rc
T-Rc
+
DHT-Rn
T-Rn
T
Inactive
receptor
(Rc)
mRNA
Androgen action
(Protein synthesis,
cell growth, etc)
5α−Reductase
DHT-Rn or T-Rn
 FIGURE 12–3  Mechanisms of androgen action (DHT, dihydrotes-
tosterone; mRNA, messenger RNA; Rc , inactive receptor; R n , activated 
nuclear receptor; T, testosterone). 
Testicle
Hypothalamus
Pituitary
Sperm
Leydig
cell
Seminiferous
tubule
−
−
−
+
+
+
+
?
T
E2
LH
FSH
Inhibin
T
DHT
E2
GnRH
T
Sertoli
cell
ABP
 FIGURE 12–4  Hypothalamic-pituitary-testicular axis (ABP, 
androgen-binding protein; DHT, dihydrotestosterone; E2, estradiol; 
FSH, follicle-stimulating hormone; GnRH, gonadotropin-releasing 
hormone; LH, luteinizing hormone; T, testosterone; +, positive influ-
ence; −, negative influence) .
400    CHAPTER 12 Testes
reaching the anterior pituitary, GnRH binds to the gonadotrophs 
and stimulates the release of both luteinizing hormone (LH) and, 
to a lesser extent, FSH into the general circulation. LH is taken up 
by the Leydig cells, where it binds to specific membrane receptors. 
The LH receptor is a G protein–coupled receptor containing 
seven transmembrane domains with a serine- and threonine-rich 
cytoplasmic region containing a phosphorylation site and a 350- 
to 400 amino acid extracellular hormone-binding domain. The 
binding of LH to the receptor leads to activation of adenylyl 
cyclase and generation of cAMP and other messengers. It also 
stimulates the synthesis of a steroidogenic acute regulatory pro-
tein. This enhances the transfer of cholesterol into the inner mito-
chondrial membrane, leading to the synthesis and secretion of 
androgens. In turn, the elevation of androgens inhibits the secre-
tion of LH from the anterior pituitary through a direct action on 
the pituitary and an inhibitory effect at the hypothalamic level. 
Both the hypothalamus and the pituitary have androgen and 
estrogen receptors. Experimentally, pure androgens such as dihy-
drotestosterone (DHT) reduce LH pulse frequency, whereas estra-
diol reduces LH pulse amplitude. However, the major inhibitory 
effect of androgen on the hypothalamus appears to be mediated 
principally by estradiol, which may be derived locally through the 
aromatization of testosterone. Leydig cells also secrete small quan-
tities of cytokines and other peptides, which may be important for 
paracrine regulation of testicular function. 
 Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Seminiferous 
Tubular Axis (See  Figure 12–4 ) 
 After stimulation by GnRH, the gonadotrophs secrete FSH into the 
systemic circulation. This glycoprotein hormone binds to specific 
receptors in the Sertoli cells and stimulates the production of 
androgen-binding protein. FSH is necessary for the initiation of 
spermatogenesis. However, full maturation of the spermatozoa 
appears to require not only an FSH effect but also testosterone. 
Indeed, the major action of FSH on spermatogenesis may be via the 
stimulation of androgen-binding protein production, which allows 
a high intratubular concentration of testosterone to be maintained. 
 In addition to androgen-binding protein, the Sertoli cell 
secretes several other substances, including insulin-like growth 
factor-I, transferrin, Müllerian duct inhibitory factor, and inhibin. 
At least three genes have been found to direct inhibin synthesis. 
Although two forms of inhibin have been identified, only inhibin 
B has been found in males. This 32-kDa protein, which is com-
posed of an alpha and a beta subunit, selectively inhibits FSH 
release from the pituitary without affecting LH release. FSH 
directly stimulates the Sertoli cells to secrete inhibin B. Serum 
inhibin B concentrations reflect Sertoli cell number and sperm 
production. They correlate with testicular size. There is a recipro-
cal relationship between serum inhibin B and FSH levels, and 
inhibin B is therefore probably a physiologic regulator of pituitary 
FSH secretion, possibly together with the gonadal steroids. 
Inhibin levels decline with advancing age. 
 Two additional inhibin-related proteins that have been identi-
fied in porcine follicular fluid may also be present in the testes. 
These factors, designated follicle regulatory protein and activin, 
are composed of inhibin beta subunit dimers and can selectively 
stimulate pituitary FSH secretion in vitro. They are struc-
turally similar to transforming growth factor β (TGFβ), which 
can also stimulate pituitary FSH release. The physiologic role, if 
any, that follicle regulatory protein, activin, and TGFβ have in the 
regulation of FSH secretion is unknown. 
 EVALUATION OF MALE GONADAL 
FUNCTION 
 CLINICAL EVALUATION 
 Clinical Presentation 
 The clinical presentation of patients with deficient testosterone 
production or action depends on the age at onset of hypogonad-
ism. Androgen deficiency during the second to third months of 
fetal development results in varying degrees of ambiguity of the 
genitalia and male pseudohermaphroditism. If the deficiency 
develops during the third trimester, defects in testicular descent 
leading to cryptorchidism as well as micropenis may occur. These 
topics are covered in Chapters 14 and 15. 
 Prepubertal androgen deficiency leads to poor secondary sexual 
development and eunuchoid skeletal proportions. The penis fails 
to enlarge, the testes remain small, and the scrotum does not 
develop the marked rugae characteristic of puberty. The voice 
remains high-pitched and the muscle mass does not develop fully, 
resulting in less than normal strength and endurance. The lack of 
appropriate stimulation of sexual hair growth results in sparse axil-
lary and pubic hair (which receive some stimulation from adrenal 
androgens) and absent or very sparse facial, chest, upper abdomi-
nal, and back hair. Although the androgen-mediated pubertal 
growth spurt fails to take place, the epiphysial plates of the long 
bones continue to grow under the influence of insulin-like growth 
factor-I and other growth factors. Thus, the long bones of the 
upper and lower extremities grow out of proportion to the axial 
skeleton. Healthy white men have an average upper segment 
(crown to pubis) to lower segment (pubis to floor) ratio of greater 
than 1, whereas prepubertal hypogonadism results in a ratio of less 
than 1. Similarly, the ratio of total arm span to total height aver-
ages 0.96 in white men. Because of the relatively greater growth in 
the upper extremities, the arm span of eunuchoid individuals 
exceeds height by 5 cm or more. 
 If testosterone deficiency develops after puberty, the patient 
may complain of decreased libido, erectile dysfunction, and low 
energy. Patients with mild androgen deficiency or androgen defi-
ciency of recent onset may not note a decrease in facial or body 
hair growth; it appears that although adult androgen levels must 
be achieved to  stimulate male sexual hair growth, relatively low 
levels of androgens are required to  maintain sexual hair growth. 
With long-standing hypogonadism, the growth of facial hair 
will diminish, and the frequency of shaving may also decrease 
( Figure 12–5 ). In addition, fine wrinkles may appear in the cor-
ners of the mouth and eyes and, together with the sparse beard 
growth, result in the classic hypogonadal facies. 
CHAPTER 12 Testes     401
 Genital Examination 
 Adequate assessment of the genitalia is essential in the evaluation 
of male hypogonadism. The examination should be performed in 
a warm room in order to relax the dartos muscle of the scrotum. 
The penis should be examined for the presence of hypospadias, 
epispadias, and chordee (abnormal angulation of the penis due to 
a fibrotic plaque), which may interfere with fertility. The fully 
stretched dorsal penile length should be measured in the flaccid 
state from the pubopenile skin junction to the tip of the glans. 
The normal range in adults is 12 to 16 cm (10th and 90th percen-
tiles, respectively). 
 Assessment of testicular volume is also vital to the evaluation of 
hypogonadism. Careful measurement of the longitudinal and 
transverse axes of the testes may be made and testicular volume ( V ) 
calculated from the formula for a prolate spheroid:  V = 0.52 × 
length × width 2 . The mean volume for an adult testis is 18.6 ± 4.8 
mL. Alternatively, volume may be estimated with the Prader 
orchidometer, which consists of a series of plastic ellipsoids rang-
ing in volume from 1 to 25 mL. Each testis is compared with the 
appropriate ellipsoid. Adults normally have volumes greater than 
15 mL by this method. 
 Because about half of testicular volume is composed of semi-
niferous tubules, decrease in volume indicates lack of tubular 
development or regression of tubular size. The consistency of the 
testicle should be noted. Small, firm testes are characteristic of 
hyalinization or fibrosis, as may occur in Klinefelter syndrome. 
Small, rubbery testes are normally found in prepubertal males; in 
an adult, they are indicative of deficient gonadotropin stimula-
tion. Testes of soft consistency are characteristically found in 
individuals with postpubertal testicular atrophy. 
 The epididymis and vas deferens should also be examined. 
One of the most important parts of the examination is evalua-
tion for the presence of varicocele resulting from incompetence 
of the internal spermatic vein. As will be discussed later, this is 
an important and potentially correctable cause of male infertil-
ity. The patient should be examined in the upright position 
while performing the Valsalva maneuver. The examiner should 
carefully palpate the spermatic cords above the testes. A varico-
cele can be felt as an impulse along the posterior portion of the 
cord. About 85% of varicoceles are located on the left side, and 
15% are bilateral. 
 LABORATORY TESTS OF TESTICULAR 
FUNCTION 
 Semen Analysis 
 With some exceptions, a normal semen analysis excludes gonadal 
dysfunction. However, a single abnormal semen analysis is not a 
sufficient basis for a diagnosis of disturbance of testicular function, 
because marked variations in several of the parameters may be seen 
in normal individuals: at least three semen samples should be 
 FIGURE 12–5  A. Hypogonadal habitus. Note absence of body and facial hair as well as feminine body distribution.  B. Hypogonadal facies. 
Note absence of facial hair and fine wrinkles around the corners of the eyes and lips. 
402    CHAPTER 12 Testes
examined over a 2- to 3-month interval in order to evaluate this 
facet of male gonadal function. As noted earlier, approximately 
3 months are required for completion of the spermatogenic cycle 
and movement of the mature spermatozoa through the ductal sys-
tem. Therefore, when an abnormal semen sample is produced, one 
must question the patient about prior fever, trauma, drug exposure, 
and other factors that may temporarily damage spermatogenesis. 
 The semen should be collected by masturbation after 2 to 
7 days of sexual abstinence and examined within 1 hour after col-
lection. Normal semen has a volume of more than 2 to 4 mL, with 
20 × 10 6 or more sperms per milliliter. Over half of the spermato-
zoa should exhibit progressive motility, and 30% or more should 
have normal morphology. 
 Steroid Measurements 
 Each of the gonadal steroids may be measured by specific assays. 
Although single determinations may distinguish between normal 
individuals and patients with severe hypogonadism, mild defects 
in androgen production may be missed. In normal individuals, 
there are frequent, rapid pulsatile changes in serum testosterone 
concentration as well as a slight early morning elevation. Therefore, 
at least three separate blood samples should be collected at 20- to 
40-minute intervals during the morning for testosterone measure-
ment. The testosterone may be measured in each of the serum 
samples, or equal aliquots of each of the three serum samples may 
be combined, mixed, and subjected to testosterone analysis. The 
latter procedure provides a savings in cost as well as a mean serum 
testosterone concentration that takes into account the pulsatile 
release of testosterone. 
 Androgen and estrogen immunoassays measure total serum 
steroid concentrations. This is the sum of the free, biologically 
active hormone and the protein-bound moiety. There is a great 
deal of variability with different testosterone immunoassays, espe-
cially in the lower ranges. The most reliable methods are specific 
immunoassays following extraction of serum or gas chromatogra-
phy (GC)- or liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass spectros-
copy. Although in most circumstances it is not necessary to 
determine the actual quantity of free steroid hormones, in some 
situations alterations in the binding protein concentration may 
occur. Lowered concentrations of SHBG are seen in patients with 
hypothyroidism, obesity, and acromegaly. In these circumstances, 
the free testosterone concentration should be measured, because it 
may be normal when the total serum testosterone level is 
decreased. The normal male serum concentrations of gonadal 
steroids collected in the basal state are given in  Table 12–2 . 
 Gonadotropin and Prolactin 
Measurements 
 LH and, to a lesser extent, FSH are released in pulsatile fashion 
throughout the day. In addition, there is a diurnal variation with 
higher levels in the morning than in the evening. Therefore, as 
with testosterone, at least three blood samples should be obtained 
at 20- to 40-minute intervals during the morning. FSH and LH 
may be measured in each of the samples or in a single pooled 
specimen. Although many laboratories give a numerical value for 
the lower limits of normal for gonadotropins, some normal males 
have undetectable concentrations of FSH and LH by presently 
available immunoassay techniques. Furthermore, the concentra-
tions of gonadotropins measured in one laboratory may not be 
directly comparable to those measured in another because of dif-
ferences in the reference preparations used. The primary use of 
basal FSH and LH concentrations is to distinguish between 
hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, in which either or both of the 
gonadotropins are elevated, and hypogonadotropic hypogonad-
ism, in which the gonadotropins are low or inappropriately nor-
mal in the presence of decreased androgen production. 
 Elevations of serum prolactin (PRL) inhibit the normal release 
of pituitary gonadotropins (shown by a reduced LH pulse fre-
quency), probably through an effect on the hypothalamus. Thus, 
serum PRL measurements should be performed in any patient with 
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. Serum PRL concentrations are 
generally stable throughout the day; therefore, measurement of this 
hormone in a single sample is usually sufficient. However, the 
patient should abstain from eating for 3 hours before the blood 
sample is obtained, because a protein meal may acutely stimulate 
the release of PRL from the pituitary. The normal ranges for serum 
PRL and gonadotropins are shown in  Table 12–2 . 
 Chorionic Gonadotropin Stimulation Test 
 Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) is a glycoprotein hormone 
with biologic actions similar to those of LH. Following an injection 
of chorionic gonadotropin, this hormone binds to the LH recep-
tors on the Leydig cells and stimulates the synthesis and secretion 
of testicular steroids. Therefore, the Leydig cells may be directly 
assessed by the intramuscular injection of 4000 IU of chorionic 
gonadotropin daily for 4 days. A normal response is a doubling of the 
testosterone level following the last injection. Alternatively, a single 
intramuscular dose of chorionic gonadotropin (5000 IU/1.7 m 2 
in adults or 100 IU/kg in children) may be given, with blood 
samples taken for testosterone measurements 72 and 96 hours later. 
Patients with primary gonadal disease have a diminished response 
following administration of chorionic  gonadotropin, whereas 
patients with Leydig cell failure secondary to pituitary or hypotha-
lamic disease have a qualitatively normal response. 
TABLE 12–2  Normal ranges for gonadal steroids, 
pituitary gonadotropins, and prolactin 
in men.
Hormone
Ranges
Testosterone, total
Testosterone, free
Dihydrotestosterone
Androstenedione
Estradiol
Estrone
FSH
LH
PRL
260-1000 ng/dL (9.0-34.7 nmol/L)
50-210 pg/mL (173-729 pmol/L)
27-75 ng/dL (0.9-2.6 nmol/L)
50-250 ng/dL (1.7-8.5 nmol/L)
10-50 pg/mL (3.67-18.35 pmol/L)
15-65 pg/mL (55.5-240 pmol/L)
1.6-8 mIU/mL (1.6 8 IU/L)
1.5-9.3 mIU/mL (1. 5-9.3 IU/L)
2-18 ng/mL (87-780 nmol/L)
CHAPTER 12 Testes     403
 Testicular Biopsy 
 Testicular biopsy in hypogonadal men is primarily indicated in 
patients with normal-sized testes and azoospermia in order to 
distinguish between spermatogenic failure and ductal obstruction. 
Although germinal aplasia, hypoplasia, maturation arrest, and 
other abnormalities of spermatogenesis may be diagnosed by 
examination of testicular tissue in oligospermic males, knowledge 
of the type of defect does not alter therapy. Therefore, testicular 
biopsy is not usually indicated for evaluation of mild to moderate 
oligospermia. If a testicular biopsy is carried out, testicular sperm 
extraction for possible intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) 
into ova may be performed at the same time. 
 Evaluation for Male Hypogonadism 
 Figure 12–6 outlines an approach to the diagnosis of male gonadal 
disorders. Semen analysis and determination of the basal concen-
trations of testosterone, FSH, and LH allow the clinician to dis-
tinguish patients with primary gonadal failure who have poor 
semen characteristics, low or normal testosterone, and elevated 
FSH or LH from those with secondary gonadal failure and abnor-
mal semen analysis, decreased testosterone, and low or inappropri-
ately normal gonadotropins. 
 In patients with elevations of gonadotropins resulting from 
primary testicular disease, chromosomal analysis helps to differen-
tiate between genetic abnormalities and acquired testicular defects. 
Because no therapy exists that restores spermatogenesis in an indi-
vidual with severe testicular damage, androgen replacement is the 
treatment of choice. Patients with isolated seminiferous tubule 
failure may have normal or elevated FSH concentrations in asso-
ciation with normal LH and testosterone levels and usually severe 
oligospermia. Patients with azoospermia require evaluation for the 
possible presence of ductal obstruction, because this defect may 
be surgically correctable. Fructose is added to seminal plasma by 
the seminal vesicles, and an absence of fructose indicates that the 
seminal vesicles are absent or bilaterally obstructed. The combina-
tion of a poor semen analysis with low testosterone, FSH, and LH 
is indicative of a hypothalamic or pituitary defect. Such patients 
need further evaluation of anterior and posterior pituitary gland 
function with appropriate pituitary function tests, as well as neu-
roradiologic and neuro-ophthalmologic studies (Chapter 4). 
 PHARMACOLOGY OF DRUGS USED 
TO TREAT MALE GONADAL 
DISORDERS 
 ANDROGENS 
 A variety of drugs are available for the treatment of androgen 
deficiency. Preparations for sublingual or oral administration such 
as methyltestosterone, oxymetholone, and fluoxymesterone have 
the advantage of ease of administration but the disadvantage of 
erratic absorption, potential for cholestatic jaundice, and decreased 
effectiveness when compared to the intramuscular preparations. 
Testosterone propionate is a short-acting androgen. Its main use is 
in initiating therapy in older men, whose prostate glands may be 
exquisitely sensitive to testosterone. A dose of 50 mg two or three 
times per week is adequate. Obstructive symptoms due to benign 
prostatic hypertrophy following therapy with this androgen usu-
ally resolve rapidly because of its short duration of action. 
 Androgen deficiency may be treated with testosterone enan-
thate or cyclopentylpropionate (cypionate) given intramuscularly. 
Unlike the oral androgen preparations, both of these agents are 
capable of completely virilizing the patients. Therapy may be initi-
ated with 50 mg intramuscularly every 4 weeks and gradually 
increased to a maintenance dose of 75 to 100 mg every week or 
150 to 200 mg every 2 weeks. Testosterone undecanoate, a long-
acting form of testosterone given intramuscularly every 3 months, 
is available in many countries, but is not yet approved by the FDA 
for use in the United States. Testosterone pellets may be implanted 
subcutaneously for a longer duration of effect. However, this ther-
apy has not enjoyed much popularity. Transdermal delivery via 
membranes impregnated with testosterone (Androderm) is another 
method of replacement therapy. The patches can be placed on the 
skin of the back, shoulder, or abdomen and provide normal andro-
gen concentrations. A testosterone gel (AndroGel 1%; Testim 1%) 
that is applied daily to the abdomen, shoulders, or upper arms also 
results in physiologic concentrations of testosterone. A buccal 
preparation (Striant) applied twice daily under the upper lip also is 
available, but is not widely used due to gum irritation. 
 Androgens, both oral and intramuscular, have been used (ille-
gally) by some athletes to increase muscle mass and strength. 
Although this may achieve the anticipated result in some indi-
viduals, adverse effects include oligospermia and testicular atro-
phy—in addition to some of the complications noted below. 
 Androgen therapy is currently contraindicated in patients with 
prostatic carcinoma. About 1% to 2% of patients receiving oral 
methyltestosterone or fluoxymesterone develop intrahepatic chole-
static jaundice that resolves when the drug is discontinued. Rarely, 
these methylated or halogenated androgens have been associated 
with benign and malignant hepatocellular tumors. 
 Androgen therapy also may cause premature fusion of the epi-
physes in an adolescent, and this may result in some loss of poten-
tial height. Therefore, androgen therapy is usually withheld until 
a hypogonadal male reaches 13 years of age. Sodium and water 
retention may induce hypertension or congestive heart failure in 
susceptible individuals. Because androgens stimulate erythropoie-
tin production, erythrocytosis may occur during therapy. This is 
not usually clinically significant. Inhibition of spermatogenesis is 
mediated through suppression of gonadotropins by the androgens. 
Gynecomastia may develop during initiation of androgen therapy 
but usually resolves with continued administration of the drug. 
Sleep apnea may be precipitated. Priapism, acne, and aggressive 
behavior are dose-related adverse effects and generally disappear 
after reduction of dosage. Androgens decrease the production of 
thyroxine-binding globulin and corticosteroid-binding globulin 
by the liver. Therefore, total serum thyroxine and cortisol concen-
trations may be decreased, although the free hormone concentra-
tions remain normal. High-density lipoprotein concentrations 
may also be reduced with oral androgens. 
Oligo- or azoospermia,
reduced testosterone,
increased LH and FSH
Oligospermia,
normal testosterone
and LH, increased FSH
Oligo- or azoospermia,
normal testosterone,
LH, FSH
Oligo- or azoospermia,
reduced testosterone,
normal or reduced FSH and LH
Primary gonadal
failure
Seminiferous tubule
failure
Seminal fluid
fructose
Hypothalamic-pituitary
disease
Chromosomal
analysis
Androgen
therapy
Normal
XXY or variants
Infertility counseling;
ART
Absent
Present
Congenital absence of
vas deferens and semi-
nal vesicles
Testicular
biopsy
Normal
spermatogenesis
Spermatogenic
failure
Ductal
obstruction
Surgery
Infertility
counseling;
ART
Serum PRL,
chorionic gonadotropin
stimulation test;
pituitary-hypothalamic
evaluation
Semen analysis;  basal testosterone, FSH, and LH
Oligo- or azoospermia,
increased testosterone
and LH, normal FSH
TSH
Suppressed
Hyperthyroidism
Antithyroid drugs,
131I, or surgery
Normal
Partial androgen
insensitivity
 FIGURE 12–6  Scheme for evaluation of clinical hypogonadism (ART, assisted reproductive technologies such as in vitro fertilization and sperm injection into ova). 
404
CHAPTER 12 Testes     405
 GONADOTROPINS 
 In patients with hypogonadism due to inadequate gonadotropin 
secretion, spermatogenesis and virilization may be induced by 
exogenous gonadotropin injections. Because the gonadotropins 
are proteins with short half-lives, they must be administered par-
enterally two or three times a week. 
 The expense and inconvenience of this type of therapy pre-
clude its routine use for the treatment of androgen deficiency. The 
two major indications for exogenous gonadotropins are treatment 
of cryptorchidism (see later) and induction of spermatogenesis in 
hypogonadal males who wish to father children. 
 To induce spermatogenesis, 2000 IU of chorionic gonadotropin 
may be given intramuscularly three times a week for 9 to 
12 months. In some individuals with partial gonadotropin deficien-
cies, this may induce adequate spermatogenesis. In patients with 
more severe deficiencies, menotropins, available in vials containing 
75 IU each of FSH and LH, or highly purified urinary FSH (urofol-
litropin) or FSH produced by recombinant DNA technology (fol-
litropin beta), each containing 75 IU of FSH, is added to chorionic 
gonadotropin therapy after 9 to 12 months and is administered in 
a dosage of one vial intramuscularly three times a week. 
 Adverse reactions with such therapy are minimal. Acne, gyneco-
mastia, or prostatic enlargement may be noted as a result of excessive 
Leydig cell stimulation. Reduction of the chorionic gonadotropin 
dosage or a decrease in the frequency of chorionic gonadotropin 
injections generally results in resolution of the problem. 
 GONADOTROPIN-RELEASING HORMONE 
 GnRH (gonadorelin acetate), administered in pulses every 60 to 
120 minutes by portable infusion pumps, effectively stimulates 
the endogenous release of LH and FSH in hypogonadotropic 
hypogonadal patients. This therapy does not currently appear to 
offer any major advantage over the use of exogenous gonadotro-
pins for induction of spermatogenesis or the use of testosterone 
enanthate or cypionate for virilization, and is no longer available 
in the United States. A long-acting analog of GnRH, leuprolide 
acetate, is available for the treatment of advanced prostatic carci-
noma. Daily subcutaneous administration of 1 mg or monthly 
intramuscular injections of 7.5 mg of a depot preparation—
22.5 mg for 3 months or 30 mg for 4 months—results in desen-
sitization of the pituitary GnRH receptors, which reduces LH and 
FSH levels and so ultimately testosterone concentrations. Similar 
results are produced with a subcutaneous injection of the depot 
form of the GnRH analog goserelin or monthly intramuscular 
injections of triptorelin. With these therapies, initial remission 
rates for prostatic carcinoma are similar to those found with 
orchiectomy or treatment with diethylstilbestrol (about 70%). 
A long-acting GnRH antagonist, abarelix, also is an effective 
means of inducing medical castration by reducing LH, FSH, and 
testosterone secretion. Although GnRH agonists may produce an 
initial rise in LH, FSH, and testosterone levels, no such rise is seen 
with GnRH antagonists, making them better agents to use in the 
presence of metastasis in sensitive areas such as the spinal cord. 
 Nafarelin acetate is a GnRH agonist that is administered intra-
nasally for the treatment of endometriosis and central precocious 
puberty. Central precocious puberty also may be treated with 
leuprolide acetate and another analog, histrelin acetate. Long-
acting GnRH agonists also are used to suppress endogenous 
gonadal steroid production as part of the endocrine treatment of 
transsexual persons. Long-acting GnRH agonists combined with 
testosterone have been studied as a possible male contraceptive, 
but they do not uniformly induce azoospermia. 
 CLINICAL MALE GONADAL DISORDERS 
 Hypogonadism may be subdivided into three general categories 
( Table 12–3 ). A thorough discussion of the hypothalamic- 
pituitary disorders that cause hypogonadism is presented in 
Chapters 4 and 15. The defects in androgen biosynthesis and 
androgen action are described in Chapter 14. The following sec-
tion emphasizes the primary gonadal abnormalities. 
 KLINEFELTER SYNDROME (XXY 
SEMINIFEROUS TUBULE DYSGENESIS) 
 Klinefelter syndrome is the most common genetic cause of male 
hypogonadism, occurring in one of 600 male births. An extra X 
chromosome is present in about 0.2% of male conceptions and 
TABLE 12–3 Classification of male hypogonadism.
Hypothalamic-Pituitary Disorders
Panhypopituitarism
Isolated LH deficiency (fertile eunuch)
Isolated FSH deficiency
LH and FSH deficiency
 a. With normal sense of smell
 b. With hyposmia or anosmia (Kallmann syndrome)
 c. With complex neurologic syndromes
  Prader-Willi syndrome
  Laurence-Moon, Bardet-Biedl syndromes
  Möbius syndrome
  Lowe syndrome
  Cerebellar ataxia
Biologically inactive LH
Hyperprolactinemia
Gonadal Abnormalities
Klinefelter syndrome
Other chromosomal defects (XX male, XY/XXY, XX/XXY, XXXY, XXXXY, 
XXYY, XYY)
Bilateral anorchia (vanishing testes syndrome)
Leydig cell aplasia
Cryptorchidism
Noonan syndrome
Myotonic dystrophy
Adult seminiferous tubule failure
Adult Leydig cell failure
Defects in androgen biosynthesis
Defects in Androgen Action
Complete androgen insensitivity (testicular feminization)
Incomplete androgen insensitivity
406    CHAPTER 12 Testes
0.1% to 0.2% of live-born males. Sex chromosome surveys of 
mentally retarded males have revealed an extra X chromosome in 
0.45% to 2.5% of such individuals. Patients with an XXY geno-
type have classic Klinefelter syndrome; those with an XXXY, 
XXXXY, or XXYY genotype or with XXY/chromosomal mosa-
icism are considered to have variant forms of the syndrome. 
 Etiology and Pathophysiology 
 The XXY genotype is usually due to meiotic nondisjunction dur-
ing parental gametogenesis, which results in an egg with two 
X chromosomes or a sperm with an X and a Y chromosome. After 
fertilization, nondisjunction during mitotic division results in 
mosaicism. 
 At birth there are generally no physical stigmas of Klinefelter 
syndrome, and during childhood there are no specific signs or 
symptoms. The chromosomal defect is expressed chiefly during 
puberty. As the gonadotropins increase, the seminiferous tubules 
do not enlarge but rather undergo fibrosis and hyalinization, 
which results in small, firm testes. Obliteration of the seminifer-
ous tubules results in azoospermia. 
 In addition to dysgenesis of the seminiferous tubules, the 
Leydig cells are also abnormal. They are present in clumps and 
appear to be hyperplastic on initial examination of a testicular 
biopsy. However, the Leydig cell mass is not increased, and the 
apparent hyperplasia is actually due to the marked reduction in 
tubular volume. Despite the normal mass of tissue, the Leydig 
cells are functionally abnormal. The testosterone production rate 
is reduced, and there is a compensatory elevation in serum LH. 
Stimulation of the Leydig cells with exogenous chorionic gonado-
tropin results in a subnormal rise in testosterone. The clinical 
manifestations of androgen deficiency vary considerably from 
patient to patient and may be related to the degree of diminished 
testosterone production and alterations in the androgen receptor. 
Exon 1 of the androgen receptor gene contains a polymorphism 
with a variable number of CAG repeats. As the number of repeats 
increases, there is a progressive decrease in androgen action and 
more phenotypic abnormalities. Thus, some individuals have vir-
tually no secondary sexual developmental changes, whereas others 
are indistinguishable from healthy individuals. 
 The elevated LH concentrations also stimulate the Leydig cells 
to secrete increased quantities of estradiol and estradiol precursors. 
The relatively high estradiol: testosterone ratio is responsible for 
the variable degrees of feminization and gynecomastia seen in 
these patients. The elevated estradiol also stimulates the liver to 
produce SHBG. This may result in total serum testosterone con-
centrations that are within the low-normal range for adult males. 
However, the free testosterone level may be lower than normal. 
 The pathogenesis of the eunuchoid proportions, personality, 
and intellectual deficits and associated medical disorders is pres-
ently unclear. 
 Testicular Pathology 
 Most of the seminiferous tubules are fibrotic and hyalinized, 
although occasional Sertoli cells and spermatogonia may be 
 present in some sections. Absence of elastic fibers in the tunica 
propria is indicative of the dysgenetic nature of the tubules. The 
Leydig cells are arranged in clumps and appear hyperplastic, 
although the total mass is normal. 
 Clinical Features ( Figure 12–7 ) 
 A. Symptoms and signs 
 There are usually no symptoms 
before puberty other than poor school performance in some 
affected individuals. Puberty may be delayed but not usually by 
more than 1 to 2 years. During puberty, the penis and scrotum 
undergo varying degrees of development, with some individuals 
appearing normal. Most patients (80%) have diminished facial 
and torso hair growth. The major complaint is often persistent 
gynecomastia, which is clinically present in over half of patients. 
The testes are uniformly small (<2 cm in longest axis and <4 mL 
in volume) and firm as a result of fibrosis and hyalinization. Other 
complaints include infertility or insufficient libido and potency. 
The patient may have difficulty putting into words his embarrass-
ment in situations where he must disrobe in the presence of other 
men, and the subnormal development of the external genitalia 
along with gynecomastia may lead to feelings of inadequacy that 
may be partly responsible for the maladjusted social behavior 
some patients exhibit. Bone mineral density may be dramatically 
reduced in patients with long-standing androgen deficiency. 
 Patients with Klinefelter syndrome have abnormal skeletal 
proportions that are not truly eunuchoid. Growth of the lower 
extremities is relatively greater than that of the trunk and upper 
extremities; therefore, pubis-to-floor height (which represents 
appendicular bone growth) is greater than crown-to-pubis height 
 FIGURE 12–7  Klinefelter syndrome in a 20-year-old man. Note 
relatively increased lower/upper body segment ratio, gynecomastia, 
small penis, and sparse body hair with a female pubic hair pattern. 
CHAPTER 12 Testes     407
(which predominantly represents axial bone growth), and span is 
less than total height. Thus, the abnormal skeletal proportions are 
not the result of androgen deficiency per se (which results in span 
greater than height). 
 Intellectual impairment is noted in many patients with 
Klinefelter syndrome, but the true proportion of affected indi-
viduals with subnormal intelligence is not known. Deficits in 
language and higher intellectual functions, such as concept forma-
tion and problem solving, have been noted. Poor social skills also 
are common (see earlier). Patients generally show lack of ambition 
and difficulties in maintaining permanent employment. 
 Several clinical and genotypic variants of Klinefelter syndrome 
have been described. In addition to small testes with seminiferous 
tubular hyalinization, azoospermia, deficient secondary sexual 
development, and elevated gonadotropins, patients with three or 
more X chromosomes uniformly have severe mental retardation. 
The presence of more than one Y chromosome tends to be associ-
ated with aggressive antisocial behavior and macronodular acne. 
Skeletal deformities such as radioulnar synostosis, flexion deformi-
ties of the elbows, and clinodactyly are more commonly seen in 
Klinefelter variants. Patients with sex chromosome mosaicism 
(XX/XXY) may have only a few of the Klinefelter stigmas. These 
patients may have normal testicular size and may be fertile if their 
testes contain the XY genotype. 
 Medical disorders found to be associated with Klinefelter syn-
drome with more than chance frequency include chronic pulmo-
nary disease (emphysema, chronic bronchitis), varicose veins, 
extragonadal germ cell tumors, cerebrovascular disease, glucose 
intolerance, primary hypothyroidism, and taurodontism—with 
early tooth decay. Some studies suggest that there is a 20-fold 
increased risk of breast cancer, while others do not. 
 B. Laboratory findings 
 Serum testosterone is low or nor-
mal, and FSH and LH concentrations are elevated. Azoospermia 
is present. The buccal smear is chromatin-positive (20% of cells 
having a Barr body), and chromosomal analysis reveals a 47,XXY 
karyotype. 
 Differential Diagnosis 
 Klinefelter syndrome should be distinguished from other causes of 
hypogonadism. Small, firm testes should suggest Klinefelter syn-
drome. Hypothalamic-pituitary hypogonadism may be associated 
with small, rubbery testes if puberty has not occurred or atrophic 
testes if normal puberty has occurred. The consistency of the testes 
in Klinefelter syndrome is also different from that noted in 
acquired forms of adult seminiferous tubular damage. The ele-
vated gonadotropins place the site of the lesion at the testicular 
level, and chromosomal analysis confirms the diagnosis. 
Chromosomal analysis is also required to differentiate classic 
Klinefelter syndrome from the variant forms. 
 Treatment 
 A. Medical treatment 
 Androgen deficiency should be 
treated with testosterone replacement. Patients with personality 
defects should be virilized gradually to decrease the risk of aggres-
sive behavior. Testosterone enanthate or cypionate, 100 mg intra-
muscularly, may be given every 2 to 4 weeks initially and increased 
to 200 mg every 2 weeks if well tolerated. Patients with low- 
normal androgen levels may not require androgen replacement 
therapy. For those desiring fertility, sperm may be extracted 
directly from the testes in about half of the patients and used for 
ICSI with a live birth rate of up to 20%. 
 B. Surgical treatment 
 If gynecomastia presents a cosmetic 
problem, mastectomy may be performed. 
 Course and Prognosis 
 Patients generally feel better after androgen replacement therapy 
has begun. However, the personality defects do not improve, and 
these patients often require long-term psychiatric counseling. Life 
expectancy is not affected. 
 BILATERAL ANORCHIA (VANISHING 
TESTES SYNDROME) 
 Approximately 3% of phenotypic boys undergoing surgery to cor-
rect unilateral or bilateral cryptorchidism are found to have 
absence of one testis, and in about 1% of cryptorchid males both 
testes are absent. Thus, bilateral anorchia is found in approxi-
mately one out of every 20,000 males. 
 Etiology and Pathophysiology 
 Functional testicular tissue must be present during the first 14 
to 16 weeks of embryonic development in order for Wolffian 
duct growth and Müllerian duct regression to occur and for the 
external genitalia to differentiate along male lines. Absence of 
testicular function before this time results in varying degrees of 
male pseudohermaphroditism with ambiguous genitalia. 
Prenatal testicular injury occurring after 16 weeks of gestation 
as a result of trauma, vascular insufficiency, infection, or other 
mechanisms may result in loss of testicular tissue in an other-
wise normal phenotypic male; hence the term  vanishing testes 
syndrome . 
 Testicular Pathology 
 In most instances, no recognizable testicular tissue has been iden-
tified despite extensive dissections. Wolffian duct structures are 
generally normal, and the vas deferens and testicular vessels may 
terminate blindly or in a mass of connective tissue in the inguinal 
canal or scrotum. 
 Clinical Features 
 A. Symptoms and signs 
 At birth, patients appear to be 
normal phenotypic males with bilateral cryptorchidism. Growth 
and development are normal until secondary sexual development 
fails to occur at puberty. The penis remains small; pubic and 
408    CHAPTER 12 Testes
 axillary hair does not fully develop despite the presence of adrenal 
androgens; and the scrotum remains empty. If the patient does not 
receive androgens, eunuchoid proportions develop. Gynecomastia 
does not occur. 
 An occasional patient undergoes partial spontaneous viriliza-
tion at puberty. Although anatomically no testicular tissue has 
been identified in such patients, catheterization studies have dem-
onstrated higher testosterone concentrations in venous blood 
obtained from the spermatic veins than in the peripheral venous 
circulation. This suggests that functional Leydig cells are present 
in some patients, although they are not associated with testicular 
germinal epithelium or stroma. 
 B. Laboratory findings 
 Serum testosterone concentrations 
are generally quite low, and both LH and FSH are markedly ele-
vated. Serum testosterone concentrations do not rise following a 
chorionic gonadotropin stimulation test. Serum Müllerian duct 
inhibitory factor levels are low. Chromosomal analysis discloses a 
46,XY karyotype. 
 C. Imaging studies 
 Testicular artery arteriograms, spermatic 
venograms, and gadolinium-infusion magnetic resonance venog-
raphy show vessels that taper and end in the inguinal canal or 
scrotum without an associated gonad. 
 D. Special examinations 
 Thorough inguinal and abdominal 
laparoscopic examination or retroperitoneal examination at lapa-
rotomy may locate the testes. If testicular vessels and the vas def-
erens are identified and found to terminate blindly together, it 
may be assumed that the testis is absent. 
 Differential Diagnosis 
 Bilateral cryptorchidism must be differentiated from congenital 
bilateral anorchia. A normal serum testosterone concentration 
that rises following stimulation with chorionic gonadotropin is 
indicative of functional Leydig cells and probable bilateral cryp-
torchidism. Elevated serum LH and FSH and a low testosterone 
that fails to rise after administration of exogenous chorionic 
gonadotropin indicate bilateral absence of functional testicular 
tissue. 
 Treatment 
 Androgen replacement therapy is discussed in the section on phar-
macology (see “Androgens,” earlier in the chapter). 
 Implantation of testicular prostheses for cosmetic purposes 
may be beneficial after the scrotum has enlarged in response to 
androgen therapy. 
 LEYDIG CELL APLASIA 
 Defective development of testicular Leydig cells is a rare cause of 
male pseudohermaphroditism with ambiguous genitalia. 
 Etiology and Pathophysiology 
 Testes are present in the inguinal canal and contain prepubertal-
appearing tubules with Sertoli cells and spermatogonia without 
germinal cell maturation. The interstitial tissue has a loose myx-
oid appearance with an absence of Leydig cells. The syndrome 
is caused by inactivating mutations in the LH receptor that 
alters receptor signal transduction. The presence of a vas defer-
ens and epididymis in these patients indicates that the local 
concentration of testosterone was high enough during embryo-
genesis to result in differentiation of the Wolffian duct struc-
tures. However, the ambiguity of the genitalia indicates that the 
androgen concentration in these patients was insufficient to 
bring about full virilization of the external genitalia. The 
absence of Müllerian duct structures is compatible with normal 
fetal secretion of Müllerian duct inhibitory factor from the 
Sertoli cells. 
 Clinical Features 
 A. Symptoms and signs 
 These patients may present in 
infancy with variable degrees of genital ambiguity, including a 
bifid scrotum, clitoral phallus, urogenital sinus, and blind vaginal 
pouch. Alternatively, they may appear as normal phenotypic 
females and escape detection until adolescence, when they present 
with primary amenorrhea, with or without normal breast develop-
ment. The gonads are generally located in the inguinal canal. 
Axillary and pubic hair, although present, may be sparse. Mild 
defects may result in Leydig cell hypoplasia, a disorder whose 
clinical manifestations include micropenis, hypospadias, and vari-
able suppression of fertility. 
 B. Laboratory findings 
 Serum gonadotropins are elevated, 
and testosterone levels are below normal limits for a male and 
within the low-normal range for females. There is no increase in 
testosterone following chorionic gonadotropin administration. 
 Differential Diagnosis 
 Leydig cell aplasia should be differentiated from the vanishing 
testes syndrome, testosterone biosynthetic defects, disorders of 
androgen action, and 5α-reductase deficiency. The differential 
diagnostic features of these disorders are discussed in Chapter 14. 
 Treatment 
 Patients with Leydig cell aplasia respond well to the exogenous 
administration of testosterone, and it would be anticipated that 
they would be fully virilized and even develop some degree of 
spermatogenesis with exogenous testosterone administration. 
However, because the few patients who have been reported have 
been discovered either late in childhood or as adolescents and have 
been raised as females, it would be inappropriate to attempt a 
gender reversal at such a late period. Removal of the cryptorchid 
testes and feminization with exogenous estrogens would appear to 
be the most prudent course of therapy. 
CHAPTER 12 Testes     409
 CRYPTORCHIDISM 
 Cryptorchidism is unilateral or bilateral absence of the testes from 
the scrotum because of failure of normal testicular descent from 
the genital ridge through the external inguinal ring. Between 2% 
and 4% of full-term and 20% to 25% of premature male infants 
have cryptorchidism. In most cases of cryptorchidism noted at 
birth, spontaneous testicular descent occurs during the first year of 
life, reducing the incidence to 0.2% to 0.8% by 1 year of age. 
Approximately 0.75% of adult males are cryptorchid. Unilateral 
cryptorchidism is 5 to 10 times more common than bilateral cryp-
torchidism. 
 Almost 50% of cryptorchid testes are located at the external 
inguinal ring or in a high scrotal position; 19% lie within the 
inguinal canal between the internal and external inguinal rings 
(canalicular); 9% are intra-abdominal; and 23% are ectopic 
(ie, located away from the normal pathway of descent from 
the abdominal cavity to the scrotum). Most ectopic testes 
are found in a superficial inguinal pouch above the external 
inguinal ring. 
 Etiology and Pathophysiology 
 Testicular descent usually occurs between the 12th week of fetal 
development and birth. Both mechanical and hormonal factors 
appear to be important for this process. Cryptorchidism is com-
mon in patients with congenital defects in androgen synthesis or 
action and in patients with congenital gonadotropin deficiency, 
and experimental studies have demonstrated that DHT is 
required for normal testicular descent. These observations sug-
gest that prenatal androgen deficiency may be of etiologic 
importance in the development of cryptorchidism. Environmental 
endocrine disruptors with estrogen or antiandrogen activity, 
such as phthalates or bisphenol A, have been proposed as a cause 
of the increased incidence of cryptorchidism seen in recent 
years. 
 It is not known whether pathologic changes in the testes are 
due to the effects of cryptorchidism or to intrinsic abnormalities 
in the gonad. Experimental studies in animals have shown that an 
increase in the temperature of the testes by 1.5°C to 2°C (34.7°F
-35.6°F) (the temperature differential between the abdomen and 
scrotum) results in depression of spermatogenesis. Serial testicular 
biopsies in cryptorchid patients have demonstrated partial reversal 
of the histologic abnormalities following surgical correction, sug-
gesting that the extra-scrotal environment is partly responsible for 
the observed pathologic abnormalities. 
 An intrinsic abnormality in the testes in patients with unilat-
eral cryptorchidism is suggested by the observation that such 
patients are at increased risk for development of germ cell neo-
plasms in the scrotal testis. Similarly, the observation that adults 
with unilateral cryptorchidism surgically corrected before 
puberty had low sperm counts, high basal serum LH and FSH 
concentrations, and an exaggerated FSH response to GnRH 
suggests either that both testes are intrinsically abnormal or that 
the cryptorchid gonad somehow suppresses the function of the 
scrotal testis. 
 Pathology 
 Histologic studies on cryptorchid testes have demonstrated a decrease 
in the size of the seminiferous tubules and number of spermatogonia 
and an increase in peritubular tissue. The Leydig cells usually appear 
normal. It is unclear at what age these changes first appear. 
Abnormalities have been detected as early as 6 months. It is well 
established that the longer a testis remains cryptorchid, the more 
likely it is to show pathologic changes. More severe changes are gen-
erally found in intra-abdominal testes than in canalicular testes. 
 Clinical Features 
 A. Symptoms and signs 
 There are usually no symptoms 
unless a complication such as testicular torsion, trauma, or malig-
nant degeneration occurs. School-age children may have gender 
identity problems. Adults may complain of infertility, especially if 
they have a history of bilateral cryptorchidism. 
 Absence of one or both testes is the cardinal clinical finding. 
This may be associated with a small scrotum (bilateral cryp-
torchidism) or hemiscrotum (unilateral cryptorchidism). Signs of 
androgen deficiency are not present. 
 B. Laboratory findings 
 Basal or stimulated serum FSH, 
LH, and testosterone concentrations are not helpful in evaluating 
prepubertal unilaterally cryptorchid males. However, serum FSH 
and LH concentrations and the testosterone response to exoge-
nous chorionic gonadotropin are useful in differentiating cryp-
torchid patients from those with congenital anorchia. The latter 
have high basal gonadotropins, low serum testosterone, and absent 
or diminished testosterone rise following chorionic gonadotropin 
stimulation. Alternatively, measurement of the serum concentra-
tion of Müllerian duct inhibitory factor can be used; children with 
no testicular tissue have very low levels in comparison to those 
with bilateral cryptorchidism. 
 Postpubertal adults may have oligospermia, elevated basal 
serum FSH and LH concentrations, and an exaggerated FSH 
increase following GnRH stimulation. Such abnormalities are 
more prevalent in patients with a history of bilateral cryptorchid-
ism than with unilateral cryptorchidism. 
 C. Imaging studies 
 Gadolinium-infusion magnetic reso-
nance venography is a sensitive method for localizing the nonpal-
pable cryptorchid testes. Intravenous urography discloses an 
associated abnormality of the upper urinary tract in 10% of 
 cases—horseshoe kidney, renal hypoplasia, ureteral duplication, 
hydroureter, and hydronephrosis. 
 Differential Diagnosis 
 Retractile testis (pseudocryptorchidism) is due to a hyperactive 
cremasteric reflex, which draws the testicle into the inguinal canal. 
Cold temperature, fear, and genital manipulation commonly acti-
vate the reflex, which is most prominent between the ages of 5 and 
6 years. The child should be examined with warm hands in a 
warm room. The testis can usually be milked into the scrotum 
410    CHAPTER 12 Testes
with gentle pressure over the lower abdomen in the direction of 
the inguinal canal. 
 Bilateral anorchia is associated with elevated gonadotropins, 
decreased testosterone, and an absent or subnormal response to 
stimulation with chorionic gonadotropin. 
 The virilizing forms of congenital adrenal hyperplasia may 
result in prenatal fusion of the labial-scrotal folds and clitoral 
hypertrophy (Chapter 14). Severely affected females have the 
appearance of phenotypic males with bilateral cryptorchidism. 
Because of the potentially disastrous consequences (acute adre-
nal insufficiency) if this diagnosis is missed, a chromosomal 
analysis should be performed on bilaterally cryptorchid pheno-
typic male infants. 
 Complications and Sequelae 
 A. Hernia 
 Approximately 90% of cryptorchid males have 
associated ipsilateral inguinal hernia resulting from failure of the 
processus vaginalis to close. This is rarely symptomatic. 
 B. Torsion 
 Because of the abnormal connection between the 
cryptorchid testis and its supporting tissues, torsion may occur. 
This should be suspected in any patient with abdominal or pelvic 
pain and an ipsilateral empty scrotum. 
 C. Trauma 
 Testes that lie above the pubic tubercle are particu-
larly susceptible to traumatic injury. 
 D. Neoplasms 
 A cryptorchid testis is four to six times more 
likely to undergo malignant degeneration than a normal testis. 
The incidence of such tumors is greater in patients with intra- 
abdominal testes than in patients with canalicular testes. 
Seminomas are the neoplasms most commonly associated with 
maldescended testes. In addition, there is an increased risk for 
development of testicular intraepithelial neoplasia (carcinoma  in 
situ ). Orchiopexy before or during puberty decreases the risk of 
malignancy. Because of the increased risk of neoplasia, many 
urologists recommend orchiectomy for a unilaterally undescended 
testicle in a patient first seen after puberty. Patients who present 
with bilateral cryptorchidism after puberty should have bilateral 
orchiopexy and testicular biopsies to preserve testicular endocrine 
function and to make palpation for detection of neoplasia easier. 
 E. Infertility 
 Over 75% of untreated bilaterally cryptorchid 
males are infertile. About 30% to 50% of bilaterally cryptorchid 
patients who undergo prepubertal orchiopexy have been found to 
be fertile. About half of patients with untreated unilateral cryp-
torchidism are infertile, whereas infertility is found in less than 
one-fourth of such patients whose cryptorchidism is surgically 
repaired before puberty. 
 Prevention 
 Although cryptorchidism cannot be prevented, the complications 
can be avoided. It is clear that the adverse changes that take place 
in the testes are related in part to the location of the maldescended 
testis and the duration of the cryptorchidism. Most testes that are 
undescended at birth enter the scrotum during the first year of 
life. However, it is rare for a cryptorchid testis to descend sponta-
neously after the age of 6 months. Because adverse histologic 
changes have been noted around the age of 2 years, hormonal or 
surgical correction should be undertaken at or before that time, 
ideally between 6 and 12 months. 
 Treatment 
 A. Medical 
 1. Intramuscular chorionic gonadotropin therapy— Because 
growth of the vas deferens and testicular descent are at least 
partially dependent on androgens, stimulation of endogenous 
testosterone secretion by chorionic gonadotropin may correct 
the cryptorchidism. Cryptorchidism is corrected in less than 
25% of patients treated with a course of chorionic gonadotro-
pin, and recent studies suggest that patients with conditions 
that respond to hormonal therapy may actually have retractile 
testes rather than true cryptorchidism. Nevertheless, this 
therapy may be tried prior to orchiopexy, because it is innocu-
ous and may avoid the need for surgery. For bilateral cryp-
torchidism, give a short course of chorionic gonadotropin 
consisting of 3300 U intramuscularly every other day over a 
5-day period (three injections). For unilateral cryptorchidism, 
give 500 U intramuscularly three times a week for 6½ weeks 
(20 injections). 
 2. Intranasal GnRH therapy— GnRH given three times a day 
for 28 days by nasal spray has been shown to be as effective as 
chorionic gonadotropin injections in correcting cryptorchid-
ism in some patients. This therapy is not approved for treat-
ment of cryptorchidism in the United States. 
 B. Surgical treatment 
 Several procedures have been devised 
to place the maldescended testis into the scrotum (orchiopexy). 
The operation may be performed in one or two stages. Inguinal 
hernia should be repaired if present. As noted earlier, the surgery 
is best performed between 6 and 12 months of age. 
 NOONAN SYNDROME (MALE TURNER 
SYNDROME) 
 Phenotypic and genotypic males with many of the physical 
stigmas of classic Turner syndrome have been described under a 
variety of names, including Noonan syndrome and male Turner 
syndrome. It has an incidence of 1:1000 to 1:2500 live births 
and may occur sporadically or may be familial—inherited in an 
autosomal dominant fashion with variable penetrance. 
Approximately half of the patients have a gain-of-function 
mutation in the protein-tyrosine phosphatase, nonreceptor type 
II ( PTPN11 ) gene on chromosome 12, which encodes for Src 
homology region two-domain phosphatase (SHP-2), a signaling 
protein that modulates cellular proliferation, differentiation, 
and migration. A number of pathologic features have been 
noted, including reduced seminiferous tubular size with or 
without sclerosis, diminished or absent germ cells, and Leydig 
cell hyperplasia. 
CHAPTER 12 Testes     411
 Clinical Features 
 A. Symptoms and signs 
 The most common clinical features 
are short stature, webbed neck, hypertelorism, cubitus valgus, and 
bleeding diathesis. Other somatic defects are variably observed in 
these patients. Congenital cardiac anomalies are common and 
involve primarily the right side of the heart—in contrast to 
patients with XO gonadal dysgenesis. 
 Cryptorchidism is frequently present. Although some affected 
individuals are fertile, with normal testes, most have small testes 
and mild to moderate hypogonadism. 
 B. Laboratory findings 
 Serum testosterone concentrations 
are usually low or low-normal, and serum gonadotropins are high. 
The karyotype is 46,XY. 
 Differential Diagnosis 
 The clinical features of Noonan syndrome are sufficiently distinct 
so that confusion with other causes of hypogonadism is usually 
not a problem. However, a rare individual with XY/XO mosaicism 
may have similar somatic anomalies requiring chromosomal 
analysis for differentiation. Some of the phenotypic features are 
shared with the Costello and cardiofaciocutaneous syndromes. 
 Treatment 
 If the patient is hypogonadal, androgen replacement therapy is 
indicated. 
 MYOTONIC DYSTROPHY 
 Myotonic dystrophies types 1 (DM1) and 2 (DM2) are autosomal 
dominant disorders of muscle with multisystem clinical features 
including primary hypogonadism. The underlying lesion in DM1is 
an expansion of the CTG repeat in the 3′ untranslated region of a 
gene that encodes a serine-threonine protein kinase located on chro-
mosome 19. The cause of DM2 is expansion of a CCTG repeat in 
intron 1 of the  zinc finger protein-9 gene on chromosome 3. 
 Testicular histology varies from moderate derangement of sper-
matogenesis with germinal cell arrest to regional hyalinization and 
fibrosis of the seminiferous tubules. The Leydig cells are usually 
preserved and may appear in clumps. 
 The testes are normal in affected prepubertal individuals, and 
puberty generally proceeds normally. Testosterone secretion is 
normal, and secondary sexual characteristics develop appropri-
ately. After puberty, seminiferous tubular atrophy results in a 
decrease in testicular size and change of consistency from firm to 
soft or mushy. Infertility is a consequence of disrupted spermato-
genesis. If testicular hyalinization and fibrosis are extensive, Leydig 
cell function may also be impaired. 
 Clinical Features 
 A. Symptoms and signs 
 The disease usually becomes appar-
ent in adulthood. Progressive weakness and atrophy of the facial, 
neck, hand, and lower extremity muscles is commonly observed. 
Severe atrophy of the temporalis muscles, ptosis due to weakness 
of the levator muscles of the eye with compensatory wrinkling of 
the forehead muscles, and frontal baldness comprise the myo-
pathic facies characteristic of the disorder. Myotonia is present in 
several muscle groups and is characterized by inability to relax the 
muscle normally after a strong contraction. 
 Testicular atrophy is not noted until adulthood, and most 
patients develop and maintain normal facial and body hair growth 
and libido. Gynecomastia is usually not present. 
 Associated features include mental retardation (type 1 disease 
only), cataracts, diabetes mellitus, cardiac arrhythmias, and 
 primary hypothyroidism. 
 B. Laboratory findings 
 Serum testosterone is normal to 
slightly decreased. FSH is uniformly elevated in patients with 
atrophic testes. LH is also frequently elevated, even in patients 
with normal serum testosterone levels. Leydig cell reserve is gener-
ally diminished, with subnormal increases in serum testosterone 
following stimulation with chorionic gonadotropin. An excessive 
rise in FSH and, to a lesser extent, LH is found following GnRH 
stimulation. 
 Treatment 
 There is no therapy that will prevent progressive muscular atrophy 
in this disorder. Testosterone replacement therapy is not indicated 
unless serum testosterone levels are subnormal. 
 ADULT SEMINIFEROUS TUBULE FAILURE 
 Adult seminiferous tubule failure encompasses a spectrum of 
pathologic alterations of the seminiferous tubules that results in 
hypospermatogenesis, germinal cell arrest, germinal cell aplasia, 
and tubular hyalinization. Almost half of infertile males exhibit 
some degree of isolated seminiferous tubule failure. 
 Etiology, Pathology, and Pathophysiology 
 Etiologic factors in seminiferous tubule failure include mumps or 
gonococcal orchitis, leprosy, cryptorchidism, irradiation, uremia, 
alcoholism, paraplegia, lead poisoning, and therapy with antine-
oplastic agents such as cyclophosphamide, chlorambucil, vincris-
tine, methotrexate, and procarbazine. Vascular insufficiency 
resulting from spermatic artery damage during herniorrhaphy, 
testicular torsion, or sickle cell anemia may also selectively damage 
the tubules. Similar pathologic changes may be found in oli-
gospermic patients with varicoceles. Deletions of portions of the Y 
chromosome may also present as adult seminiferous tubule failure. 
In many patients, no etiologic factors can be identified, and the 
condition is referred to as  idiopathic . 
 The rapidly dividing germinal epithelium is more susceptible 
to injury than are the Sertoli or Leydig cells. Thus, pressure necro-
sis (eg, mumps or gonococcal orchitis), increased testicular tem-
perature (eg, cryptorchidism and perhaps varicocele and 
412    CHAPTER 12 Testes
paraplegia), and the direct cytotoxic effects of irradiation, alcohol, 
lead, and chemotherapeutic agents primarily injure the germ cells. 
Although the Sertoli and Leydig cells appear to be morphologi-
cally normal, severe testicular injury may result in functional 
alterations in these cells. 
 Several different lesions may be found in testicular biopsy 
specimens. The pathologic process may involve the entire testes or 
may appear in patches. The least severe lesion is hypospermato-
genesis, in which all stages of spermatogenesis are present but 
there is a decrease in the number of germinal epithelial cells. Some 
degree of peritubular fibrosis may be present. Cessation of devel-
opment at the primary spermatocyte or spermatogonial stage of 
the spermatogenic cycle is classified as germinal cell arrest. More 
severely affected testes may demonstrate a complete absence of 
germ cells with maintenance of morphologically normal Sertoli 
cells (Sertoli cell–only syndrome). The most severe lesion is fibro-
sis or hyalinization of the tubules. This latter pattern may be 
indistinguishable from that seen in Klinefelter syndrome. 
 Irrespective of the etiologic factors involved in damage to the 
germinal epithelium, the alterations in spermatogenesis result in 
oligospermia. If the damage is severe, as in the Sertoli cell–only 
syndrome or tubular hyalinization, azoospermia may be present. 
Because testicular volume consists chiefly of tubules, some degree 
of testicular atrophy is often present in these patients. Some 
patients have elevations in basal serum FSH concentrations and 
demonstrate a hyperresponsive FSH rise following GnRH, sug-
gesting that the Sertoli cells are functionally abnormal despite 
their normal histologic appearance. 
 Clinical Features 
 A. Symptoms and signs 
 Infertility is usually the only com-
plaint. Mild to moderate testicular atrophy may be present. 
Careful examination should be made for the presence of varicocele 
by palpating the spermatic cord during Valsalva maneuver with 
the patient in the upright position. The patients are fully virilized, 
and gynecomastia is not present. 
 B. Laboratory findings 
 Semen analysis shows oligospermia 
or azoospermia, and serum testosterone and LH concentrations 
are normal. Basal serum FSH levels may be normal or high, and 
an excessive FSH rise following GnRH may be present. Serum 
inhibin B levels generally are low, but they add little information 
beyond that of the serum FSH measurement. 
 Differential Diagnosis 
 Patients with hypothalamic or pituitary disorders may have oli-
gospermia or azoospermia and testicular atrophy. The serum FSH 
and LH concentrations are often in the low-normal range, and the 
testosterone level is usually (not always) diminished. The presence 
of neurologic and ophthalmologic abnormalities, diabetes insipi-
dus, anterior pituitary trophic hormone deficiencies, or an elevated 
serum PRL concentration distinguishes these patients from those 
with primary seminiferous tubule failure. Other causes of primary 
testicular failure are associated either with clinical signs and 
 symptoms of androgen deficiency or with enough somatic abnor-
malities to allow differentiation from isolated seminiferous tubule 
failure. 
 Prevention 
 In many instances, damage to the seminiferous tubules cannot be 
prevented. Early correction of cryptorchidism, adequate shielding 
of the testes during diagnostic radiologic procedures or radio-
therapy, and limitation of the total dose of chemotherapeutic 
agents may prevent or ameliorate the adverse effects. 
 Treatment 
 A. Medical 
 Attempts to treat oligospermia and infertility 
medically have included low-dose testosterone, exogenous gonad-
otropins, thyroid hormone therapy, vitamins, bromocriptine, 
aromatase inhibitors, tamoxifen, and clomiphene citrate. None of 
these agents have been found to be uniformly beneficial, and sev-
eral may actually lead to a decrease in the sperm count. 
 B. Surgical 
 Some of the pathologic changes in the testes have 
been reversed by early orchiopexy in cryptorchid individuals. If a 
varicocele is found in an oligospermic, infertile male, it should be 
ligated. 
 Course and Prognosis 
 Patients who have received up to 300 cGy of testicular irradiation 
may show partial or full recovery of spermatogenesis months to 
years following exposure. The prognosis for recovery is better for 
individuals who receive the irradiation over a short interval than 
for those who are exposed over several weeks. Radiation therapy 
for prostate cancer may cause an acute reduction in spermatogen-
esis and testosterone followed in most patients by partial or full 
recovery. 
 Recovery of spermatogenesis may also occur months to years 
following administration of chemotherapeutic agents. The most 
important factor determining prognosis is the total dose of che-
motherapy administered. 
 Improvement in the quality of the semen is found in 60% to 
80% of patients following successful repair of varicocele. 
Restoration of fertility has been reported in about half of such 
patients. 
 The prognosis for spontaneous improvement of idiopathic 
oligospermia due to infection or infarction is poor. 
 ADULT LEYDIG CELL FAILURE 
(ANDROPAUSE) 
 In contrast to the menopause in women, men do not experience 
an abrupt decline or cessation of gonadal function. However, a 
gradual diminution of testicular function does occur in many 
men as part of the aging process (see Chapter 23). It is not known 
how many men develop symptoms directly attributable to this 
phenomenon. 
CHAPTER 12 Testes     413
 Etiology, Pathology, and Pathophysiology 
 After age 50, there is a gradual decrease in the total serum testos-
terone concentration, although the actual values remain within 
the normal range. The levels of free testosterone decrease to a 
greater extent because of an increase in SHBG. The testosterone 
production rate declines and Leydig cell responsiveness to hCG 
also decreases. A gradual compensatory increase in serum LH 
levels has also been noted. Aging also is associated with alterations 
in the hypothalamic-pituitary portion of the axis. 
 Histologic studies of the aging testes have shown patchy 
degenerative changes in the seminiferous tubules with a reduc-
tion in number and volume of Leydig cells. The pathologic 
changes are first noted in the regions most remote from the arte-
rial blood supply. Thus, microvascular insufficiency may be the 
etiologic basis for the histologic tubular changes and the decrease 
in Leydig cell function noted with aging. In addition, virtually 
all of the conditions that cause adult seminiferous tubule failure 
may lead to Leydig cell dysfunction if testicular injury is severe 
enough. 
 Clinical Features 
 A. Symptoms and signs  A great many symptoms have been 
attributed to the male climacteric (andropause), including 
decreased libido and potency, emotional instability, fatigue, 
decreased strength, decreased concentrating ability, vasomotor 
instability (palpitations, hot flushes, diaphoresis), and a variety of 
diffuse aches and pains. There are usually no associated signs 
unless the testicular injury is severe. In such patients, a decrease 
in testicular volume and consistency may be present as well as 
gynecomastia. 
 B. Laboratory findings 
 Serum testosterone may be low or 
low-normal. Serum LH concentration is usually high-normal or 
slightly high, but a number of men have a normal LH and border-
line low total and free testosterone. Oligospermia is usually pres-
ent. Bone mineral density may be decreased. 
 C. Special examinations 
 Because many men with com-
plaints compatible with Leydig cell failure have borderline low 
testosterone concentrations and LH concentrations within the 
normal adult range, a therapeutic testosterone/placebo trial may 
be attempted. The test is best performed double-blind over an 
8-week period. During the first or last 4 weeks, the patient 
receives testosterone enanthate, 100 mg intramuscularly per 
week; during the other 4-week period, placebo injections are 
administered. The patient is interviewed by the physician 
2 weeks after the last course of injections. After the interview, the 
code is broken; if the patient notes amelioration of symptoms 
during the period of androgen administration but not during the 
placebo period, the diagnosis or adult Leydig cell failure is sub-
stantiated. If the patient experiences no subjective improvement 
following testosterone, or if improvement is noted following 
both placebo and testosterone injections, Leydig cell failure is 
effectively ruled out. 
 Differential Diagnosis 
 Erectile dysfunction from vascular, neurologic, or psychologic 
causes must be distinguished from Leydig cell failure. A therapeu-
tic trial of androgen therapy does not help erectile dysfunction 
that is not due to androgen deficiency. 
 Treatment 
 Androgen replacement therapy is the treatment of choice for both 
symptomatic and asymptomatic Leydig cell failure. This results in 
increases in lean body mass, bone mineral density, hemoglobin, 
libido, strength, and sense of well-being and decreases in total 
and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol and markers of bone 
resorption. 
 MALE INFERTILITY 
 About 15% of married couples are unable to produce off spring. 
Male factors are responsible in about 30% of cases, female factors 
in about 45%, and couple factors in 25%. 
 Etiology and Pathophysiology 
 In order for conception to occur, spermatogenesis must be nor-
mal, the sperm must complete its maturation during transport 
through patent ducts, adequate amounts of seminal plasma must 
be added to provide volume and nutritional elements, and the 
male must be able to deposit the semen near the female’s cervix. 
Any defect in this pathway can result in infertility due to a male 
factor problem. The spermatozoa must also be able to penetrate 
the cervical mucus and reach the uterine tubes, where conception 
takes place. These latter events may fail to occur if there are female 
reproductive tract disorders or abnormalities of sperm motility or 
fertilizing capacity. 
 Table 12–4 lists the identified causes of male infertility. 
Disturbances in the function of the hypothalamus, pituitary, 
adrenals, or thyroid are found in approximately 4% of males 
evaluated for infertility. Sex chromosome abnormalities, cryp-
torchidism, adult seminiferous tubule failure, and other forms of 
primary testicular failure are found in 15% of infertile males. 
Congenital or acquired ductal problems are found in approxi-
mately 6% of such patients, and poor coital technique, sexual 
dysfunction, ejaculatory disturbances, and anatomic abnormalities 
such as hypospadias are causative factors in 4% to 5% of patients 
evaluated for infertility. Idiopathic infertility, in which no cause 
can be identified with certainty, accounts for approximately 35% 
of patients. Some of these patients may have mild forms of andro-
gen receptor defects, microdeletions of the Y chromosome, or 
mutations in the cystic fibrosis gene. Autoimmune disturbances 
that lead to sperm agglutination and immobilization causes infer-
tility in only a small fraction of patients. Varicoceles are found in 
25% to 40% of patients classified as having idiopathic infertility, 
and experimental studies have shown an adverse effect of varicoce-
les on spermatogenesis. However, it is unclear why some individu-
als appear to be more susceptible to testicular problems from 
414    CHAPTER 12 Testes
varicoceles, as the presence of a varicocele is not uniformly associ-
ated with infertility and they are found in 8% to 20% of healthy 
males in the general population. 
 Clinical Features 
 A. Symptoms and signs 
 The clinical features of the hypo-
thalamic-pituitary, thyroid, adrenal, testicular, and sexual dysfunc-
tional disorders have been discussed in preceding sections of this 
chapter. Evaluation for the presence of varicocele has also been 
described. 
 Patients with immotile cilia syndrome have associated muco-
ciliary transport defects in the lower airways that result in chronic 
pulmonary obstructive disease. Some patients with this disorder 
also have Kartagener syndrome, with sinusitis, bronchiectasis, and 
situs inversus. Infections of the epididymis or vas deferens may be 
asymptomatic or associated with scrotal pain that may radiate to 
the flank, fever, epididymal swelling and tenderness, and urethral 
discharge. The presence of thickened, enlarged epididymis and vas 
is indicative of chronic epididymitis. Chronic prostatitis is usually 
asymptomatic, although a perineal aching sensation or low back 
pain may be described. A boggy or indurated prostate may be 
found on rectal palpation. A careful examination for the presence 
of penile anatomic abnormalities such as chordee, hypospadias, or 
epispadias should be made, because these defects may prevent the 
deposit of sperm in the vagina. 
 B. Laboratory findings 
 A carefully collected and performed 
semen analysis is mandatory. A normal report indicates normal 
endocrine function and spermatogenesis and an intact transport 
system. Sperm function can be further evaluated through sperm 
penetration assays, the inducibility of the acrosome reaction, and 
motility evaluation on a postcoital test. Immunologic infertility 
can be examined with a mixed antiglobulin reaction test for anti-
sperm antibodies. 
 If semen analysis shows abnormalities, at least two more speci-
mens should be obtained at monthly intervals. Persistent 
 oligospermia or azoospermia should be evaluated by studies out-
lined in  Figure 12–6 . Patients with severe oligospermia or azoo-
spermia should undergo chromosome analysis and testing for Yq 
microdeletions. If congenital absence of the vas deferens is present, 
testing for cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator 
gene mutations should be performed. 
 The female partner should be thoroughly examined to verify pat-
ency of the uterus and uterine tubes, normal ovulation, and normal 
cervical mucus. This examination must be performed even in the 
presence of a male factor abnormality, because infertility is due to a 
combination of male and female factors in about 20% of cases. 
 C. Imaging studies 
 In patients with azoospermia or severe 
oligospermia, transscrotal ultrasound allows an assessment of the 
seminal vesicles and ejaculatory ducts. Patency of the ducts can be 
examined with scrotal vasography or seminovesiculography. 
 Treatment 
 A. Endocrine disorders 
 Correction of hyperthyroidism, 
hypothyroidism, adrenal insufficiency, and congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia generally restores fertility. Patients with hypogonado-
tropic hypogonadism may have spermatogenesis initiated with 
gonadotropin therapy. Chorionic gonadotropin (2000 units intra-
muscularly three times per week) with urofollitropin or follitropin 
beta (75 units intramuscularly three times per week) added after 
12 to 18 months if sperm cells do not appear in the ejaculate, 
restores spermatogenesis in most hypogonadotropic men. The 
sperm count following such therapy usually does not exceed 
10 million/mL but may still allow impregnation. Patients with 
isolated deficiency of LH may respond to chorionic gonadotropin 
alone. There is no effective therapy for adult seminiferous tubule 
failure not associated with varicocele or cryptorchidism. However, 
if the oligospermia is mild (10-20 million/mL), cup insemination 
of the female partner with concentrates of semen may be tried. In 
vitro fertilization (IVF) and other assisted reproductive tech-
niques, including direct injection of a spermatozoon into an egg 
(intracytoplasmic sperm injection; ICSI), are increasingly being 
utilized as a method for achieving pregnancy in couples in which 
the male is oligospermic. 
 B. Defects of spermatogenesis 
 There is no treatment for 
immotile cilia syndrome or for chromosomal abnormalities associ-
ated with defective spermatogenesis. Drugs that interfere with 
spermatogenesis should be discontinued. These include the anti-
metabolites, phenytoin, marijuana, alcohol, monoamine oxidase 
inhibitors, sulfasalazine, and nitrofurantoin. Discontinuing use of 
these agents may be accompanied by restoration of normal sperm 
TABLE 12–4 Causes of male infertility.
Endocrine
 Hypothalamic-pituitary disorders
 Testicular disorders
 Defects of androgen action
 Hyperthyroidism
 Hypothyroidism
 Adrenal insufficiency
 Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
Systemic illness
Defects in spermatogenesis
 Immotile cilia syndrome
 Drug induced
 Adult seminiferous tubule failure
 Microdeletions within Y chromosomes
Ductal obstruction
 Congential
 Acquired
Seminal vesicle disease
Prostatic disease
Varicocele
Retrograde ejaculation
Antibodies to sperm or seminal plasma
Anatomic defects of the penis
Poor coital technique
Sexual dysfunction
Idiopathic
CHAPTER 12 Testes     415
production. In some patients with maturation arrest, severe 
hypospermatogenesis or incomplete Sertoli cell only, retrieval of 
sperm through testicular aspiration or testicular biopsy followed 
by IVF or ICSI have resulted in pregnancies. 
 C. Ductal obstruction 
 Localized obstruction of the vas def-
erens may be treated by vasovasostomy. Sperm are detected in the 
ejaculate of 60% to 80% of patients following this procedure. 
However, the subsequent fertility rate is only 40% to 50%; the 
presence of antisperm antibodies that agglutinate or immobilize 
sperms probably accounts for the high failure rate. 
 Epididymovasostomy may be performed for epididymal 
obstruction. Sperm in the postoperative ejaculate have been found 
in approximately half of patients treated with this procedure, but 
subsequent fertility has been demonstrated in only 20% of cases. 
 D. Genital tract infections 
 Acute prostatitis may be treated 
with daily sitz baths, prostatic massage, and antibiotics. A combi-
nation of trimethoprim (400 mg) and sulfamethoxazole (2000 
mg), twice a day for 10 days followed by the same dosage once a 
day for another 20 days, has been used with some success. Chronic 
prostatitis requires a longer period of treatment or a switch to a 
fluoroquinolone, such as ciprofloxacin 500 mg orally twice daily 
for 4 weeks. Acute epididymitis may respond to injections of local 
anesthetic into the spermatic cord just above the testicle. 
Appropriate antibiotic therapy should also be given. The progno-
sis for fertility following severe bilateral chronic epididymitis or 
extensive scarring from acute epididymitis is poor. 
 E. Varicocele 
 The presence of varicocele in an infertile male 
with oligospermia is considered an indication for surgical ligation 
of the incompetent spermatic veins or radiographic embolization of 
the veins. Improvement in the semen is noted in 60% to 80% of 
treated patients, and about half are subsequently fertile. 
 F. Retrograde ejaculation 
 Ejaculation of semen into the 
urinary bladder may occur following disruption of the internal blad-
der sphincter or with neuropathic disorders such as diabetic auto-
nomic neuropathy. Normal ejaculation has been restored in a few 
patients with the latter problem following administration of phenyl-
propanolamine, 15 mg orally twice daily in timed-release capsules. 
Sperm can also be recovered from the bladder following masturba-
tion for the purpose of direct insemination of the female partner. 
 G. Antibodies to sperm or seminal plasma 
 Antibodies 
in the female genital tract that agglutinate or immobilize sperm 
may be difficult to treat. Older methods such as condom therapy 
or administration of glucocorticoids have not been uniformly suc-
cessful. Currently, intrauterine insemination with washed sperma-
tozoa, IVF, and gamete intrafallopian transfer are considered the 
most effective treatments. 
 H. Anatomic defects of the penis 
 Patients with hypospa-
dias, epispadias, or severe chordee may collect semen by masturba-
tion for use in insemination. 
 I. Poor coital technique 
 Couples should be counseled not 
to use vaginal lubricants or postcoital douches. In order to maxi-
mize the sperm count in cases of borderline oligospermia, inter-
course should not be more frequent than every other day. Exposure 
of the cervix to the seminal plasma is increased by having the 
woman lie supine with her knees bent up for 20 minutes after 
intercourse. 
 Course and Prognosis 
 The prognosis for fertility depends on the underlying cause. It is 
good for patients with nontesticular endocrine abnormalities, 
varicoceles, retrograde ejaculation, and anatomic defects of the 
penis. If fertility cannot be restored, the couple should be coun-
seled regarding intrauterine insemination with concentrated 
sperm, artificial insemination, IVF, ICSI, or adoption. 
 ERECTILE DYSFUNCTION 
 Erectile dysfunction is the inability to achieve or maintain an erec-
tion of sufficient duration and firmness to complete satisfactory 
sexual activity in more than 25% of attempts. It may occur with 
or without associated disturbances of libido or ejaculation. 
Approximately 5% of men have complete erectile dysfunction by 
age 40 and 15% by age 70. Some degree of erectile dysfunction is 
present in about 50% of men between ages 40 and 70. 
 Etiology and Pathophysiology 
 Penile erection occurs when blood flow to the penile erectile tissue 
(corpora cavernosa and spongiosum) increases as a result of dila-
tion of the urethral artery, the artery of the bulb of the penis, the 
deep artery of the penis, and the dorsal artery of the penis follow-
ing psychogenic or sensory stimuli transmitted to the limbic sys-
tem and then to the thoracolumbar and sacral autonomic nervous 
system. The relaxation of the cavernosal arterial and cavernosal 
trabecular sinusoidal smooth muscle occurs following stimulation 
of the sacral parasympathetic (S2-4) nerves, which results in the 
release of acetylcholine, vasoactive intestinal peptide, and an 
endothelial cell-derived nitric oxide, which activates guanylyl 
cyclase. As the sinusoids become engorged, the subtunical venous 
plexus is compressed against the tunica albuginea, preventing 
egress of blood from the penis. Contraction of the bulbocaverno-
sus muscle through stimulation of the somatic portion of the S2 
to S4 pudendal nerves further increases the intracavernosal pres-
sure. These processes result in the distention, engorgement, and 
rigidity of the penis that constitute erection. 
 Broadly speaking, erectile dysfunction may be divided into 
psychogenic and organic causes. Major epidemiologic factors that 
have been associated with erectile dysfunction include diabetes, 
hypertension, depression, smoking, aging, low high-density lipo-
protein cholesterol, metabolic syndrome, cardiovascular disease, 
lower urinary tract symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia, and 
a low serum DHEA sulfate level.  Table 12–5 lists various patho-
logic conditions and drugs that may be associated with erectile 
dysfunction. 
416    CHAPTER 12 Testes
 Most organic causes of erectile dysfunction result from distur-
bances in the neurologic pathways essential for the initiation and 
maintenance of erection or in the blood supply to the penis. Many 
of the endocrine disorders, systemic illnesses, and drugs associated 
with erectile dysfunction affect libido, the autonomic pathways 
essential for erection, or the blood flow to the penis. Venous 
incompetence because of anatomic defects in the corpora cavern-
osa or subtunical venous plexus is being recognized with increas-
ing frequency. Local urogenital disorders such as Peyronie disease 
(idiopathic fibrosis of the covering sheath of the corpus caverno-
sum) may mechanically interfere with erection. In some patients, 
the cause of erectile dysfunction is multifactorial. For example, 
some degree of erectile dysfunction is reported by over 50% of 
men with diabetes mellitus. The basis of the erectile dysfunction 
is usually autonomic neuropathy. However, vascular insufficiency, 
antihypertensive medication, uremia, and depression may also 
cause or contribute to the problem in diabetics. 
 Clinical Features 
 A. Symptoms and signs 
 Patients may complain of constant 
or episodic inability to initiate or maintain an erection, decreased 
penile turgidity, decreased libido, or a combination of these diffi-
culties. The degree of erectile dysfunction can be assessed by 
questionnaires such as the International Index of Erectile Function 
or the Sexual Health Inventory for men. Besides the specific sexual 
dysfunction symptoms, symptoms and signs of a more pervasive 
emotional or psychiatric problem may be elicited. If an underlying 
neurologic, vascular, or systemic disorder is the cause of erectile 
dysfunction, additional symptoms and signs referable to the ana-
tomic or metabolic disturbances may be present. A history of 
claudication of the buttocks or lower extremities should direct 
attention toward arterial insufficiency. Lower urinary tract disor-
ders may be screened for through the use of the International 
Prostate Symptom Score questionnaire. A thorough history of 
medication, herb, illicit drug and alcohol use should be obtained. 
 The differentiation between psychogenic and organic erectile 
dysfunction can usually be made on the basis of the history. Even 
though the patient may be selectively unable to obtain or maintain 
a satisfactory erection to complete sexual intercourse, a history of 
repeated normal erections at other times is indicative of psycho-
genic erectile dysfunction. Thus, a history of erections that occur 
nocturnally, during masturbation, or during foreplay or with other 
sexual partners eliminates significant neurologic, vascular, or endo-
crine causes of erectile dysfunction. Patients with psychogenic 
erectile dysfunction often note a sudden onset of sexual dysfunc-
tion concurrently with a significant event in their lives such as loss 
of a friend or relative, an extramarital affair, or the loss of a job. 
 Patients with organic erectile dysfunction generally note a 
more gradual and global loss of potency. Initially, such individuals 
may be able to achieve erections with strong sexual stimuli, but 
ultimately they may be unable to achieve a fully turgid erection 
under any circumstances. In contrast to patients with psychogenic 
erectile dysfunction, patients with organic erectile dysfunction 
generally maintain a normal libido. However, patients with 
 systemic illness may have a concurrent diminution of libido and 
TABLE 12–5 Organic causes of erectile dysfunction.
Neurologic
Anterior temporal lobe lesions
Spinal cord lesions
Autonomic neuropathy
Vascular
Leriche syndrome
Pelvic vascular insufficiency
Sickle cell disease
Venous leaks
Aging
Endocrine
Diabetes mellitus
Hypogonadism
Hyperprolactinemia
Adrenal insufficiency
Feminizing tumors
Hypothyroidism
Hyperthyroidism
Urogenital
Trauma
Castration
Priapism
Peyronie disease
Systemic Illness
Cardiac insufficiency
Cirrhosis
Uremia
Respiratory insufficiency
Lead poisoning
Postoperative
Aortoilliac or aortofemoral reconstruction
Lumbar sympathectomy
Perineal prostatectomy
Retroperitoneal dissection
Drugs
Endocrinologic
Antiandrogens
Estrogens
5α-Reductase inhibitors
GnRH agonists
Antihypertensives
Diuretics
Antidepressants
 Selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitors
 Lithium
 Monamine oxidase inhibitors
 Tricyclic antidepressants
Other
 Tobacco
 Alcohol
 Opioids
 H2-receptor antagonists
 Gemfibrozil
 Amphetamines
 Cocaine
 Interferon-α
 Anticonvulsants
 Disopyramide
CHAPTER 12 Testes     417
potency. Hypogonadism should be suspected in a patient who has 
never had an erection (primary erectile dysfunction). 
 During the physical examination, the patient’s secondary sex-
ual characteristics should be assessed and examination performed 
for gynecomastia, discordant or diminished femoral pulses, 
reduced testicular volume or consistency, penile plaques, and evi-
dence of peripheral or autonomic neuropathy. The bulbocaverno-
sus reflex tests the integrity of the S2 to S4 nerves. It is performed 
by inserting a finger into the patient’s rectum while squeezing his 
glans penis. Contraction of the anal musculature represents a nor-
mal response. 
 B. Laboratory findings and special examinations 
 Serum testosterone measurements may uncover a mild and other-
wise asymptomatic androgen deficiency. If the testosterone level is 
low, serum PRL should be measured because hyperprolactine-
mia—whether drug-induced or due to a pituitary or hypothalamic 
lesion—may inhibit androgen production. Diabetes mellitus is a 
relatively common cause of erectile dysfunction and erectile dys-
function may be the presenting symptom of diabetes; therefore, 
fasting and 2-hour postprandial blood glucose measurements 
should be ordered. 
 In a patient with a normal physical examination and screening 
blood tests, many clinicians elect to begin with a therapeutic trial 
of a type 5 phosphodiesterase (PDE5) inhibitor that potentiates 
the effects of nitric oxide by inhibiting the breakdown of cyclic 
guanosine monophosphate. The initial oral dose is usually 50 mg 
of sildenafil (Viagra), 10 mg of tadalafil (Cialis), or 10 mg vard-
enafil (Levitra). This should be tried only if the patient is not 
taking nitrates, has not had a myocardial infarction in the last 
6 months, and does not have unstable angina, hypotension, severe 
congestive heart failure, or retinitis pigmentosa. 
 The integrity of the neurologic pathways and the ability of the 
blood vessels to deliver a sufficient amount of blood to the penis 
for erection to occur may be objectively examined by placement of 
a strain gauge behind the glans penis and at the base of the penis 
at the time the patient retires for sleep. The occurrence of noctur-
nal penile tumescence can thus be recorded. Healthy men and 
those with psychogenic erectile dysfunction have three to five erec-
tions a night associated with rapid eye movement sleep. Absence 
or reduced frequency of nocturnal tumescence indicates an 
organic lesion. Penile rigidity as well as tumescence can be evalu-
ated with an ambulatory monitor called RigiScan. The vascular 
integrity of the penis may be examined by Doppler ultrasonogra-
phy with spectral analysis following intracorporeal injection of a 
vasoactive drug. This method allows detection of venous leaks 
with a sensitivity of 55% to 100% and specificity of 69% to 88%. 
Arterial problems are also detected with a sensitivity of 82% to 
100% and specificity of 64% to 96%. The choice of other labora-
tory tests such as cavernosometry, cavernosography, or arteriogra-
phy depends on associated organic symptoms or signs. 
 Treatment 
 Discontinuation of an offending drug usually results in a return 
of potency. Similarly, effective therapy of an underlying systemic 
or endocrine disorder may cure the erectile dysfunction. For psy-
chogenic erectile dysfunction, simple reassurance and explana-
tion, formal psychotherapy, and various forms of behavioral 
therapy have a reported 40% to 70% success rate. Sildenafil, 25 
to 100 mg taken orally about 1 hour before anticipated inter-
course is approximately 70% to 80% effective in patients with a 
wide variety of causes of erectile dysfunction, including psycho-
genic ones. This agent is absolutely contraindicated in men 
receiving oral or transdermal nitrates for vascular disease. Side 
effects include headache (16%) and visual disturbances (3%). 
Other PDE5 inhibitors that are available include vardenafil 
(2.5-20 mg) and tadalafil (2.5-20 mg). 
 Vasoactive drugs including prostaglandin E 1 , papaverine 
hydrochloride, and phentolamine mesylate, either alone or in 
combination, may induce an erection following intracavernous 
injection. Of these, the only Food and Drug Administration-
approved agent is prostaglandin E 1 (alprostadil), which needs to 
be individualized within the dosage range of 2.5 to 60 µg per 
injection. In clinical studies, up to 90% of men with erectile 
dysfunction developed erections with intracavernosal injections. 
Side effects include penile pain (33% of patients), hematoma 
(3%), penile fibrosis (3%), and priapism (0.4%). Intraurethral 
insertion of a 1.4-mm pellet containing alprostadil leads to 
satisfactory erections in two-thirds of patients, with effects 
beginning within 10 minutes and lasting 30-60 minutes. The 
major side effects are penile pain (36%), urethral pain (13%), 
and dizziness (4%). 
 Devices have been developed that use suction to induce penile 
engorgement and constrictive bands to maintain the ensuing erec-
tion. Erections are achieved in 90% of patients with an approxi-
mately 70% couple satisfaction rate. Alternatively, a surgically 
implanted semirigid or inflatable penile prosthesis provides satis-
factory results in 85% to 90% of cases, but the device must be 
replaced every 5 to 10 years. 
 Repair of venous leaks and microsurgical revascularization of 
arterial lesions have had variable success rates. Patients with 
permanent erectile dysfunction due to organic lesions that can-
not be corrected should be counseled in noncoital sensate focus 
techniques. 
 GYNECOMASTIA 
 Gynecomastia is common during the neonatal period and is pres-
ent in about 70% of pubertal males (Chapter 15). Clinically 
apparent gynecomastia has been noted at autopsy in almost 1% of 
adult males, and 40% of autopsied males have histologic evidence 
of gynecomastia. 
 Etiology and Pathophysiology 
 The causes of gynecomastia are listed in  Table 12–6 . Several 
mechanisms have been proposed to account for this disorder. All 
involve a relative imbalance between estrogen and androgen con-
centrations or action at the mammary gland level. Decrease in free 
testosterone may be due to primary gonadal disease or an increase 
418    CHAPTER 12 Testes
in SHBG as is found in hyperthyroidism and some forms of liver 
disease (eg, alcoholic cirrhosis). Decreased androgen action in 
patients with the androgen insensitivity syndromes results in 
unopposed estrogen action on the breast glandular tissue. Acute or 
chronic excessive stimulation of the Leydig cells by pituitary 
gonadotropins alters the steroidogenic pathways and favors exces-
sive estrogen and estrogen precursor secretion relative to testoster-
one production. This mechanism may be responsible for the 
gynecomastia found with hypergonadotropic states such as 
Klinefelter syndrome and adult Leydig cell failure. The rise of 
gonadotropins during puberty may lead to an estrogen-androgen 
imbalance by similar mechanisms. Patients who are malnourished 
or have systemic illness may develop gynecomastia during refeed-
ing or treatment of the underlying disorder. Malnourishment and 
chronic illness are accompanied by a reduction in gonadotropin 
secretion, and during recovery the gonadotropins rise and may 
stimulate excessive Leydig cell production of estrogens relative to 
testosterone. 
 Excessive stimulation of Leydig cells may also occur in patients 
with hCG-producing trophoblastic or nontrophoblastic tumors. 
In addition, some of these tumors are able to convert estrogen 
precursors into estradiol. Feminizing adrenocortical and Leydig 
cell neoplasms may directly secrete excessive quantities of estro-
gens. The mechanisms by which PRL-secreting pituitary tumors 
and hyperprolactinemia produce gynecomastia are unclear. 
Elevated serum PRL levels may lower testosterone production and 
diminish the peripheral actions of testosterone, which may result 
in an excessive estrogen effect on the breast that is not counter-
acted by androgens. 
 Drugs may reduce androgen production (eg, spironolactone, 
ketoconazole), peripherally antagonize androgen action 
(spironolactone, cimetidine), or interact with breast estrogen 
receptors (spironolactone and phytoestrogens in marijuana). 
 Finally, it has been proposed that patients with idiopathic and 
familial gynecomastia have breast glandular tissue that is inordi-
nately sensitive to normal circulating levels of estrogen or exces-
sively converts estrogen precursors to estrogens. 
 Pathology 
 Three histologic patterns of gynecomastia have been recognized. 
The florid pattern consists of an increase in the number of bud-
ding ducts, proliferation of the ductal epithelium, periductal 
edema, and a cellular fibroblastic stroma. The fibrous type has 
dilated ducts, minimal duct epithelial proliferation, no periductal 
edema, and a virtually acellular fibrous stroma. An intermediate 
pattern contains features of both types. 
 Although it has been proposed that different causes of gyne-
comastia are associated with either the florid or the fibrous pat-
tern, it appears that the duration of gynecomastia is the most 
important factor in determining the pathologic picture. 
Approximately 75% of patients with gynecomastia of 4 months’ 
duration or less exhibit the florid pattern, whereas 90% of 
patients with gynecomastia lasting a year or more have the 
fibrous type. Between 4 months and 1 year, 60% of patients have 
the intermediate pattern. 
TABLE 12–6 Causes of gynecomastia.
Physiologic
Neonatal
Pubertal
Involutional
Drug Induced
Hormones
 Androgens and anabolic steroids
 Chorionic gonadotropin
 Estrogens and estrogen agonists
 Growth hormone
 Environmental estrogens
Antiandrogens or inhibitors of androgen synthesis
 Cyproterone
 Flutamide
 Biclutamide
Antibiotics
 Isoniazid
 Ketoconazole
 Metronidazole
Antiulcer medications
 Cimetidine
 Omeprazole
 Ranitidine
Cancer chemotherapeutic agents (especially alkylating agents)
Cardiovascular drugs
 Amiodarone
 Captopril
 Enalapril
 Nifedipine
 Spironolactone
 Verapamil
Psychoactive agents
 Diazepam
 Haloperidol
 Phenothiazines
 Tricyclic antidepressants
Drugs of abuse
 Alcohol
 Amphetamines
 Heroin
 Marijuana
Other
 Highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART)
 Phenytoin
 Penicillamine
Endocrine
Primary hypogonadism with Leydig cell damage
Hyperprolactinemia
Hyperthyroidism
Androgen receptor disorders
Excessive aromatase activity
Systemic Diseases
Hepatic cirrhosis
Uremia
Recovery from malnourishment
Neoplasms
Testicular germ cell or Leydig cell tumors
Feminizing adrenocortical adenoma or carcinoma
HCG-secreting nontrophoblastic neoplasms
Idiopathic
CHAPTER 12 Testes     419
 Clinical Features 
 A. Symptoms and signs The principal complaint is unilateral 
or bilateral concentric enlargement of breast glandular tissue. 
Nipple or breast pain is present in one-fourth of patients and 
objective tenderness in about 40%. A complaint of nipple dis-
charge can be elicited in 4% of cases. Histologic examination has 
demonstrated that gynecomastia is almost always bilateral, 
although grossly it may be detected only on one side. The patient 
often complains of discomfort in one breast despite obvious bilat-
eral gynecomastia. Breast or nipple discomfort generally lasts less 
than 1 year. Chronic gynecomastia is usually asymptomatic, 
with the major complaint being the cosmetic one.  Symptoms 
and signs of underlying disorders may be present. Gynecomastia 
may be the earliest manifestation of an hCG-secreting testicu-
lar tumor; therefore, it is mandatory that careful examination 
of the testes be performed in any patient with gynecomastia. 
Enlargement, asymmetry, and induration of a testis may be 
noted in such patients. 
 B. Laboratory findings 
 Once pubertal and drug-induced 
gynecomastia have been excluded, a biochemical screen for liver 
and renal abnormalities should be performed. If those are normal 
and the gynecomastia is of recent onset, then serum hCG, LH, 
testosterone, and estradiol levels should be measured. The inter-
pretation of the results is outlined in  Figure 12–8 . For chronic, 
asymptomatic gynecomastia detected on physical examination, 
measurement of a morning serum testosterone level is a reasonable 
screen for hypogonadism. 
 Differential Diagnosis 
 Gynecomastia should be differentiated from lipomas, neurofibro-
mas, carcinoma of the breast, and obesity. Breast lipomas, neuro-
fibromas, and carcinoma are usually unilateral, painless, and 
eccentric, whereas gynecomastia characteristically begins in the 
subareolar areas and enlarges concentrically. The differentiation 
between gynecomastia and enlarged breasts due to obesity may be 
difficult. The patient should be supine. Examination is performed 
by spreading the thumb and index fingers and gently palpating the 
breasts during slow apposition of the fingers toward the nipple. In 
this manner, a concentric ridge of tissue can be felt in patients 
with gynecomastia but not in obese patients without glandular 
tissue enlargement. The examination may be facilitated by 
applying soap and water to the breasts. 
 Complications and Sequelae 
 There are no complications other than possible psychologic dam-
age from the cosmetic defect. With the possible exclusion 
of patients with Klinefelter syndrome, individuals with gyneco-
mastia do not have an increased risk of development of breast 
carcinoma. 
 Treatment 
 A. Medical treatment 
 The underlying disease should be 
corrected if possible, and offending drugs should be discontinued. 
Antiestrogens or selective estrogen receptor modulators, such as 
tamoxifen or raloxifene, have been found useful in relieving pain 
and reversing gynecomastia in some patients. Whether these 
hCG
LH,  T
LH,  T
or normal LH,  T
Testicular
ultrasound
Primary
hypogonadism
Measure serum
prolactin
Mass
Testicular
germ cell
tumor
Extragonadal
germ cell
tumor
hCG-secreting
nontrophoblastic
neoplasm
Normal
Chest x-ray
Abdominal CT
or
Elevated
Probable
prolactin-
secreting
pituitary
tumor
Secondary
hypogonadism
Normal
Measure serum hCG, LH, T, E2
Measure
T4, TSH
T4,  TSH
Hyperthyroidism
Androgen
resistance
Normal
E2,   or normal LH
Testicular
ultrasound
Mass
Leydig
or 
Sertoli
cell tumor
Normal
Adrenal CT or MRI
Mass
Adrenal
neoplasm
Normal
Increased
extraglandular
aromatase
activity
Normal
Idiopathic
gynecomastia
 FIGURE 12–8  Diagnostic evaluation for endocrine causes of gynecomastia (E2, estradiol; hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; LH, luteiniz-
ing hormone; T, testosterone; T 4 , thyroxine; TSH, thyrotropic hormone).  (Reproduced, with permission, from Braunstein GD. Gynecomastia.  N Engl J Med . 
1993;328:490). 
420    CHAPTER 12 Testes
therapies will be useful in most patients with gynecomastia 
remains to be seen. Aromatase inhibitors have also been tried but 
are not as beneficial as tamoxifen. Tamoxifen is also useful in pre-
venting development of gynecomastia in many patients who are 
starting therapy for prostate cancer with antiandrogens. 
 B. Surgical treatment 
 Reduction mammoplasty should be 
considered for cosmetic reasons in any patient with long-standing 
gynecomastia that is in the fibrotic stage. 
 C. Radiologic treatment 
 Patients with prostatic carcinoma 
may receive low-dose radiation therapy (900 cGy or less) to the 
breasts before initiation of antiandrogen monotherapy for prostate 
cancer. This may prevent or diminish the gynecomastia that usu-
ally results from such therapy, although tamoxifen is more effec-
tive. Radiotherapy should not be given to other patients with 
gynecomastia. 
 Course and Prognosis 
 Pubertal gynecomastia usually regresses spontaneously over 1 to 
2 years. Patients who develop drug-induced gynecomastia generally 
have complete or near-complete regression of the breast changes if 
the drug is discontinued during the early florid stage. Once gyne-
comastia from any cause has reached the fibrotic stage, little or no 
spontaneous regression occurs, and medical therapy is ineffective. 
 TESTICULAR TUMORS 
 Testicular neoplasms account for 1% to 2% of all male-specific 
malignant neoplasms and 4% to 10% of all genitourinary neo-
plasms. They are the most frequent type of cancer in men between 
20 and 34 years of age. The incidence is 5.4 per 100,000 men in 
the United States and 4.6 to 7.3 per 100,000 men in Europe. The 
incidence is lower in nonwhite than in white populations. Ninety-
five percent of testicular tumors are of germ cell origin; 5% are 
composed of stromal or Leydig cell neoplasms. 
 Etiology and Pathophysiology 
 The cause of germ cell testicular tumors is not known. Predisposing 
factors include testicular maldescent and dysgenesis. About 4% to 
12% of testicular tumors are found in association with cryp-
torchidism, and such a testicle has a 20- to 30-fold greater risk of 
developing a neoplasm than does a normally descended one. 
Almost 20% of testicular tumors associated with cryptorchidism 
arise in the contralateral scrotal testis, suggesting that testicular 
dysgenesis may be of etiologic importance in the development of 
germ cell neoplasms. Although trauma is frequently cited as an 
etiologic factor in testicular tumors, no causal relationship has 
been established. What is more likely is that testicular trauma 
serves to call the patient’s attention to the presence of a testicular 
mass. Familial predisposition is found in 1% to 2% of patients. An 
increased incidence has been noted in patients with Down and 
Klinefelter syndromes and prenatal exposure to exogenous 
 estrogens. Increased risk also has been associated with smoking 
and possibly HIV infection. Extra copies of a portion of chromo-
some 12 (isochromosome 12p) have been found in testicular germ 
cell tumors. 
 Bilateral gynecomastia is uncommon in patients who present 
with germ cell tumors. It is generally associated with production 
of hCG by the trophoblastic elements in the tumor. The hCG 
stimulates the Leydig cells to produce excessive estrogens relative 
to androgen production, resulting in estrogen-androgen imbal-
ance and gynecomastia. In addition, the trophoblastic tissue in 
some of the germ cell tumors may convert estrogen precursors to 
estrogens, as can Leydig and Sertoli cell tumors. 
 Pathology 
 A. Germ cell tumors 
 Seminomas account for 33% to 50% of 
all germ cell tumors. They are composed of round cells with abun-
dant cytoplasm, prominent nuclei, and large nucleoli. The cells are 
arranged in cords and nests and have a thin delicate network of 
stromal connective tissue. Embryonal cell neoplasms comprise 
20% to 33% of germ cell tumors. These tumors have multiple 
histologic patterns composed of cuboidal pleomorphic cells. One 
distinct pattern of cellular arrangement is the endodermal sinus 
tumor (yolk sac tumor), the most frequent germ cell neoplasm 
found in infants. Immunohistochemical techniques have localized 
alpha-fetoprotein to the embryonal cells. About 10% of germ cell 
tumors are teratomas, which are composed of well-differentiated 
cells derived from all three germ layers. When one or more of the 
teratoid elements are malignant or are mixed with embryonal 
carcinoma cells, the term teratocarcinoma is applied. These 
tumors account for one-tenth to one-third of germ cell neoplasms. 
Choriocarcinoma is the rarest form of germ cell tumor (2%) and 
is composed of masses of large, polymorphic, multinucleated syn-
cytiotrophoblastic cells. Although pure choriocarcinoma is rare, 
many testicular tumors contain an occasional trophoblastic giant 
cell. Immunohistochemical techniques have shown that these cells 
are the source of hCG in such tumors. 
 B. Leydig and Sertoli cell tumors 
 Leydig cell (interstitial 
cell) tumors are rare. Most are benign and are composed of sheets 
of oval to polygonal cells arranged in lobules separated from one 
another by thin strands of connective tissue. Malignant Leydig cell 
tumor disseminates by both lymphatic and venous channels, with 
initial metastatic deposits being found in the regional lymph 
nodes, followed by metastases to liver, lung, and bone. Sertoli cell 
tumors also are rare, are generally benign, and are composed of 
large tubules, a thick basement membrane with enlarged cuboidal 
Sertoli cells. There may be extensive calcification within the 
tumors and the tumors may be multifocal and bilateral. 
 Clinical Features 
 A. Symptoms and signs  
 1. Germ cell tumors— Testicular tumors usually present as 
painless enlargement of a testicle with an associated feeling of 
fullness or heaviness in the scrotum. Thus, about 80% of 
CHAPTER 12 Testes     421
patients note a testicular swelling or mass, whereas only 25% 
complain of testicular pain or tenderness. About 6% to 25% 
of patients give a history of testicular trauma that brought the 
testicular mass to their attention. Gynecomastia may be pres-
ent initially in 2% to 4% of patients and develops subse-
quently in another 10%. About 5% to 10% of patients 
present with symptoms of distant metastatic disease, including 
backache, skeletal pains, gastrointestinal symptoms and 
abdominal pains, inguinal adenopathy, cough, hemoptysis, 
and neurological dysfunction. 
 A testicular mass or generalized enlargement of the testis is 
often present on examination. In 5% to 10% of patients, a 
coexisting hydrocele may be present. In the presence of meta-
static disease, supraclavicular and retroperitoneal lymph node 
enlargement may be present. 
 2. Leydig and Sertoli cell tumors— In children, Leydig cell 
tumors of the testes may produce sexual precocity, with rapid 
skeletal growth and development of secondary sexual charac-
teristics. Adults with such tumors usually present with a tes-
ticular mass and occasionally gynecomastia. Decreased libido 
may also be present in such patients. Sertoli cell tumors are 
associated with gynecomastia and feminization due to excessive 
aromatase activity. In addition, these tumors are associated 
with the autosomal dominant Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (gastro-
intestinal polyposis and oval, irregularly pigmented lip mac-
ules) and the Carney complex (cardiac myxomas, spotty 
cutaneous pigmentation, primary pigmented nodular adreno-
cortical disease with hypercortisolism). 
 B. Laboratory findings 
 1. Germ cell tumors— The tumor markers hCG, alpha-fetopro-
tein, and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) should be measured in 
every male presenting with a testicular mass. hCG is found in 
the sera of 5% to 10% of males with seminoma, over half of 
patients with teratocarcinoma or embryonal cell carcinoma, 
and all patients with choriocarcinoma. hCG should be mea-
sured as the beta subunit or other hCG-specific immunoassay 
method. Elevated serum immunoreactive alpha-fetoprotein 
concentrations are found in almost 70% of patients with non-
seminomatous forms of germ cell neoplasms. Both markers are 
elevated in over 50% of patients with nonseminomatous germ 
cell tumors, and at least one of the markers is elevated in 85% 
of such patients. These markers can also be used to monitor the 
results of therapy. LDH measurements have an independent 
prognostic significance and reflect tumor growth rate and cel-
lular proliferation. It is increased in about 80% of patients with 
advanced seminomas and 60% of advanced nonseminomatous 
tumors. The results of the three marker measurements are 
included in the formal staging classification from the American 
Joint Committee on Cancer. 
 2. Leydig and Sertoli cell tumors— Serum DHEA sulfate, uri-
nary 17-ketosteroid, and both urinary and serum estrogen 
levels may be increased, while serum testosterone concentra-
tions tend to be low or within the normal adult range in 
patients with Leydig cell tumors. Individuals with Sertoli cell 
tumors have elevated estradiol levels. 
 C. Imaging studies 
 Testicular ultrasonography may be 
required to visualize small tumors. Staging of testicular tumors 
requires chest and abdominal CT scans and other radiologic pro-
cedures depending on the type of tumor and the symptoms. 
 Differential Diagnosis 
 Testicular tumors are sometimes misdiagnosed as epididymitis or 
epididymo-orchitis. An inflammatory reaction of the epididymis 
often involves the vas deferens. Therefore, both the vas and the 
epididymis are thickened and tender on examination during the 
acute disease. Pyuria and fever also help to differentiate between 
epididymitis and testicular tumor. Because hydrocele may coexist 
with testicular tumor, the testes should be carefully examined fol-
lowing aspiration of the hydrocele. 
 Other conditions that can cause confusion with testicular 
tumors include inguinal hernia, hematocele, hematoma, torsion, 
spermatocele, varicocele, and (rarely) sarcoidosis, tuberculosis, and 
syphilitic gumma. Ultrasonic examination of the scrotum may help 
distinguish between testicular tumors and extratesticular disease 
such as acute or chronic epididymitis, spermatocele, or hydrocele. 
 Benign Leydig cell tumors of the testes must be differentiated 
from adrenal rest tumors in patients with congenital adrenal hyper-
plasia. Because the testes and the adrenals are derived from the same 
embryologic source, ectopic adrenal tissue may be found to migrate 
with the testes. This tissue can enlarge under the influence of 
ACTH in patients with congenital adrenal hyperplasia or Cushing 
disease. Adrenal rest tumors tend to be bilateral, whereas patients 
with Leydig cell tumors generally have unilateral disease. Both may 
be associated with elevated urine 17-ketosteroids and elevated 
serum DHEA sulfate concentrations. Elevated serum and urinary 
estrogen concentrations are found with both disorders. However, 
patients with congenital adrenal hyperplasia or Cushing disease have 
a decrease in 17-ketosteroids, DHEA sulfate, and estrogen concen-
trations, as well as a decrease in tumor size, following administration 
of dexamethasone, while those with Leydig cell tumors do not. 
 Treatment 
 A. Germ cell tumors 
 Seminomas are quite radiosensitive, 
and disease localized to the testes is usually treated with radical 
inguinal orchiectomy and 2000 to 4000 cGy of conventional 
radiotherapy delivered to the ipsilateral inguinal-iliac and bilateral 
para-aortic lymph nodes to the level of the diaphragm. For disease 
that has spread to the lymph nodes below the diaphragm, addi-
tional whole abdominal radiotherapy and prophylactic mediasti-
nal and supraclavicular lymph node irradiation are usually given. 
Widely disseminated disease is generally treated with a combina-
tion of radiotherapy and chemotherapy, especially with bleomy-
cin, etoposide, and cisplatin. 
 Nonseminomatous tumors are treated with orchiectomy, retro-
peritoneal lymph node dissection, and, if necessary, radiotherapy 
or chemotherapy (or both). Although many chemotherapeutic 
agents have been used, combinations of etoposide, bleomycin, and 
cisplatin currently appear to produce the best overall results. 
Patients with nonseminomatous tumors treated by these means 
should be monitored with serial measurements of serum hCG and 
alpha-fetoprotein. 
 B. Leydig and Sertoli cell tumors 
 Leydig and Sertoli cell 
tumors of the testes are treated by unilateral radical inguinal 
422    CHAPTER 12 Testes
orchiectomy. Objective remissions of malignant Leydig cell 
tumors have been noted following treatment with mitotane. 
 Course and Prognosis 
 A. Germ cell tumors 
 In patients with seminoma confined to 
the testicle, the 5-year survival rates after orchiectomy and radio-
therapy are 98% to 100%. Disease in the lymph nodes below the 
diaphragm also has an excellent prognosis, with 5-year survival 
rates of 80% to 85%. Disease above the diaphragm and dissemi-
nated disease have overall 5-year survival rates of about 70%. 
 In patients with nonseminomatous germ cell tumors, aggres-
sive surgery and combination chemotherapy have raised the 5-year 
survival rates from less than 20% to 60% to 90%. 
 B. Leydig and Sertoli cell tumors 
 Removal of a benign 
Leydig or Sertoli cell tumor is accompanied by regression of iso- or 
heterosexual precocious puberty in children or feminization in 
adults. The prognosis for malignant Leydig cell tumor is poor, 
with most patients surviving less than 2 years from the time of 
diagnosis. 
 REFERENCES 
 Physiology 
 Agarwal A, Bragais FM, Sabanegh E. Assessing sperm function.  Urol Clin N Amer. 
2008;35:157. [PMID: 18423237] 
 Amory JK, Bremner WJ. Regulation of testicular function in men: implications for 
male hormonal contraceptive development.  J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 
2003;85:357. [PMID: 12943722] 
 Josso N, Picard JY, Rey R, Clemente N. Testicular anti-Mullerian hormone: his-
tory, genetics, regulation and clinical application.  Pediat Endocrinol Rev. 
2006;3:347. [PMID: 16816803] 
 Rajender S, Singh L, Thangaraj K. Phenotypic heterogeneity of mutations in 
androgen receptor gene.  Asian J Androl. 2007;9:147. [PMID: 17334586] 
 Rosner W, Auchus RJ, Azziz R, Sluss PM, Raff H. Position statement: utility, limi-
tations, and pitfalls in measuring testosterone: an Endocrine Society Position 
Statement.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2007;92:405. [PMID: 17090633] 
 Sofikitis N, Giotitsas N, Tsounapi P,  Baltogiannis D, Giannakis D, Pardalidis N. 
Hormonal regulation of spermatogenesis and spermiogenesis.  J Steroid 
Biochem Molecular Biol. 2008;109:323. [PMID: 18400489] 
 Androgen Therapy 
 Seftel A. Testosterone replacement therapy for male hypogonadism: part III. 
Pharmacologic and clinical profiles, monitoring, safety issues, and potential 
future agents.  Int J Impotence Res. 2007;19:2. [PMID: 16193074] 
 Hypogonadism 
 Bhasin S, Cunningham GR, Hayes FJ, et al. Testosterone therapy in adult men 
with androgen deficiency syndromes: an Endocrine Society Clinical Practice 
Guideline.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2006;91:1995. [PMID: 16720669] 
 Foresta C,  Cunningham GR, Hayes FJ, Role of hormones, genes, and environ-
ment in human cryptorchidism.  Endocrine Rev. 2008;29:560. [PMID: 
18436703] 
 Lanfranco F, Kamischke A, Zitzmann M, Nieschlag E. Klinefelter’s syndrome.  Lancet. 
2004;364:273. [PMID: 15262106] 
 Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine in col-
laboration with the Society for Male Reproduction and Urology. Androgen 
deficiency in the aging male.  Fertil Steril. 2008;90(suppl 3):S83. [PMID: 
19002654] 
 Ranum LPW, Day JW. Myotonic dystrophy: RNA pathogenesis comes into focus. 
 Am J Hum Genet. 2004;74:793. [PMID: 15065017] 
 Ritzen EM, Bergh A, Bjerknes R, et al. Nordic consensus on treatment of unde-
scended testes.  Acta Paediatrica. 2007;96:638. [PMID: 17326260] 
 Seftel A. Male hypogonadism. Part II: etiology, pathophysiology, and diagnosis.  Int 
J Impotence Res . 2006;18:223. [PMID: 16094414] 
 Van der Burgt I. Noonan syndrome.  Orphanet J Rare Dis . 2007;2:4. [PMID: 
17222357] 
 Wang C, Nieschlag E, Swerdloff R, et al. ISA, ISSAM, EAU, EAA and ASA recom-
mendations: investigation, treatment and monitoring of late-onset hypogo-
nadism in males.  Int J Impotence Res. 2009;21:1. [PMID: 18923415] 
 Infertility 
 Bhasin S. Approach to the infertile man.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2007;92:1995. 
[PMID: 17554051] 
 French DB, Desai NR, Agarwal A. Varicocele repair: does it still have a role in 
infertility treatment?  Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol . 2008;20:269. [PMID: 
18460942] 
 Kim HH, Schlegel PN. Endocrine manipulation in male infertility.  Urol Clin N 
Am. 2008;35:303. [PMID: 18423250] 
 Oates RD. The genetic basis of male reproductive failure.  Urol Clin N Am. 
2008;35:257. [PMID: 18423246] 
 Pauli SA, Berga SL, Shang W, Session DR. Current status of the approach to 
assisted reproduction.  Pediatr Clin N Am. 2009;56:467. [PMID: 
19501687] 
 Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Report 
on varicocele and infertility.  Fertil Steril. 2008;90 (suppl 3):S247. [PMID: 
19007639] 
 Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Sperm 
retrieval for obstructive azoospermia.  Fertil Steril . 2008;90 (suppl 3):S213. 
[PMID: 19007634] 
 Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine in col-
laboration with the Society for Male Reproduction and Urology. The man-
agement of infertility due to obstructive azoospermia.  Fertil Steril. 2008;90 
(suppl 3):S121. [PMID: 19007607] 
 Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine in col-
laboration with the Society for Male Reproduction and Urology. Evaluation 
of the azoospermic male.  Fertil Steril. 2008;90 (suppl 3):S74. [PMID: 
19007652] 
 Tournaye H. Evidence-based management of male subfertility.  Curr Opin Obstet 
Gynecol . 2006;18:253. [PMID: 167355823] 
 Erectile Dysfunction 
 McVary KT. Clinical practice. Erectile dysfunction.  N Engl J Med. 2007;357:2472. 
[PMID: 18077811] 
 Montague DK, Jarow JP, Broderick GA, et al. The management of erectile dysfunc-
tion: an AUA update.  J Urol. 2005;174:230. [PMID: 15947645] 
 Gynecomastia 
 Braunstein GD. Clinical practice. Gynecomastia.  N Engl J Med. 2007;357:1229. 
[PMID: 17881754] 
 Niewoehner CB, Schorer AE. Gynaecomastia and breast cancer in men.  BMJ. 
2008;336:709. [PMID: 18369226] 
 Testicular Cancer 
 American Cancer Society: Detailed Guide: Testicular Cancer.  http://www.cancer.
org/docroot/CRI/CRI_2_3x.asp?dt=41 . 
 Carmignani L, Salvioni R, Gadda F, et al. Long-term followup and clinical charac-
teristics of testicular Leydig cell tumor: experience with 24 cases.  J Urol. 
2006;176:2040. [PMID: 17070249] 
 Gori S, Porrozzi S, Roila F, Gatta G, De Giorgi U, Marangolo M. Germ cell 
tumours of the testis.  Crit Rev Oncol/Hematol . 2005;53:141. [PMID: 
15661565] 
 
 
423
3
1
 Female Reproductive 
Endocrinology and Infertility 
 Mitchell P. Rosen, MD and Marcelle I. Cedars, MD 
ACTH
Adrenocorticotropic hormone
AFC
Antral follicle count
AIRE
Autoimmune regulator gene
AIS
Androgen insensitivity syndrome
AMH
Anti-Müllerian hormone
APS
Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome
ArKO
Aromatase knockout
ART
Assisted reproductive therapy
BBT
Basal body temperature
BMD
Bone mineral density
BMP
Bone morphogenic protein
cAMP
Cyclic adenosine monophosphate
CEE
Conjugated equine estrogen
CRH
Corticotropin-releasing hormone
DHEAS
Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate
DHT
Dihydrotestosterone
DXA
Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry
ERA
Estrogen Replacement and Atherosclerosis 
Trial
FGFR1
Fibroblast growth factor receptor 1
FMR1
Fragile X gene
FSH
Follicle-stimulating hormone
FXTAS
Fragile-X tremor ataxia syndrome
GH
Growth hormone
GnRH
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone
hCG
Human chorionic gonadotropin
HDL
High-density lipoprotein
HERS
Heart and Estrogen-Progestin Replacement 
Study
HPO
Hypothalamic pituitary ovarian
HRT
Hormone replacement therapy
HSD
Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
HT
Hormone therapy
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
IGF-BP
Insulin-like growth factor binding protein
IUI
Intrauterine insemination
LDL
Low-density lipoprotein
LH
Luteinizing hormone
MBH
Medial basal hypothalamus
MCR
Metabolic clearance rate
MMP
Matrix metalloproteinase
MPA
Medroxyprogesterone acetate
MT
Menopausal transition
OMI
Oocyte maturation inhibitor
PCOS
Polycystic ovarian syndrome
POF
Premature ovarian failure
PR
Production rate
PRL
Prolactin
SERM
Selective estrogen receptor modulator
SF-1
Steroidogenic factor-1
SHBG
Sex hormone–binding globulin
SNRI
Serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake 
inhibitor
SR
Secretion rate
SRY
Sex-determining region of the Y gene
SSRI
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor
StAR
Steroidogenic acute regulatory protein
STRAW
Stages of Reproductive Aging Workshop
SWAN
Study of Women’s Health Across the 
Nation
Tg
Thyroglobulin
TGF
Transforming growth factor
TPO
Thyroid peroxidase
TRH
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone
TSH
Thyroid-stimulating hormone
VEGF
Vascular endothelial growth factor
WHI
Women’s Health Initiative
 
424    CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility
 EMBRYOLOGY AND ANATOMY 
 No gene has yet been identified that generates an ovary from an 
undifferentiated gonad. It is only in the absence of the sex- 
determining region of the Y gene  (SRY) that the gonad develops 
into an ovary. (For more details, see the discussion of sexual dif-
ferentiation in Chapter 14.) Primordial germ cells, which give rise 
to oocytes or spermatogonia, are first identifiable in the yolk sac 
endoderm (hindgut) at 3 to 4 weeks’ gestation. Once specified, 
they migrate and proliferate en route through the dorsal mesen-
tery into the gonadal ridge, which is located lateral to the dorsal 
mesentery of the gut and medial to the mesonephros 
( Figure 13–1 ). Studies in mice have suggested that the process of 
proliferation and navigation to the gonad depends on several 
genes, including  Steel (kit ligand and receptor),  β 1 integrin ,  pog 
(proliferation of germ cells), and many cytokines. Failure of pri-
mordial germ cells to develop or migrate into the gonadal ridge 
results in failure of ovarian development. In contrast, it is sug-
gested that male gonadal development may continue to develop 
into functional testis despite the absence of germ cells. 
 The germ cells that reach the gonadal ridge (6 weeks’ gestation) 
continue to proliferate and are referred to as oogonia (premeiotic 
germ cells). At 10 to 12 weeks’ gestation, some oogonia leave the 
mitotic pool and begin meiosis, where they arrest in prophase I 
(dictyotene stage). These arrested germ cells are now called pri-
mary oocytes. By 16 weeks, primordial follicles are first identified, 
making a clear distinction for gonadal differentiation into an ovary. 
At approximately 20 weeks’ gestation, a peak of 6 to 7 million germ 
cells (two-thirds of them primary oocytes and one-third oogo-
nia) are present in the ovaries. During the second half of gesta-
tion, the rate of mitosis rapidly decreases and the rate of oogonial 
and follicular atresia increases. Those oogonia that are not trans-
formed into primary oocytes will undergo atresia before birth. 
This leads to a reduction in the number of germ cells, resulting 
in a total of 1 to 2 million germ cells at birth. No germ cell 
mitosis occurs after birth, whereas follicular atresia continues, 
with the result that the average girl entering puberty has only 
300,000 to 400,000 germ cells. 
 The ovary is organized into an outer cortex and an inner 
medulla. The germ cells are located within the cortex. Along the 
outer surface of the cortex is the germinal epithelium. This cell 
layer is composed of cuboidal cells resting on a basement mem-
brane and forms a continuous layer with the peritoneum. Even 
though it is called the germinal epithelium, there are no germ cells 
within this layer. During embryonic development, the epithelial 
cells proliferate and enter the underlying tissue of the ovary to 
form cortical cords. When the primordial germ cells arrive at the 
genital ridge, they are incorporated into these cortical cords. At 
the same time the germ cells migrate from the yolk sac, the 
stromal cells of the ovary (granulosa and interstitial cells) migrate 
from the mesonephric tubules into the gonad.  Primordial folli-
cles form within the cortical cords. They are composed of a pri-
mary oocyte and one layer of granulosa cells with its basement 
membrane. Oocytes not surrounded by granulosa cells are lost, 
probably by apoptosis. This finite follicle population represents 
the pool of germ cells that will ultimately be available to enter the 
follicular cycle. 
 During fetal development, the gonad is held in place by the 
suspensory ligament at the upper pole and the gubernaculum at 
the lower pole. The final location of the gonad is dependent on 
hormone production. In the presence of testosterone, the guber-
naculum grows while the suspensory ligament regresses. As the 
gubernaculum continues to grow, the gonad (testis) descends into 
the scrotum. In contrast, when testosterone is absent, the suspen-
sory ligament remains and the gubernaculum regresses. This pro-
cess maintains the gonad (ovary) in the pelvis. 
 The remainder of the female internal reproductive organs are 
formed from the paramesonephric (Müllerian) ducts. In the 
absence of anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH), the paramesonephric 
system develops into the uterine (fallopian) tubes, uterus, cervix, 
and upper third of the vagina. Unlike Wolffian duct differentia-
tion, the development of the female reproductive tract is not 
Foregut
Hindgut
Heart
Hindgut
Genital
ridge
Genital
ridge
Mesonephros
Allantois
Primordial
germ cells
Yolk sac
Cloaca
A
B
 FIGURE 13–1  A. Schematic drawing of a 3-week-old embryo showing the primordial germ cells in the wall of the yolk sac, close to the 
attachment of the allantois.  B. Drawing to show the migrational path of the primordial germ cells along the wall of the hindgut and the dorsal 
mesentery into the genital ridge.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Langman J, Sadler TW.  Langman’s Medical Embryology . 8th ed. Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins; 2000.) 
CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility     425
dependent on hormone production. (For more details, see 
“Human Sex Differentiation” in Chapter 14.) Briefly, the Müllerian 
buds are formed lateral to the Wolffian ducts and the gonadal 
ridge after 37 days’ gestation ( Figure 13–2 ). These buds elongate, 
extend caudally, and cross medially to the Wolffian ducts by 8 
weeks’ gestation. By 10 weeks, the adjacent paired Müllerian ducts 
meet in the midline as they join the Müllerian tubercle (urogenital 
sinus). Over the next couple of weeks, the Wolffian ducts degener-
ate, and the paired Müllerian ducts fuse and begin to canalize. The 
intervening septum resorbs between the 12th and 16th weeks of 
gestation, resulting in a single uterine cavity. The most cranial 
parts of the Müllerian ducts remain unfused and form the uterine 
tubes, which remain patent with the coelom (future peritoneal 
cavity). The caudal segments stimulate solid cords to extend from 
the Müllerian tubercle to the sinovaginal bulbs from the posterior 
aspect of the urogenital sinus. In turn, the sinovaginal bulbs 
extend cranially and fuse with the vaginal cords, forming the 
vaginal plate. The vagina is subsequently formed by canalization 
of the vaginal plate. It is ultimately the cervix and the upper one-
third of the vagina that are derived from the Müllerian structures, 
and the remaining lower two-thirds are formed from the urogeni-
tal sinus. 
 The uterus is composed of endometrium (innermost lining), 
myometrium, and serosa. The adult uterus is a pear-shaped hol-
low organ. The cervical portion extends approximately 2 cm 
into the vagina, and the remaining corpus extends approxi-
mately 6 cm into the abdomen. The normal adult uterus weighs 
40 to 80 g. 
 The uterus is located in the pelvis and rests on the pelvic floor. 
Seventy percent to 80% of the time, the uterine position is ante-
flexed (cervical-uterine corpus angle) and anteverted (cervical-
vaginal angle). Therefore, when a woman is standing, the corpus 
of the uterus is horizontal and resting on top of the bladder. The 
uterus has several paired ligaments that develop from thickenings 
of the peritoneum and serve to maintain this anatomic position. 
The cardinal ligament (Mackenrodt) is the main supporting liga-
ment. It attaches to the lateral margins of the cervix at the upper 
vagina and extends to the lateral pelvic wall. The remaining liga-
ments—uterosacral, round, and broad—have a lesser role in sup-
porting the uterus. 
 The uterine artery originates from the anterior division of the 
internal iliac artery (hypogastric), enters the cardinal ligament, 
and supplies the uterus. The uterine artery divides into a descend-
ing branch and an ascending branch known as the vaginal and 
arcuate arteries, respectively. The arcuate arteries anastomose with 
each other and form a vascular network around the uterus. The 
radial arteries branch off from the arcuate network and penetrate 
the uterus to supply the myometrium. Smaller basal branches and 
spiral arteries supply the endometrium. 
 The ovary is suspended in the pelvis and has three associated 
ligaments. The average adult ovary is 2.5 to 5 cm × 2.5 cm × 1 cm 
in size and weighs 3 to 8 g. The position of the ovary is variable, 
but in a nulliparous woman it is often located in a peritoneal 
depression on the pelvic sidewalls between the ureter and external 
iliac vein. The suspensory (infundibulopelvic) ligament attaches to 
the cranial pole of the ovary and extends to the pelvic brim. This 
ligament suspends the ovary in the pelvis and contains the ovarian 
vessels, lymphatics, and nerves. The utero-ovarian ligament 
attaches to the inferior pole of the ovary and extends to the uterus. 
The mesovarium connects the anterior portion of the ovary to the 
posterior leaf of the broad ligament. The blood supply of the ovary 
originates from the abdominal aorta, passes through the suspen-
sory ligament, and enters the mesovarium to form an anastomotic 
network with branches from the uterine artery. The ovarian artery 
enters the ovarian hilum and branches into spiral arteries that 
enter the medulla and extend to the ovarian cortex. Other 
branches from the anastomotic network, located in the mesovar-
ium, supply the uterine tubes. 
Uterine
tube
Lumen of uterus
Uterine
septum
Urogenital sinus
Caudal tip of
paramesonephric
ducts
Tissue of
sinovaginal bulbs
(vaginal plate)
Vagina
Hymen
Fornix
Cervix
B
A
C
 FIGURE 13–2  Schematic drawing showing the formation of the uterus and vagina.  A. At 9 weeks. Note the disappearance of the uterine 
septum.  B. At the end of the third month. Note the tissue of the sinovaginal bulbs.  C. Newborn. The upper portion of the vagina and the for-
nices are formed by vacuolization of the paramesonephric tissue and the lower portion by vacuolization of the sinovaginal bulbs.  (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Langman J, Sadler TW.  Langman’s Medical Embryology . 8th ed. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2000.) 
426    CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility
 OVARIAN STEROIDOGENESIS 
 The ovaries are not only the store for germ cells—they also pro-
duce and secrete hormones that are vital for reproduction and the 
development of secondary sexual characteristics. The next section 
will briefly discuss the biosynthesis of ovarian hormones. 
 In the ovary, the major source of hormone production is the 
maturing follicle. The components of the follicle are the theca 
cells, the granulosa cells, and the primary oocyte. The theca cells 
produce androgens, and the granulosa cells produce estrogens. 
The other stromal cells that contribute to androgen production 
can be divided into two populations of cells: the secondary inter-
stitial cells (derived from theca) and the hilum cells. These cells are 
the major ones involved in ovarian hormone production during 
menopause (see below). 
 The ovarian hormones are derived from cholesterol. 
Steroidogenic cells acquire the cholesterol substrate from one of 
three sources. The most common source is plasma lipoprotein-
carrying cholesterol, primarily in the form of low-density lipopro-
tein (LDL). Other minor sources include de novo synthesis from 
acetate and liberation from stored lipid droplets (cholesterol 
esters). Stimulation of ovarian cells by trophic hormones such as 
follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone 
(LH) facilitate uptake of cholesterol by increasing the number of 
LDL receptors on the cell surface. The LDL particle is subse-
quently internalized and degraded in the lysosome. The free cho-
lesterol that is liberated from the lysosome is delivered to the 
mitochondria by an unknown mechanism, possibly via microfila-
ments and microtubules. The cholesterol is then translocated into 
the mitochondria by the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein 
(StAR). Thus, StAR is the rate-limiting step regulating substrate 
availability for steroidogenesis. 
 Although acute alterations in steroid production result from 
changes in delivery of cholesterol to the mitochondria, the long-
term control of steroid synthesis results from regulation of gene 
expression. Most of the genes involved in steroidogenesis contain 
at least one steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1) response element in the 
promoter region. These elements are critical for the regulation of 
steroidogenic genes as well as the development of adrenal gland, 
ovary, and testis. The importance of SF-1 for steroidogenesis is 
highlighted in knockout mice deficient in this transcription factor 
which lack adrenal glands and gonads. Although SF-1 is essential, 
the specific expression of each gene involves many other transcrip-
tion factors that work independently or in concert with SF-1. 
 The rate-determining step that commits cholesterol to steroid 
synthesis is the cholesterol side chain cleavage enzyme reaction 
(P450scc) ( Figure 13–3 ). This reaction converts cholesterol to 
pregnenolone, the precursor of steroid hormones, and takes place 
in the mitochondria. Pregnenolone is transported out of the mito-
chondrion, and the remaining steps in sex steroid production take 
place primarily within the smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER). 
 Once pregnenolone is formed, the particular hormones that 
are synthesized are dependent on the endocrine organ and cell 
type. For example, the main sources of sex steroids in the female 
Cholesterol
Aldosterone
Cortisol
Pregnenolone
Cholesterol desmolase
(CYP11A)
CH3
HO
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH2
HC
Progesterone
Deoxycorticosterone
17-OH Pregnenolone
17-OH Progesterone
11-Deoxycortisol
Corticosterone
18-OH corticosterone
17α-Hydroxylase
(CYP17)
17, 20-Lyase
5α-reductase
3β-Hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase
21-Hydroxylase
(CYP21)
11β-Hydroxylase
(CYP11B1)
Aromatase
(CYP19)
17β-Hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase
11β-Hydroxylase
(CYP11B2)
18-Hydroxylase
(CYP11B2)
18-Oxidase
(CYP11B2)
Dihydrotestosterone
Androstenedione
Dehydroepi-
androsterone
Testosterone
Estradiol
Estrone
CH2
CH2
CH
CH3
O
HO
3
11
18
21
CH
O
CH2OH
O
HC
CH3
CH3
O
HO
OH
3
11
17
21 CH2OH
O
HC
CH3
CH3
O
3
11
17
OH
CH3
HO
11
17
OH
 FIGURE 13–3  Pathways of steroid biosynthesis. The pathways for synthesis of progesterone and mineralocorticoids (aldosterone), gluco-
corticoids (cortisol), androgens (testosterone and dihydrotestosterone), and estrogens (estradiol) are arranged left to right. The enzymatic activ-
ities catalyzing each bioconversion are written in the boxes. For those activities mediated by specific cytochrome P450, the systematic name of 
the enzyme ( CYP followed by a number) is listed in parentheses. CYPB2 and CYP17 have multiple activities. The planar structures of cholesterol, 
aldosterone, cortisol, dihydrotestosterone, and estradiol are placed near the corresponding labels.  (Reproduced, with permission, from White 
PC, Speiser PW. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency.  Endocr Rev . 2000;21:245.) 
CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility     427
come from the adrenal gland, ovary, and the periphery. The spe-
cific type of hormone synthesized is dependent on the specific 
gene expression within each cell type. 
 In the adrenal gland, there are three zones: zona glomerulosa, 
zona fasciculata, and zona reticularis. The cells in the different 
zones start with the same hormone precursor but differ in their 
secretory products. The glomerulosa produces mainly aldosterone, 
whereas cortisol and androgen are produced by the zona fascicu-
lata and zona reticularis, respectively. The major androgen pro-
duced by the adrenal gland is dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate 
(DHEAS). Differences in enzymatic activity among cells in the 
various zones are what regulate hormone production. The zona 
reticularis and zona fasciculata lack 11β-hydroxylase, which is 
necessary for aldosterone synthesis (see  Figure 13–3 ; see Chapters 
9 and 10). The zona glomerulosa lacks 17-hydroxylase and 17,20-
lyase (CYP17), which are necessary for sex steroid synthesis. 
 Ovarian cells similarly secrete different hormones due to dif-
ferential enzyme activity. The theca interstitial and secondary 
interstitial cells lack aromatase and hence are the androgen pro-
ducers in the ovarian cortex. The granulosa cells, on the other 
hand, lack CYP17 and, therefore, secrete estrogens—mainly 
estradiol—from thecal cell-derived androgens in the proliferative 
phase and progesterone in the luteal phase (see later). 
 Adipose and skin make significant contributions to plasma con-
centrations of some sex steroids. Adipose tissue is able to sequester 
most steroids due to their lipid solubility. Fat also expresses genes 
capable of sex steroid metabolism (ie, aromatase). Skin significantly 
contributes to the plasma concentration of testosterone by utilizing 
circulating DHEAS and androstenedione as precursors. 
 The major circulating androgens include DHEAS, androstene-
dione, and testosterone. During the reproductive years, the ovaries 
are directly responsible for one-third of the testosterone produc-
tion. The remaining two-thirds come from the periphery (17β-
hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase [HSD] types 3 and 5) and is 
derived from ovarian and adrenal gland precursors—notably 
androstenedione, which is produced in equal proportions by the 
adrenal gland and the ovary. The adrenal gland may directly 
secrete testosterone, but its major contribution is derived from its 
production of precursors. Therefore, the ovaries are responsible for 
nearly two-thirds of the circulating testosterone. This differs from 
males, in whom only 5% of the circulating testosterone is derived 
from peripheral conversion of androstenedione. It is also esti-
mated that more than 60% of the most potent androgen, dihy-
drotestosterone (DHT) in women, is produced in the skin 
(5α-reductase type 1 and 2) and originates from androstenedione. 
DHEAS is the major androgen produced by the adrenal gland. The 
adrenal gland is responsible for more than 95% of the circulating 
DHEAS levels. Although it is the most abundant androgen circulat-
ing in the body, it contributes minimally to serum testosterone levels. 
The relative strengths of androgens are listed in  Table 13–1 . 
 The circulating estrogens include estrone, estrone sulfate, estra-
diol, and estriol (pregnancy). More than 95% of estradiol in the 
circulation is produced from the ovary. In contrast to estradiol, 
approximately one-half of the circulating estrone is secreted from 
the ovary, while the remaining is derived from peripheral conver-
sion. The most significant precursor, androstenedione, is aromatized 
in the adipose tissue, hair follicles, and the liver to estrone. 
Estrone is also derived from estradiol through 17β-HSD type 2 
activity or from estrone sulfate (steroid sulfatase). Almost all estriol 
is produced during pregnancy and is secreted from the placenta (see 
Chapter 16). 
 Ultimately, the serum concentration of sex steroids is dictated 
by the secretion rate (SR), production rate (PR), and metabolic 
clearance rate (MCR), as shown in  Table 13–2 . The SR of sex 
steroids from each organ determines the PR of the hormone. If the 
SR for a specific hormone in the ovary equals the PR, then there 
is no extragonadal formation. However, if there is extra-gonadal 
formation, then the PR exceeds the SR. 
 MCR is the volume of blood per unit of time cleared of the 
hormone. The metabolic clearance rate of sex steroids is inversely 
related to the affinity for sex hormone–binding globulin (SHBG) 
and/or albumin. Prior to excretion, steroids are conjugated to 
make them water soluble. The bulk of testosterone is bound to 
SHBG (∼65%) and to a lesser extent albumin (∼35%); only 1% 
( free hormone) is active and available for metabolism. The remain-
ing androgens have negligible binding affinity for SHBG. Free 
testosterone may be converted to more potent androgens such as 
DHT or may be metabolized through androstenedione. 
Metabolites of androstenedione and DHT are conjugated with a 
sulfate or glucuronide and are excreted in the urine. The majority 
of estradiol is also bound, although it has less binding affinity than 
testosterone for SHBG (38%) and more for albumin (60%); 
approximately 2% is unbound. Estradiol may be directly conju-
gated (16α-hydroxylated or 2-hydroxylated) or is metabolized to 
estrone prior to conjugation. The remaining estrogens are weakly 
bound to proteins. Progesterone is metabolized into many inter-
mediates prior to conjugation. Pregnanediol glucuronide is the 
major metabolite observed in the urine. 
 A variety of clinical conditions result from or cause deviations 
in normal secretion rates, leading to disturbances in the menstrual 
cycle. This chapter discusses the normal physiology and touches 
on several of these hormonal disturbances. 
 PHYSIOLOGY OF FOLLICULOGENESIS 
AND THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE 
 The menstrual cycle is regulated by complex interactions between 
the hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian (HPO) axis and the uterus. 
Briefly, the hypothalamus secretes gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
TABLE 13–1  Relative androgenic activity of 
androgens. 
Steroid 
Activity 
Dihydrotestosterone 
Testosterone 
Androstenedione 
DHEA, DHEAS 
300 
100 
10 
5 
Reproduced, with permission, from Yen SSC, Jaffe RB, Barbieri RL, eds. Reproductive 
Endocrinology. Saunders; 1999. 
428    CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility
(GnRH), which stimulates the pituitary to release FSH and LH. 
These gonadotropins then trigger the ovary to release an oocyte that 
is capable of fertilization. Concurrently, the ovary secretes hor-
mones, which act on the endometrial lining of the uterus to prepare 
for implantation. In addition, the ovarian hormones feed back to 
the hypothalamus and pituitary, regulating the secretion of 
 gonadotropins during the phases of the menstrual cycle. This com-
plex interaction will be discussed in greater detail below. The hor-
monal changes associated with menstruation are summarized in 
 Figure 13–4 . 
 The Hypothalamic-Pituitary Axis 
 GnRH is the central initiator of reproduction. GnRH is a 10 amino 
acid peptide with a short half-life of 2 to 4 minutes. It is processed 
in specialized secreting neurons that originate in the olfactory pla-
code during development and migrate to the arcuate nucleus of the 
medial basal hypothalamus (MBH). These neurons project from the 
median eminence and secrete GnRH, with inherent rhythmic 
behavior (pulse generator), into the portal vessels to reach the 
gonadotropes within the anterior pituitary. GnRH binds to its 
receptor, a member of the G protein–coupled seven-transmem-
brane-spanning receptor superfamily. 1,4,5–inositol triphosphate 
and diacylglycerol act as second messengers for GnRH. The pulsa-
tile frequency of GnRH secretion regulates gonadotropin synthesis 
and the secretion of pituitary gonadotropes (see Chapter 4). 
 During the late luteal-follicular phase, the slower pulsatile release 
of GnRH—every 90 to 120 minutes—favors FSH secretion. In 
response to FSH, the maturing follicle in the ovary secretes estra-
diol. This hormone is involved in a negative feedback loop that 
inhibits the release of FSH by indirectly decreasing the production 
of GnRH via gamma-aminobutyric acid neurons, in addition to 
possibly having a direct effect on the pituitary gland. Estradiol is 
also involved in a positive feedback loop that increases the frequency 
of GnRH pulses to every 60 minutes during the follicular phase and 
acts directly on the pituitary to stimulate LH secretion. LH stimu-
lates the ovary to further increase estradiol production (see two-cell 
theory, later). There is no further change in GnRH pulsatility at this 
point in the cycle; however, estradiol and other regulatory factors 
(see later) increase pituitary sensitivity to GnRH. This increased 
sensitivity results in a rapid elevation of LH production—the LH 
surge—which stimulates ovulation. After ovulation, the ruptured 
follicle (corpus luteum) secretes progesterone. This hormone is 
involved in a negative-feedback loop, indirectly through increased 
endogenous opioid activity and possibly directly through a reduc-
tion in GnRH pulsatility to every 3 to 5 hours. This favors FSH 
synthesis during the luteal-follicular transition. As progesterone 
levels fall again, GnRH pulsatility increases, favoring FSH release. 
 Role of the Pituitary 
 Gonadotropes are located in the adenohypophysis and make up 
approximately 10% of the cells in the pituitary. These cells synthe-
size and secrete FSH and LH. These hormones, thyroid-stimulat-
ing hormone (TSH) and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), 
all belong to a family of glycoprotein hormones. Gonadotropins 
TABLE 13–2  Production rate (PR), secretion rate (SR), and metabolic clearance rate (MCR) of plasma steroids in 
women.
Compound 
MCR of Compound 
in Peripheral 
Plasma (L/d) 
Phase of 
Menstrual 
Cycle 
Concentration in 
Plasma 
PR of Circulating 
Compound 
(mg/d) 
SR by Both 
Ovaries (mg/d)
(nmol/L) 
(μg/dL)
Estradiol 
1350 
Early follicular 
Late follicular 
Midluteal 
0.2 
1.2–2.6 
0.7 
0.006 
0.033-0.070 
0.020 
0.081 
0.445-0.945 
0.270 
0.07 
0.4-0.8 
0.25 
Estrone 
2210 
Early follicular 
Late follicular 
Midluteal 
0.18 
0.5-1.1 
0.4 
0.005 
0.015-0.030 
0.011 
0.110 
0.331-0.662 
0.243 
0.08 
0.25-0.50 
0.16 
Progesterone 
2200 
Follicular 
Luteal 
3.0 
36 
0.095 
1.13
2.1 
25.0 
1.5 
24.0 
20α-Hydroxyprogesterone 
2300 
Follicular 
Luteal 
1.5 
7.5 
0.05 
0.25 
1.1 5.8 
0.8 
3.3 
17-Hydroxyprogesterone 
2000 
Early follicular 
Late follicular 
Midluteal 
0.9 
6 6 
0.03 
0.20 
0.20 
0.6 
4.0 
4.0 
0-0.3 
3-4 
3-4 
Androstenedione 
2010 
5.6 
0.159 
3.2 
0.8-1.6 
Testosterone 
690 
1.3 
0.038 
0.26 
Dehydroepiandrosterone 
1640 
17 
0.490 
8.0 
0.3-3 
From Tagatz GE, Gurpride E. Hormone secretion by the normal human ovary. In: Greep RP, Astwood EP, eds. Handbook of Physiology. Section 7, Vol. II, Part 1 American Physiological 
Society. Williams and Wilkins; 1973:603.
CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility     429
are functional as heterodimers and are composed of an alpha and 
a beta subunit. The alpha subunit amino acid sequence is identical 
for all of the glycoprotein hormones while the beta subunits con-
tain different amino acid sequence and confer unique specificity 
on the glycoproteins. 
 The synthesis of FSH and LH mostly occur in the same cell, 
yet their secretion patterns differ. The secretion of FSH is tightly 
linked to the expression of the FSH beta subunit. This suggests 
that there is minimal storage of FSH within the gonadotropes, 
and the majority of secretion follows more of a constitutive path-
way. This is in contrast to LH secretion, in which it is first stored 
in organelles and then released with the appropriate trigger (regu-
lated pathway). The different oligosaccharides on the beta sub-
units likely facilitate the intracellular sorting that results in 
different mechanisms of secretion. 
 The differential gene expression that leads to the production and 
release of gonadotropins by cells in the pituitary is influenced by 
GnRH and ovarian hormones through feedback loops. Slower 
GnRH pulse frequency enhances FSH beta subunit expression and 
increases LH amplitude. In turn, increased GnRH pulse frequency 
stimulates LH beta subunit expression while promoting FSH 
release. As a result, LH amplitude decreases while the mean concen-
tration rises. Thus, ovarian steroid modification of hypothalamic 
GnRH pulsatility controls pituitary gonadotrophin production. 
 An intrapituitary network involves several factors that play a 
role in regulating gonadotropin synthesis and secretion. The 
gonadotropes produce and secrete peptides that are in the trans-
forming growth factor (TGF) family. Activin is a local regulatory 
protein that is involved in control of gonadotrope function. 
Slow pulses of GnRH enhance activin synthesis, which 
 subsequently enhances FSH transcription. Follistatin, another 
TGF-related protein that binds to activin, is stimulated by rapid 
pulses of GnRH. This decreases the bioavailability of activin and 
consequently reduces FSH synthesis. In addition to these local 
modifiers, ovarian transforming growth factors such as inhibin 
also modulate the expression of gonadotropins (see later). 
A
80
60
40
20
0
200
150
100
50
0
Inhibin A (pg/mL)
Inhibin B (pg/mL)
B
50
40
30
20
10
0
1500
1000
500
0
Progesterone (nmol/L)
Estradiol (pmol/L)
C
40
30
20
10
0
15
10
5
0
LH (U/L)
FSH (U/L)
−14
−7
0
7
14
Days relative to midcycle LH peak
 FIGURE 13–4  The endocrinology of the luteal-follicular transition in women. Data are mean ± SE of daily serum concentrations of FSH, LH, 
estradiol, progesterone, and immunoreactive inhibin in women with normal cycles. Note the secondary rise in plasma FSH in the late luteal 
phase (∼2 days before menses).  (Reproduced with permission from Erickson GF. Ovarian anatomy and physiology. In: Lobo R, ed.  Menopause: 
Biology and Pathobiology . Academic Press; 2000.) 
430    CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility
 Role of the Ovary 
 The ovary is intimately involved in regulating the menstrual cycle 
via steroid feedback to alter gonadotropin secretion. In addition, 
the ovary contains an intraovarian network involving factors that 
are synthesized locally and have a paracrine and autocrine role in 
the modulation of gonadotropin activity. The intraovarian regula-
tors include the insulin-like growth factor (IGF) family, TGF 
superfamily, and epidermal growth factor (EGF) family. 
Furthermore, it is these factors that assist in the coordination of 
follicular development, steroidogenesis, and ovulation. 
 The menstrual cycle of the ovary includes a follicular phase and 
a luteal phase. The follicular phase is characterized by growth of 
the dominant follicle and ovulation. It typically lasts 10 to 
14 days. It is, however, this phase that is variable in duration and 
most often accounts for the variability in menstrual cycle length in 
ovulatory women. The luteal phase starts after ovulation and is the 
period when the ovary secretes hormones that are essential to 
accommodate conceptus implantation. This phase is relatively 
constant and averages 14 days (range, 12-15 days) in duration. 
The next section will describe the two phases in some detail. 
 Primordial follicles are the fundamental reproductive units 
that comprise the pool of resting oocytes. Morphologically, they 
are composed of a primary oocyte that is surrounded by a single 
layer of squamous granulosa cells and a basement membrane. 
They have no blood supply. These primordial follicles develop 
between the sixth and ninth months of gestation and harbor the 
complete supply of ovarian follicles. 
 The initiation of follicular growth begins with the transition of 
the dormant primordial follicle into the growth phase. The exact 
mechanisms controlling the initial recruitment of the primordial 
follicle are under investigation. It is suggested that the resting fol-
licular pool is probably under tonic inhibitory control. The initial 
recruitment process induces growth in some primordial follicles; 
other neighboring follicles remain quiescent for many months or 
years. It is thought that the recruitment of these follicles is a con-
tinuous process that begins once the germ pool is created and ends 
with follicular exhaustion. This complex process is gonadotropin 
independent. Several studies have suggested that an intraovarian 
signaling network, involving members of the TGF superfamily, is 
responsible for primordial follicle recruitment. It is also known 
that recruitment and growth of the follicle absolutely requires cell-
to-cell contact with neighboring granulosa cells and the oocyte. 
These cells transfer various factors, nutrients, and waste to and 
from the oocyte through gap junctions derived from connexins. 
 One theory proposes that the oocyte actively influences its own 
fate by secreting various factors. These include two particular 
growth factors related to TGF-β, which are produced by the 
oocyte early in follicular development, growth differentiation fac-
tor (GDF)-9 and bone morphogenic protein (BMP)-15. Knockout 
mouse studies suggest that the oocyte induces granulosa cell pro-
liferation through these growth factors, and the granulosa cell 
responds with factors (eg, follistatin, c-kit) to decrease the inhibi-
tory influences (eg, activin A, Müllerian-inhibiting substance) and 
promote stimulators of oocyte growth ( Figure 13–5 ). 
Phase 1
Phase 2
Local inhibitors
Local stimulators
? Kit ligand
Kit ligand
GDFs, BMP15
GDFs BMP 15
 FIGURE 13–5  A theoretical model of follicular recruitment into the growth phase. Initiation of follicular growth may be regulated by many 
local inhibitory and stimulatory factors (ie, inhibin A, follistatin, kit ligand) and begins with transformation of the granulosa cells from squamous 
to cuboidal shape. Oocytes subsequently commence growth and regulate proliferation and differentiation of granulosa cells with members of 
the transforming growth factor β superfamily (ie, GDF-9, BMP15). Phase 1: transition of granulosa cells from flattened to cuboidal. Phase 2: 
oocyte growth and proliferation and differentiation of granulosa cells.   (Redrawn with permission of Braw-Tal R. The initiation of follicle growth: 
the oocyte of the somatic cells?  Mol Cell Endocrinol . 2002;187:11.) 
CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility     431
 Several other local factors have been described to date, and 
many more will be identified in the future. The ongoing search for 
these growth factors and hormones will ultimately elucidate the 
physiology of primordial follicle recruitment. There is a finite 
number of germ cells, and each successive recruitment further 
depletes the germ pool. Any abnormality that alters the number of 
germ cells or accelerates recruitment could perhaps lead to early 
ovarian follicular depletion and, therefore, early reproductive fail-
ure (see section on infertility, later). 
 Primary follicle development is the first stage of follicular 
growth ( Figure 13–6 ). Primary follicles differ from primordial fol-
licles in several ways. The oocyte begins to grow. As growth pro-
gresses, the zona pellucida is formed. This is a thick layer of 
glycoprotein that is most likely synthesized by the oocyte. It com-
pletely surrounds the oocyte and forms a barrier between the 
oocyte and the granulosa cell layer. It serves a number of biologic 
functions that are critical for protection of the oocyte and concep-
tion. Finally, the granulosa cells undergo a morphologic change 
from squamous to cuboidal. This stage of development may last 
150 days. 
 The progression to a  secondary follicle includes attainment of 
maximal oocyte growth (120 μm in diameter), proliferation of 
granulosa cells, and acquisition of theca cells. The exact mecha-
nism involved in acquiring theca cells is not completely under-
stood, but they are thought to be derived from the surrounding 
ovarian mesenchyme (stromal fibroblasts) as the developing folli-
cle migrates to the medulla. It is the development of this layer that 
gives rise to the theca interna and theca externa. With theca cell 
development, these follicles gain an independent blood supply, 
although the granulosa cell layer remains avascular. In addition, 
the granulosa cells in the secondary follicle develop FSH, estrogen, 
and androgen receptors. This phase of follicular development may 
take as long as 120 days, probably because of the long doubling 
time (>250 hours) of granulosa cells. 
 Further follicular development leads to the tertiary follicle or 
early antral phase. This phase is characterized by the formation of 
an antrum or cavity in the follicle. The antral fluid contains ste-
roids, proteins, electrolytes, proteoglycans, and an ultrafiltrate that 
forms from diffusion through the basal lamina. Other changes in 
this phase include further theca cell differentiation. Subpopulations 
ATRESIA
24%
50%
24%
2 mm
5 mm
10 mm
16 mm
Preovulatory
Early antral
Preantral
Secondary
120 d
150 d
20 mm
0.9 mm
0.4 mm
≈ 0.2 mm
≈ 0.12 mm
≈ 0.06 mm
≈ 0.03 mm
58%
77%
35%
15%
OVULATION
epithelioid cells in the theca
1 granulosa cell
layer
6 × 102 gc
3-5 × 103
gc
1.5 × 104 gc
7.5 × 104
gc
1.9 × 106
gc
9.4 × 106
gc
47 × 106
gc
60 × 106
gc
 P
rim
or
dia
l   
 P
rim
ar
y  
   
     
   
   
  C
LA
SS
 1
   
   
   
CL
AS
S 
2  
   
   
CL
AS
S 
3  
   
   
  
CL
AS
S 4
   
   
   
 C
LA
SS
 5
   
   
   
   
  
CL
AS
S 
6  
   
   
   
   
 C
LA
SS
 7
   
   
   
   
   
 C
LA
SS
 8
   
   
                             
GR
OW
TH
    
    
  6
5 d
        
 S
EL
EC
TIO
N   
    
 10
 d 
    
   
   
M
AT
UR
ATI
ON
    
  1
0 d
     
IN
ITI
ATI
ON
 
3.7 × 105
gc
 FIGURE 13–6  The chronology of folliculogenesis in the human ovary. Folliculogenesis is divided into two major periods, preantral (gonad-
otropin independent) and antral (FSH dependent). In the preantral period, a recruited primordial follicle develops into the primary/secondary 
(class 1) and early tertiary (class 2) stages, at which time cavitation or antrum formation begins. The antral period includes the small graafian 
(0.9-5 mm, classes 4 and 5), medium graafian (6-10 mm, class 6), large graafian (10-15 mm, class 7), and preovulatory (16-20 mm, class 8) folli-
cles. Time required for completion of preantral and antral periods is approximately 300 and 40 days, respectively. Number of granulosa cells 
(gc), follicle diameter (mm), and atresia (%) are indicated.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Gougeon A. Regulation of ovarian follicular devel-
opment in primates: facts and hypotheses.  Endocr Rev . 1996;17:121.) 
432    CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility
of thecal interstitial cells develop within the theca interna, acquire 
LH receptors, and are capable of steroidogenesis. The granulosa 
cells begin to differentiate into distinct cell layers. Starting from 
the basal lamina, the cells can be stratified into the membrana, 
periantral, cumulus oophorus, and corona radiata layers. This 
developmental process is influenced by FSH and unidentified 
signals originating from the oocyte. It is suggested that oocyte-
derived GDF-9, is an important factor in this process, where the 
relative concentration of GDF-9 dictates the specific subtype of 
granulosa cell. In addition, the granulosa cell—most likely in 
response to FSH—starts producing activin, a member of the TGF 
family. Activin is composed of two types of beta subunits, βA and 
βB, which are held together by disulfide bonds. It is the combina-
tion of these subunits that generates the various activins (activin A 
[βA,βA], AB [βA,βB], or BB [βB,βB]). It is unlikely that activin 
has an endocrine role, because serum activin levels do not change 
throughout the menstrual cycle and the free activin level in the 
serum is negligible. Activin’s primary activity is within the ovary, 
where it plays an autocrine role by enhancing FSH receptor gene 
expression in the granulosa cells and accelerating folliculogenesis. 
 Follicular growth during the early antral phase occurs at a slow 
and constant pace. The follicle achieves a diameter of 400 μm. 
FSH-stimulated mitosis of granulosa cells is the major contributor 
to follicular growth at this stage. Until this point, follicular growth 
and survival are largely independent of gonadotropins. In fact, 
prepubertal females and women taking oral contraceptives may 
have follicles arrested at various phases up until this point. It is at 
this phase in follicular development that FSH is critical for growth 
and survival. If FSH does not rescue these follicles, they undergo 
atresia. 
 The morphologic follicular unit, consisting of theca cells and 
granulosa cells, is also a functional hormonal unit capable of sub-
stantial estrogen production (two-cell theory;  Figure 13–7 ). The 
thecal interstitial cells and granulosa cells are under the direct 
influence of LH and FSH, respectively. The gonadotropins 
increase cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) production 
and the activity of the transcription factor SF-1 in the respective 
cell types. 
 In the theca cell, LH increases the number of LH receptors on 
the cell surface and the expression and activity of StAR, P450scc, 
3β-HSD-II, and P450c17 to increase androgen production. FSH 
increases the expression of aromatase and 17β-HSD within the 
granulosa cell. 
 The pathway of androgen synthesis is shown in  Figure 13–3 . 
Androgens may be formed in one of two ways: (1) Δ5 pathway, 
which entails dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) as the precursor 
to androgens, and (2) Δ4 pathway, which synthesizes androgen 
through 17-OH progesterone. However, in the human, the con-
tribution of the Δ4 pathway for androgen production appears 
minimal. This is due to 17,20-lyase activity having a much higher 
affinity for 17-OH pregnenolone than 17-OH progesterone. 
Therefore, the main precursor to sex steroids in the human is 
DHEA. 
 The androgens—mainly androstenedione—then diffuse 
through the basal lamina of the follicle and are the main precur-
sors that granulosa cells utilize for estrogen production through 
the activity of the aromatase enzyme. However, the pathway of 
estradiol biosynthesis is dictated by the type of 17β-HSD that is 
expressed. In humans, seven 17β-HSDs have been identified, each 
having different affinities for particular steroids. In the granulosa 
cell, it is type 1 17β-HSD that is expressed preferentially reducing 
estrone to yield estradiol. Type 3 17β-HSD preferentially reduces 
androstenedione to testosterone and is expressed in the Leydig 
cells and not in the ovary. However, type 5 17β-HSD is expressed 
in the theca cells and is likely the catalyst for the final step in 
testosterone synthesis from androstenedione in the ovary. In 
summary, the major pathway of estradiol biosynthesis within 
the granulosa cell entails androstenedione aromatization to estrone 
by aromatase, followed with a reduction to estradiol by type 1 
17β-HSD. 
 The importance of estradiol on folliculogenesis with respect to 
its negative and positive feedback effects on gonadotropin secre-
tion is well established. However, the role of estradiol in local 
oocyte maturation and follicular growth remains controversial. 
There is evidence that estrogen is synergistic with FSH during the 
follicular phase by increasing FSH and LH receptors, stimulating 
proliferation of granulosa cells and gap junctions as well as aro-
matase activity. The aromatase knockout (ArKO) mouse suggests 
a local role for estrogen. The ArKO mouse initially has large antral 
follicles, but after the first year, there are no remaining antral fol-
licles or secondary follicles and atresia is evident among the 
remaining primary follicles. However, the ArKO oocytes are 
capable of in vitro maturation and blastocyst formation. There is 
evidence that both estrogen receptors are expressed in the granu-
losa and theca cells. Studies with the estrogen receptor α knockout 
mice show these mice are infertile and lack graafian follicles. 
However, the estrogen receptor β knockouts are fertile but pro-
duce smaller litters. In humans, there are cases where follicular 
development has occurred in the absence of estradiol secretion. 
This was observed in a woman with CYP17α deficiency where 
promotion of follicular growth was noted with gonadotropins. 
Embryo development followed in vitro fertilization, but unfortu-
nately no pregnancy resulted. 
 Intraovarian factors play a major modulatory role in both fol-
liculogenesis and steroidogenesis. The oocyte-derived factor 
GDF-9 is expressed throughout folliculogenesis. It is thought not 
only to promote granulosa cell differentiation but also to have a 
stimulatory effect on theca cells and an inhibitory effect on luteal 
cell formation. The IGFs enhance the response to FSH. In vitro 
studies have shown that both IGF-1 and IGF-2 increase granulosa 
cell proliferation and estradiol secretion. However, it is suggested 
that IGF-2 rather than IGF-1 plays a dominant role in follicular 
maturation. This may be explained by the absence of IGF-1 
expression in the granulosa cells of dominant follicles. Furthermore, 
women with Laron syndrome (IGF-1 deficiency) can be induced 
to ovulate by ovarian stimulation with gonadotropins. This sce-
nario suggests that IGF-1 is not critical for folliculogenesis. 
 The granulosa cells produce other hormones (members of the 
TGF-β family), that regulate folliculogenesis (see activin earlier). 
The granulosa cells synthesize the alpha subunit, which combines 
with beta subunits to create a heterodimer known as inhibin A 
(αβA) or inhibin B (αβB). The role of inhibins in folliculogenesis 
CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility     433
Gsα
Gsα
Cyclase
Cyclase
Cyclase
Follicular
fluid
ATP
ATP
FSH
FSH-R
FSH
B
A
FSH-R
LH-R
LH-R
LH-R
LH
LH
LH
LDL
cAMP
cAMP
SF-1
SF-1
SF-1
SF-1
P450arom
P450arom
P450c17
P450c17
P450scc
P450scc
P450scc
17β-HSD-1
17β-HSD-1
3β-HSD-ll
3β-HSD-ll
3β-HSD-ll
Estrone
Estrone
Estradiol
Estradiol
Pregnenolone
Pregnenolone
Pregnenolone
Cholesterol
Cholesterol
Cholesterol
Androstenedione
Androstenedione
Androstenedione
Androstenedione
Progesterone
ATP
cAMP
Cyclase
ATP
cAMP
Mitochondrion
Mitochondrion
Mitochondrion
StAR
StAR
StAR
Cytosol
Cytosol
Cytosol
Gsα
Gsα
Gsα
Granulosa
Theca
Granulosa
Theca
Basement membrane
Circulation
Circulation
 FIGURE 13–7  Two-cell hypothesis.  A. The preovulatory follicle produces estradiol through a paracrine interaction between theca and gran-
ulosa cells. The theca cells provide the substrate, androstenedione, to the granulosa cell for estradiol production. The granulosa cells express the 
enzymes necessary for transformation of androstenedione to estradiol (P450 aromatase, 17β hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-1).  B. In the corpus 
luteum, granulosa-lutein cells gain vascularity, LH receptors, and the enzymes necessary for progesterone synthesis. The theca-lutein cells 
remain the source of androstenedione for estradiol production in granulosa-lutein cells. Gonadotropins, steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1), and ste-
roidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR) play crucial roles in steroidogenesis with the ovary (ATP, adenosine triphosphate; cAMP, cyclic ade-
nosine monophosphate; FSH-R, follicle- stimulating hormone receptor; LH-R, luteinizing hormone receptor; P450 arom, P450 aromatase;
17β- HSD-I, 17-β hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-I).  (Redrawn with permission from Larsen et al, eds. The physiology and pathology of the 
female reproductive axis. In:  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . Saunders; 2003; 604.) 
434    CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility
and steroidogenesis is largely indirect; it suppresses pituitary FSH 
secretion. The serum concentrations of inhibin A and B are influ-
enced by the menstrual rhythm. The circulating levels of inhibin 
A rise late in the follicular phase and remain elevated in the luteal 
phase whereas the concentration of inhibin B mirrors the men-
strual pattern of serum FSH levels ( see Figure 13–4 ). Although 
inhibin B expression is increased within the granulosa cell on 
stimulation with FSH, the follicular concentration of inhibin B 
does not change with follicular size. It has been suggested that the 
serum concentration of inhibin B reflects the volume of granulosa 
cells within the ovary, thereby serving as an indicator of the size of 
the growing cohort of follicles (ovarian reserve). Because inhibin 
B is the primary inhibitor of pituitary production of FSH in the 
follicular phase in the absence of estradiol, measuring baseline 
FSH circulating levels early in the follicular phase (cycle day 3) 
serves as indirect marker of ovarian reserve (see infertility). 
 The antral growth phase of follicular development is character-
ized by rapid follicle growth (1-2 mm/d) and is gonadotropin 
dependent. In response to FSH, the antral follicle rapidly grows to 
a diameter of 20 mm, primarily as a result of accumulation of 
antral fluid. The theca interna continues to differentiate into 
interstitial cells that produce increasing amounts of androstene-
dione for aromatization to estrone. The granulosa cell layers have 
continued to differentiate from each other. The membrana layer, 
through the action of FSH, acquires LH receptors. This differs 
from the cumulus layer, which lacks LH receptors. The final 
progression to a mature graafian follicle is a selection process 
that in most cases generates one dominant follicle destined for 
ovulation. 
 The selection process actually begins in the midluteal phase of 
the previous cycle. The rise in estrogen level that is generated by 
the preovulatory follicle augments FSH activity within the follicle 
while exerting negative feedback on the pituitary release of FSH. 
The decrease in pituitary release of FSH results in withdrawal of 
gonadotropin support from the smaller antral follicles, promoting 
their atresia. The dominant follicle continues to grow, despite 
decreasing levels of FSH, by accumulating a greater mass of 
granulosa cells with more FSH receptors. Increased vascularity of 
the theca cells allows preferential FSH delivery to the dominant 
follicle despite waning FSH levels. Increased estrogen levels in the 
follicle facilitate FSH induction of LH receptors on the granulosa 
cells, allowing the follicle to respond to the ovulatory surge of LH 
levels. Without estrogen, LH receptors do not develop on the 
granulosa cells. 
 The generation of the LH surge is absolutely required for ovu-
lation and oocyte maturation. The amplified production of LH in 
the midcycle is due to an increase in pituitary sensitivity to 
GnRH. The sensitization is mediated by the positive feedback 
effect of the exponential rise in estrogen and possibly inhibin A. 
This surge results in the resumption of meiosis I in the oocyte 
with release of a polar body just prior to ovulation. Evidence sug-
gests that the granulosa membrana cells secrete an oocyte matura-
tion inhibitor (OMI), which interacts with the cumulus to block 
the progression of meiosis during most of folliculogenesis. It is 
theorized that OMI exerts its inhibitory influence by stimulating 
the cumulus to increase cAMP production, which diffuses into the 
oocyte and halts meiotic maturation. The LH surge overcomes the 
arrest of meiosis by inhibiting OMI secretion; thereby decreasing 
cAMP levels and increasing intracellular calcium, allowing the 
resumption of meiosis ( Figure 13–8 ). 
 Just prior to the ovulation, progesterone production increases, 
and this may be responsible, at least in part, for the midcycle peak 
in FSH and the coordination of the LH surge. The FSH peak 
stimulates the production of an adequate number of LH receptors 
Regulation of oocyte maturation
Preovulatory
LH surge
Basal
LH
Dictyate
oocyte
Mature
oocyte
Membrana
granulosa
cells
OMI
cAMP
GVB
2+
+
−
Ca
 FIGURE 13–8  Current concepts of control of meiotic maturation.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Felig P, Frohman LA, eds. 
 Endocrinology and Metabolism . 4th ed. McGraw-Hill; 2001.) 
CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility     435
on the granulosa cells for luteinization. FSH, LH, and progester-
one induce expression of proteolytic enzymes that degrade the 
collagen in the follicular wall, thereby making it prone to rupture. 
Prostaglandin (PG) production increases and may be responsible 
for contraction of smooth muscle cells in the ovary, aiding the 
extrusion of the oocyte. 
 The LH surge lasts approximately 48 to 50 hours. Thirty-six 
hours after onset of the LH surge, ovulation occurs. The feedback 
signal to terminate the LH surge is not known. Perhaps the rise in 
progesterone production results in a negative feedback loop and 
inhibits pituitary LH secretion by decreasing the pulsatility of 
GnRH. In addition, just prior to ovulation LH downregulates its 
own receptors, which decreases the activity of the functional hor-
monal unit. As a result, estradiol production decreases. 
 Following ovulation and in response to LH, the granulosa cells 
(membrana) and thecal interstitial cells that remain in the ovu-
lated follicle differentiate into granulosa lutein and theca lutein 
cells, respectively, to form the corpus luteum. In addition, LH 
induces the granulosa lutein cells to produce vascular endothelial 
growth factor (VEGF), which plays an important role in develop-
ing the corpus luteum vascularization. This neovascularization 
penetrates the basement membrane and provides the granulosa 
lutein cells with LDL for progesterone biosynthesis. After ovula-
tion, the luteal cells upregulate their LH receptors by an unknown 
mechanism. This is critical in that it allows basal levels of LH to 
maintain the corpus luteum. Rescue of the corpus luteum with 
hCG from the developing conceptus works through the LH recep-
tor, which is vital for embryonic life. 
 Hormone production by the corpus luteum requires the coop-
eration of theca lutein and granulosa lutein cells, much like the 
preovulatory follicle (see  Figure 13–7 ). In response to LH and 
hCG, the theca lutein cells increase the expression of all the 
enzymes responsible for androstenedione production (see earlier). 
Aromatase activity is increased in the granulosa lutein cells by LH 
to aromatize the androgens to estrogen. A notable difference in the 
granulosa lutein cells, as opposed to the preovulatory granulosa 
cells, is that LH also induces the expression of P450scc and 
3β-HSD, which enables the cell to synthesize progesterone. The 
secretion of progesterone and estradiol is episodic and correlates 
with the LH pulses. FSH has minimal influence on progesterone 
production but continues to stimulate estrogen production during 
the luteal phase. The progesterone levels rise and reach a peak on 
approximately day 8 of the luteal phase. The luteal phase lasts 
approximately 14 days. 
 The corpus luteum starts to undergo luteolysis (programmed 
cell death) approximately 9 days after ovulation. The mechanism 
of luteal regression is not completely known. Once luteolysis 
begins, there is a rapid decline in progesterone levels. A number of 
studies suggest that estrogen has a role in luteolysis. It has been 
shown that direct injection of estrogen into the ovary containing 
a corpus luteum induces luteolysis and a fall in progesterone levels. 
Experimental data suggest that there is increased aromatase activ-
ity in the corpus luteum just prior to luteolysis. The rise in aro-
matase activity is secondary to gonadotropin (FSH and LH) 
stimulation, although later in the luteal phase, FSH probably plays 
a more important role. Consequently, estrogen production 
increases, and this decreases 3β-HSD activity. This may result in a 
decline in progesterone levels and lead to luteolysis. Furthermore, 
local modifiers such as oxytocin, which is secreted by luteal cells, 
have been shown to modulate progesterone synthesis. Other evi-
dence supports the role of PGs in luteolysis. Experimental data 
suggest that PGF 2α , which is secreted from the uterus or ovary 
during the luteal phase, stimulates the synthesis of cytokines such 
as tumor necrosis factor; this causes apoptosis and, therefore, may 
be linked to corpus luteum degeneration. 
 The process of luteolysis is known to involve proteolytic 
enzymes. Evidence suggests that matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) 
activity is increased during luteolysis. hCG is a known modulator 
of MMP activity. This may play an important role in early preg-
nancy, when hCG rescues the corpus luteum and prevents luteal 
regression. However, in the absence of pregnancy, the corpus 
luteum regresses, resulting in a decrease in progesterone, estradiol, 
and inhibin A levels. The decrease in these hormones allows for 
increased GnRH pulsatility and FSH secretion. The rise in FSH 
will rescue another cohort of follicles and initiate the next men-
strual cycle. 
 Role of the Uterus 
 The sole function of the uterus is to accommodate and support a 
fetus. Furthermore, it is the endometrium, the lining of the uter-
ine cavity, that differentiates during the menstrual cycle so that it 
can support and nourish the conceptus. Histologically, the endo-
metrium is made up of an epithelium composed of glands and a 
stroma that contains stromal fibroblasts and extracellular matrix. 
The endometrium is divided into two layers based on morphol-
ogy: the basalis layer and the functionalis layer. The basalis layer 
lies adjacent to the myometrium and contains glands and support-
ing vasculature. It provides the components necessary to develop 
the functionalis layer. The functionalis is the dynamic layer that is 
regenerated every cycle. More specifically, it is this layer that can 
accommodate implantation of the blastocyst. 
 During the menstrual cycle, the endometrium responds to hor-
mones secreted from the ovaries. Somewhat like the other endo-
crine organs, it contains a network of local factors that modulate 
hormonal activity. The endometrial phases are coordinated with 
ovulatory phases. During the follicular phase, the endometrium 
goes through the proliferative phase. It begins with the onset of 
menses and ends at ovulation. During the luteal phase, the endo-
metrium undergoes the secretory phase. It starts at ovulation and 
ends just before menses. If implantation does not occur, a degen-
erative phase follows the secretory phase within the endometrium. 
It is this phase that results in menstruation. The next section will 
discuss the phases of the endometrium in more detail. 
 During the follicular phase, the ovary secretes estrogen, which 
stimulates the glands in the basalis to initiate formation of the 
functionalis layer. Estrogen promotes growth by enhancing gene 
expression of cytokines and a variety of growth factors, including 
EGF, TGFα, and IGF. These factors provide a microenvironment 
within the endometrium to modulate the effects of hormones. At 
the beginning of the menstrual cycle, the endometrium is thin—
usually less than 2 mm in total thickness. The endometrial glands 
436    CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility
are straight and narrow and extend from the basalis toward the 
surface of the endometrial cavity. As the epithelium and the 
underlying stroma develop, they acquire estrogen and progester-
one receptors. The spiral blood vessels from the basalis layer 
extend through the stroma to maintain blood supply to the epi-
thelium. Ultimately, the lining (functionalis) surrounds the entire 
uterine cavity and achieves a thickness of 3 to 5 mm in height 
(total thickness 6 to 10 mm). This phase is known as the prolif-
erative phase. 
 After ovulation, the ovary secretes progesterone, which inhib-
its further endometrial proliferation. This mechanism may be 
mediated by antagonizing estrogen effects. Progesterone down-
regulates estrogen receptors in the epithelium and mediates estra-
diol metabolism within the endometrium by stimulating 
17β-HSD activity and converting estradiol into the weaker estro-
gen, estrone. During the luteal phase, the glandular epithelium 
accumulates glycogen and begins to secrete glycopeptides and 
proteins—along with a transudate from plasma—into the endo-
metrial cavity. It is this fluid that provides nourishment to the 
free-floating blastocyst. Progesterone also stimulates differentia-
tion of the endometrium and causes characteristic histologic 
changes. The glands become progressively more tortuous, and the 
spiral vessels coil and acquire a corkscrew appearance. The under-
lying stroma becomes very edematous as a result of increased 
capillary permeability, and the cells begin to appear large and 
polyhedral, with each cell developing an independent basement 
membrane. This process is termed predecidualization. These cells 
are very active and respond to hormonal signals. They produce 
PGs along with other factors that play an important role in men-
struation, implantation, and pregnancy. This phase is known as 
the secretory phase. 
 If there is no implantation of an embryo, the endometrium 
enters the degenerative phase. Estrogen and progesterone with-
drawal promotes prostaglandin production—PGF 2α and PGE 2 . 
These PGs stimulate progressive vasoconstriction and relaxation 
of the spiral vessels. These vasomotor reactions lead to endome-
trial ischemia and reperfusion injury. Eventually, there is hem-
orrhage within the endometrium with subsequent hematoma 
formation. The progesterone withdrawal triggers MMP activity, 
which facilitates degradation of the extracellular matrix. As 
ischemia and degradation progress, the functionalis becomes 
necrotic and sloughs away as menstruum consisting of endome-
trial tissue and blood. The amount of blood lost in normal 
menses ranges from 25 mL to 60 mL. Although PGF 2α is a 
potent stimulus for myometrial contractility and limits postpar-
tum bleeding, it has minimal impact on cessation of menstrual 
bleeding. The major mechanisms responsible for limiting blood 
loss involve the formation of thrombin-platelet plugs and 
estrogen-induced healing of the basalis layer by reepithelializa-
tion of the endometrium, which begins in the early follicular 
phase of the next menstrual cycle. 
 If conception takes place, implantation can occur in the endo-
metrium during the midsecretory (midluteal) phase, at which time 
it is of sufficient thickness and full of sustenance. The syncytiotro-
phoblast subsequently secretes hCG, which rescues the corpus 
luteum and maintains progesterone secretion, essential for com-
plete endometrial decidual development. 
 In summary, the ovary has two phases during the menstrual 
cycle: the follicular phase and the luteal phase. The endometrium 
has three phases and is synchronized by the ovary. The complex 
feedback loops between the ovary and the hypothalamic-pituitary 
axis regulate the menstrual cycle. During the follicular phase, the 
ovary secretes estradiol, which stimulates the endometrium to 
undergo the proliferative phase. After ovulation (luteal phase), the 
ovary secretes estrogen and progesterone, which maintains the 
endometrial lining and promotes the secretory phase. In a non-
pregnant cycle, luteolysis occurs, resulting in cessation of hormone 
production. This hormone withdrawal results in the degenerative 
phase and the onset of menses. 
 MENSTRUAL DISTURBANCES 
 AMENORRHEA 
 The mean age of menarche is 12.8 years. Normally, this event 
marks the completion of puberty. The onset of regular cyclicity 
in the menstrual cycle is determined by the duration of the 
maturation process of the HPO axis, which is quite variable. As 
a result, anovulation can occur in 50% to 80% of girls 2 years 
after menarche, and in more than 20% of girls, it can persist 
until 5 years after menarche. This period of time can be frustrat-
ing for many girls and their parents. The evaluation should 
include a clinical examination and reassurance. If positive find-
ings are noted, limited, pertinent diagnostic tests (see later) are 
indicated. 
 Amenorrhea can be defined as either the absence of menar-
che by age 16 or no menses for more than three cycles in an 
individual who has previously had cyclic menses. The definition, 
although arbitrary, nonetheless gives a general guideline to the 
clinician for further evaluation. Although amenorrhea does not 
cause harm, in the absence of pregnancy, it may be a sign of 
genetic, endocrine, and/or anatomic abnormalities. If the out-
flow tract is intact, amenorrhea is most likely the result of dis-
ruption in the HPO axis. These aberrations can affect any level 
of control in the menstrual cycle and, thus, result in menstrual 
abnormalities. 
 Amenorrhea was formerly classified as primary or secondary 
depending on whether the individual had experienced menses in 
the past. This classification may lead to misdiagnosis of the cause 
of amenorrhea. Although primary amenorrhea is more often asso-
ciated with genetic and anatomic abnormalities, each individual 
should be assessed by means of the history and clinical findings, 
including the presence or absence of secondary sexual characteris-
tics ( Table 13–3 ). The causes of amenorrhea are grouped accord-
ing to the level of involvement in the regulatory systems that 
govern normal menstrual activity (ie, hypothalamic, pituitary, 
ovarian, and uterine). An algorithm for the workup of amenorrhea 
or oligomenorrhea in the presence of secondary sexual character-
istics is illustrated in  Figure 13–9 . 
CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility     437
 HYPOTHALAMIC AMENORRHEA 
 Isolated GnRH Deficiency 
 The hypothalamus is the source of GnRH, which directs the 
synthesis and secretion of pituitary gonadotropins. Dysfunction 
at this level leads to hypogonadotropic hypogonadism or eugo-
nadotropic hypogonadism. Disorders of GnRH production can 
result in a wide range of clinical manifestations. The individual’s 
appearance is dependent on the age at onset and the degree of 
dysfunction. 
 Isolated GnRH deficiency results in hypogonadotropic hypog-
onadism. Female patients present with amenorrhea, and females 
and males present with absent or incomplete pubertal develop-
ment secondary to absent or diminished sex steroids (estradiol in 
females, testosterone in males). They have normal stature with a 
eunuchoidal body habitus. Because the adrenal glands are unaf-
fected by the absence of GnRH, body hair distribution is not 
affected. 
 A. Genetic origin 
 Several genetic lesions associated with 
GnRH deficiency have been described. The best characterized 
form of GnRH deficiency is Kallmann syndrome, which involves 
the  Kal-1 gene as well as a number of other genes. The Kal-1 gene 
normally codes for anosmin, an adhesion molecule that appears to 
be involved in the migration of GnRH and olfactory neurons 
from the olfactory placode to the hypothalamus. The  Kal-1 gene 
is located on the short arm of the X chromosome. Most cases of 
Kallmann syndrome are sporadic, although the disorder has also 
been observed to have a familial pattern, and most often it is 
transmitted by X-linked recessive inheritance. Autosomal recessive 
and dominant patterns have been reported but are much less com-
mon. When mutations exist in the  Kal-1 gene, there may 
be associated defects, including anosmia and, less frequently, mid-
line facial defects, renal anomalies, and neurologic deficiency. The 
disorder affects both sexes, but because of the X-linked inheritance 
pattern it is more common in boys. Unlike males, the specific 
genetic mutations in the  Kal-1 gene in females with hypogonado-
tropic hypogonadism have not been identified, suggesting there 
TABLE 13–3 Assessment of patients with amenorrhea. 
I. Absent breast development; uterus present 
  A. Gonadal failure 
  1. Gonadal agenesis 
  2. Gonadal dysgenesis 
   a. 45,X (Turner syndrome) 
   b. 46,X abnormal X (eg, short- or long-arm deletion) 
   c. Mosaicism (eg, X/XX, X/XX/XXX) 
   d. 46,XX or 46,XY (Swyer syndrome) gonadal dysgenesis 
  B. Defects in estrogen biosynthesis (46, XX) 
  1. 17,20-Lyase deficiency 
  2. CYP17α deficiency 
  C. Hypothalamic failure secondary to inadequate GnRH release 
  1. Insufficient GnRH secretion 
   a. FHA 
   b. Anorexia nervosa and bulimia 
   c. CNS neoplasm (craniopharyngioma, gliomas) 
   d. Excessive exercise 
   e. Constitutional delay 
  2. Inadequate GnRH synthesis (Kallmann syndrome) 
  3. Developmental anatomic abnormalities in central nervous system 
  D. Pituitary failure 
  1. Isolated gonadotropin insufficiency 
  2. GnRH resistance 
  3. Pituitary tumors (hyperprolactinemia) 
  4. Pituitary insufficiency 
   a. Infections (mumps, encephalitis) 
   b. Newborn kernicterus 
  5. Prepubertal hypothyroidism 
IV. Breast development; uterus present 
  A. Pregnancy 
  B. Hypothalamic etiology 
  1. FHA 
  2. Anorexia nervosa and bulimia 
  3. Psychogenic (depression) 
  4. CNS neoplasm 
  5. Chronic disease 
  C. Pituitary etiology 
  1. Pituitary tumors (hyperprolactinemia) 
  2. Pituitary insufficiency 
   a. Hypotensive event (Sheehan syndrome) 
   b. Infections 
   c. Autoimmune destruction 
   d. Iatrogenic (surgery, radiation) 
  D. Ovarian etiology 
  1. POF 
   a. Mosaicism (46,XX/XO,XX/XY) 
   b. Autoimmune destruction 
   c. Iatrogenic (radiation, chemotherapy) 
   d. Fragile X syndrome 
   e. Infections 
  2. Resistant ovarian syndrome (Savage syndrome) 
  E. Chronic estrogenized anovulation 
  1. Hyperandrogenic 
   a. PCOS 
   b. Nonclassical congenital adrenal hyperplasia 
   c. Cushing syndrome 
   d. Androgen secreting tumors 
  2. Other 
   a. Adrenal insufficiency 
   b. Thyroid disorders 
  F. Outflow tract 
  1. Congenital abnormalities 
   a. Transvaginal septum 
   b. Imperforate hymen 
  2. Asherman syndrome 
II. Breast development; uterus absent 
  A. Androgen resistance (androgen insensitivity syndrome) 
  B. Congenital absence of uterus (utero-vaginal agenesis) 
III. Absent breast development; uterus absent 
  A. Defects in testosterone biosynthesis (46,XY) 
  1. 17,20-Lyase deficiency 
  2. CYP17α deficiency 
  3. 17β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency 
  B. Testicular regression syndrome (46,XY) 
438    CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility
are other genetic mutations that cause this disorder. Recently, it 
was determined that heterozygous mutations in fibroblast growth 
factor receptor 1 ( FGFR1 ) gene, known as the  Kal-2 , were identi-
fied in cases of Kallmann syndrome. FGFR1 and  Kal-1 are coex-
pressed at the same sites during development and are thought to 
have a functional interaction. Mutations in the Kiss-1 derived 
peptide receptor, GPR54, have also been identified in these 
patients. Several mechanisms of how GPR54 may regulate gonad-
otropin production via GnRH function or production have been 
proposed. Several studies have shown that females with presumed 
Kallmann syndrome demonstrate variable responses to exogenous 
GnRH administration, which suggests a GnRH receptor defect. 
In fact, mutations in the GnRH receptor have been identified in 
both sexes and are inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion. 
 Management of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism involves 
scheduled hormone replacement therapy (HRT) to stimulate the 
development of secondary sexual characteristics and increase bone 
mineral density. If pregnancy is desired, treatment involves the 
administration of pulsatile GnRH or gonadotropin treatment. 
 B. Endocrine causes 
 1. Functional hypothalamic amenorrhea— Functional hypo-
thalamic amenorrhea is one of the most common types of 
amenorrhea and accounts for 15% to 35% of cases. It is an 
endocrine disorder, although the exact mechanism has not 
been definitively determined. It is characterized by a reduced 
GnRH drive (decrease in pulse frequency and amplitude), 
leading to low or low-normal serum levels of FSH and LH and 
HRT
*Support group
*DEXA
Amenorrhea or oligomenorrhea
with secondary sexual characteristics
and after menarche (negative hCG)
Neurologic symptoms
(ie, headaches, visual changes)
Signs of hyperandrogenism
(hirsutism, acne)
Evaluate for hypothalamic-
pituitary lesions
Yes
Yes
Evaluate for adrenal
or ovarian tumor
*Transvaginal
  ultrasound
*Testosterone
Pelvic exam
*Hormone
  withdraw
History (iatrogenic)
*Karyotype
Evaluate for APS
Screen for thyroid
and adrenal
insufficiency
*Fragile X testing
Lipid profile
*Oral glucose
  tolerance test
*Endometrial biopsy
*17-OH progesterone
*24-h cortisol
Oral contraceptives
*Spironolactone
*Lifestyle changes
Levothyroxine
*Lipid profile
Treatment
(Chapter 7)
Stress management
HRT/BCP
*DEXA
Dopamine agonist
or
Oral contraceptives
Dopamine agonist
or
Surgery
No
PCOS
Possible
late onset
CAH
*Cushing
Evaluate for
PCOS
Evaluate for
uterine factor
Evaluate for
etiology
Evaluate for etiology
Yes
Yes
Asherman
Unexplained/
hypothalamic dysfunction
Hyperprolactinemia
Hypothyroid
Hyperthyroid
Microprolactinoma
Macroprolactinoma
No
No
No
MRI
Rapid-onset virilization
Progressive symptoms
Labs normal
↑ PRL
↑ TSH
↑ > 40 mlU/mL
ovarian failure
FSH:LH > 1
Estradiol < 50 pg/mL
Functional
hypothalamic
amenorrhea
Evaluate for
etiology of stress
*r/o organic cause
FSH/LH
↓ TSH
↓ FT4
↑ FT4
FSH
TSH
*FT4
PRL
*E2
*LH
Testosterone
DHEAS
Pelvic ultrasound
CT scan of abdomen
History (medication,
breast stimulation,
stress)
TSH
MRI of pituitary
*Creatinine
*AST
 FIGURE 13–9  An algorithm for women who have developed secondary sexual characteristics, have experienced menarche, and are pre-
senting with amenorrhea or oligomenorrhea. A negative human chorionic gonadotropin test documents the nonpregnant state. All women 
should be screened for known causes of oligomenorrhea, whether or not hyperandrogenism is present. Hyperandrogenism suggests either 
polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) or late-onset congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH). If rapid in onset, progressive virilization requires an 
evaluation for an androgen-secreting tumor. Management of late-onset CAH and PCOS is similar. Clinical history and physical findings suggest-
ing hypoestrogenism, stress, or thyroid dysfunction are indications for measurement of estradiol (E 2 ), luteinizing hormone (LH), and free thyroid 
hormone (FT4) levels in plasma (APS, autoimmune polyglandular syndrome).  * As indicated (refer to text). 
CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility     439
resulting in anovulation. The ratio of serum FSH to LH in 
these patients is often equivalent to that of a prepubertal 
female with a relative FSH dominance. 
 The adipocyte hormone, leptin, has been implicated in the 
development of this disorder. Leptin is an important nutri-
tional satiety factor, but it is also necessary for maturation of 
the reproductive system. The potential link to the reproductive 
system is thought to be through leptin receptors, which have 
been identified in the hypothalamus and gonadotropes. This is 
supported by the observation that leptin can stimulate GnRH 
pulsatility and gonadotropin secretion. Several studies suggest 
that women with functional hypothalamic amenorrhea have 
lower serum leptin levels in comparison with eumenorrheic 
controls. This relative deficiency may lead to dysfunctional 
release of GnRH and subsequent development of functional 
hypothalamic amenorrhea. 
 Abnormal, and often subtle, activation of the hypothalam-
ic-pituitary-adrenal axis is associated with functional hypotha-
lamic amenorrhea. The inciting event may be excessive 
production of corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), which 
has been shown to decrease the pulse frequency of GnRH and 
increase cortisol levels in vivo. In contrast, another study sug-
gests that although acute elevations of CRH can suppress 
GnRH release, this suppression cannot be maintained with 
CRH alone. The cause of functional hypothalamic amenor-
rhea often remains unclear, but the associated hypercorti-
solemia suggests that it is preceded by psychologic stress, 
strenuous exercise, or poor nutrition. There is support for the 
concept that these factors may act synergistically to further 
suppress GnRH drive. In fact, patients with functional hypo-
thalamic amenorrhea resulting from psychologic stress are 
usually high achievers who have dysfunctional coping mecha-
nisms when dealing with daily stress. The severity of hypotha-
lamic suppression is reflected by the clinical manifestations. 
The significant interpatient variability in the degree of psy-
chologic or metabolic stress required to induce a menstrual 
disturbance explains the heterogeneity of clinical presenta-
tions, ranging from luteal phase defects to anovulation with 
erratic bleeding to amenorrhea. 
 Functional hypothalamic amenorrhea is reversible. 
Interestingly, the factors that have predicted the rate of recov-
ery are body mass index and basal cortisol levels. When 
patients recover, ovulation is preceded by return of cortisol 
levels to baseline. Some experts have shown that cognitive 
behavioral therapy, teaching the patient how to cope with 
stress—and nutritional consultation—reverse this condition. 
Complete reversal may be less likely if the functional insult 
occurs during the period of peripubertal maturation of the 
HPO axis. 
 The diagnosis of functional hypothalamic amenorrhea can 
be made if the FSH-LH ratio is greater than 1 in the presence 
of hypoestrogenemia. However, a minor disturbance of hypo-
thalamic dysfunction may present with normal laboratory 
findings, a clinical history that coincides with stress, and a 
negative evaluation for other causes of anovulation. 
Interestingly, most of these patients, despite hypoestrogenism, 
do not have symptoms. The estrogen status should still be 
evaluated given the strong correlation between hypoestrogen-
emia and the development of osteoporosis. Estrogen status can 
be determined by means of the progesterone withdrawal test 
or by measurement of serum estradiol (<50 pg/mL). If there is 
no withdrawal or the estradiol is less than 50 pg/mL, HRT 
with combination contraceptive hormones (or traditional 
HRT) should be instituted. If withdrawal bleeding occurs, any 
cyclic progestin-containing therapy is adequate to combat 
unopposed estrogen and the development of endometrial 
hyperplasia. 
 2. Amenorrhea in the female athlete— Hypothalamic dysfunc-
tion has been observed in female athletes. Competitors in 
events such as gymnastics, ballet, marathon running, and div-
ing can show menstrual irregularities ranging from luteal phase 
defects to amenorrhea. The  female athletic triad as defined by 
the American College of Sports Medicine is characterized by 
disordered eating, amenorrhea, and osteoporosis. The associ-
ated nutritional deficiencies can lead to impaired growth and 
delayed sexual maturation. The neuroendocrine abnormalities 
are similar to those of women with functional hypothalamic 
amenorrhea. 
 These patients have very low body fat, often below the 
tenth percentile. There is evidence that a negative correlation 
between body fat and menstrual irregularities exists. In addi-
tion, there appears to be a critical body fat level that must be 
present in order to have a functioning reproductive system. 
Several studies have shown that these amenorrheic athletes 
have significantly lower serum leptin levels, which further sup-
ports leptin’s role as a mediator between nutritional status and 
the reproductive system. The strenuous exercise these athletes 
engage in amplifies the effects of the associated nutritional 
deficiency. This synergism causes severe suppression of GnRH, 
leading to the low estradiol levels. 
 Amenorrhea alone is not harmful. However, low serum 
estradiol over a period of time may lead to osteoporosis and 
delayed puberty. An analysis of estrogen status may be obtained 
with measurement of serum estradiol levels or with the proges-
tin withdrawal test (see earlier). If estrogen is low, bone mineral 
density (BMD) should be assessed by dual-energy x-ray 
absorptiometry (DXA) scan. All patients diagnosed with 
female athletic triad need combination contraceptive therapy 
or HRT. 
 3. Amenorrhea associated with eating disorders—Anorexia 
nervosa is a disorder characterized by relentless dieting in pur-
suit of a thin body habitus. Approximately 95% of cases occur 
in females, and the onset is chiefly in adolescence. The clinical 
features include extreme weight loss leading to a body weight 
less than 85% of normal for age and height, a distorted body 
image, and intense fear of gaining weight. These patients usu-
ally have a preoccupation with food and are hyperactive, with 
an obsessive-compulsive personality. The associated symptoms 
include hypothermia, mild bradycardia, dry skin, constipation, 
and symptoms of hypoestrogenemia. Furthermore, as part of 
the diagnostic criteria, they must experience at least 3 months 
of no menses. 
 The dysfunction in the neuroendocrine system is similar to 
but often more severe than that described in association with 
functional hypothalamic amenorrhea. The severe reduction in 
GnRH pulsatility leads to suppression of FSH and LH secre-
tion, possibly to undetectable levels, and results in anovulation 
and low serum estradiol levels. Given the severe psychologic 
and metabolic stress experienced by these individuals, the 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis is activated. The circadian 
rhythm of adrenal secretion is maintained, but both cortisol 
production and plasma cortisol levels are persistently elevated 
secondary to increased pituitary secretion of adrenocorticotro-
pic hormone (ACTH). Serum leptin levels in these individuals 
are significantly lower than normal healthy controls and cor-
relate with percentage of body fat and body weight. A rise in 
440    CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility
leptin levels in response to dietary treatment is associated with 
a subsequent rise in gonadotropin levels. This further suggests 
leptin’s role as a potential link between energy stores and the 
reproductive system. 
 The self-induced starvation state associated with anorexia 
nervosa leads to additional endocrine abnormalities not 
observed in other causes of hypothalamic amenorrhea. For 
instance, thyroid hormone metabolism is altered. TSH and T 4 
levels are in the low-normal range, but T 3 levels are usually 
below normal. This is attributable to decreased peripheral con-
version of T 4 to T 3 and increased conversion of T 4 to the meta-
bolically inactive thyroid hormone, reverse T 3 —a change that 
often resembles other states of starvation. This may be a protec-
tive mechanism in that the relative hypothyroid state attempts 
to reduce basal metabolic function in response to a highly 
catabolic state. 
 Bulimia occurs in about half of patients with anorexia and 
is defined as binge eating followed by self-induced purging. 
Not all bulimics have low body weight—in fact, normal-
weight bulimic individuals are much more common. These 
patients also have a variety of neuroendocrine aberrations—
often to a lesser degree than those with anorexia—which also 
lead to menstrual disturbances. Leptin levels are lower than in 
matched controls but not as low as in individuals with anorexia 
nervosa. They also have neurotransmitter abnormalities—no-
tably low serotonin levels—which might help explain the often 
coexisting psychologic difficulties. 
 Anorexia nervosa is a life-threatening illness with a sig-
nificant mortality rate due to its metabolic consequences. 
Anorexic patients should be considered for inpatient therapy 
and management with a multidisciplinary approach that 
includes nutritional counseling and psychotherapy. Force-
feeding may be necessary in some patients. If weight gain 
cannot be achieved with oral intake, meals may need to be 
supplemented by enteral or parenteral feeding. Because 
anorexia nervosa is a hypoestrogenic state and there is a high 
potential for the development of osteoporosis, all patients 
should receive hormone therapy either in the form of HRT 
or combination contraceptive pills. It is important to note 
that many patients with anorexia will continue to have 
reduced bone size regardless of sex steroid administration 
presumably due to the concurrent malnutrition and meta-
bolic compromise. Weight rehabilitation and recovery is 
associated with bone accretion; however, the loss of bone may 
not be completely reversible. 
 In summary, the hypothalamic amenorrhea endocrine syn-
dromes are probably a continuum of disordered eating and nutri-
tional deficiencies resulting in increasingly severe abnormalities in 
the reproductive system. Furthermore, the age at onset affects the 
potential complications of these disorders. If low estradiol levels 
are present before age 20, bone mineralization may be profoundly 
affected, because this period is critical for building peak bone 
mass. In addition, if these conditions occur prior to puberty, it 
may result in stunted growth and delayed development of second-
ary sexual characteristics. 
 C. Anatomic causes 
 Numerous anatomic abnormalities 
within the central nervous system can result in menstrual  disturbances. 
These include developmental defects, brain tumors, and infiltrative 
disorders. The most common anatomic lesion associated with 
delayed puberty and amenorrhea is a craniopharyngioma. It is 
derived from Rathke pouch and extends into the hypothalamus, 
pituitary, and third ventricle. The symptoms include headaches, 
visual loss, and hypoestrogenism. 
 Infiltrative disorders that involve the hypothalamus are uncom-
mon but can result from systemic diseases, including sarcoidosis, 
histiocytosis, hemochromatosis, and lymphoma. These diseases do 
not initially present with amenorrhea. However, in the presence of 
these diseases, the hypothalamus may be affected, so they should 
be part of the differential diagnosis of amenorrhea. 
 PITUITARY AMENORRHEA 
 There are a few genetic mutations affecting the pituitary that 
cause amenorrhea. Rare autosomal recessive mutations may cause 
deficiencies in FSH, LH, TSH, prolactin (PRL), and growth hor-
mone (GH). The clinical manifestations may include delayed 
puberty, a hypoestrogenic state, and infertility. 
 A. Genetic causes 
 A deficiency in FSH and LH may be a 
result of GnRH receptor gene mutations. Such mutations are 
primarily compound heterozygous mutations that affect GnRH 
receptor–dependent signal transduction. The phenotype of 
these individuals is similar to that of those with isolated GnRH 
deficiency. In fact, some investigators speculate that these 
receptor mutations may be the cause of isolated GnRH defi-
ciency in women, given that no mutations have yet been iden-
tified in the ligand or  Kal-1 gene. The estimated prevalence of 
GnRH receptor mutations in women with hypothalamic 
amenorrhea is 2%. In a family with other affected females, the 
prevalence is 7%. 
 Other rare genetic defects have been associated with amenor-
rheic women. Mutations in the  FSH β gene have been reported. 
These have an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance and 
lead to low serum FSH and estradiol levels and high plasma LH 
levels. The clinical features include minimal development of 
secondary sexual characteristics and amenorrhea with no history 
of menses. Combined hormone deficiencies have also been 
described. Mutations in Prop-1, a pituitary transcription factor 
for Pit-1, lead to deficiencies in gonadotropins, TSH, PRL, and 
GH. These patients present with stunted growth, hypothyroid-
ism, and delayed puberty in addition to amenorrhea. 
 B. Endocrine causes 
 Hyperprolactinemia is one of the 
most common causes of amenorrhea, accounting for 15% to 30% 
of cases. In the absence of pregnancy or postpartum lactation, 
persistently elevated PRL is almost always associated with a 
hypothalamic-pituitary disorder. Normal PRL secretion is regu-
lated by several stimulatory and inhibitory factors (see Chapter 4). 
PRL secretion is primarily under tonic inhibition by dopamine, so 
that any interference with dopamine synthesis or transport from 
the hypothalamus may result in elevated PRL levels. In addition 
to menstrual disturbances, individuals with hyperprolactinemia 
may present with galactorrhea. In fact, hyperprolactinemia is a 
common cause of galactorrhea, and up to 80% of patients with 
CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility     441
amenorrhea and galactorrhea have elevated PRL levels. Other 
associated symptoms include headaches, visual field defects, infer-
tility, and osteopenia. 
 The mechanism whereby hyperprolactinemia causes amenor-
rhea is not completely known. Studies have shown that PRL can 
affect the reproductive system in several ways. PRL receptors have 
been identified on GnRH neurons and may directly suppress 
GnRH secretion. Others have postulated that elevated PRL levels 
inhibit GnRH pulsatility indirectly by increasing other neuro-
modulators such as endogenous opioids. There is also evidence 
that GnRH receptors on the pituitary may be downregulated in 
the presence of hyperprolactinemia. Furthermore, PRL may affect 
the ovaries by altering ovarian progesterone secretion and estrogen 
synthesis. The best data now available suggest that hyperpro-
lactinemia causes amenorrhea primarily by suppression of GnRH 
secretion. 
 Approximately half of patients with elevated PRL levels have 
radiologic evidence of a pituitary tumor. The most common type 
is a PRL-secreting tumor (prolactinoma), accounting for 40% to 
50% of pituitary tumors. Prolactinomas are composed mainly of 
lactotrophs, and they secrete PRL. Occasionally these tumors 
secrete both GH and PRL. 
 The diagnosis of a pituitary adenoma is usually made by 
examination of the pituitary with magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI). These tumors are categorized into two groups based on 
their dimensions—microadenomas are those less than 10 mm in 
diameter and macroadenomas are larger than 10 mm. These 
tumors are usually located in the lateral wings of the anterior 
pituitary. Microadenomas are typically wholly contained within 
the confines of the pituitary gland. Very rarely, a microadenoma 
infiltrates the surrounding tissue, including the dura, cavernous 
sinus, or adjacent skull base. A macroadenoma may expand far-
ther and grow out of the sella to impinge on surrounding struc-
tures, such as the optic chiasm or may extend into the sphenoid 
sinus. As a result, macroadenomas are more frequently associated 
with severe headaches, visual field defects, and ophthalmoplegia. 
The incidence of a microadenoma progressing to a macroade-
noma is relatively low, only 3% to 7%. During pregnancy the risk 
of a microprolactinoma enlarging is also low, but in the presence 
of a macroprolactinoma, the chance of tumor growth is up 
to 25%. 
 Some investigators have found a correlation between pitu-
itary adenoma size and serum PRL levels. If the serum PRL is 
less than 100 ng/mL, a microprolactinoma is more likely, 
whereas if it is greater than 100 ng/mL, a macroprolactinoma is 
often present. Although this correlation has been reported, the 
evidence supporting it is not strong. In fact, low PRL levels may 
also be associated with nonfunctioning macroadenomas. This is 
thought to reflect impingement of the adenoma on the pituitary 
stalk leading to reduced dopamine secretion and loss of the tonic 
suppression of prolactin secretion. These nonfunctioning tumors 
may synthesize glycoproteins such as FSH, LH, or their free 
alpha subunits. Rarely, functioning tumors may arise from other 
pituitary cells, resulting in excessive hormone secretion. If a 
macroadenoma is present, measurement of IGF-I, alpha subunit, 
TSH, and 24-hour urinary cortisol will begin to exclude other 
functioning adenomas. 
 Other tumors of nonpituitary origin may also result in delayed 
puberty and amenorrhea. The most common of these is a cranio-
pharyngioma. Although craniopharyngiomas are commonly 
located in the suprasellar region, they can also involve the sella. 
These tumors have not been shown to produce hormones, but 
because they may compress the infundibulum, they can interfere 
with the tonic inhibition of PRL secretion and result in mildly 
elevated PRL levels. 
 Hyperprolactinemia in a patient with amenorrhea is defined as 
a PRL level greater than 20 ng/mL, although the limit of normal 
may vary between laboratories. Normal PRL release follows a 
sleep-circadian rhythm, but PRL may also be secreted in response 
to stress, physical exercise, breast stimulation, or a meal. Therefore, 
PRL should be measured in the midmorning hours and in the 
fasting state. Other causes of mildly elevated PRL include medica-
tions such as oral contraceptives, neuroleptics, tricyclic antidepres-
sants, 
metoclopramide, 
methyldopa, 
and 
verapamil. 
Hyperprolactinemia has also been observed in several chronic 
diseases, including cirrhosis and renal disease. Furthermore, 
inflammatory diseases such as sarcoidosis and histiocytosis can 
infiltrate the hypothalamus or pituitary and result in hyperpro-
lactinemia. Elevated PRL levels may be a physiologic response. 
During pregnancy, PRL levels may be two to four times baseline. 
With postpartum breast-feeding, the PRL level should be below 
100 ng/mL after 7 days and below 50 ng/mL after 3 months. If a 
woman is not breast-feeding, PRL levels should return to baseline 
by 7 days postpartum. 
 Persistently elevated PRL levels may also be present in primary 
hypothyroidism. Approximately 40% of patients with primary 
hypothyroidism present with a minimal increase in prolactin 
(25-30 ng/mL), and 10% present with even higher serum levels. 
Individuals with primary hypothyroidism have an increase in 
thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) from the hypothalamus, 
which stimulates TSH and PRL release and leads to hyperpro-
lactinemia. Patients with long-standing primary hypothyroidism 
may eventually manifest profound pituitary enlargement due to 
hypertrophy of thyrotrophs. This mass effect with elevated PRL 
levels mimics a prolactinoma. Therefore, all patients with hyper-
prolactinemia should have their thyroid function investigated to 
exclude hypothyroidism as the cause. 
 Prolactinomas are the most common cause of persistent hyper-
prolactinemia. All patients with elevated PRL levels should have 
the test repeated for verification. In addition to blood tests, a care-
ful clinical and pharmacologic history and physical examination 
should be performed to exclude other causes of hyperprolactine-
mia. If elevated PRL levels persist or if any measurement is found 
to be above 100 ng/mL, MRI of the hypothalamic-pituitary 
region should be performed. If a microadenoma is observed, the 
diagnosis of microprolactinoma can be made. If a macroadenoma 
is observed, other pituitary hormones should be measured to 
exclude other functioning adenomas or hypopituitarism. All 
patients diagnosed with macroadenoma should have a visual field 
examination. 
442    CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility
 The treatment of choice for prolactinoma is dopamine agonist 
therapy. These drugs (bromocriptine, cabergoline, pergolide, qui-
nagolide) are very effective at lowering PRL levels, resolving symp-
toms, and causing tumor shrinkage. Treatment results in a rapid 
reduction in PRL levels in 60% to 100% of cases. Following 
reduction of PRL levels, 60% to 100% of women resume ovula-
tory menses within 6 weeks, and galactorrhea disappears within 1 
to 3 months after starting treatment. Reduction in tumor size is 
usually evident after 2 to 3 months of drug therapy, but it may 
occur within days after initiation of treatment. The extrasellar por-
tion of the tumor appears to be particularly sensitive to drug 
therapy, which explains the improvement in symptoms such as 
visual impairment or ophthalmoplegia with drug therapy. In 
patients diagnosed with a microadenoma that is manifested only 
as a menstrual disturbance, observation should only be considered 
if the patient does not desire conception. These individuals should 
be offered oral contraceptives to control the bleeding pattern and 
to protect bone from estrogen deficiency. However, the long-term 
sequelae of persistently elevated PRL levels are unknown. If dop-
amine agonist treatment is initiated for a microadenoma, therapy 
may be continued long term. If the tumor responds, the dose may 
be tapered and stopped after menopause. Many individuals with a 
macroadenoma take dopamine agonist therapy indefinitely. All 
patients diagnosed with a prolactinoma should have follow-up 
imaging, determination of serum PRL levels, and visual field 
examinations. Alternatively, patients with a micro- or macropro-
lactinoma may be offered discontinuation of therapy. Dopamine 
agonist therapy may be tapered and ultimately discontinued if 
follow-up PRL levels are normal, and follow-up MRI scans show 
no evidence of tumor (or tumor reduction of at least 50%, with 
the tumor at a distance of more than 5 mm from the optic chiasm 
and no evidence for tumor invasion of adjacent structures), and if 
follow-up after withdrawal is assured. 
 An alternative to medical management of pituitary tumors is 
transsphenoidal surgery, after which resolution of symptoms may 
be immediate. However, the success and recurrence rates vary and 
are dependent on the size of the tumor and the depth of invasion. 
The larger and more invasive the tumor is, the less chance there is 
for complete resection and the greater the chance of recurrence. In 
general, the success rate of surgery for a microadenoma in some 
centers may be 70% or higher; surgical cure rates for macroade-
nomas are generally less than 40%. Overall, the recurrence rate 
following surgery is approximately 50%. Surgery is a good alterna-
tive for resistant tumors or for patients intolerant of medical treat-
ment. Because non-PRL-secreting pituitary tumors often do not 
respond well to medical therapy, operation is the treatment of 
choice for these tumors as well. The risks of surgery include infec-
tion, diabetes insipidus, and panhypopituitarism. Complete pitu-
itary testing should be performed prior to surgery. 
 Women with hyperprolactinemia who desire to conceive 
should be administered dopamine agonist therapy. Elevated PRL 
levels can lead to anovulation and hormonal disturbances that can 
result in difficulty in achieving pregnancy. Once pregnant, 
patients with microadenomas may have their medication discon-
tinued. If a macroadenoma is present, thought should be given to 
continuing dopamine agonist therapy throughout pregnancy. 
Women with prolactinomas may breast-feed since there is no evi-
dence that it stimulates tumor growth. If breast-feeding, dop-
amine agonist therapy should be discontinued since these agents 
will interfere with lactation. 
 C. Anatomic causes 
 1. Pituitary destruction— Amenorrhea may be the result of not 
only pituitary neoplasms but also pituitary destruction. 
Infiltrative disorders that involve the hypothalamus can affect 
the pituitary. Other disorders that cause pituitary insufficiency 
may be situational. A rare autoimmune disease, lymphocytic 
hypophysitis, can cause pituitary destruction during the puer-
perium and ultimately results in panhypopituitarism. Pituitary 
necrosis may also occur secondary to a hypotensive event. 
Typically, 80% to 90% of the pituitary must be damaged 
before pituitary failure ensues, and the robust blood supply to 
the pituitary makes this an uncommon event. If pituitary isch-
emia and necrosis are related to postpartum hemorrhage, it is 
known as Sheehan syndrome; otherwise, it is called Simmond 
disease. Because this type of injury typically affects the entire 
pituitary, most often more than one or all the pituitary 
hormones may be deficient. Observation has suggested that 
hormone loss follows a pattern, starting with the gonadotropins, 
followed by GH and PRL; however, this is highly variable. 
 OVARIAN AMENORRHEA 
 The physiologic period in a woman’s life when there is permanent 
cessation of menstruation and regression of ovarian function is 
known as menopause (see later). The cause of ovarian failure is 
thought to be depletion of ovarian follicles. The median age at 
menopause is 51.1 years. Premature menopause is defined as ovar-
ian failure prior to age 40, which is reported to occur in 1% of the 
population. The etiology of premature ovarian failure (POF) may 
have a genetic basis. Several mutations that affect gonadal func-
tion have been identified and include defects in hormone recep-
tors and steroid synthesis. Other potential causes include 
autoimmune ovarian destruction, iatrogenic ovarian injury, and 
idiopathic ovarian failure. The most severe form of POF presents 
with absent secondary sexual characteristics and is most often due 
to gonadal agenesis or dysgenesis (see Chapter 14). Less severe 
forms may result only in diminished reproductive capacity. 
 The other ovarian cause of amenorrhea is repetitive ovulation 
failure or anovulation. Other than menopause, it is the most com-
mon cause of amenorrhea. Chronic anovulation may be secondary 
to disorders of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis and has been previ-
ously discussed. Anovulation may also be due to systemic disor-
ders. The causes of ovarian failure and anovulation due to 
peripheral disorders will be discussed later. 
 Ovarian failure is diagnosed based on the clinical picture of 
amenorrhea and the demonstration of elevated FSH (>40 IU/L). 
This may occur at any time from embryonic development onward. 
If it occurs prior to age 40, it is called POF. The presence or 
absence of secondary sexual characteristics defines whether ovarian 
activity was present in the past. The most common cause of hyper-
gonadotropic amenorrhea, in the absence of secondary sexual 
characteristics, is abnormal gonadal development, which occurs in 
CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility     443
more than half of these individuals. When the gonad fails to 
develop, this is known as  gonadal agenesis . The karyotype of 
these individuals is 46,XX, and the cause of failure is usually 
unknown. If streak gonads are present, this indicates at least par-
tial gonadal development and is called  gonadal dysgenesis . The 
karyotype of these individuals may be normal, but it is more likely 
that there are alterations in sex chromosomes (see Chapter 14). 
 Premature Ovarian Failure 
 A. Genetic origin of POF 
 Two intact X chromosomes are 
necessary for the maintenance of oocytes during embryogenesis, 
and the loss of or any alteration in the sex chromosome leads to 
accelerated follicular loss. This implies that two intact alleles are 
required for the normal function of some genes on the X chromo-
some. Turner syndrome is a classic example of complete absence 
of one X chromosome. It manifests as short stature, sexual infan-
tilism, amenorrhea, and ovarian dysgenesis. This is a well-recog-
nized condition that occurs in 1:2000 to 1:5000 females at birth. 
Turner syndrome is associated with a number of other phenotypic 
abnormalities, including a webbed neck, broad chest, low hairline, 
and cardiovascular and renal defects. It is interesting that fewer 
than half of patients with Turner syndrome have a single cell line 
with the karyotype 45,X. The majority of patients actually present 
with a mosaic karyotype such as 45,X/46,XX. These patients have 
varying degrees of the Turner syndrome phenotype and may dis-
play some secondary sexual development or may have a history of 
menstrual function. Some pregnancies have been reported. 
 The term  mixed gonadal dysgenesis is used to describe chro-
mosomal aneuploidies with a Y-chromosome component. The 
most common type is a mosaic pattern that has been associated 
with Turner syndrome (45,X/46,XY). These patients may have 
some functional testicular tissue and present with varying degrees 
of genital ambiguity. If enough testicular tissue is present to pro-
duce AMH, these patients may also present with abnormalities of 
the internal genitalia. Individuals who have both ovarian tissue 
and testicular tissue along with Wolffian and Müllerian structures 
internally are termed  true hermaphrodites . Interestingly, most 
true hermaphrodites have 46,XX karyotypes (see Chapter 14) but 
others may have a 46,XY or 46,XX/46,XY chimerism. 
 Patients with gonadal dysgenesis may be phenotypically normal, 
and the abnormality may be manifest only as delayed pubertal 
development and amenorrhea. They probably have normal 
Müllerian structures and streak gonads. These individuals can dis-
play an array of karyotypes, including 46,XY (Swyer syndrome). 
Patients with a male karyotype but a female phenotype presumably 
underwent testicular failure prior to internal or external genitalia 
differentiation. If a dysgenetic gonad contains a Y chromosome or a 
fragment of the Y chromosome, there is a 10% to 30% risk for 
future gonadal malignancy, and the risk is higher if a mutation in 
the  SRY gene is present. These tumors may be hormonally active. 
The onset of spontaneous pubertal development in girls with mixed 
gonadal dysgenesis may be a clinical marker of tumor development. 
Gonadal extirpation is extirpation at the time of diagnosis. 
 POF is defined as ovarian failure before age 40 but after 
puberty. Because complete absence of an X chromosome results in 
a dysgenetic gonad, candidate genes for POF are probably those 
that escape X inactivation. In mammals, X inactivation occurs in 
all cells in order to provide dosage compensation for  X-linked 
genes between males and females (Lyon hypothesis). Further 
observation has illustrated that terminal deletions in Xp lead to 
the classic stigmata of Turner syndrome, whereas other deletions 
in Xp or Xq present with varying degrees of early reproductive 
failure. Most of the genes involved in folliculogenesis appear to be 
located on the long arm of the X chromosome. Several regions on 
the X chromosome, including POF 1 and POF 2, have been 
evaluated with knockout models in animals and have shown vary-
ing effects on ovarian development ( Figure 13–10 ). 
 Limited observations have found that deletions occurring 
closer to the centromere of the X chromosome manifest a more 
severe phenotype that includes disruption of pubertal develop-
ment. In contrast, deletions that occur in the distal regions tend 
to present with early reproductive aging and infertility. An exam-
ple of a distal mutation on the long arm of the X chromosome is 
that in the  FMR1 gene ( fragile X gene). An association has been 
described between the  FMR1 permutation state and POF. The 
prevalence of  FMR1 gene permutations accounts for approxi-
mately 2% to 3% of patients who present with sporadic POF and 
may be as high as 15% in familial cases. This permutation is also 
associated with the occurrence of a late-onset neurological disor-
der in male carriers designated as fragile-X tremor ataxia syndrome 
(FXTAS). Although a number of genes on the X chromosome 
have demonstrated involvement in ovarian physiology, the major-
ity of patients with POF have no identifiable mutations on the 
X chromosome. 
ZFX
DFFRX
XIST
AT2
DIA
FSHPRH1
FRAXA
SOX3
POF1
POF2
22.3
22.1
21.3
21.1
11.4
11.3
11.2
11
12
13
21.1
21.2
21.3
22.1
22.3
23
24
25
26
27
28
 FIGURE 13–10  Candidate genes on the X chromosome for pre-
mature ovarian failure (POF).  (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Davison RM, Davis CJ, Conway GS. The X chromosome and ovarian 
failure.  Clin Endocrinol . 1999;51:673.) 
444    CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility
 Autosomal recessive genes that have been shown to contribute 
to POF are very rare. FSH receptor mutations have been identi-
fied in humans with POF. These individuals present with a phe-
notype that ranges from absent secondary sexual development to 
normal development and early reproductive failure. The preva-
lence of FSH receptor mutations varies but is most common in 
the Finnish population (1% carriers). This mutation has not been 
observed in North America. An inactivated LH receptor has been 
identified in patients with normal puberty and amenorrhea but is 
quite rare. Mutations in genes involved in steroidogenesis have 
also been associated with POF. These enzymes include CYP17α 
and aromatase. Patients with CYP17α mutations may have a 
46,XX or 46,XY karyotype. They have a similar phenotype except 
that those with 46,XY have absent Müllerian structures because 
AMH is produced from their testes. Individuals with aromatase 
deficiency present with sexual ambiguity and clitoromegaly. 
Several other autosomal mutations have been discovered that may 
have a role in ovarian physiology. However, at this time, most 
cases of POF with normal pubertal development have not been 
associated with any specific mutation (see Chapter 14). 
 B. Autoimmune origin of POF 
 Autoimmune ovarian 
destruction is another potential cause of POF. This diagnosis is 
difficult to make unless it presents with one of the autoimmune 
polyglandular syndromes (see Chapter 2). The circumstantial 
evidence supporting the diagnosis is found in the high incidence 
of concomitant autoimmune disease—20% or more in patients 
with POF. The strongest association is with autoimmune thyroid 
disease. In addition, 10% to 20% of individuals with autoimmune 
adrenal disease experience POF. Conversely, 2% to 10% of 
patients with idiopathic POF develop adrenal insufficiency. 
 Autoimmune-associated POF is often diagnosed based on the 
presence of another autoimmune disease or detection of autoanti-
bodies. Thyroid antibodies are most frequently screened. However, 
these antibodies are present in 15% to 20% of reproductive-aged 
women. Others have suggested measuring ovarian-specific autoan-
tibodies. There is, however, significant inconsistency in the testing 
methodology, and this is not recommended. Although the diagno-
sis is imprecise, all patients suspected of having POF should be 
screened regularly for thyroid dysfunction. In addition, these 
patients should be evaluated for the autoimmune polyglandular 
syndrome (APS) and particularly tested for adrenal insufficiency, 
especially if there is no identifiable cause of POF. Testing for 
Addison disease can be performed using provocative ACTH test-
ing or alternatively adrenal antibodies to identify patients at risk. 
There are commercially available tests for both antiadrenal anti-
bodies and antibodies to 21-hydroxylase. The sensitivity of these 
tests for the diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency is 100%, the speci-
ficity 98%, and the PPV is 67%. If a patient has either of these 
antibodies they have a 25% to 50% risk of developing adrenal 
insufficiency within 5 to 10 years. 
 C. Iatrogenic causes of POF 
 Iatrogenic causes of POF 
include radiation therapy, chemotherapy, and ovarian insults 
resulting from torsion or surgery. The risk of POF following 
radiation and chemotherapy is proportionate to the patient’s age. 
If the radiation dose is higher than 800 Gy, all women experience 
ovarian failure. Displacing the ovaries out of the radiation field 
(ovarian transposition) has shown to be very effective at preserving 
ovarian function in patients receiving pelvic radiation. Therefore, 
patients wishing to preserve their fertility should be offered this 
procedure. Chemotherapy alone, particularly with alkylating 
agents, may induce temporary or permanent ovarian failure. 
Studies have shown that the likelihood of experiencing amenor-
rhea during treatment is 50% to 100%, and on average 40% of 
patients experience irreversible menopause. In general, younger 
individuals with chemotherapy-induced ovarian injury are more 
likely to recover. In women older than age 40, the chance of recov-
ery is less 10%. Modifications of chemotherapy drugs, duration of 
treatment, and dosing are modifiers of permanent ovarian injury. 
 D. Resistant ovary syndrome 
 A rare cause of hypergonad-
otropic amenorrhea associated with numerous unstimulated ovar-
ian follicles is the resistant ovary syndrome. These patients 
classically have no history of ovulatory dysfunction and present 
with secondary sexual characteristics and symptoms suggestive of 
estrogen deficiency. This diagnosis was established in an era when 
ovarian biopsy was used to determine the cause of menstrual dis-
turbances. However, the definition of resistant ovary syndrome is 
not universally accepted. In fact, in the original series, cases were 
included in which patients had demonstrated ovulatory function 
in the past but later developed a clinical picture suggestive of ovar-
ian resistance. This pattern is more typical of ovarian aging and 
follicular depletion. 
 The cause is not known. Histologic features of ovarian biopsy 
demonstrate that there is no plasma cell or lymphocytic infiltra-
tion, indicating that it is not caused by autoimmune destruction. 
The presence of numerous follicles indicates that POF is not due 
to follicular depletion. Several studies have looked at gonadotro-
pins, FSH receptors, and antibodies that serve as blockers to the 
gonadotropin receptors, and the literature to date is inconclusive 
about the cause. 
 Diagnosis can be established with certainty only with ovarian 
biopsy. However, current recommendations for management of 
amenorrhea do not include surgery to make a diagnosis. The diag-
nosis is, therefore, one of exclusion. In the absence of autoimmune 
disease and of any history of ovulation, karyotyping should be 
performed to exclude chromosomal abnormalities. In patients 
with normal karyotypes, the diagnosis of POF and resistant ovary 
syndrome is difficult to make without biopsy. Improvements in 
ultrasound technology may make it possible to differentiate these 
entities by the measurement of ovarian volumes and antral follicle 
counts. 
 E. Summary 
 In more than half of patients with POF, no spe-
cific cause can be identified. The age defining POF is somewhat 
arbitrary. By definition, menopause is preceded by reproductive 
failure. It is thought that the time interval between menopause 
and the end of fertility may be approximately 10 years, and we 
know that approximately 10% of women reach menopause by 
CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility     445
46 years of age and 1% by 40 years. Therefore, women who expe-
rience menopause at 45 years of age probably encounter a decline 
in reproductive potential or even reproductive failure at 35 years 
of age. This has obvious implications for women who are delaying 
childbearing. Several studies have described a significant associa-
tion between the menopausal ages of mothers and daughters, 
twins, and sisters. A number of studies have identified new genes 
that are involved in ovarian physiology. It is hoped that these 
investigations will help in the treatment of subfertility and result 
in a reduction in infertility. At a minimum, they may allow better 
prospective individual prediction of reproductive risk. 
 Women diagnosed with POF that is not readily explained must 
have an evaluation that consists of a karyotype, testing for frag-
ile-X (FMR) permutation, and evaluation for APS. If a patient has 
an FMR permutation, one should offer screening to her father. If 
there is no identifiable cause of POF, screening for adrenal insuf-
ficiency is obligatory. All patients with POF should be considered 
for combination HRT. The increased risks associated with breast 
cancer are likely no greater than the age-adjusted risk of women 
with intact ovaries. Patients with absent secondary sexual charac-
teristics should initially be given estrogen-only therapy in low 
doses and titrated every 3 to 6 months (see Chapters 14 and 15 
and see below for management of menopause). 
 ANOVULATION 
 Chronic anovulation may be defined as repetitive ovulation fail-
ure, which differs from ovarian failure in that viable oocytes 
remain in the ovary. Anovulation is the most common cause of 
amenorrhea during the reproductive years. There are several 
causes; those associated with hypothalamic and pituitary disorders 
have previously been mentioned and will not be considered in this 
section. Other conditions that cause anovulation include the 
peripheral endocrinopathies. These disorders result in a hormonal 
imbalance—mainly elevated androgens or estrogens—and lead to 
inappropriate feedback mechanisms and ovulatory failure. The 
peripheral endocrine disorders will be discussed later in greater 
detail. 
 Hyperandrogenism and Anovulation 
 A. Polycystic ovarian syndrome  Hyperandrogenic anovula-
tion accounts for more than 30% of cases of amenorrhea and up to 
75% of all cases of anovulation. Most often it is due to polycystic 
ovarian syndrome (PCOS). The reported prevalence of PCOS 
depends on the criteria used to define it. Although there is consider-
able controversy over the definition, most investigators, until 
recently, have focused on the 1990 National Institutes of Health-
National Institute for Child and Human Development (NIH-
NICHD) diagnostic criteria ( Table 13–4 ). This definition puts 
forth ovarian hyperandrogenism and anovulation as the cardinal 
features of PCOS. The criteria include ovulatory dysfunction with 
evidence of hyperandrogenism, either clinically or by laboratory 
testing, in the absence of identifiable causes of hyperandrogenism. 
Using these criteria, the prevalence of unexplained hyperandrogenic 
chronic anovulation approximates 4% to 6%, and it is considered 
the most common endocrine disorder in women of reproductive 
age. However, in 2003 the diagnostic criteria were revised by the 
Rotterdam consensus conference ( see Table 13–4 ). The Rotterdam 
criteria consider a broader spectrum of ovarian dysfunction than 
previous definitions. Some experts criticize the new definition, 
because it encompasses many more women, notably those with 
hyperandrogenism and ovulatory cycles, in addition to women with 
anovulation without androgen excess. This is contrast to the 1990 
NIH-NICHD definition, which required  both androgen excess and 
irregular cycles. Most recently, the Androgen Excess Society task 
force proposed the criteria should be defined by the presence of 
hyperandrogenism and ovarian dysfunction (see  Table 13–4 ). This 
definition expands upon the 1990 NIH-NICHD criteria and 
requires that all patients with PCOS are hyperandrogenic at some 
level. Although the revised criteria can include women with ovula-
tory cycles, the remaining discussion on PCOS focuses on women 
who have anovulatory cycles. 
 Approximately 50% of women diagnosed with PCOS are 
obese, and most have polycystic ovaries present on sonography 
(see later). Underlying these features are numerous biochemical 
abnormalities that have been associated with this syndrome, 
including elevated circulating total testosterone, free testosterone, 
DHEAS, and insulin as well as decreased SHBG and an elevated 
LH-FSH ratio. However, these abnormalities are not present in all 
PCOS patients. In fact, 40% of women who present with only 
hirsutism have elevated total testosterone levels, and 30% to 70% 
have elevated DHEAS levels. Similarly, the evaluation of increased 
LH pulsatility, in association with low-normal FSH levels 
(LH-FSH ratio), is not a reliable diagnostic test. Although elevated 
LH-FSH ratios are common findings in thin women, in obese 
patients with PCOS, the ratio is within the normal range about 
half of the time. The short half-life of LH (∼20 minutes) is likely 
another major contributor to the inaccuracy of LH testing. 
Hyperinsulinemia has recently been hypothesized to play a major 
role in the pathogenesis of PCOS (see later). The prevalence of 
insulin resistance may approximate 50% to 60%, compared with 
10% to 25% observed in the general population. However, insulin 
resistance is difficult to measure in the clinical setting. Part of the 
TABLE 13–4  Revised diagnostic criteria for 
polycystic ovary syndrome.
1990 criteria (both 1 and 2) 
 1. Chronic anovulation 
 2. Clinical and/or biochemical signs of hyperandrogenism and 
  exclusion of other etiologies 
Revised 2003 criteria (2 of 3) 
 1. Oligo or anovulation 
 2. Clinical and/or biochemical signs of hyperandrogenism 
 3. Polycystic ovaries and exclusion of other etiologies (congenital 
  adrenal hyperplasia, androgen-secreting tumors, Cushing 
  syndrome) 
From Rotterdam ESHRE/ASRM-Sponsored PCOS Consensus Workshop Group. Revised 
2003 consensus on diagnostic criteria and long-term health risks related to polycystic 
ovary syndrome. Fertil Steril. 2004;81:19. 
446    CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility
difficulty is that there is no universally agreed on definition of 
insulin resistance, and the laboratory tests are not standardized. 
Furthermore, baseline insulin levels vary depending on population 
and body weight. For example, up to 60% of ovulatory obese 
patients have demonstrated some form of insulin resistance. 
Nonetheless, there is good evidence that a subset of normal-weight 
women and obese women with PCOS have a greater degree of 
insulin resistance and compensatory hyperinsulinemia compared 
with weight-matched controls. 
 There is increasing evidence for a strong genetic component in 
the etiology of PCOS. Several candidate genes have been investi-
gated, including genes involved in steroidogenesis and carbohy-
drate metabolism, but none has been conclusively linked with the 
disease. PCOS is heterogeneous clinically, raising the possibility of 
different genetic causes and a variable environmental contribution 
to the syndrome. 
 1. Diagnosis of PCOS —The diagnosis of PCOS is typically 
based on clinical features (irregular menstrual cycles, acne, 
hirsutism), although additional information may be obtained 
with biochemical testing and sonographic examination. Known 
causes of hyperandrogenism and anovulation should be 
excluded in all patients (ie, androgen-secreting tumors, thyroid 
and adrenal gland dysfunction, hyperprolactinemia). 
 In most situations, the manifestations of PCOS emerge in 
the peripubertal years, occasionally with premature pubarche, 
and likely irregular cycles that persist through much of repro-
ductive life. The diagnosis may be challenging, however, 
because adolescent girls commonly display irregular cycles dur-
ing the 5 years following menarche. Ultrasonography may help 
to solidify the diagnosis of PCOS in children given that the 
likelihood of restoration of normal ovarian morphology is 
small as long as irregular menses persist. 
 Polycystic ovaries tend to be enlarged and have been 
defined in multiple ways: (1) the presence of 10 or more cystic 
follicles that are between 2 and 8 mm in diameter and arranged 
along the subcapsular edge of the ovary in a string of pearls 
fashion; and (2) 12 or more follicles 2 to 9 mm in either ovary 
and/or an ovarian volume of 10 cm 3 or greater. The increased 
ovarian volume and displacement of follicles toward the 
periphery may be explained by the hyperplastic stroma. The 
stroma contains hilar cells and secondary interstitial cells (theca 
cells) that are capable of androgen synthesis. 
 Polycystic-appearing ovaries are very common in women 
with clinical features suggestive of hyperandrogenism, inde-
pendent of menstrual disturbances. This finding suggests 
that ovarian hyperandrogenism can occur in ovulatory states 
and should be considered in the spectrum of PCOS, if poly-
cystic ovaries are present. However, the finding of polycystic 
ovaries alone does not establish the diagnosis of PCOS. In 
fact, based on the Rotterdam definition, more than 30% of 
normal women have this ovarian morphologic feature. The 
prevalence is significantly impacted by age. Approximately 
60% of women with regular cycles between the ages of 25 to 
30 have morphologic characteristics consistent with polycys-
tic ovaries compared to 7% of women between the ages of 41 
to 45. Furthermore, the morphogenesis of polycystic ovaries 
is not unique to PCOS as it has been observed in other sce-
narios (ie, late-onset congenital adrenal hyperplasia, HIV, 
epilepsy). 
 2. Hyperandrogenism —The origin of sex steroids is from two 
sources: the gonads and the adrenal gland. The adrenal gland 
is responsible for most of the precursor hormones in the gen-
eral circulation, which serve as reservoirs for the more potent 
androgens and estrogens. The ovary produces bioactive andro-
gens and estrogens as well as precursor hormones.  Figure 
13–11 illustrates the relative contribution of each organ to the 
pool of circulating sex steroids. DHEAS is the most abundant 
steroid in the circulation, and serves as a precursor to the more 
potent androgens and estrogens. Over 98% of DHEAS is 
secreted from the adrenal gland. Approximately half of the 
circulating levels of androstenedione are equally derived from 
the adrenal gland and gonads and the remaining half from 
conversion of DHEAS (DHEA) in the periphery. DHEAS also 
serves as a substrate for the ovary to produce bioactive sex steroids. 
It is evident that the majority of bioactive androgen is derived from 
precursor steroids that undergo peripheral conversion. It is sug-
gested over 60% of the testosterone is derived from circulating 
androstenedione, and the remaining is by direct secretion. The 
contribution of testosterone from the ovary and the adrenal gland 
is not completely known. The fact that the various methods to 
obtain secretion rates are difficult and that assays used to measure 
testosterone can be unreliable with resultant variability contributes 
to the uncertain interpretation. 
 A common clinical sign of hyperandrogenism is hirsutism. 
Hirsutism affects approximately 5% to 15% of the popula-
tion. The prevalence depends on the population and the 
method used to establish the diagnosis. The most common 
scoring method used to diagnose hirsutism is based on the 
Ferriman and Gallwey system. It is based on evaluating 9 to 
11 body areas and assigning a score of 0 to 4 based on the 
density of hair. This method is primarily used for research 
purposes. Clinically, it is often diagnosed by history and the 
presence of excess hair growth in centrally located regions, not 
commonly found in women. For example, those areas most 
affected are the face (sideburns, mustache, and beard), chest, 
linea alba, or the inner aspect of the thighs. The characteristics 
and distribution of body hair may be influenced by ethnic or 
racial factors. Alternatively, hyperandrogenism may present as 
acne or alopecia. 
 The diagnostic evaluation of hirsutism should include a 
thorough history and physical examination ( Figure 13–12 ). 
The etiology can be divided between nonandrogenic and 
androgenic causes. Organic causes of hyperandrogenism must 
be excluded. Nonandrogenic causes include chronic skin irrita-
tion, anabolic medications, and rarely acromegaly. The most 
common androgenic cause is PCOS which affects at least 70% 
of hirsute women. Less common is late-onset congenital adre-
nal hyperplasia, which affects approximately 5% of patients. 
PCOS is a diagnosis of exclusion—measurements of serum 
androgen levels should play only a limited role in the evalua-
tion. Most patients who have hyperandrogenemia present with 
obvious clinical manifestations, and the presence of normal 
androgen levels in a patient with hirsutism or acne does not 
exclude the diagnosis of PCOS. However, there are subsets of 
amenorrheic patients (ie, Asians) who are hyperandrogenemic 
without clinical manifestations, most likely as a result of their 
relative insensitivity to circulating androgens. It is in these 
patients that assessing androgen levels may be of value in deter-
mining the cause of amenorrhea. More commonly, androgens 
such as DHEAS and testosterone are measured to exclude 
other causes of hyperandrogenic anovulation such as nonclassic 
adrenal hyperplasia and androgen-secreting tumors (see later). 
CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility     447
 Another cause of hirsutism, made only after excluding other 
diagnoses, is characterized by regular menstrual cycles, normal 
androgen levels, and the absence of polycystic-appearing ova-
ries; it is termed idiopathic hirsutism. This common disorder 
occurs more frequently in certain ethnic populations, particu-
larly those of Mediterranean descent. It is thought that the 
etiology of hirsutism in these patients is related to higher 
5α-reductase activity (increased sensitivity) within the pilose-
baceous unit. 
 3. Mechanism of anovulation —The mechanism of anovulation 
in PCOS remains unclear. It is evident that the population of 
antral follicles is increased and that follicular development is 
arrested. It is also known that the development of preantral 
follicles is not primarily under hormonal control. Evidence 
supports the components of the intraovarian network as regu-
lators of antral follicle development. It is known that many of 
the accumulated follicles in PCOS remain steroidogenically 
competent and are capable of producing estrogen and proges-
terone. In fact, it is interesting that women with PCOS pro-
duce both androgens and estrogen (estrone) in excess. 
 One of the most frequently described characteristics of 
PCOS is the functional derangement of LH secretion. 
Numerous studies have shown that frequency, amplitude, and 
mean levels of LH are increased. The aberration in LH secre-
tion may be a result of heightened pituitary responsiveness and 
increased hypothalamic GnRH activity. Under normal condi-
tions, follicles respond to LH after they reach approximately 10 
mm in diameter. However, polycystic ovarian follicles acquire 
responsiveness to LH at a much smaller diameter, which may 
lead to inappropriate terminal differentiation of granulosa cells 
and result in disorganized follicular development. It has been 
suggested that the theca cells increase their expression of 
steroidogenic enzymes following stimulation by LH, whereas 
the granulosa display resistance to FSH (see later). The elevated 
LH levels and relative hyperinsulinemia that exist in 
some PCOS patients may synergistically potentiate disordered 
folliculogenesis. Although hyperandrogenism is part of the 
diagnostic criteria for PCOS, its direct impact on folliculogen-
esis is not clear. It is conceivable that androgens contribute to 
the effects of LH and insulin on follicular maturation. It is also 
possible that the excess estrogens may result in a negative-
feedback loop to inhibit FSH release and prevent further fol-
licular development. 
 Most experts are of the opinion that excess androgen pro-
duction is a fundamental abnormality in women with PCOS. 
Androgens within the ovary are produced mainly by the thecal 
interstitial cells that surround the follicle and to a lesser extent 
by the secondary interstitial cells located in the stroma (see 
earlier). The CYP17α complex is thought to be the key enzyme 
in biosynthesis of ovarian androgens. Under normal condi-
tions, a large proportion of the androgens produced by the 
theca cells diffuses into the granulosa cell layer of the follicle 
where they are rapidly converted to estrogen as shown in 
 Figures 13–7 and  13–11 (two-cell theory). The intrinsic con-
trol of androgen production in the ovary is modulated by 
intraovarian factors and hormones (see section on ovarian ste-
roidogenesis at the beginning of this chapter). It is the dysregu-
lation of hormone production that is most likely responsible 
for PCOS. 
 Several studies have shown that women with PCOS have an 
exaggerated ovarian androgen response to various stimuli. To 
illustrate, hyperstimulation of 17-hydroxyprogesterone levels 
was noted when women diagnosed with PCOS were given a 
GnRH agonist or hCG, suggesting increased CYP17α activity. 
This study is supported by in vitro studies in which measure-
ment of steroids in cultured human theca cells from polycystic 
ovaries revealed concentrations of androstenedione, 17α-
hydroxyprogesterone, and progesterone that were respectively 
20-fold, 10-fold, and 5-fold higher than levels in control 
cells. Additional studies have found increased expression of the 
genes encoding CYP17α hydroxylase, P450scc, the LH recep-
tor, and StAR. These findings reflect a global enhancement of 
E1 (50%)
E2 (50%)
E2 (>95%)
E1 (50%)
T (50%–60%)
DHT (>70%)
DHEA (30%)
T (<<25%)
DHEAS (98%)
T (25%–35%)
A
DHEA (S)
A (50%)
DHEA (20%)
LH
ACTH
+/– IGF
+/– PRL
A (50%)
DHEA (20%)
 FIGURE 13–11  The origin of circulating sex steriods: the relative contribution of each organ to the pool of circulating sex steroids. 
448    CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility
steroidogenesis. This situation is compounded by the hypertro-
phy of theca cells that is present in women with PCOS. 
 Several studies have evaluated intraovarian modulators as 
participants in the pathogenesis of PCOS ( Figure 13–13 ). 
IGF-binding proteins (IGFBPs), especially IGFBP-2 and 
IGFBP-4, are found to be increased in the follicular fluid of 
polycystic ovaries. They may act locally to decrease free IGF-2 
and, thus, decrease the effects of FSH on the oocyte and 
granulosa cells. Alternatively, the granulosa cells may down-
regulate their insulin receptors as a result of hyperinsulinemia. 
This would deprive the granulosa cells of their co-gonadotro-
pin, IGF-2, and account for the relative FSH insensitivity. 
Inhibin is also a likely candidate, because a large proportion of 
women with PCOS have relative FSH suppression ( Figure 13–13 ). 
However, studies have not shown consistent results, suggesting 
that if inhibin is involved, the effect is minimal. Follistatin, the 
activin-binding protein, was in the past thought to play an 
important role in the development of PCOS. It was initially 
implicated because activin functions to inhibit androgen pro-
duction and enhance FSH expression. However, current stud-
ies do not demonstrate a significant association between 
abnormalities in follistatin and PCOS. 
 The adrenal gland may be significantly involved in the patho-
genesis of some cases of PCOS. The connection seems plausible 
because adrenal androgens can be converted to more potent 
androgens in the ovary. Furthermore, a significant portion of 
women with congenital adrenal hyperplasia have polycystic ova-
ries (see later). Several studies have shown that DHEAS is ele-
vated in 25% to 60% of patients with PCOS. However, ACTH 
levels are normal in PCOS women. Interestingly, it has been 
reported that there is an increased response of androstenedione 
and 17α-hydroxyprogesterone to exogenous ACTH. These 
Hyperandrogenism
(hirsutism)
Physical examination,
and history
Regular cycles
Yes
Unexplained
No
Identify etiology of irregular cycles
(see Figure 13–9)
Medications HIV, epilespy, chronic
skin irritation
Testosterone, DHEAS,
CT scan of abdomen,
pelvic ultrasound
Rapid-onset
virilization
Progressive symptoms
Genetic predisposition
Ovaries normal
Obesity, hypertension
plethora, stria
Evaluate for adrenal or
ovarian tumor
Idiopathic hirsutism or
late-onset CAH
Evaluation for Cushing
syndrome (Chapter 10)
Evaluation for
acromegaly (Chapter 4)
Enlarged hands and feet
Coarse facial features
Heat intolerance
*PCOS or late-onset CAH
 FIGURE 13–12  An algorithm for women with hirsutism. All women should be screened for known causes of hyperandrogenism. 
Hyperandrogenism suggests either PCOS or late-onset congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH). If hirsutism is rapid in onset or rapidly progressive 
in nature or the patient is frankly virilized, an evaluation for an androgen-secreting tumor is required. Management of hirsutism in late-onset 
CAH or PCOS is similar.  * Late-onset CAH can present with regular cycles. Depending on the specific criteria ( see Table 13–4 ), PCOS can present 
with regular cycles. Serum hormones are not required for the diagnosis of idiopathic hirsutism or PCOS. 
CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility     449
 findings suggest an underlying abnormality in the CYP17α 
expressed in the adrenal gland as well as in the ovary. However, 
minimal data support CYP17α dysfunction in the adrenal 
gland. It has also been shown that ovarian steroids can stimulate 
adrenal androgen production; however, additional findings sug-
gest that the ovary is not the primary cause of adrenal hyperre-
sponsiveness. The critical role played by adrenal androgens 
during the pubertal transition has not been fully investigated as 
a potential contributor to the development of PCOS. 
 4. Hyperinsulinemia and PCOS —A relationship between insu-
lin and hyperandrogenism has been postulated based on several 
observations. This association may be demonstrated in the 
peripubertal years with premature pubarche, which is more 
commonly associated with insulin resistance than with con-
genital adrenal hyperplasia or androgen excess. Various case 
reports have shown that  acanthosis nigricans —hyperpigmen-
tation of skin in the intertriginous areas—is associated with 
severe insulin resistance. A number of these patients also pre-
sented with hyperandrogenism and anovulation. The relation-
ship was substantiated when it was observed that the degree of 
hyperinsulinemia was correlated with the degree of hyperan-
drogenism. Further studies revealed that hyperinsulinemia is 
frequently identified in women with PCOS. 
 It has been shown that the cause of hyperinsulinemia is 
insulin resistance and that the defect lies in the postreceptor 
signaling pathway. The frequency and degree of hyperinsuline-
mia in women with PCOS is amplified in the presence of 
obesity. Although many women with PCOS exhibit insulin 
resistance, some do not. However, insulin resistance is also 
observed in some thin PCOS patients. 
 Insulin may cause hyperandrogenism in several different 
ways, although the exact mechanism has not been well defined. 
It has been suggested that insulin has a stimulatory effect on 
CYP17α. There is evidence from in vitro models that insulin 
may act directly on the ovary ( see Figure 13–13 ). It has been 
shown that the ovary possesses insulin receptors and IGF recep-
tors. In addition, several studies have reported that insulin 
stimulates ovarian estrogen, androgen, and progesterone secre-
tion and that its effects are greatly enhanced by the addition of 
gonadotropins. Administration of an insulin-sensitizing agent 
(eg, metformin or a thiazolidinedione) to obese women with 
PCOS leads to a substantial reduction in 17α-hydroxyprogesterone 
levels, reflecting decreased CYP17α activity. However, clinical 
studies, in which insulin infusions were administered to normal 
women, failed to demonstrate increased testosterone produc-
tion, and there were no changes in androgen levels when normal 
women were given insulin-sensitizing agents. These observa-
tions suggest that insulin has more of a modifying rather than a 
predisposing effect on androgen production. 
 The relationship between insulin and adrenal androgen 
production is less clear. Some studies have shown that insulin 
increases secretion of 17α-hydroxyprogesterone and DHEAS 
in response to ACTH. Other studies have shown that DHEAS 
decreases after acute insulin infusions are administered to 
Cholesterol
Pregnenolone
17-Hydroxy-
pregnenolone
Dehydroepi-
androsterone
17a-hydroxylase
17,20-lyase
3b
Aromatase
Side-chain
cleavage
Progesterone
Thecal cell
Granulosa
cell
LH
+
FSH
+
+
+
−
−
17-Hydroxy-
progesterone
Androstenedione
Testosterone
Dihydro-
testosterone
Estrone
Estradiol
Inhibin
IGF
IGF
Insulin
17a-hydroxylase
17,20-lyase
17b HSD
17b HSD
5a-reductase
3b
3b
 FIGURE 13–13  Regulation of sex steroid production in the theca and granulosa cells of the ovary. Several autocrine and paracrine factors 
such as insulin and insulin-like growth factors (IGFs) work synergistically with luteinizing hormone (LH) to stimulate androgen production 
through increased 17α-hydroxylase activity.  (Redrawn with permission from Ehrmann DA, Barnes RB, Rosenfield RL. Polycystic ovary syndrome 
as a form of functional ovarian hyperandrogenism due to dysregulation of androgen secretion.  Endocr Rev . 1995;16:322.) 
450    CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility
 normal men and women. Furthermore, when insulin- sensitizing 
agents were administered to women with PCOS, a decrease in 
DHEAS was observed. Although there is less evidence to sup-
port the association of insulin and adrenal androgen produc-
tion, if there is an insulin effect, it is as a modulator of adrenal 
secretory activity. 
 Insulin may indirectly affect androgen levels. Several studies 
have reported that insulin directly inhibits SHBG production. 
There is an inverse correlation between insulin levels and 
SHBG, so that decreasing insulin levels would decrease the 
circulating bioavailable androgen level (via increases in SHBG). 
It has also been shown that insulin decreases IGFBP-1. 
This would increase free IGF-1, which could modulate ovarian 
androgen production in a fashion similar to insulin 
( see Figure 13–13 ). Although these indirect mechanisms may 
play a role, the literature suggests that insulin acts directly to 
augment androgen production ( see Figure 13–13 ). However, it 
appears that a dysregulation in steroidogenesis must also exist 
in order for insulin to cause hyperandrogenism. 
 Increasing attention is being directed to the possibility that 
PCOS begins before adolescence. In fact, the initial insult may 
begin in utero, where there is ample exposure to androgens 
derived from the fetal adrenal gland and ovary. This hormonal 
environment may reprogram the ovary and alter steroidogen-
esis in a manner that predisposes to PCOS. The phenotypic 
expression of PCOS would then be determined by environ-
mental factors such as diet and exercise. 
 The various biochemical abnormalities associated with 
PCOS have led to studies investigating metabolic sequelae of 
this syndrome. Long-term health problems such as the devel-
opment of cardiovascular disease and diabetes have been 
linked to PCOS. In fact, several studies have suggested that 
the metabolic syndrome is significantly more prevalent in 
women with PCOS. However, studies looking at whether 
women with PCOS actually experience increased cardiovascu-
lar events are limited. Several observational studies have dem-
onstrated that women with PCOS have alterations in their 
lipid profiles, including increased triglycerides and LDL and 
decreased high-density lipoprotein (HDL) compared with 
weight-matched controls. Furthermore, the degree of dyslipi-
demia has been correlated with the magnitude of insulin 
resistance. The fact that insulin resistance occurs with greater 
frequency in women with PCOS suggests that they are at 
higher risk for the development of diabetes mellitus. It is 
known that up to 30% to 40% of women with PCOS have 
impaired glucose tolerance, although it is most often seen in 
patients who are obese. Limited retrospective studies have sug-
gested that women with PCOS have an increased frequency of 
developing type 2 diabetes. In summary, as demonstrated by 
surrogate markers, the available data show that these patients 
have increased risk factors for cardiovascular events and diabe-
tes. Long-term prospective studies will be required to deter-
mine if these patients are actually at risk for increased 
mortality and morbidity. 
 The fact that hyperinsulinemia underlies many of the 
potential adverse sequelae raises a question about whether 
insulin resistance should be assessed in all patients diagnosed 
with PCOS. There are several methods of measuring insulin 
resistance ( Table 13–5 ). However, the potential impact of 
hyperinsulinemia is unknown. Furthermore, there is no uni-
versal laboratory criterion or standardization for establishing 
the diagnosis of insulin resistance, which raises doubts about 
whether any potential adverse sequelae can be prevented if 
insulin resistance is identified. Further data are necessary, 
prior to widespread use of medications such as metformin or 
a thiazolidinedione to reduce insulin resistance in patients 
with PCOS to determine (1) if these patients are indeed at 
risk for cardiovascular events, (2) if hyperinsulinemia is an 
independent risk factor, and (3) whether long-term treatment 
with any insulin-sensitizing agent will decrease the potential 
sequelae. 
 5. Additional risks associated with PCOS —Another concern is 
that women who are anovulatory do not produce a significant 
amount of progesterone. This leads to a situation in which the 
uterine lining is stimulated by unopposed estrogens, which is a 
significant risk factor for development of endometrial cancer. 
In fact, an association has been found between endometrial 
cancer and PCOS. There is also evidence to suggest an associa-
tion of PCOS with both breast cancer and ovarian cancer, but 
PCOS has not been conclusively shown to be an independent 
risk factor for either disease. 
 6. Management of PCOS —The management of PCOS should 
be dictated by the patients’ risk factors for cardiovascular dis-
ease, diabetes, malignant sequelae, and symptomatology (see 
also “Infertility”). All patients should have a lipid profile mea-
sured. In addition, oral glucose tolerance tests should be per-
formed—at least in obese women. In patients who have a long 
history of irregular cycles (>1 year), an endometrial biopsy 
should be considered. 
 Cardiovascular risk factors, weight loss, and progression to 
diabetes can be improved with diet and exercise. In the subset 
of patients with glucose intolerance, administration of insu-
lin-sensitizing agents should be considered. Metformin, a 
biguanide, is the most widely studied. Several studies have 
shown modest transitory weight loss, and possibly a decreased 
incidence of diabetes in patients with PCOS due to its use. 
Metformin is not effective for treatment of hyperandrogenic 
symptomatology. The use of metformin is not recommended 
unless there is evidence of metabolic derangements that are 
not fixed with diet and exercise alone. 
 Irregular bleeding can be improved by the administration of 
oral contraceptives which induce scheduled withdrawal bleed-
ing. However, another benefit of oral contraceptives has been 
the significant reduction in endometrial cancer in the general 
population. It is rational to expect that a similar benefit would 
TABLE 13–5  Measurements of insulin resistance. 
Frequently sampled intravenous glucose tolerance test (FSIGT)a 
Euglycemic insulin clampa 
Insulin tolerance test (ITT) 
 Fasting insulin levels 
Oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) + insulin levels and calculating 
 area under the curve 
Glucose-insulin ratio 
 Derivatives of glucose-insulin ratiob 
Insulin resistance index = glucose × insulin/25 
Homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance HOMA-IR = 22.5 
 × 18/glucose × or log (HOMA-IR) 
Quantitative insulin sensitivity check index (QUICKD = 1/log 
(glucose) + log (insulin) 
aAmerican Diabetes Association (ADA) gold standard; not practical for clinical use. 
bCalculations based on fasting glucose and insulin levels. 
CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility     451
accrue to women with PCOS, because the ovarian stimulation 
is minimized and the progestin would counteract the estro-
genic environment. 
 Acne and hirsutism in women diagnosed with PCOS or of 
idiopathic origin can be treated with oral contraceptives. The 
mechanism is not completely known, but oral contraceptives 
decrease the amount of bioavailable androgens by increased 
SHBG production and by ovarian suppression. It has also been 
shown that progestins can inhibit 5α-reductase activity, which 
further decreases the production of dihydrotestosterone, the 
major androgen that stimulates hair growth. The maximal 
effect is evident after 6 months of treatment (the hair cycle 
length is estimated to be 4 months). If hirsutism is severe or if 
oral contraceptives alone are not effective, the addition of 
spironolactone may be beneficial. Spironolactone is an anti-
mineralocorticoid agent that inhibits androgen biosynthesis in 
the adrenal gland and ovary, inhibits 5α-reductase, and is a 
competitive inhibitor of the androgen receptor. Side-effects are 
minimal and include diuresis in the first few days; dyspepsia; 
nausea; skin hypersensitivity; breast tenderness; and abnormal 
bleeding, which can be alleviated by increasing the dose to 
desired amount over 3 weeks. Spironolactone is used concomi-
tantly with oral contraceptives. Because oral contraceptives and 
spironolactone act by different mechanisms, the combined 
effect is synergistic. 
 If oral contraceptives are not desired or have not improved 
the excess hair growth, there are several other methods that can 
be used in conjuction with oral contraceptives or administered 
alone. The only topical agent approved for hirustism by the 
FDA is Vaniqa (Eflornithine) cream, which is an inhibitor of 
L-ornithine decarboxylase. It has been shown to be effective for 
control of facial hair. Long-acting GnRH agonists and 
5α-reductase inhibitors (finasteride) have been used for refrac-
tory cases with some success. Shaving, bleaching, chemical 
depilation, plucking, or waxing are temporary measures to 
control unwanted hair growth. However, several of these meth-
ods can cause skin irritation and result in progressive hair 
growth. Permanent techniques such as electrolysis or laser 
depilation have shown promising results. 
 B. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia  Congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia is another disorder that may cause hyperandro-
genism. It presents in a wide range of clinical forms, ranging 
from severe—which may be classified as  classic ,  salt-wasting , or 
 simple virilizing —to milder forms known as  acquired ,  adult- 
onset ,  nonclassic , or  late-onset congenital hyperplasia. The clinical 
manifestations reflect the severity of the enzymatic defect. Severe 
or classic forms are discussed in Chapter 14 and will not be 
considered here. This section will discuss the nonclassic forms, 
which affect 1% to 10% of the population, depending on the 
ethnicity of the patient. The clinical features are similar to those 
of patients diagnosed with PCOS and include menstrual irregu-
larities, hyperandrogenism, and infertility, and up to 50% have 
polycystic ovaries. 
 The adrenal gland consists of a cortex and a medulla. The 
cortex is divided into three functional zones based on location and 
the principal hormone secreted (see Chapter 9). The zona glom-
erulosa is the outermost zone and lies adjacent to the adrenal 
capsule. It is primarily responsible for aldosterone production. 
The zona fasciculata lies immediately below the glomerulosa. It 
principally secretes glucocorticoids, although it is capable of pro-
ducing androgens. The zona reticularis is located beneath the zona 
fasciculata and overlies the adrenal medulla. It is this zone that 
principally secretes androgens. Both the zona fasciculata and the 
zona reticularis are regulated by ACTH. It is the secretory activity 
of these two zones that results in nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia. 
 Congenital adrenal hyperplasia is an autosomal recessive disor-
der that is caused by mutations of genes involved with adrenal 
steroidogenesis. The mutations mostly occur in the 21- hydroxylase 
gene  (P450c21B) and rarely in the 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydroge-
nase gene or 11β-hydroxylase genes  (P450c11B and  P450c11AS). 
In classic forms, the enzymatic defects are severe, affect both 
alleles, and result in cortisol deficiency diagnosed at birth. Owing 
to the cortisol deficiency, there is ACTH excess and hyperstimula-
tion of the adrenal gland. The adrenal precursors produced proxi-
mal to the enzymatic defect accumulate and promote the synthesis 
of DHEA and androstenedione through the androgen synthetic 
pathway. These are converted in the periphery to more potent 
androgens, resulting in symptoms of hyperandrogenism. 
Approximately 50% of patients diagnosed with nonclassic con-
genital adrenal hyperplasia are compound heterozygotes with one 
of the mutant alleles coding for a severe defect. Typically, patients 
who are carriers have a normal phenotype. Therefore, most 
patients with nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia do not demonstrate 
deficient cortisol production or excess ACTH. It is suggested that 
most of the androgen excess in nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia 
arises as a consequence of subtle alterations in enzyme kinetics. 
Furthermore, some studies report a generalized adrenocortical 
hyperactivity rather than deficient enzyme activity. 
 The diagnosis can be established by measuring early morning 
basal 17-hydroxyprogesterone levels. Levels greater than 800 ng/dL 
(24.24 pmol/L) are diagnostic of 21-hydroxylase deficiency. 
However, the elevation in 17-hydroxyprogesterone is often not 
impressive and does not differ from that observed in PCOS. If the 
basal 17-hydroxyprogesterone levels are greater than 200 ng/dL 
(6.06 pmol/L) and less than 800 ng/dL (24.2 pmol/L), a provoca-
tive test with ACTH (250 μg intravenously) should be performed. 
If 17-hydroxyprogesterone levels are greater than 1000 ng/dL 
(30.30 pmol/L) 1 hour after administration of ACTH, the diag-
nosis of 21-hydroxylase deficiency can be made. Elimination of a 
false elevation in 17-hydroxyprogesterone due to ovulation must 
be excluded by simultaneous measurement of progesterone. A 
17-hydroxyprogesterone screening level greater than 200 ng/dL 
has 100% sensitivity, but only 7% positive predictive value for the 
diagnosis of nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia. The other rare enzy-
matic defects that result in nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia can be 
assessed with measurements of steroid products proximal to the 
blockade following provocative testing. 
 Treatment of nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia is similar to that of 
PCOS, raising a question about whether an etiologic diagnosis is 
necessary. It is certainly an expense, leading to no change in man-
agement except with regard to infertility treatment and manage-
ment of subsequent pregnancies (see later). Establishing a specific 
diagnosis may be advisable to facilitate genetic counseling in the 
woman with adrenal hyperplasia who intends future childbearing 
and to prepare for in utero treatment should an affected fetus be 
452    CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility
identified by amniocentesis. Although some experts suggest dex-
amethasone treatment for symptoms of hyperandrogenism, stud-
ies show inconsistent results, and there is concern about the 
consequent adrenal suppression. 
 C. Cushing syndrome 
 Chronic glucocorticoid excess, what-
ever its cause, leads to the constellation of symptoms and physical 
features known as Cushing syndrome. The most common cause is 
iatrogenic as a result of glucocorticoid treatment. However, an 
ACTH-secreting microadenoma (Cushing disease) accounts for 
more than 70% of cases of endogenous hypercortisolism. Less 
common causes include primary adrenal disease (tumors or hyper-
plasia) and ectopic (not hypothalamic-pituitary) ACTH-producing 
or CRH-producing tumors. Patients with Cushing syndrome have 
a range of clinical manifestations that vary with age at onset and 
etiology. This section will discuss the adult clinical presentation 
briefly. For a more detailed discussion, see Chapter 9. 
 Cushing syndrome (noniatrogenic) is rare and occurs in approx-
imately 2.6 patients per million individuals in the population. It is 
responsible for less than 1% of those individuals who present with 
hirsutism. Although Cushing syndrome is uncommon, it presents 
in a manner similar to PCOS and congenital adrenal hyperplasia 
and needs to be considered in the differential diagnosis of hyperan-
drogenism and anovulation. Patients with ACTH excess typically 
have additional clinical features suggestive of glucocorticoid or 
mineralocorticoid hypersecretion. The most common features 
include obesity with increased centripetal fat, moon facies, muscle 
weakness, and striae. Other manifestations may include diabetes, 
hypertension, and osteoporosis. Women with primary tumors tend 
to have a rapid onset of symptoms and often manifest with severe 
hyperandrogenism (frank virilization) that includes male pattern 
baldness, deepening voice, clitoromegaly, and defeminization. 
 Hirsutism or acne is present in about 60% to 70% of women 
with Cushing syndrome. However, the exact mechanism of hyper-
androgenic effects is not completely known. It is evident that 
excess ACTH causes hyperstimulation of the zona fasciculata and 
zona reticularis and results in hypersecretion of cortisol and andro-
gens. It is also known that adrenal tumors may selectively overpro-
duce androgens. 
 Menstrual irregularities occur in more than 80% of patients 
with Cushing syndrome. The exact cause of anovulation is unclear. 
It has already been observed that hyperandrogenemia may have a 
significant impact on ovulation. However, several studies have 
shown that glucocorticoids can also suppress the hypothalamic-
pituitary axis. Thus, the elevated glucocorticoids may be an addi-
tional factor in the pathophysiology of anovulation associated 
with this syndrome (see Chapters 4 and 9 for the diagnosis and 
treatment of Cushing syndrome). 
 D. Androgen-secreting tumor 
 If there is a rapid onset of 
androgenic symptoms, an androgen-secreting adrenal tumor 
should be suspected. Elevated testosterone (>200 ng/dL; 
6.9 nmol/L) and DHEAS (>700 ng/mL; 19 μmol/L) levels should 
raise the suspicion of a tumor. However, more than 50% of 
adrenal androgen-secreting tumors have testosterone levels below 
200 ng/dL (6.9 nmol/L). Furthermore, the majority of patients 
with high testosterone levels do not have tumors. Testosterone 
levels above 250 ng/dL are only 10% predictive for androgen-se-
creting tumor. Measurement of DHEAS levels in these patients 
yields similar inconsistencies. This suggests that laboratory tests 
have limited value in screening for androgen-secreting tumors, 
and a clinical history and physical examination are better predic-
tors. The presence of systemic symptoms such as weight loss, 
anorexia, bloating, and back pain favor an androgen-secreting 
tumor. If suspicion is high, an abdominal computed tomography 
(CT) scan confirms the diagnosis. The treatment involves surgical 
resection, mitotane (adrenolytic), and steroid synthesis inhibitors. 
 Androgen-secreting tumors can also originate from the ovary. 
The incidence approximates 1:500 to 1:1000 hyperandrogenic 
patients. Testosterone levels >200 ng/dL (6.9 nmol/L) arouse sus-
picion, although in 20% of patients with ovarian androgen- 
producing tumors, testosterone levels are below this value. Again, 
the best screening procedures are the clinical history and physical 
examination. In the absence of Cushingoid features, adrenal and 
ovarian tumors present similarly. Ovarian tumors often have uni-
lateral ovarian enlargement that can be palpated on pelvic exami-
nation. Ultrasonography often confirms the diagnosis. In selected 
cases, selective venous sampling may be performed if CT or 
sonography cannot identify the source of androgen production. 
 OBESITY 
 Obesity is the most prevalent chronic disease in the United States. 
Adverse health events are dramatically increased in obese subjects 
(see Chapter 20). These include cardiovascular disease, diabetes, 
joint disease, respiratory dysfunction, and colon, endometrial, and 
ovarian cancers. Obesity is often also associated with menstrual 
irregularities, and the relationship between the two is strengthened 
the earlier the onset of the obesity. Alterations in sex steroid 
metabolism are clearly evident in obese females, and the conse-
quences are attenuated release of gonadotropins, which manifests 
as anovulation. Obese patients have increased production rates 
and MCRs of androgens; therefore, their serum levels of andro-
gens are largely within the normal range. However, free testoster-
one levels tend to be in the high-normal range due to the decreased 
SHBG levels. A portion of androgen metabolism occurs in body 
fat. The excess adipose tissue aromatizes these androgens and 
increases the amount of circulating estrone causing a state of func-
tional hyperestrogenism. In fact, studies have shown that the rate 
of peripheral conversion of androstenedione to estrone is corre-
lated with body weight. Other studies have illustrated that the 
conversion of estrone to estradiol in adipose tissue is higher in 
visceral fat than subcutaneous fat. The increased visceral fat associ-
ated with obesity is also associated with hyperinsulinemia, which 
may have independent effects on ovarian function. 
 Management of Obesity 
 The management of obesity includes diet and exercise (see 
Chapter 20). In patients who have irregular uterine bleeding, an 
CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility     453
endometrial biopsy must be performed to rule out endometrial 
cancer. Oral contraceptives are effective at treating the irregular 
bleeding and reduce the incidence of endometrial cancer. Weight 
loss reestablishes normal menstrual cycles in the majority of these 
women. 
 Anovulation Unrelated to Excess Sex 
Steroid Production 
 A. Adrenal insufficiency 
 Adrenocortical insufficiency may 
be categorized as primary or secondary. Primary adrenal insuffi-
ciency (Addison disease) is caused by destruction of adrenal corti-
cal tissue. Secondary adrenal insufficiency is due to defects in the 
hypothalamic-pituitary axis resulting in a deficiency in ACTH. 
Both types lead to cortisol deficiency, which is life threatening. 
 The main cause of primary adrenal failure is autoimmune 
destruction of the adrenal cortex. In fact, in the industrialized 
world, an autoimmune pathogenesis accounts for more than 60% 
of cases of primary adrenocortical deficiency. The symptoms are 
typically those of chronic insufficiency and include weakness, 
fatigue, menstrual disturbances, and gastrointestinal symptoms 
such as nausea, abdominal pain, and diarrhea. Additional signs 
may include weight loss, hypotension, and hyperpigmentation of 
the skin and mucous membranes. These symptoms may appear 
insidiously with a mean duration of approximately 3 years. 
Symptoms usually wax and wane until there is complete decom-
pensation. 
 Autoimmune adrenal failure may occur as an isolated event, 
but estimates link more than 70% of cases to an autoimmune 
polyglandular syndrome (APS) of two subtypes (type 1 and 2). 
APS-1 usually presents in childhood with hypoparathyroidism, 
chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, adrenal insufficiency, and 
other autoimmune disorders such as celiac disease and ovarian 
failure. It is caused by mutations in the autoimmune regulator 
gene  (AIRE) and has an autosomal recessive inheritance. APS-2 
(Schmidt syndrome) has its onset in adulthood (usually the third 
decade). Common manifestations include type 1 diabetes melli-
tus, myasthenia gravis, Hashimoto thyroiditis, ovarian failure, and 
adrenal insufficiency. Susceptibility to this disorder seems to be 
inherited as a dominant trait in linkage dysequilibrium with the 
HLA-B region of chromosome 6. Autoimmune adrenal insuffi-
ciency is associated with autoantibodies that are directed toward 
enzymes involved with steroidogenesis. Several studies suggest that 
the antigens in this disorder include 17α-hydroxylase, 21-hydrox-
ylase, and P450scc. Detection of antibodies directed at these 
enzymes is helpful in making the diagnosis of autoimmune adre-
nal failure (see Chapters 2 and 9). 
 Worldwide, infection—especially tuberculosis—is the most 
common cause of primary adrenal failure. The adrenal cortex and 
medulla are involved and may be completely replaced by caseating 
granulomas. This phenomenon is always associated with other 
evidence of a tuberculosis infection. Fungal, viral, and bacterial 
pathogens are less common causes. 
 The most common cause of secondary adrenal insufficiency is 
adrenal suppression after exogenous glucocorticoid administration. 
Adrenal insufficiency is also seen following treatment of Cushing 
disease and with a variety of hypothalamic-pituitary lesions that 
result in hypopituitarism. These patients more commonly present 
with symptoms suggestive of acute adrenal insufficiency. The clini-
cal features include abdominal pain, hypotension, fever, severe 
volume depletion, and possibly profound shock. 
 Menstrual disturbances are a frequent presentation in patients 
with adrenal insufficiency. Autoimmune adrenal insufficiency is 
often accompanied by gonadal failure. In the two forms of APS, 
POF develops in APS-1 in 50% of patients and in APS-2 in 10% 
of patients. It has been shown that antibodies—particularly to 
CYP17α and P450scc—are associated with POF. Other causes of 
adrenal failure are associated with menstrual disorders more than 
25% of the time. The cause of anovulation is not known with 
certainty, but chronic illness itself is probably responsible. 
 Diagnosis and treatment are discussed in Chapter 9. The 
screening process includes blood chemistries and basal cortisol 
levels. The diagnosis is confirmed with provocative tests using 
exogenous ACTH. 
 B. Thyroid disorders 
 The prevalence of overt thyroid dys-
function is 1% to 2% in women of reproductive age. Thyroid 
disorders can develop secondary to an insult in the hypothalamus, 
pituitary, or thyroid, the latter being most common. In order to 
understand the pathophysiology of these disorders, it is important 
to be familiar with the normal physiologic regulation (see Chapter 
7). This section will briefly review the common causes of hyper-
thyroidism and hypothyroidism, their manifestations after the 
onset of puberty, and their impact on reproductive function. 
 1. Hyperthyroidism— Hyperthyroidism is the clinical syndrome 
associated with excessive thyroid hormone activity. The clini-
cal presentation of hyperthyroidism (thyrotoxicosis) depends 
on the age at onset and the degree of thyrotoxicosis. The 
clinical manifestations can involve most organ systems, and 
the presentation ranges from asymptomatic to thyroid storm. 
Typical features include nervousness, malaise, palpitations, 
heat intolerance, weight loss, and inability to concentrate. 
Additional features may involve the eyes and include lid 
lag, proptosis, and ophthalmoplegia. The reproductive 
abnormalities include menstrual abnormalities, infertility, and 
spontaneous abortions. 
 The most common cause of hyperthyroidism is an autoim-
mune process that affects thyroid hormone production (Graves 
disease). Antibodies bind to the TSH receptor and stimulate 
the thyroid gland to secrete increased amounts of thyroid hor-
mone. Less common causes include subacute thyroiditis, toxic 
multinodular goiter, and struma ovarii. 
 Excess thyroid hormone has an impact on sex steroids. 
Thyroid hormones stimulate hepatic production of SHBG. As 
a result, total serum estradiol, estrone, testosterone, and dihy-
drotestosterone are increased, yet free levels of these hormones 
remain within the normal range. The metabolic clearance 
pathways appear to be altered, which can be explained in part 
by the increased binding. The conversion rates of androstene-
dione to estrogen and testosterone are increased. The signifi-
cance of the alterations in metabolism has not been 
determined. 
454    CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility
 Menstrual irregularities frequently occur in hyperthyroid 
states. The exact mechanism is unclear. Altered levels of TRH 
and TSH do not appear to have a significant impact on the 
HPO axis. The LH surge may be impaired, although studies 
have shown that hyperthyroid patients have normal FSH and 
LH responses to exogenous GnRH. It is possible that the weight 
loss and psychologic disturbances associated with this disease 
may contribute to the menstrual abnormalities. It is interesting 
to note that endometrial biopsies of many amenorrheic patients 
with hyperthyroidism have demonstrated a secretory endome-
trium, indicating that many of these women remain ovulatory. 
Menstrual abnormalities return to normal with treatment. 
 2. Hypothyroidism— A more common disorder than hyperthy-
roidism in women of reproductive age, hypothyroidism results 
from inadequate thyroid hormone production. Manifestations 
can involve almost any organ system, and the presentation can 
range from asymptomatic to myxedema coma. Common symp-
toms include lethargy, memory defects, cold intolerance, dry 
skin, hair loss or occasionally excess hair growth, deepening of the 
voice, nausea, and constipation. Physical findings include somno-
lence; bradycardia; mild hypertension; dry skin; periorbital puffi-
ness; nonpitting edema of the hands, face, and ankles; and 
decreased tendon reflexes. Reproductive abnormalities include 
menstrual disorders, infertility, and spontaneous abortions. 
 The most common cause is autoimmune destruction of the 
thyroid (Hashimoto thyroiditis). It is mediated by humoral and 
cell-mediated processes. The antibodies are directed toward 
thyroglobulin (anti-Tg) and thyroid peroxidase (anti-TPO anti-
body). Histologic specimens show lymphocytic infiltration. 
Other causes include ablative therapy of the thyroid gland 
(postsurgery or radioactive iodine), end-stage Graves disease, 
and transient thyroiditis (viral, drug-induced, or postpartum). 
 Inadequate thyroid hormone levels influence the metabo-
lism of sex steroids. The production of SHBG is decreased. As 
a result, serum estradiol and testosterone concentrations are 
decreased, but free hormone levels remain within the normal 
range. However, the metabolism of these steroids is altered and 
differs from that found in individuals with hyperthyroidism. 
 The mechanism underlying menstrual abnormalities in 
hypothyroidism is incompletely understood. Because primary 
hypothyroidism is associated with elevated serum PRL in up to 
one-third of patients, it is plausible that hyperprolactinemia is 
a contributing factor (see Chapter 4). However, menstrual 
abnormalities are also observed in the absence of elevated PRL. 
Alterations in FSH and LH levels have been investigated, and 
studies have shown inconclusive results, although several stud-
ies suggest that the midcycle surge is absent. Menstrual func-
tion returns to normal with thyroid hormone replacement. 
 Thyroid dysfunction often presents with nonspecific symp-
toms, which delays the diagnosis. If only menstrual abnor-
malities are present, it is prudent to screen for thyroid 
abnormalities. Most cases are detected by TSH assays. 
Confirmation is obtained with a repeat TSH level and serum 
thyroid hormone levels. 
 OUTFLOW TRACT DISORDERS 
 The true prevalence of Müllerian tract abnormalities is not known. 
It is reported in as many as 45% of women. The reproductive 
consequences depend on the type of abnormality identified. A 
septate uterus is the most common defect described. These patients 
often present with infertility or obstetric complications. Other 
abnormalities include unicornous, bicornous, and didelphic uteri. 
These abnormalities present most commonly with reproductive or 
obstetric complications. Müllerian agenesis, androgen insensitivity 
syndrome, and congenital outflow obstruction defects are abnor-
malities that present with primary amenorrhea with no history of 
menses. In the following section these two abnormalities are dis-
cussed in greater detail. 
 A. Müllerian agenesis 
 Müllerian agenesis (Mayer-Rokitansky-
Küster-Hauser syndrome) is the second most common cause of 
primary amenorrhea. It is a congenital condition that occurs in 
one in 5000 female births. These individuals have normal ovarian 
development, normal endocrine function, and normal female 
sexual development. The physical findings are a shortened or 
absent vagina in addition to absence of the uterus, although small 
masses resembling a rudimentary uterus may be noted (see the 
section “Embryology and Anatomy” at the beginning of this 
chapter). About one-third of patients have renal abnormalities, 
and several have had bone abnormalities and eighth nerve deaf-
ness. These individuals have a 46,XX karyotype. 
 The exact cause has not been identified. It is known that 
regression of Müllerian structures in males is controlled by AMH, 
which is secreted by the Sertoli cells of the testis. One hypothesis 
assigns the underlying defect to an activating mutation of either 
the  AMH gene or its receptor. The genes for both AMH and 
AMH receptor have been investigated, but no mutations have yet 
been identified in patients with this syndrome. 
 B. Androgen insensitivity syndrome 
 Androgen insensi-
tivity syndrome (AIS) presents in somewhat the same way as 
Müllerian agenesis. The presentation differs in that individuals 
with complete AIS have minimal sexual hair. These patients have 
a male karyotype with a mutation of the androgen receptor on the 
X chromosome. They have normal testicular development and 
endocrine function. However, because the internal and external 
male sexual structures need testosterone for development, they are 
absent. This results in a female phenotype. Because the testis still 
secretes AMH, Müllerian regression does occur. Secondary sexual 
characteristics (female) develop as a result of peripheral conversion 
of testosterone to estradiol, effectively resulting in unopposed 
estrogen stimulation. 
 The diagnosis of either disorder is entertained when pelvic 
examination reveals a short or absent vagina and no uterus on 
rectal examination. Confirmation of absent uterus can be obtained 
with ultrasound, MRI, or laparoscopy. These two disorders can 
usually be differentiated based on physical examination; patients 
with AIS have no pubic hair. However, the differential diagnosis 
becomes more difficult when patients have incomplete AIS. A 
testosterone level and karyotype can easily differentiate the two 
syndromes. This disorder is further discussed in Chapter 14. 
 C. Congenital outflow obstruction 
 Transvaginal septum 
and imperforate hymen are typical obstructive abnormalities. 
CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility     455
These patients usually present with cyclic lower abdominal pain 
and amenorrhea. The physical findings are a shortened or absent 
vagina. However, this syndrome differs from Müllerian agenesis in 
that the pelvic organs are present. Behind either defect is old blood 
that has not escaped with menses. The differential diagnosis is 
sometimes difficult, although bulging of the introitus suggests 
imperforate hymen, because the defect is thinner than a trans-
vaginal septum. 
 The embryologic formations of the transvaginal septum and 
imperforate hymen are similar but not identical. Transvaginal sep-
tum is due to failure of complete canalization of the vaginal plate 
(see the section “Embryology and Anatomy” at the beginning of 
this chapter). The septum can vary in thickness and can be located 
at any level in the vagina. The hymen represents the junction of the 
sinovaginal bulbs and urogenital sinus. Typically, the hymen is 
perforated during fetal development. The hymen is thin and is 
always at the junction of the vestibule and vagina. It is important 
to distinguish these defects because the surgical correction proce-
dures are different and require different levels of expertise. 
 D. Asherman syndrome 
 Intrauterine adhesions or synechiae 
(Asherman syndrome) are an acquired condition that may obliter-
ate the endometrial cavity. These patients usually present with a 
range of menstrual disturbances, infertility, and recurrent sponta-
neous abortions. The most frequent symptom is amenorrhea. 
 Intrauterine adhesions result from damage to the endometrial 
basal layer. A common antecedent factor is a surgical procedure 
within the uterine cavity, and most often it is endometrial curet-
tage that occurs shortly after pregnancy. The concurrent presence 
of infection or heavy bleeding increases the risk. Endometrial 
tuberculosis and septic abortion are rare causes. 
 The diagnosis is entertained after demonstrating no with-
drawal bleeding after administration of estrogen and progesterone. 
Confirmation is made with a hysterosalpingogram, saline sono-
gram, or hysteroscopy. Treatment involves lysis of adhesions and 
hormonal therapy. 
 MENOPAUSE 
 The ovary is unique in that the age at which it ceases to function 
in women appears to have remained constant despite the increase 
in longevity experienced by women over the last century. Because 
the loss of ovarian function has a profound impact on the hor-
monal milieu in women and the subsequent risk of the develop-
ment of disease resulting from the loss of estrogen production, 
improving our understanding of reproductive aging is critical for 
optimal female health. 
 Human follicles begin development in the fourth gestational 
month. Approximately 1000 to 2000 germ cells migrate to the 
gonadal ridge and multiply, reaching a total of 6 to 7 million 
around the fifth month of intrauterine life. At this point, multi-
plication stops and follicle loss begins, declining to approximately 
1 million by birth. In the human male, the germ cells become 
quiescent and maintain their stem cell identity. In contrast, in the 
human female, between weeks 12 and 18, the germ cells enter 
meiosis and differentiate. Thus, in the female, all germ stem cells 
have differentiated prior to birth. In the adult woman, the germ 
cells may remain quiescent, may be recruited for further develop-
ment and ovulation, or may be destroyed by apoptosis. Over time, 
the population of oocytes is depleted (without regeneration) 
through recruitment and apoptosis until less than a thousand 
oocytes remain and menopause ensues. Approximately 90% of 
women experience menopause at a mean age of 51.2 years (range, 
46-55). The remainder experiences menopause prior to age 46 
(often termed early menopause), with 1% of women experiencing 
menopause before age 40 years (POF, as discussed above). 
 Understanding ovarian aging has been difficult. The variability in 
definitions has made comparisons from study to study difficult. The 
participants in the Stages of Reproductive Aging Workshop (STRAW) 
developed criteria for staging female reproductive aging. They uti-
lized menstrual cyclicity and early follicular FSH levels as the pri-
mary determinants for this staging system. Five stages precede the 
final menstrual period and two stages follow it. Stages −5 to −3 
include the reproductive interval; stages −2 to −1 are termed the 
menopausal transition; and stages +1 and +2 are the postmenopause 
( Figure 13–14 ). The menopausal transition begins with increased 
variability in menstrual cyclicity (>7 days) in women with elevated 
FSH levels. This stage ends with the final menstrual period, which 
cannot be recognized until after 12 months of amenorrhea. Early 
postmenopause is defined as the first 5 years following the final men-
strual period. Late postmenopause is variable in length, beginning 
5 years after the final menstrual period and continuing until death. 
 This system is said to include endocrinologic aspects of ovarian 
aging, but it still depends largely on menstrual cyclicity as a key 
indicator of ovarian age. The system includes measurement of 
FSH; however, by the time FSH is elevated, even in the face of 
cyclic menstrual cycles, oocyte depletion has already proceeded to 
such an extent that fertility (as a marker of reproductive aging) is 
significantly diminished. Evidence suggests that genetic and envi-
ronmental factors influence both age at menopause and the 
decline in fertility, although the specific nature of these relation-
ships is poorly characterized. Premature menopause can be due to 
failure to attain adequate follicle numbers in utero or to acceler-
ated depletion thereafter. Potentially, either of these causes could 
be affected by genetic and environmental factors. The timing of 
menopause has a consistent impact on overall health with respect 
to osteoporosis, cardiovascular disease, and cancer risk. Over the 
next decade, it is estimated that more than 40 million women in 
the United States will enter menopause. 
 OOCYTE DEPLETION 
 As discussed earlier, the leading theory regarding the onset of 
menopause relates to a critical threshold in oocyte number. The 
theory that menopause is primarily triggered by ovarian aging is 
supported by the coincident occurrence of follicular depletion, 
elevation of gonadotropins, and menstrual irregularity with ulti-
mate cessation. 
 In 1992 Faddy and colleagues developed a mathematical model 
to predict the rate of follicular decline. They utilized data from 
456    CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility
multiple sources to construct a model that ultimately showed a 
biexponential decline with an acceleration in oocyte loss begin-
ning in the late thirties. More recently, Hansen et al utilized newer 
technology and a single population of specimens. They fit the data 
to multiple models and found that a pattern of gradually increas-
ing atresia fit the decline in nongrowing follicles ( Figure 13–15 ). 
This same model most closely follows the decline in the antral 
follicles—small (2-10 mm) growing follicles seen on ultrasound—
seen across the reproductive-age span ( Figure 13–16 ). As noted 
earlier, the loss of follicles (oocytes) is a constant process beginning 
 in utero and continuing throughout reproductive life, even during 
pregnancy and in the absence of ovulation, until approximately 
1000 follicles/oocytes remain and menopause ensues. 
 ENDOCRINE SYSTEM CHANGES WITH 
AGING 
 The entire endocrine system changes with advancing age. The 
somatotrophic axis begins to decline in the fourth decade, prior to 
the decline in ovarian function. This decline is accelerated in the 
face of ovarian failure and may act to accelerate the decline in 
Final menstrual period
(FMP)
Menopausal
transition
Postmenopause
Perimenopause
Reproductive
Early
Stages:
Duration
of stage:
Menstrual
cycles:
*Stages most likely to be characterized by vasomotor symptoms
= elevated
Terminology:
Endocrine:
Peak
Variable
Variable
variable
cycle length
(>7 d
different
from normal)
Days skipped
cycles and
an interval of
amenorrhea
( 60 d)
Normal FSH
FSH
Regular
none
4 y
Amen x 12 mos
Until
demise
Late
Late*
Early*
Early
Variable
to
regular
Late
FSH
FSH
b
a
1
y
0
 FIGURE 13–14  Stages of reproductive aging.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Soules MR, et al. Stages of Reproductive Aging 
Workshop [STRAW].  J Women’s Health Gend Based Med . 2001;10:843.) 
Log (NGF)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
60
50
40
30
20
10
Age (years)
Menopause threshold
NGF
95% Cl
Power fit
24
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
26
28
30
32
34
Age (years)
R2 = 27.34
AFC
36
38
40
42
44
46
 FIGURE 13–15  A new model of reproductive aging: the decline 
in ovarian nongrowing follicle number (primordial follicles) from 
birth to menopause.  (Reproduced with permission from Hansen KR, 
et al. A new model of reproductive aging: the decline in ovarian non-
growing follicle number from birth to menopause.  Hum Reprod . 
2008;23:699-708.) 
 FIGURE 13–16  The antral follicle count (AFC) which declines with 
age in a Caucasian population is best described as a gradual acceleration 
in decline with age. Relationship of total AFC and chronological age. 
 (Reproduced with permission from Rosen M, et al. Antral follicle count—
absence of significant midlife decline.  Fertil Steril. 2010: in press.) 
CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility     457
ovarian function. However, pituitary concentrations of GH as well 
as ACTH and TSH remain constant into the ninth decade. While 
the thyroid gland undergoes progressive fibrosis with age and 
concentrations of T 3 decline by 25% to 40%, elderly patients still 
remain euthyroid. Beta cell function also undergoes degeneration 
with aging such that by age 65 years, 50% of subjects have abnor-
mal glucose tolerance tests. Frank diabetes is less frequent, how-
ever, occurring in approximately 7% of the population. The 
female reproductive system, on the other hand, undergoes com-
plete failure at a relatively early age. 
 Secretion of reproductive hormones during the menopausal 
transition (MT) was previously thought to decline progressively in 
a linear fashion, but hormone levels have since been shown to 
fluctuate widely. Studies in large cohorts of women have demon-
strated that circulating FSH concentrations rise progressively dur-
ing the MT. The initial monotropic rise in FSH is attributed to a 
decrease in ovarian inhibin secretion rather than to a decrease in 
estradiol production. 
 Inhibin and activin are proteins produced by the granulosa 
cells and have been shown to play major roles during the MT. 
Inhibin consists of a covalently bound dimer with an α subunit 
and one of two different β subunits, designated as β A and β B ; the 
resulting heterodimers are known as inhibin A and inhibin B. 
Inhibin A is secreted by the corpus luteum and inhibin B by antral 
and dominant follicles. Consequently, inhibin A levels increase 
during the luteal phase, and inhibin B concentrations rise during 
the follicular phase. Both inhibins inhibit pituitary FSH secretion. 
Activins are a related class of proteins that stimulate pituitary FSH 
release. The activin molecule is a homodimer composed of two 
covalently linked inhibin β subunits, designated as activin A 
(β A β A ) and activin B (β B β B ). 
 AMH is also secreted by the granulosa cells of secondary and 
preantral follicles. Circulating concentrations remain relatively sta-
ble across the menstrual cycle and correlate with the number of early 
antral follicles. Levels of AMH decrease markedly and progressively 
across the MT to a time point approximately 5 years prior to the 
final period when levels are below the limit of detection. 
 During the late reproductive stage (stage −3), follicular phase 
inhibin B levels decrease as FSH concentrations rise. As the MT 
progresses, luteal phase inhibin A levels also decline. Activin A 
concentrations also are elevated in perimenopausal women. 
Whereas activins clearly play a local role in regulating pituitary 
FSH secretion, their ability to act as endocrine factors to influence 
the production of FSH has not been established. Thus, a decrease 
in secretion of inhibin A and inhibin B, and a corresponding 
increase in activin production may favor increased FSH secretion 
in the absence of any decrease (and perhaps an increase) in estra-
diol production. 
 Estrogens/Progesterone 
 The main circulating estrogen during the premenopausal years is 
17β-estradiol. Levels of this hormone are controlled by the develop-
ing follicle and resultant corpus luteum. The fact that oophorectomy 
reduces peripheral estradiol levels from 120 to 18 pg/mL confirms 
that over 85% of circulating estradiol is derived from 
the ovary. In perimenopausal women, estradiol production fluctu-
ates with FSH levels and can reach higher concentrations than 
those observed in young women under age 35. Estradiol levels 
generally do not decrease significantly until late in the MT. 
Estradiol levels may be quite variable, with chaotic patterns and 
occasionally very high or very low levels. This dramatic variability 
may lead to an increase in symptomatology during the perimeno-
pausal years (stages −2 to −1). As peripheral gonadotropins rise, 
LH pulsatile patterns become abnormal. There is an increase in 
pulse frequency, with a decrease in GnRH inhibition by opioids. 
Despite continuing regular cyclic menstruation, progesterone 
levels during the early MT are lower than in women of mid-repro-
ductive-age and vary inversely with body mass index. Women in 
the late MT exhibit impaired folliculogenesis and an increasing 
incidence of anovulation, compared to mid-reproductive-aged 
women. Essentially all estradiol in postmenopausal women is 
derived from peripheral conversion from estrone. 
 The predominant estrogen in the postmenopausal woman is 
estrone, with a biologic potency approximately one-third that of 
estradiol. The circulating levels of estrone (and estrone sulfate) in 
older women are approximately one-third to one-half of the con-
centration observed in women of reproductive age ( Table 13–6 ). 
This is due to estrone production, resulting largely from periph-
eral aromatization of androstenedione (see earlier). This aromatase 
activity increases with aging by two- to fourfold and is further 
amplified by the increased adiposity that typically accompanies 
the aging process (see earlier). Estrone and estradiol production 
rates during the postmenopausal years are 40 and 6 μg/d, respec-
tively. This compares with 80 to 500 μg/d for estradiol during the 
reproductive years. 
 Androgens 
 In contrast to estrogens, circulating androgens (DHEAS, andros-
tenedione, and testosterone) decrease less dramatically after 
physiologic menopause. DHEAS undergoes a linear reduction 
with aging in both men and women (∼2% per year starting at age 
30), but there is no specific decline associated with menopause. 
Changes in DHEAS levels have been associated with alterations 
in body composition with aging. Androstenedione production 
TABLE 13–6  Plasma concentrations of sex steroids in 
premenopausal and postmenopausal 
women. 
Steroid (concentration) 
Premenopausal 
Postmenopausal 
Estrone (pg/mL) 
50->125a 
30-35 
Estrone sulfate (pg/mL) 
1000-1800a 
350 
Estradiol (pg/mL) 
50->250a 
10-20 
DHEAS (ng/mL) 
1-3 
0.1-2.7 
Testosterone (ng/mL) 
<1 
< 1 
aPlasma concentration depends on the phase of menstrual cycle. 
DHEAS = dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate. 
458    CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility
similarly decreases with aging, but the circulating levels are 
affected less because ovarian secretion is maintained, albeit at a 
reduced rate ( see Table 13–6 ). Testosterone levels do not vary 
appreciably during the MT. Testosterone levels decrease after 
menopause. Historically it was believed the postmenopausal 
ovary produced a larger percentage of testosterone (50%) than 
did the premenopausal ovary. However, the literature is conflict-
ing on the origin of androgens in postmenopausal women. The 
conventional view was that the adrenals, ovaries, and periphery 
all contributed to circulating androgen levels in postmenopausal 
women. Contemporary data suggest that androgen production 
after menopause is largely derived from adrenal precursors. This 
is supported by studies that have shown that postmenopausal 
women receiving dexamethasone suppression, or who have 
endogenous adrenal insufficiency, have undetectable levels of 
circulating androgens. Investigators have also demonstrated that 
the postmenopausal ovary has no appreciable enzymatic activities 
capable of generating sex steroids. The fact that women of repro-
ductive age who undergo a bilateral oophorectomy have less tes-
tosterone and androstenedione than menopausal women with 
intact ovaries challenges this concept. However, the conflict may 
be explained by the hypothesis that the postmenopausal ovary 
produces androgens for a limited time. 
 Hypothalamic/Pituitary 
 Significant additional information regarding the hormonal changes 
during the menopausal transition is being developed in the multi-
ethnic, community-based, longitudinal study of perimenopausal 
women at seven sites throughout the United States, The Study of 
Women’s Health Across the Nation (SWAN). While most atten-
tion has been devoted to the role of the ovarian and oocyte decline 
in the onset of menopause, new evidence suggests potential altera-
tions in the hypothalamic-pituitary feedback system. In evaluating 
the ability of estradiol to stimulate an effective LH surge, data from 
SWAN suggest the MT is characterized by three distinct hormonal 
patterns: (1) estrogen rise with rise in LH but anovulation; 
(2) estrogen rise without a concomitant rise in LH; or (3) failure of 
rise in either estradiol or FSH. Additionally, there may be ethnic 
differences in the sensitivity of the pituitary to negative feedback. 
 MENOPAUSAL CONSEQUENCES 
 Given the endocrinologic changes associated with aging, many 
symptoms appearing in the aging female may be due to estrogen 
deficiency or diminished androgen or GH secretion. Disorders 
that are definitely due to estrogen deprivation include vasomotor 
symptoms and urogenital atrophy. Osteoporosis is also thought to 
be due largely to estrogen deficiency, and it may be exacerbated by 
the relative decline in GH levels. The same may be said for the 
hormone-related increase in the prevalence of atherosclerotic car-
diovascular disease and psychosocial symptoms, including insom-
nia, fatigue, short-term memory changes, and possibly depression. 
Both DHEAS and GH may impact these phenomena as well. 
Most women who are symptomatic during the MT present with 
frequent or excessive bleeding or with hot flashes and other symp-
toms of estrogen deficiency. Other common symptoms during the 
MT include decreased libido, forgetfulness, vaginal dryness, and 
urinary incontinence. 
 Mood disorders also are increased during the MT. Community-
based surveys have shown that perimenopausal women report sig-
nificantly more psychological distress and have an increased risk for 
significant depression, compared with premenopausal or postmeno-
pausal women. In an 8-year longitudinal study of premenopausal 
women having no prior history of depression, a depressive disorder 
was more likely to be diagnosed during the MT than in the 
premenopausal years (OR, 2.5; 95% CI, 1.25-5.02, p = 0.01). 
 Vasomotor Symptoms 
 Vasomotor symptoms (hot flushes) are experienced with greatest 
frequency during stages −1 and +1, with about 75% to 85% of 
women complaining of this symptom. Although 80% of US 
women have symptoms lasting for at least 1 year, only 25% of 
women are still symptomatic at 5 years after the final menstrual 
period. Studies of hot flushes with external monitoring of skin 
temperature and resistance have shown a frequency of approxi-
mately 54 ± 10 minutes. In sleep studies, hot flush frequency has 
been shown to interrupt rapid eye movement sleep and may con-
tribute to some of the psychosocial complaints. Hot flushes are 
temporarily correlated with pulses of LH, but exogenous LH does 
not induce a flush, suggesting that there is some central mediator 
leading to both the flush and the elevation in LH. 
 Sleep disturbances, most likely the result of vasomotor activity, 
also are very common during the MT. In longitudinal studies of 
perimenopausal women, the prevalence of sleep disturbances has 
ranged from 32% to 40% in the early MT and from 38% to 46% 
in the late MT. 
 Vasomotor symptoms during the MT can be treated with hor-
mone therapy (HT) using estrogen or progestin alone or in com-
bination, neuroactive agents, or other nonhormonal alternatives. 
Estrogen therapy provides the best treatment for severe vasomotor 
symptoms, reducing their frequency and severity in 80% to 85% 
of women over 12 weeks compared with 30% of women receiving 
placebo. Hormone therapy also may help in the management of 
depression associated with the MT. In a randomized, placebo-
controlled, 12-week trial involving perimenopausal women ages 
40 to 55, symptoms of depression were improved in 68% of 
women receiving unopposed estrogen treatment (0.1 mg transder-
mal estradiol patch), compared with 20% of those receiving 
placebo (p = 0.001). 
 Other drugs have been tried in women for whom estrogen is 
contraindicated, although none have the efficacy associated with 
ERT. These alternatives include transdermal clonidine, ergot alka-
loids, and, more recently, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and 
gabapentin. High-dose progestins may also produce some relief. 
 Genital Atrophy 
 The vagina, vulva, urethra, and bladder trigone not only share 
embryonic proximity but all contain estrogen receptors. Atrophy 
CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility     459
begins in stage −2 to −1. The most common symptoms include 
itching and vaginal thinning, with decreased distensibility and 
reduced secretions, leading to vaginal dryness and pain with inter-
course. This and the change in pH with resultant changes in vagi-
nal flora increase the incidence of vaginal and urinary tract 
infections. Estrogen is the treatment of choice, and treatment 
must continue for at least 1 to 3 months for symptomatic 
improvement to be noted. The systemic dosage necessary for 
vaginal protection is somewhat higher than that needed for bone 
protection (see later), and local therapy by means of creams or 
vaginal rings may thus be advisable to limit systemic absorption. 
It should be noted, however, that vaginal absorption of steroids is 
quite efficient once estrogenization and revascularization have 
occurred. If the goal is to limit systemic absorption, slow-release 
rings may be superior to estrogen creams. 
 Vaginal estrogen frequently improves symptoms of urinary 
frequency, dysuria, urgency, and postvoid dribbling. Its direct 
effect to improve stress incontinence is less clear. 
 Osteoporosis 
 Osteoporosis is a condition in which bone loss is sufficient to 
allow fracture with minimal trauma. Major risk factors for the 
development of osteoporosis are the peak bone density attained in 
the late teens and early twenties (stressing the importance of bone 
building in the young) and the rate of loss (accelerated with estro-
gen deficiency). Primary or  senile osteoporosis usually affects 
women between the ages of 55 and 70 years. The most common 
sites include the vertebrae and the long bones of the arms and legs. 
Secondary osteoporosis is caused by a specific disease (such as 
hyperparathyroidism) or medication usage (such as glucocorti-
coids) (see Chapter 8). 
 Menopausal bone loss begins before the final menstrual period 
during stage −1. Postmenopausal osteoporosis causes over 1.3 million 
fractures annually in the United States. Most of the more than 
250,000 hip fractures are due to primary osteoporosis, and—
given that 15% of patients die within a year after a hip fracture 
and 75% of patients lose their independence—the social costs, not 
to mention the financial costs, are great. 
 Bone loss following natural menopause is approximately 1% to 
2% per year compared with 3.9% per year following oophorec-
tomy. A woman’s genetic background, lifestyle, dietary habits, and 
coexisting disease also influence the development of osteoporosis. 
Cigarette smoking, caffeine usage, and alcohol consumption also 
negatively affect bone loss, whereas weight-bearing activity appears 
to have a positive influence. See Chapter 8 for a detailed discus-
sion of bone and mineral metabolism and osteoporosis. 
 A. Osteoporosis treatment 
 1. Estrogen therapy— Estrogen therapy acts via the inhibition of 
bone resorption. Both BMD and fracture rate are improved 
with estrogen therapy. However, with cessation of estrogen 
therapy, there is a rapid and progressive loss of bone mineral 
content. By 4 years after therapy, bone density is no different 
from that of patients who were never treated with estrogen. 
Estrogen is approved for prevention of osteoporosis, and there 
is also some support for its usage as a treatment modality in 
established disease. Dosages of 0.625 mg of conjugated estro-
gens orally daily—and, more recently, as low as 0.3 mg—have 
been shown to slow bone loss and provide adequate protection 
against the development of osteoporosis. Higher dosages may 
be required to treat existing disease. 
 2. Alternative therapies for osteoporosis 
 a. Calcitonin— Calcitonin is a hormone normally secreted by 
the thyroid gland. Calcitonin (salmon) is available as a nasal 
spray specifically developed to decrease local side effects 
caused by subcutaneous injection. Although few studies 
have been performed and no data are available regarding 
reduction in hip fracture, it does seem to be especially ben-
eficial for women with a recent and still painful vertebral 
fracture. Intranasal calcitonin has also been shown to 
improve spinal bone density and decrease the vertebral frac-
ture rate in established osteoporosis. The increase in bone 
density appears to peak in as little as 12 to 18 months. The 
waning effects of calcitonin therapy over time may be due to 
downregulation of calcitonin receptors on osteoclasts and/or 
the development of neutralizing antibodies. 
 b. Bisphosphonates— These compounds are analogs of pyro-
phosphates and have a high affinity for hydroxyapatite in 
bone matrix. The basic structure of bisphosphonates allows 
a large number of manipulations of the basic molecule, pro-
ducing different types of bisphosphonates that vary consid-
erably in their potency on bone. In order of increasing 
potency are pamidronate, alendronate, risedronate, iban-
dronate, and zoledronic acid. 
 Alendronate has been evaluated extensively in patients 
with osteoporosis. Alendronate has been shown to inhibit 
markers of bone remodeling and increase BMD at the lum-
bar spine, hip, and total body and reduces fracture risk. 
Alendronate is taken orally; the recommended doses are 
70 mg once weekly or 10 mg daily; alendronate must be 
taken according to a strict dosing schedule (in the morning 
on an empty stomach, with the patient required to remain 
upright for 30 minutes thereafter). The medication has very 
poor bioavailability (approximately 1%), and for that reason 
these instructions must be meticulously obeyed. Alendronate 
also has a propensity for causing irritation of the esophagus 
and stomach, especially in women with preexisting esopha-
geal reflux, gastric or duodenal disease. Risedronate is simi-
larly effective in the dosage of 35 mg weekly or 5 mg once 
daily, and the same dosing regimen is recommended. 
Ibandronate has the easiest schedule for administration 
150 mg once monthly. 
 Increases in bone density with alendronate, risedronate, 
and ibandronate are greater than what is seen with calci-
tonin and similar to what is seen with HRT. The escape 
phenomenon seen with calcitonin is not seen with these oral 
bisphosphonates. 
 The final issue concerning long-term administration of 
bisphosphonates relates to their long half-lives in bone and 
their incorporation into the bone matrix. Although short-
term fracture data appear favorable, the long-term effects of 
these agents on fracture incidence have never been assessed. 
 c. SERMs— Raloxifene is the first selective estrogen receptor 
modulator (SERM) approved for prevention and treatment 
of osteoporosis and for the prevention of breast cancer. 
SERMS act selectively as estrogen receptor agonists in some 
tissues (bone and heart) and antagonists in others (breast 
and uterus and possibly brain). Data with raloxifene show 
460    CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility
preservation of BMD, albeit less well than that seen with 
alendronate, risedronate, ibandronate, or HRT, and spinal 
fracture data support a protective effect. 
 It is believed that the differential effects of estrogens and 
antiestrogens are related to the transcriptional activation of 
specific estrogen response elements. Two different domains 
of the estrogen receptor (AF-1 and AF-2) are responsible for 
this transcriptional activation. Estrogens and antiestrogens 
appear to act via different domains, leading to their differen-
tial effects. Both act to maintain bone density—at least 
partially—via regulation of the gene for TGF-β. 
 d. Calcium and vitamin D— These are critical adjuvants for 
any type of antiresorptive therapy. Decreased ability to 
absorb calcium among older women is due in part to 
impaired vitamin D activation and effect. Older women may 
have limited exposure to sunlight, and their dietary vitamin 
D intake may be lower than that of younger women. 
 Daily intakes of 1000 to 1500 mg of calcium and 800 to 
1200 IU of vitamin D are probably sufficient to reduce the 
risk of fragility fractures by 10% or more. 
 e. Anabolic therapy— The first anabolic therapy for the treat-
ment of severe osteoporosis parathyroid hormone (1-34) or 
teriparatide has been approved for clinical use. Details about 
its efficacy and use in advanced postmenopausal osteoporo-
sis are described in Chapter 8. 
 Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease 
 Cardiovascular disease is the number one cause of mortality in both 
men and women in Western societies. This is largely attributed to age 
and lifestyle. Lifestyle modifications are known to decrease the inci-
dence of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. For women, cardio-
vascular disease is largely a disease of the postmenopause. Women 
now spend more than a third of their lives in the postmenopausal 
years, and preventive measures are thus of paramount importance. 
Although a large body of observational evidence supported a protec-
tive effect of ERT on cardiovascular disease, observational data are 
limited by the confounding variables of patient self-selection. Animal 
and in vitro studies, as well as assessment of surrogate markers in 
women, have also shown a positive effect of ERT and HRT against 
cardiovascular disease development. However, several large random-
ized, controlled studies have failed to support a protective role for 
HRT in preventing cardiovascular events. 
 One of the first such trials was the Heart and Estrogen-
Progestin Replacement Study (HERS), a secondary prevention 
trial that evaluated the use of daily HRT (0.625 mg conjugated 
estrogens plus 2.5 mg medroxyprogesterone acetate [MPA]) in 
2763 postmenopausal women with a mean age of 66.7 years and 
preexisting vascular disease. The study failed to demonstrate any 
overall difference in vascular events. This occurred despite 
improvements in lipid parameters in those patients receiving 
HRT. The Estrogen Replacement and Atherosclerosis (ERA) Trial 
compared 3.2 years of treatment with estrogen, combined estro-
gen and progestin, and placebo in postmenopausal women aged 
42 to 80 years. It also failed to demonstrate a significant difference 
in the rate of progression of coronary atherosclerosis between the 
three groups. The importance of this study was the inclusion of an 
estrogen-only arm. 
 The Women’s Health Initiative (WHI) was the first large ran-
domized study to look at primary prevention of cardiovascular 
disease. This study compared (1) the combination of conjugated 
equine estrogen (CEE) and MPA with placebo and (2) CEE to 
placebo. It was designed to assess the overall risks and benefits of 
HRT in a prospective randomized fashion. 
 The WHI demonstrated that there was an unacceptable risk 
profile for the combination HRT arm of the trial. There was an 
increase in the incidence in breast cancer (an increase of 8 cases per 
10,000 women) with no cardiovascular protection (and poten-
tially increased cardiovascular risk). There was, in fact, an increase 
in venous thromboembolism, strokes, and coronary heart disease. 
The risk of stroke and thromboembolism continued for the 
5 years of study, whereas most of the coronary heart disease was 
limited to the first year of treatment. There were, however, docu-
mented decreases in the risk of fracture and colon cancer. 
 In the CEE-only arm, there was an increased risk of stroke and 
a decreased risk in hip fractures compared to placebo. This study 
showed that the use of ERT had no protective effect on coronary 
heart disease. Interestingly, there appeared to be a trend toward a 
reduction in breast cancer (0.77, CI 0.59-1.01) with use of ERT. 
More recent studies and reevaluation of large datasets have sug-
gested that combined estrogen/progestin has a more profound 
increased risk on breast cancer, than estrogen alone or cyclic pro-
gestins, consistent with increase in mitogenic activity of the breast 
during the normal luteal phase when progesterone levels are high. 
 Treatment—Summary 
 As noted earlier, long-term use of HT in older menopausal 
women has been associated with increased risks for venous 
thromboembolism, coronary events, stroke, and breast cancer. 
Although short-term treatment of symptomatic women during 
the MT likely poses significantly fewer risks, HT generally should 
be used in the lowest effective dose and for the shortest time 
required. Data suggest the use of HT does not increase the risk of 
breast cancer, on a yearly basis, more than would continuing 
spontaneous cycles for any given age. This suggests treatment of 
symptomatic women in their forties may not increase breast can-
cer risk over normal cycling. Low-dose estrogen regimens (conju-
gated equine estrogens, 0.3 mg daily, or its equivalent) can 
achieve as much as a 75% reduction in vasomotor symptoms over 
12 weeks, approaching the efficacy of standard-dose HT regi-
mens, and may be associated with fewer risks and side-effects. 
The decision to use HT should be made only after first carefully 
reviewing its risks and benefits for the individual. 
 The relative safety of HT during the MT has not been thor-
oughly investigated. The results of one observational study have 
suggested that women who start HT near menopause had a 
decreased risk of coronary heart disease when taking estrogen 
alone (relative risk [RR] = 0.66; 95% CI, 0.54-0.80) or in com-
bination with progestin (RR = 0.72; 95% CI, 0.56-0.92). A 
secondary analysis conducted by the investigators involved in the 
WHI revealed that risk for coronary heart disease was not sig-
nificantly increased in women under age 60 years of age or 
within 10 years of menopause. Further studies to evaluate the 
CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility     461
safety and efficacy of HT during the MT and the early post-
menopausal years are ongoing. 
 Concerns about the risks of HT have increased interest in non-
hormonal alternatives for the treatment of symptoms in the MT. In 
some women, vasomotor symptoms during the MT can be reduced 
by wearing layered clothing, avoiding caffeine and alcohol, and by 
keeping the ambient temperature a few degrees cooler. Herbal treat-
ments such as black cohosh (Remifemin Menopause; Enzymatic 
Therapy, Green Bay, WI) have been shown to have marginal or no 
benefit in placebo controlled trials. Neuroactive agents, including 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), serotonin-norepi-
nephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), alpha adrenergic agents, and 
others all have some efficacy in the treatment of vasomotor symp-
toms ( Table 13–7 ). Both SSRIs and SNRIs may be effective because 
norepinephrine and serotonin appear to be involved in the hypotha-
lamic regulation of temperature homeostasis and to play a role in 
the development of hot flashes. Randomized placebo-controlled 
trials have shown that SSRIs (citalopram, sertraline, paroxetine) and 
SNRIs (venlafaxine) can help to reduce the severity and frequency 
of hot flushes. Clonidine (an alpha adrenergic agonist) and gabap-
entin also have some efficacy. Gabapentin is the only agent com-
pared head-to-head with estrogen suggesting equivalent efficacy 
when used in high doses. 
 The WHI study did not address the effect of hormone treatment 
on hot flushes and vaginal atrophy. Clearly, there are alternatives for 
the treatment of osteoporosis and cardiovascular disease that are 
superior if prevention of both conditions is the sole reason for HRT. 
Every woman should discuss with her caregiver the optimal manage-
ment for her as an individual. This should take into account medical 
and family history as well as symptomatology. It can be uniformly 
recommended, however, that menopausal women maintain appro-
priate nutrition, weight reduction, and exercise along with modera-
tion in alcohol and caffeine intake and cessation of smoking. 
 INFERTILITY 
 Infertility is defined as the inability of a couple to conceive after 
1 year of frequent unprotected intercourse without contraception. 
This definition is based on observational data showing that 
approximately 85% of couples achieve pregnancy after 1 year of 
unprotected coitus. Using this definition, approximately 15% of 
reproductive-age couples experience infertility. However, the diag-
nosis of infertility does not mean that they cannot conceive—a 
more precise diagnosis term would be  subfertility , or a dimin-
ished capacity to conceive. The actual probability of the fertility 
potential of a population may be better assessed with variables that 
can quantify a monthly cycle rate. The concepts that have been 
used for quantitative analysis are  fecundability and  fecundity . 
Fecundability is defined as the probability of achieving a preg-
nancy within one menstrual cycle, and in normal couples the 
chance of conception after 1 month is approximately 25%. 
Fecundity is a related concept that is defined as the ability to 
achieve a live birth within one menstrual cycle. 
 In the United States, demands for infertility treatment have 
dramatically increased. The 1995 National Survey of Family 
Growth reported that 9.3 million women received infertility treat-
ment in their lifetime compared with 6.8 million in 1988. This rise 
in treatment is due not only to increased public awareness—it also 
reflects the significant demographic, societal, and economic changes 
in our society. These include the aging of the baby boom generation, 
which has increased the size of the reproductive-age population. 
Perhaps more important is the increased use of contraception and 
postponement of childbearing until the last two decades of a 
woman’s reproductive life. Approximately 20% of women in the 
United States now have their first child after 35 years of age. 
 Age alone has a significant impact on fertility and affects a 
woman many years before the onset of menopause. One factor is 
the age-dependent loss of ovarian follicles (see later). A 38-year-
old woman has 25% of the fecundability of a woman under 
30 years of age. Another age-related subfertility factor is that the 
spontaneous abortion rate increases with advancing age. The over-
all incidence of clinical abortion increases from 10% in women 
under age 30 to more than 40% in women over 40. The increased 
pregnancy loss can be largely attributed to abnormalities in the 
aging oocyte; older follicles have an increased rate of meiotic dys-
function, resulting in higher rates of chromosomal abnormalities. 
 The main causes of female subfertility can be classified in the 
following way: (1) ovulatory defects, (2) pelvic disorders, and 
(3) male factors. These factors account for 80% to 85% of couples 
diagnosed with infertility. They are not mutually exclusive—about 
15% of couples have more than one cause of subfertility. In approx-
imately 20% of couples, the cause remains unknown and is classi-
fied as unexplained infertility. This section will briefly discuss the 
causes of subfertility and review the diagnosis and management. 
 DIAGNOSIS OF INFERTILITY 
 Ovulatory Defects 
 Ovulatory disorders are responsible for 25% of cases of infertility. 
Ovulatory status can be obtained from the history. If a woman expe-
riences cyclic, predictable menses at monthly intervals, ovulation can 
be predicted 98% of the time. This is not an invariable rule, however, 
and irregular menstrual cycles are not a sure sign of anovulation. 
TABLE 13-7 Treatment for hot flashes.
Drug
Name
Dose (mg/day)
SSRI
Citalopram
10-20
Fluoxetine
10-20
Sertraline
25-50
Paroxetine
10-20
SNRI
Venlafaxine
37.5-150
Desvenlafaxine
50-100
Alpha adrenergic agents
Clonidine
0.1
Gamma aminobutyric
 acid
Gabapentin
300-900
462    CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility
 The only way to confirm ovulation is by achieving pregnancy. 
However, a variety of methods can indicate that ovulation has 
occurred. For example, a thermal shift occurs around the time of 
ovulation. Prior to ovulation, morning basal body temperature 
(BBT) is below 98°F (36.7°C), and after ovulation the tempera-
ture increases at least 0.4°F (0.2°C) for at least 1 to 3 days. This 
rise in temperature reflects the progesterone that is secreted from 
the corpus luteum, which consequently raises the hypothalamic 
set point for BBT. The temperature rise occurs approximately 
2 days after ovulation because of the time and dose required for 
the progesterone effect at the hypothalamus. BBT can therefore 
not be utilized to prospectively predict ovulation. Measurements 
of midluteal serum progesterone concentration can also be per-
formed to document the occurrence of ovulation. If this level is 
greater than 3 μg/L (9.5 nmol/L), it is a strong indication that 
ovulation has occurred. An endometrial biopsy can confirm ovula-
tion. It is performed during the luteal phase and gives a qualitative 
assessment of ovulation, because the duration of progesterone 
exposure produces predictable endometrial histology. Lastly, a 
sonographic examination documenting a decrease in follicle 
size—or disappearance altogether of the previously developed 
follicle—is suggestive of ovulation. All of these methods indicate 
that ovulation has occurred. 
 There are only a few ways to predict that ovulation is going to 
occur. The most common way is to detect the LH surge. Ovulation 
typically occurs 34 to 36 hours after the onset of the LH surge. 
 Although ovulation may occur, some women may have a 
luteal-phase defect. This is characterized by an inadequate quan-
tity or duration of progesterone secretion by the corpus luteum. 
There is a distinct window of time for implantation. The theory is 
that the progesterone deficiency desynchronizes ovulation (egg) 
and implantation (endometrium). However, the incidence of 
luteal phase defects is difficult to assess because the definition is 
not standardized. Typically, the diagnosis is established by luteal 
phase endometrial dating; if the histologic development of the 
endometrium lags more than 2 days beyond the day of the cycle, 
it is diagnostic of a luteal phase defect. However, up to 30% of 
women with normal cycles meet this criterion. Another method 
involves measuring midluteal progesterone levels. If progesterone 
is less than 10 ng/mL, it suggests a luteal phase defect. This is not 
reliable because progesterone is intermittently secreted, and the 
serum progesterone level can change from 1 hour to the next in 
the same individual. Furthermore, the lack of properly validated 
tests places the existence of luteal phase defects and their associa-
tion with subfertility in question. Lastly, as empiric treatment for 
unexplained infertility has developed, delaying treatment (see 
later: superovulation with IUI) for exact diagnoses has less impor-
tance. More sophisticated testing of endometrial proteins required 
for implantation (eg, integrins, glycodelin) may revive enthusiasm 
for making a specific diagnosis in the future. 
 The cause of ovulatory dysfunction has been previously dis-
cussed. All anovulatory patients should have determination of 
PRL and TSH levels—and, if necessary, androgen levels—to iden-
tify the cause of the ovulatory disturbance. Treatment should be 
directed toward the cause, which is discussed in greater detail later. 
It could be argued that all patients should have evaluation of early 
follicular cycle (days 2-4) FSH, LH, and estradiol to assess ovarian 
reserve (age). 
 Pelvic Disorders 
 Pelvic disorders account for more than 30% of couples with the 
diagnosis of infertility. Uterine tube damage and adhesion forma-
tion are responsible for most pelvic pathologic processes causing 
infertility, whereas endometriosis is the primary pelvic disorder 
causing subfertility. The causes of tubal damage and adhesions 
include postinfectious state (pelvic inflammatory disease [PID]), 
endometriosis, and a history of pelvic surgery (especially surgery 
for ruptured appendicitis). 
 PID is defined as infection of upper genital tract structures and 
is usually caused by a sexually transmitted disease. The known 
initiating organisms are chlamydiae and  Neisseria gonorrhoeae. The 
symptoms are variable but usually include lower abdominal pain, 
nausea, and vaginal discharge. However, in up to 30% of chla-
mydial infections, PID may be clinically inapparent and may 
remain undiagnosed until presenting with subfertility. 
 Endometriosis is the presence of endometrial glands and 
stroma outside of the uterus. There may be no manifestations 
other than infertility, or symptoms may progress to include severe 
pelvic pain, dysmenorrhea, and dyspareunia. The diagnosis is 
suspected if findings on surgical exploration show characteristic 
lesions. Lesions can be staged according to published criteria. 
Diagnosis is confirmed with biopsy of the peritoneal lesions. The 
disease occurs in approximately 3% to 10% of reproductive-age 
women and may be responsible for up to 25% to 35% of the 
female factors responsible for subfertility. 
 The pathogenesis of endometriosis is not completely known. A 
prominent theory (Sampson) involves retrograde menstruation. It 
is well established that menses can flow through the uterine tubes 
into the abdominal cavity. In fact, this phenomenon is thought to 
occur in almost all menstruating women. There is good evidence 
that the endometrial tissue subsequently invades and proliferates 
into the peritoneum. It is theorized that the immune system 
should normally dispose of the tissue and that altered immunity 
may result in implantation of this endometrial tissue outside the 
uterus in those women who subsequently develop endometriosis. 
 There is a strong association between adhesive disease and 
endometriosis. In these cases, the cause of subfertility is a result 
of distorted anatomy and consequently altered function. 
However, in mild cases of endometriosis, where only peritoneal 
lesions are identified and no anatomic distortion exists, the cause 
of infertility remains uncertain and controversial. There is evi-
dence that the peritoneal fluid is altered in the presence of endo-
metrial tissue with increased macrophages and inflammatory 
mediators. Several studies suggest that inflammatory changes 
result in adverse effects on folliculogenesis, ovum transport, fer-
tilization, and implantation. 
 Tubal damage can be diagnosed with a hysterosalpingogram or 
surgical exploration. Hysterosalpingography involves the intro-
duction of radiopaque contrast media into the pelvis through the 
cervix and then fluoroscopy, revealing an outline of contrast in the 
uterine cavity, uterine tubes, and peritoneal cavity. The diagnosis 
CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility     463
of pelvic endometriosis can only be made by surgery, and most 
often the surgical procedure is laparoscopy. Diagnostic laparos-
copy is usually done when there is a high suspicion of endometri-
osis based on the clinical history or adhesive disease based on a 
history of PID or pelvic surgery. Laparoscopy may also be per-
formed, if all other tests are normal and the couple continues not 
to achieve a pregnancy. 
 Male Factor Causes 
 The male factor contributes in 40% to 50% of cases of diag-
nosed infertility, and all evaluations should include the male 
partner. The diagnostic test for male factor infertility is the 
semen analysis. Although this is a largely descriptive test (vol-
ume, sperm count, motility, and morphology), there is some 
correlation with pregnancy outcome. This should be used solely 
as a screening test. To understand the pathophysiology of male 
factors, it is important to review the physiology of spermatogen-
esis and the anatomy of the male reproductive tract as described 
in Chapter 12. 
 Unexplained Infertility 
 Approximately 15% to 20% of the couples diagnosed with infer-
tility have no identifiable cause after a full investigation. The 
workup should include documentation of ovulation (regular men-
strual cycles, progesterone levels, or LH testing), hysterosalpingo-
graphy to verify patent fallopian tubes, and a semen analysis. The 
term  unexplained implies that there is a potential explanation for 
the subfertility, but the cause has yet to be identified. The cause 
may be subtle abnormalities in folliculogenesis, sperm-ovum 
interactions, or defective implantation. 
 Several studies have evaluated the natural history of unex-
plained infertility. It is estimated that fecundity in younger couples 
(female partner under the age of 40) with unexplained infertility 
is 3% to 5% compared with 20% to 25% in the age-matched 
couples with normal fertility. Treatment involves methods that 
increase fecundability and are discussed later. 
 MANAGEMENT OF THE INFERTILE 
COUPLE 
 It is important to remember that in most couples, there is a chance 
for spontaneous conception. Recent studies estimate that the aver-
age probability for live birth without treatment is 25% to 40% 
during the 3 years after the first infertility consultation. This trans-
lates into a cycle fecundity rate of 0.7% to 1% per month. The 
presence of endometriosis, abnormal sperm, or tubal disease inde-
pendently reduces the chance of spontaneous pregnancy and live 
birth by approximately 50% for each variable. Infertility for more 
than 3 years, female age over 30 years, and primary infertility were 
important negative prognostic factors. 
 Evaluation should focus on known causes of infertility or subfer-
tility: ovulatory defects, pelvic disorders (tubal disease, endometrio-
sis), and male factor issues. 
 Ovulatory Disorders 
 Treatment should be diagnosis-specific, if possible. For the female, 
this means that the cause of any ovulatory defect should be deter-
mined and specific treatment then instituted. This enhances out-
come and decreases the risk of complications (spontaneous 
abortion and multiple gestation). This treatment may include the 
use of dopamine agonists (hyperprolactinemia), thyroid replace-
ment (hypothyroidism), pulsatile GnRH (hypogonadotropic 
hypogonadism), or clomiphene citrate (for PCOS). The most 
common cause of anovulation is inappropriate feedback such as in 
PCOS. Ovulation in patients with PCOS can be induced with 
clomiphene citrate, a nonsteroidal agonist-antagonist of estrogen 
that blocks the hypothalamic-pituitary axis from feedback by cir-
culating estrogens. As a result, there is increased gonadotropin 
release to stimulate follicular recruitment and ovulation. In addi-
tion, because PCOS is associated with insulin resistance, and ele-
vated insulin directly has an impact on the ovary, insulin sensitizers 
such as metformin have been used to enhance ovulatory response 
in women with PCOS. Recently, a large multicenter randomized 
trial compared clomiphene to metformin and found clomiphene 
to be significantly more effective for ovulation induction and 
achieving a live birth. 
 Pelvic Disorders 
 In general, adhesive tubal lesions should be treated surgically. The 
location and extent of disease should, however, be evaluated. 
Patients with distal tubal occlusion—unless it is very mild—are 
most often better served by assisted reproduction (in vitro fertil-
ization [IVF]). Other possible causes of infertility should also be 
examined. If a patient has a history of documented tubal disease, 
in addition to other abnormalities (ovulatory dysfunction or male 
factor infertility), or if they are over 35, the likelihood for success-
ful surgical management decreases by approximately 50%, and 
consideration for avoiding surgery and moving directly to assisted 
reproduction is paramount. The exception to this rule is docu-
mentation of hydrosalpinges on ultrasound. The presence of 
hydrosalpinges that retain fluid when nondistended (ie, not seen 
only with hysterosalpingography) leads to a significant reduction 
in outcome with assisted reproductive therapy (ART). Prior 
removal or proximal occlusion of the tube to prevent contamina-
tion of the uterine cavity should be performed before ART is 
offered. 
 There are conflicting data in the literature concerning the 
appropriate treatment for mild endometriosis. A well-designed 
randomized trial from Canada evaluated the effect of surgical 
treatment on pregnancy outcome for patients diagnosed with mild 
endometriosis without anatomic distortion. It showed that preg-
nancy rates at 9 months postlaparoscopy were 27% in the surgi-
cally treated group compared with 18% in the untreated group. 
Severe endometriosis (disease that alters the pelvic anatomy or 
involves the ovary with endometriomas) should be surgically 
treated to restore normal pelvic anatomy. There appears to be no 
advantage to medical therapy for endometriosis in women seeking 
fertility. 
464    CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility
 Male Factor Infertility 
 Male factor infertility is discussed in Chapter 12. Like female 
partner treatment, therapy should be targeted, if possible, toward 
the cause of subfertility. Obstructive disease may be treated surgi-
cally. A prominent varicocele with a stress pattern on semen 
analysis (decreased motility with an increase in abnormal mor-
phology) may suggest a need for surgical repair. Any endocrino-
logic abnormalities (while less common in the male) should be 
treated (eg, prolactinoma). Unfortunately, beyond this point, 
most treatments require a combined approach very similar to that 
discussed below for unexplained infertility. 
 Unexplained Infertility 
 The treatment of unexplained infertility can be frustrating for the 
physician and the patients because the recommendations for 
therapy are not targeted toward a specific diagnosis. Although 
there are very limited evidence-based data to guide treatment, 
therapy should be directed toward increasing the fecundability 
rate. The two main treatments are superovulation plus intrauter-
ine insemination (IUI) and IVF. 
 Superovulation methods are designed to qualitatively improve 
the cycle and to hyperstimulate the ovary with rescue of more fol-
licles (quantitative improvement). Administration of clomiphene 
citrate or of gonadotropins alone can be used for superovulation. 
However, higher success rates are observed when superovulation is 
combined with IUI of washed sperm (Table 13–8). IVF provides 
a higher fecundability rate. However, these procedures are signifi-
cantly more costly and more invasive, and they should only be 
used after a trial (three or four cycles) of superovulation and IUI 
has failed. With older patients, aggressive therapy should be con-
sidered earlier in the treatment effort. 
 CONTRACEPTION 
 Approximately 50% of all pregnancies in the United States are 
unplanned. In adolescents and in women of older reproductive 
age, the unplanned pregnancy rate is higher, approaching 82% 
and 77%, respectively. This equates to 3.5 million unplanned 
pregnancies in the United States per year. The advent of oral con-
traceptives has meant that women have been able to postpone 
childbearing. However, approximately 50% of unplanned preg-
nancies are due to contraceptive failures. Possible causes of failure 
include lack of education, poor compliance, and side-effect pro-
files. In this section, we discuss the different methods of hormonal 
contraception. We shall discuss also the target population for the 
various modalities of contraception and their mechanisms, side-
effects, and ways to decrease failure rates. At the end of the section, 
emergency contraception will be discussed briefly. 
 ORAL CONTRACEPTIVES 
 Combination Pills 
 In the United States, oral contraceptive pills are the most widely 
used method for contraception. There are two types of oral 
contraception: combination pills and progestin-only pills. The 
various hormones used in birth control pills are illustrated in 
 Figure 13–17 . 
 The development of oral contraceptive agents began with the 
isolation of progesterone. However, progesterone was very expen-
sive and difficult to isolate. Ethisterone, a derivative of an andro-
gen, was found to have progestin activity and was much easier to 
isolate than progesterone. With removal of carbon 19, the proges-
tational activity was increased, and the new compound was 
termed norethindrone. When this hormone was administered to 
women, ovulation was inhibited. During the process of norethin-
drone purification, an estrogen contaminant was found. When 
this contaminant was removed, women would experience break-
through bleeding. The estrogen was added back, thereby creating 
the first-generation combination birth control pill, which was 
approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 1960. 
 Oral contraceptives can be divided into generations based on 
dose and type of hormone. The first-generation birth control 
pills contained more than 50 μg of ethinyl estradiol or mestranol 
and a progestin. The adverse events associated with high-dose 
estrogen, such as coronary thrombosis, led to development of 
the second-generation pill, which contained less than 50 μg of 
TABLE 13–8  Pregnancy rates after treatment for unexplained infertility. Aggregate data for each treatment. 
Treatment 
No. of Studies 
No. (%) of Pregnancies per 
Initiated Cycle 
Percent of Quality-Adjusted 
Pregnancies per Initiated Cycle 
Control groups 
Control groups, randomized studies 
IUI 
Clomiphene citrate 
Clomiphene citrate + IUI 
hMG 
hMG + IUI 
IVF 
GIFT 
11 
6 
9 
3 
5 
13 
14 
9 
9 
64/3,539 (1.8) 
23/597 (3.8) 
15/378 (4) 
37/617 (6) 
21/315 (6.7) 
139/1806 (7.7) 
207/1133 (18) 
378/683 (22.5) 
158/607 (26.0) 
1.3 
4.1 
3.8 
5.6 
8.3 
7.7 
17.1 
20.7 
27.0 
Reproduced, with permission, from Guzick DS, et al. Efficacy of treatment of unexplained infertility. Fertil Steril. 1998;70:207. 
GIFT,  gamete intrafollicular transfer; hMG,  human menopausal gonadotrophin; IVF,  in vitro fertilization; IUI,  intrauterine insemination. 
CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility     465
ethinyl estradiol and progestins other than levonorgestrel deriva-
tives. Next, attention was directed toward the progestin, which 
was thought to have adverse androgenic effects such as affecting 
lipid profiles and glucose tolerance. This led to the development 
of third-generation pills that contained both a lower dose of 
estrogen (20-30 μg of ethinyl estradiol) and newer progestins 
(gonanes: desogestrel or norgestimate). Indeed, studies have 
demonstrated a reduction in metabolic changes associated with 
these progestins, but limited data are available to show any 
actual reduction of cardiovascular events. Another recently 
developed progestin, drospirenone, has antimineralocorticoid 
and antiandrogenic activity in addition to its pharmacologic 
progestational effects. As an analog of spironolactone rather than 
androgen, it competitively binds to aldosterone receptors, and it 
may counteract the estrogen stimulation of the renin-angiotensin 
system, resulting in more weight stability and less water reten-
tion. A new combination oral contraceptive, Yasmin, which 
contains 3 mg drospirenone and 30 μg ethinyl estradiol, has 
been approved by the FDA and is prescribed for women with 
hyperandrogenism or other side-effects attributable to oral con-
traceptives. However, the relative antiandrogenic activity of 
drospirenone is small compared with cyproterone acetate or the 
therapeutic dose of spironolactone used for the treatment of 
hirsutism. 
Estrogens: EE, Mestranol (non-US)
OH
HO
C
CH
Ethinyl estradiol
Mestranol
OH
O
C
CH
CH3
Progestins: 19-nortestosterone
Norethindrone
OH
O
C
CH
H3C
Norethynodrel
OH
C
CH
O
H3C
Estranes
Derivatives of levonorgestrel
Norgestimate
OCOCH2
HON
C
CH
Desogestrel
OH
C
CH
H2C
Levonorgestrel
OH
O
C
CH
 FIGURE 13–17  Oral contraceptive pill hormonal components. All except endogenous hormones are synthetic steroids. 
466    CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility
 Contraceptives can be classified also based on formulas or 
schedules of administration. The theory behind phasic prepara-
tions was to further decrease the amount of total progestin admin-
istered in an attempt to reduce metabolic changes attributed to the 
progestin, thereby decreasing adverse effects. The traditional 
monophasic pill (eg, Loestrin) contains 30 μg of ethinyl estradiol 
and 1.5 mg of norethindrone. This dose is given every day for 
3 weeks with a 1-week hormone-free interval. The progestin dose 
remains constant throughout the cycle. The second type is the 
biphasic pill (eg, Ortho-Novum 10/11), which contains 35 μg of 
ethinyl estradiol and either 0.5 or 1 mg of norethindrone. The 0.5 
mg of norethindrone is administered in the first 10 days of the 
month, and the 1 mg is administered for the following 11 days. 
The last 7 days of the cycle are free of hormone. With this combi-
nation, there was a theoretical increase in breakthrough bleeding 
and an increased pregnancy rate. A meta-analysis revealed no dif-
ference, but limited data were available. 
 Because of concerns that this regimen might result in both 
breakthrough bleeding and pregnancies, another phasic formula-
tion was developed. The triphasic pills (eg, Triphasil, Ortho-
Novum 7/7/7) contain 0.5, 0.75, and 1 mg norethindrone 
combined with 35 μg ethinyl estradiol. Theoretically, this formu-
lation improves cycle control. There are several other regimens, 
some of which alter estrogen doses to simulate the estrogen cyclic 
rhythm (Triphasil-30, Triphasil-40, Triphasil-30 μg ethinyl estra-
diol) and possibly decrease breakthrough bleeding. A meta-analysis 
comparing biphasic versus triphasic pills revealed that triphasic 
pills significantly improved cycle control. However, the progestins 
in each pill tested were different, and this could account for better 
cycle control rather than the phasic formulation. An additional 
meta- analysis was performed on triphasic versus monophasic pills 
to assess cycle control and metabolic effects. This analysis revealed 
no difference between the formulations. Therefore, there is little 
scientific rationale for prescribing phasic preparations in prefer-
ence to the monophasic pill. 
 The pharmacologic activity of progestins is based on the pro-
gestational activity and bioavailability of each progestin as well as 
the dose. The relative potencies of the different progestins are 
levonorgestrel greater than norgestrel greater than norethindrone. 
The active estrogen component of oral contraceptives is ethinyl 
estradiol (even if mestranol is administered). 
 When the hormones are administered for 21 days of the cycle, 
there is enough progestin to inhibit rapid follicle growth for about 
7 more days.  Figure 13–18 demonstrates that during the steroid-
free interval there is no rise in estrogen, indicating no follicular 
maturation. It is likely that pills missed after this time are respon-
sible for some of the unintended pregnancies. Therefore, it is 
important that this interval not be extended. 
 Pharmacologic doses of progestin inhibit ovulation by suppress-
ing GnRH pulsatility and possibly inhibiting release of pituitary 
LH. Progestins also impair implantation and produce thick, scanty 
cervical mucus that retards sperm penetration. These latter meth-
ods play a minor role in the mechanism of oral contraception. 
 Ethinyl estradiol helps prevent the selection of a dominant fol-
licle by suppressing pituitary FSH. In addition to FSH suppres-
sion, ethinyl estradiol provides stability to the endometrium, 
Pregnanes
Medroxyprogesterone acetate
(Provera)
C
O
O
C
CH3
CH3
O
CH3
O
Endogenous hormones
Estradiol
H
O
HO
Progesterone
O
C
CH3
O
FIGURE 13–17 (continued)
CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility     467
decreasing breakthrough bleeding. It also upregulates the proges-
terone receptor and decreases clearance, thereby potentiating the 
activity of the progestin. 
 Traditionally, a pill is administered daily for 3 weeks out of 4, 
preferably at the same time each day (more critical with proges-
tin-only pills). This regimen was designed to mimic the men-
strual cycle with monthly withdrawal bleeding. The conventional 
start date is on the first Sunday after menses (first day of menses 
for triphasics). An alternative method is to start at the time of 
the clinic visit, regardless of the day of the menstrual cycle, with 
a backup method for 7 days ( Quick-Start ). This method has the 
advantage of immediate contraception without adverse bleeding 
events. In addition, with the Quick-Start method, women are 
more likely to start the second pack of oral contraceptives, sug-
gesting increased compliance. During the 28-day regimen, there 
is a 1-week steroid-free interval. If the steroid-free interval is 
prolonged beyond the 7-day window, ovulation is possible. 
Therefore, this is a critical time not to neglect taking pills. On 
the other hand, a woman may continue to take the hormone 
pills and skip the steroid-free interval to avoid monthly bleeding. 
A randomized trial comparing continuous oral contraception 
with the traditional cyclic method revealed a significantly greater 
incidence of erratic bleeding with (overall) the same number of 
days of bleeding, albeit with a reduced volume of bleeding. New 
formulations have been developed for those who do not desire 
cyclic bleeding. This regimen involves 84 days of continuous 
hormone administration followed by a steroid-free interval of 
1 week. This can easily be done with the traditionally packaged 
oral contraceptive pills. 
 A routine for daily administration improves compliance and 
contraceptive efficacy. Failure to take the pill at the same time 
every day and not understanding the package insert are associated 
with missing two or more pills during the cycle. To decrease failure 
rates, women should understand that if they forget to take the pill, 
they must use barrier prophylaxis. 
 Postpartum women who are not breast-feeding may begin 
combination oral contraceptives 3 weeks after delivery. For 
women who are breast-feeding, it is advised that institution of 
combination oral contraceptives be delayed until 3 months post-
partum. The recommendation for this delay is due to decreased 
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Norgestrel (ng/mL)
30
20
10
0
LH (mlU/mL)
30
20
10
0
FSH (mlU/mL)
150
100
50
0
Estradiol (pg/mL)
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Progesterone
(ng/mL)
5
10
15
25
20
1
10
5
15
25
20
1
10
5
Cycle days
 FIGURE 13–18  Progestin effects on steroidogenesis and ovulation.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Brenner PF, et al. Serum levels of 
d-norgestrel, luteinizing hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone, estradiol and progesterone in women during and following ingestion of combi-
nation oral contraceptives containing dl-norgestrel.  Am J Obstet Gynecol . 1997;129:133.) 
468    CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility
milk letdown secondary to estrogen but may be waived once 
lactation is well established. 
 Noncompliance increases the incidence of unwanted pregnan-
cies. Appropriate use of birth control is achieved 32% to 85% of the 
time in the general population. Teenagers have at most a 50% con-
tinuation rate, and 25% of pill users discontinue the practice in the 
first year. The efficacy of the oral contraceptive under conditions of 
perfect use is 0.1 failures per 100 woman-years (0.1 per 100 users). 
With typical use, the failure rate is 3%, with first-year failure rates 
approaching 7.3% to 8.5%. Side-effects contribute to noncompli-
ance. The most common side-effect is breakthrough bleeding. 
Other unwanted symptoms include bloating, breast tenderness, 
nausea, and possibly headaches, weight gain, and depression. Some 
studies suggest that altering estrogen doses may improve symptoms. 
Failure rates may also be associated with concomitant use of drugs 
(eg, rifampin, hydantoins) that accelerate hormone metabolism. 
 A. Other benefits 
 There are noncontraceptive benefits to 
the pill. These include reduced monthly blood loss (less iron 
deficiency) and less dysmenorrhea as well as reduced benign 
breast disease and mastalgia. Oral contraceptives also reduce the 
incidence of PID and ectopic pregnancies. Other significant ben-
efits include a reduction in risk of ovarian cancer, endometrial 
cancer, and colorectal cancer. Oral contraceptive use also has 
cosmetic benefits; it can improve excess hair growth and acne (see 
PCOS). It is not unusual for the pill to be administered for non-
contraceptive problems. 
 B. Potential risks 
 In general, oral contraceptives have proved 
to be safe for most women, but the possibility of adverse effects 
has received much attention. Unfortunately, the literature is full of 
conflicting reports. Data concerning controversial adverse effects 
will be discussed in the following section. 
 Although the estrogen in combination oral contraceptives tends 
to increase triglycerides and total cholesterol, these levels are still 
within the normal range, and the contraceptives appear to increase 
HDL and decrease LDL. Progestins attenuate these effects, which 
suggest an adverse metabolic milieu. Although it is known that low 
HDL-LDL ratios are associated with cardiovascular events, the 
importance of lipid changes associated with birth control pills is 
unknown. To date there is no strong evidence of an increased inci-
dence of myocardial infarctions in healthy nonsmoking oral con-
traceptive users. In patients with other cardiovascular risk factors 
such as hypertension—at least in Europe—there is an up to 
12-fold increased risk of cardiovascular events. Women who are 
over 35 years of age and who smoke are at increased risk of cardio-
vascular events. This risk is amplified with use of the birth control 
pills. If more than 15 cigarettes per day are smoked, there is a rela-
tive risk (RR) of 3.3 for a cardiovascular event, compared with an 
RR of 20.8 with concomitant use of oral contraceptives. However, 
if a woman smokes fewer than 15 cigarettes per day, there is an RR 
of 2.0 for a cardiovascular event, compared with an RR of 3.5 with 
concomitant contraceptive use. Former smokers after 1 year have 
no significant increased risk. First-generation oral contraceptives 
(>50 μg ethinyl estradiol) imposed an RR for stroke (ischemic or 
hemorrhagic) of 5.8. With low-dose agents (<50 μg ethinyl estra-
diol), there appears to be no significant increased risk of stroke 
among healthy normotensive nonsmoking women. The RR associ-
ated with hemorrhagic stroke for hypertensive women is 10.2 to 
14.2. Because the potential exists for adverse outcomes, women 
taking oral contraceptives should be screened regularly for cardio-
vascular risk factors to ensure safe administration. 
 The risk of deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism is 
increased twofold to threefold with administration of the pill. The 
mechanism by which oral contraceptives enhance venous thrombo-
sis is unknown, but there may be estrogen-related changes in 
coagulation parameters. These include increased clotting factors 
and activation of platelets and a decrease in protein S and fibrin-
olytic activity. However, these changes in measured serum clotting 
factors do not predict the occurrence of deep vein thrombosis. 
Genetic thrombophilias increase the risk of venous thrombosis. 
The prevalence of factor V Leiden in the general population is 5%. 
The incidence of deep vein thrombosis among this population is 
60 per 100,000 per year, and with use of oral contraceptives, the 
incidence approaches 280 to 300 per 100,000 per year. The base-
line incidence of deep vein thrombosis in women is approximately 
3 per 100,000 per year, and with current oral contraceptive uses it 
is 9.6 to 21.1 per 100,000 per year. For comparison, during preg-
nancy, the incidence of deep vein thrombosis is 60 per 100,000 per 
year. Older age (>40-44) increases the incidence two- to three-fold 
but does not affect the RR. There is no evidence that smoking has 
an effect on the incidence of deep vein thrombosis with oral con-
traceptive use. At this time, universal screening for thrombophilias 
is not cost effective. However, any history of deep vein thrombosis 
warrants a workup for thrombophilia. 
 The association of oral contraceptives and cancer risk has been 
evaluated for breast, cervical, and liver cancer. Observational stud-
ies investigating a possible association between oral contraceptive 
use and breast cancer have reported conflicting results. The most 
recent information is that oral contraceptive usage (current or past 
use) has no impact on the incidence of breast cancer—RR 1.0 (CI 
95% 0.8-1.3)—among women 35 to 64 years of age. Several obser-
vational studies have linked oral contraceptive use with invasive 
cervical cancer, although it is not clear if this association is causally 
related. A recent study investigating the association between oral 
contraception use and cervical cancer revealed a nearly threefold 
increased risk among human papillomavirus carriers with 5 to 
9 years of oral contraceptive use (RR 2.82; 95% CI 1.46-5.42). 
This evidence suggests that women taking oral contraceptives 
should be screened yearly with Pap smears to prevent cervical can-
cer. In the 1980s, there was an association between hepatocellular 
carcinoma in women under 50 years of age and oral contraceptive 
use. With further investigation there appears to be no increased risk 
of hepatic cancer with the use of oral contraceptives. 
 After discontinuation of oral contraceptives, the activity of the 
HPO axis gradually returns to a precontraceptive state. After a 2- 
to 4-week prolongation of the follicular phase, the LH peak is 
observed, which suggests that the suppressive effects of the oral 
contraceptive have dissipated and that cyclic menses will resume. 
 Contraindications to oral contraceptive administration are 
summarized in  Table 13–9 . 
CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility     469
 Progestin Only 
 Progestin-only pills (Ortho Micronor, Nor-QD, 0.35 mg nore-
thindrone; Ovrette, 0.075 mg levonorgestrel) are also available for 
contraception. The target population for administration of pro-
gestin-only contraception includes women with contraindications 
to estrogen, breast-feeding mothers, and older women. 
 The circulating levels of progestin following ingestion of pro-
gestin-only pills (minipill) are 25% to 50% of that following 
ingestion of estrogen-progestin oral contraceptive pills. Serum 
levels that peak 2 hours after administration are followed by rapid 
elimination ( Figure 13–19 ). The peak levels of norethindrone and 
levonorgestrel vary (4-14 and 0.9-2 ng/mL, respectively), but 
24 hours after pill ingestion, serum levels are 0.2 to 1.6 ng/mL 
and 0.2 to 0.5 ng/mL, respectively. Thus, there is no accumulation 
of progestin over time. Progestin-only administration results in 
lower steady state levels and a shorter half-life compared with 
concomitant administration with estrogen. 
 Owing to the lower levels of progestin in the progestin-only 
pill, there is less influence on the inhibition of ovulation and more 
impact of thickening cervical mucus ( hostile environment ) inhibit-
ing sperm penetration. Sperm that are able to penetrate have 
decreased mobility. Progestins also alter the endometrial lining 
(inhibition of progesterone receptor synthesis and reduction in 
endometrial glandular development, preventing implantation) 
and perhaps inhibit the motility (number and motility of the cilia) 
of the uterine tube. LH peaks—as well as FSH peaks—are sup-
pressed compared with pretreatment levels. The change in cervical 
mucus takes place 2 to 4 hours after the first dose. However, after 
24 hours, thinning of the cervical mucus is evident, allowing 
TABLE 13–9  Contraindications to combination oral 
contraceptive use. 
Pregnancy 
History of thromboembolic disease 
Smoking and age ≥ 35 y 
Hepatoma 
Breast cancer 
Endometrial cancer 
History of cerebrovascular or cardiovascular disease 
Undiagnosed vaginal bleeding 
First-degree relative with history of thromboembolic disease 
Uncontrolled hypertension 
Plasma progestin (mg/mL)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
A. Norethindrone
0
24
22
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
Hours
Plasma progestin (mg/mL)
0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
1
B. Levonorgestrel
0
24
22
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
Hours
 FIGURE 13–19  Serum levels attained with progestin-only pills.  [Reproduced, with permission, from McCann MF, Potter LS. Progestin-only 
oral contraception: a comprehensive review.  Contraception . 1994;50(6 suppl 1):S1.] 
470    CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility
unimpaired sperm penetration, which is why it is critical to take 
the progestin-only pills at the same time every day. 
 The progestin-only pill should be started on the first day of 
menses. This pill should be taken at the same time every day. If 
administration is 3 hours late, a backup method should be used 
for 48 hours. If a pill is missed, a backup method should be used 
for 48 hours, and if two or more pills are missed, a backup method 
should be used for 48 hours due to rapid resumption of the cervi-
cal mucus effect. If no menses occur in 4 weeks, a pregnancy test 
is necessary. Progestin-only pills may be administered immediately 
postpartum. 
 The efficacy of progestin-only pills under conditions of perfect 
use is 0.3 to 3.1 failures per 100 woman-years (failure rates of 
1.1%-9.6% in the first year) or 0.5 per 100 users. This efficacy 
rate is achieved only with careful compliance. The typical use is 
associated with a greater than 5% failure rate. Failure rates were 
lowest in women over 38½ years of age and those who were 
breast-feeding. The efficacy may also be influenced by body 
weight and by concomitant use of anticonvulsants. The major 
disadvantage is that the pill must be administered at the same time 
every day. As a result of even slight flexibility in the schedule, there 
is increased contraceptive failure. 
 The risks associated with progestin-only pills are minimal. 
Various studies have revealed no significant impact on lipids, car-
bohydrate metabolism, blood pressure, or the incidence of myo-
cardial infarction and stroke. Furthermore, no adverse coagulation 
parameters have been associated with its use. There are almost no 
data on the association of progestin-only pills and endometrial, 
ovarian, cervical, or breast cancer. The major side-effect is break-
through bleeding (40%-60%). Other side-effects include acne and 
persistent ovarian cysts. With discontinuation of the pill, menses 
resume with no impact on subsequent pregnancy rates or future 
fertility. 
 CONTRACEPTION: LONG-ACTING 
CONTRACEPTIVES 
 The high rate of unintended pregnancies has led to the develop-
ment of long-acting reversible contraceptive modalities. Interest in 
long-acting methods is increasing because they offer convenience, 
obviate problems of compliance, and thus offer higher efficacy. 
Most long-acting systems contain either combination or proges-
tin-only hormones. The effectiveness of these hormones is pro-
longed, mostly due to the sustained system that results in a gradual 
release. The modes of administration include injectables, transder-
mal patches, subdermal rods, vaginal rings, and intrauterine 
devices. The various types of long-acting contraceptives are dis-
cussed below. 
 Injectable Contraceptives 
 A. Progestin only 
 Injectable progestins that contain 
medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA, Depo-Provera) are beneficial 
when women have contraindications to estrogen, use antiepilep-
tics, are mentally handicapped, or have poor compliance. 
Furthermore, there is good evidence that its use is safe in the pres-
ence of coronary artery disease, congestive heart failure, diabetes, 
tobacco use, and a history of venous thromboembolism. Other 
uses of MPA include treatment of metastatic endometrial or renal 
carcinoma. 
 Although most other long-acting contraceptives are sustained-
release formulations, Depo-Provera (150 mg MPA) is provided as 
an aqueous microcrystalline suspension that gradually declines 
throughout the cycle ( Figure 13–20 ). Pharmacologic levels 
(>0.5 ng/mL) are achieved within the first 24 hours and peak (at 
2 ng/mL) within the first week after the injection. Serum concen-
trations are maintained at 1 ng/mL for approximately 3 months. 
Interestingly, estrogen concentration is in the early to midfollicu-
lar level (below 100 pg/mL) and persists for 4 months after the 
last injection. The serum concentration of MPA decreases to 
0.2 ng/mL during the last 5 to 6 months (ovulation occurs when 
levels are <0.1 ng/mL). However, one study observed progesterone 
levels to rise after 3½ months. 
 The mechanism of action depends mainly on the ability of 
higher peaks of hormone to inhibit ovulation (LH surge). Like 
other progestins, MPA increases cervical mucus viscosity, alters 
the endometrium, and decreases the motility of the uterine 
tubes and uterus. FSH levels are minimally suppressed with 
Depo-Provera. 
 The manufacturer’s recommendation is to administer the agent 
every 3 months, starting within 5 days of the onset of menses and 
not to exceed 1 week. The agent is injected deeply into the upper-
outer quadrant of the buttock or deltoid without massage to 
ensure slow release. If the subject is postpartum and not breast-
feeding, Depo-Provera should be given within 3 weeks after deliv-
ery and if lactating within 6 weeks ( Table 13–10 ). 
 Because compliance is not an issue, the failure rate is minimal 
at 0 to 0.7 per 100 woman-years (0.3 per 100 users). Weight and 
use of concurrent medications do not affect the efficacy. 
However, continuation rates are poor at 50% to 60% because of 
the side-effect profile. The major dissatisfaction that leads to 
discontinuation is breakthrough bleeding, which approaches 
50% to 70% in the first year of use. Other side-effects include 
weight gain (2.1 kg/y), dizziness, abdominal pain, anxiety, and 
possibly depression. Another disadvantage with the use of Depo-
Provera is a delay in fertility after discontinuation. Ovulation 
returns when serum levels are less than 0.1 ng/mL. The time 
from discontinuation to ovulation is prolonged. Only 50% of 
patients ovulate at 6 months after discontinuing the medication, 
and although the agent does not cause infertility, achieving preg-
nancy may be delayed for more than 1 year. (The length of time 
for release at the injection site is unpredictable.) After the first 
year, 60% of women become amenorrheic, and at 5 years, the 
incidence of amenorrhea approaches 80%, which can be consid-
ered a potential benefit. Other benefits with use of MPA include 
prevention of iron deficiency anemia, ectopic pregnancy, PID, 
and endometrial cancer. In addition, Depo-Provera is a recom-
mended contraceptive for women with sickle cell disease 
(decreased crisis) and seizure disorders (raises seizure threshold). 
Other therapeutic uses include dysmenorrhea and endometrial 
hyperplasia or cancer. 
CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility     471
 One major concern with use of Depo-Provera is the develop-
ment of osteopenia, with possible advancement to osteoporosis 
later in life. Several observational studies have evaluated the 
potential impact on bone. A prospective trial revealed that cur-
rent users, after 12 months of use, experience a mean BMD loss 
of 2.74%. However, on examining former users 30 months later, 
it was found that mean BMD was similar to that of nonusers, 
indicating that the loss is reversible and of minimal clinical 
importance. An ongoing multicenter study assessing BMD in 
users versus nonusers should clarify the impact of Depo-Provera 
on bone. BMD in adolescents has also been investigated because 
adolescence is a critical time in bone mineralization. A small 
prospective study revealed that BMD was decreased by 1.5% to 
3.1% after 1 and 2 years of use in Norplant users compared to 
increases in BMD of 9.3% and 9.5% in controls. This is a poten-
tial concern and has also led to a prospective multicenter study 
investigating the use of Depo-Provera in adolescents. Although 
one possible cause is less exposure to estrogen, an alternative and 
perhaps not exclusive theory involves MPA-dependent glucocor-
ticoid activity that impairs osteoblast differentiation. Other 
potential risks include an adverse lipid profile (increase in LDL, 
decrease in HDL) and a slightly increased risk of breast cancer. 
The association of breast cancer with use of Depo-Provera is 
minimal within the first 4 years of use, with no risk after 5 years 
of use. Paradoxically, MPA has been used for treatment of meta-
static breast cancer. 
 B. Combination 
 The development of monthly combination 
injectables (Lunelle) has responded to the erratic bleeding associ-
ated with Depo-Provera ( Figure 13–21 ). The cycle control is 
similar to what is achieved with combined oral contraceptives. 
The monthly withdrawal bleeding occurs 2 weeks after the injec-
tion. The target populations are adolescents and women who have 
difficulty with compliance. Lunelle is an aqueous solution con-
taining 25 mg of MPA and 5 mg of estradiol cypionate per 
0.5 mL. In women who receive repeated administration of 
Lunelle, peak estradiol levels occur approximately 2 days after the 
third injection and are 247 pg/mL (similar to peak ovulatory lev-
els). The estradiol level returns to baseline 14 days after the last 
injection (100 pg/mL); the drop in estradiol is associated with 
menstrual bleeding (2-3 weeks after the last injection). Peak MPA 
levels (2.17 ng/mL) occur 3½ days after the third monthly injec-
tion. The mean MPA level is 1.25 ng/mL. The level at day 28 of 
the cycle is 0.44 to 0.47 ng/mL (level needed for contraceptive 
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
200
180
160
140
280
260
240
220
8
6
4
2
0
300
200
100
0
Subject C
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
8
6
4
2
0
300
200
100
0
Subject B
Medroxyprogesterone acetate (ng/mL)
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
200
180
160
140
280
260
240
220
8
6
4
2
0
300
200
100
0
Subject A
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
200
180
160
140
280
260
240
220
Estradiol (ng/mL)
Progesterone (ng/mL)
Days after injection
 FIGURE 13–20  MPA levels following injection of Depo-Provera. Open bars represent serum estradiol; closed bars represent serum proges-
terone concentrations.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Ortiz A, et al. Serum medroxyprogesterone acetate [MPA] and ovarian function fol-
lowing intramuscular injection of depo-MPA.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 1977;44:32.) 
472    CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility
TABLE 13–10 Scheduling for injectable contraceptives. 
Method 
DMPA 
MPA/E2C
First injection 
Spontaneous menstrual cycle 
Within 5 d of menses onset 
Within 5 d of menses onset 
Spontaneous or elective 
 first-trimester abortion 
Within 7 d 
Within 7 d 
Term delivery 
Within 3 wk postpartum if not lactating; within 6 wk 
postpartum if lactating 
Between 21 and 28 d postpartum if not 
lactating 
Switching from combination OCs 
With administered active pills or within 7 d after 
administering the pill pack’s last active tablet 
With administered active pills or within 7 d after 
administering the pill pack’s last active tablet 
Switching from DMPA 
— 
Within 13 wk after last DMPA injection 
Switching from MPA/E2C 
Within 33 d after previous injection 
— 
Switching from levonorgestrel 
 implant 
Any time within 5 y of implant insertion; use of a 
condom back-up is recommended for 1 wk 
Any time within 5 y of implant insertion; use of a 
condom backup is recommended for 1 wk 
Switching from Copper T 380A IUD 
First injection should occur before IUD removal and 
within 10 y after IUD insertion; a condom should be 
used as a back-up if the first injection is not adminis-
tered within 5 d of menses onset 
First injection should occur before IUD removal 
and within 10 y after IUD insertion condom should 
be used as a back-up if the first injection is not 
administered within 5 d of menses onset
Subsequent injections 
Injection interval 
Every 12 wk or 3 mo; earlier reinjections are 
acceptable 
Every 28 d or 4 wK or monthly; reinjection earlier 
than 23 d may impair cycle 
Grace period 
2 wk (14 wk from last injection); after 1 wk manufac-
turer recommends pregnancy testing before repeat 
injection 
Control ± 5 d (23-33 d from last injection); 
thereafter, pregnancy testing needed before repeat 
injection 
DMPA,  depot medroxyprogesterone acetate; IUD, intrauterine device; MPA/E2C, medroxyprogesterone acetate and estradiol cypionate; OCs , oral contraceptives. 
Reproduced, with permission, from Kaunitz AM. Injectable long-acting contraceptives. Clin Obstet Gynecol. 2001;44:73.
effect is 0.1-0.2 ng/mL). The earliest return of ovulation seen in 
women with multiple injections has been 60 days after the last 
dose. The mechanism of action is similar to that of combined oral 
contraceptives. 
 Lunelle is administered intramuscularly in the buttock or 
deltoid every month. The first injection should be given within 
the first 5 days of the menstrual cycle ( Table 13–10 ). Even 
though pharmacokinetic analysis reveals a delay in ovulation, the 
manufacturer recommends a 5-day grace period. The failure rate 
is 0.1 per 100 woman-years. Neither body weight nor use of 
concomitant drugs appears to affect the efficacy. Although this 
contraceptive has the advantages of the oral contraceptives and is 
associated with better compliance, the continuation rate is only 
55%. This may be due to its side-effect profile, which is similar 
to that of the combined oral contraceptives with the addition of 
monthly injections. 
 There are limited data on potential risks. The risk potential is 
probably similar to that of the combined oral contraceptives, with 
a potentially lower incidence of deep vein thrombosis secondary 
to the absence of the first-pass effect. On discontinuation of 
Lunelle, achieving pregnancy may be delayed for as long as to 3 to 
10 months after the last injection. 
 Lunelle was approved for use in the United States in 2000. 
However, in October 2002, Lunelle was recalled from the market, 
due to plant manufacturing problems. Alternatives to Lunelle that 
are administered outside the United States are: Mesigyna, Perlutal, 
Yectames, and Chinese Injectable No 1. 
 Subdermal Implants 
 The Norplant package consists of six capsules (34 mm in length, 
2.4 mm in diameter), with each capsule providing 36 mg of 
levonorgestrel (total 216 mg). The target population is women 
who have contraindications to or adverse side-effects from estro-
gen, women who are postpartum or breast-feeding, and adolescent 
mothers. This method provides long-term continuous contracep-
tion (approved for 5 years) that is rapidly reversible. The advan-
tages, side-effects, risks, and contraindications are similar to those 
of oral progestins. The major disadvantage—not present with use 
of oral progestins—is the surgical insertion and removal of the 
rods. A newer system, Norplant II, contains two rods (4 cm in 
length, 3.4 cm in diameter) and releases 50 μg/d of norgestrel 
(approved for 3 years). The two-rod system has the same mecha-
nism of action and side-effect profile as its predecessor. However, 
the rods are much easier and faster to insert and remove than the 
capsules. 
 Within the first 24 hours, serum concentrations of levonorg-
estrel are 0.4 to 0.5 ng/mL. The capsules release 85 μg of levonorg-
estrel per 24 hours for the first year (equivalent to the daily dose of 
progestin-only pills) and then 50 μg for the remaining 5 years. The 
CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility     473
1600
1200
800
400
0
0 1 3 5 7 10 12 14 18 21 28 35 42 49 56 63 70 77 84
Time post-third injection (days)
MPA concentrations (pg/mL)
400
300
200
100
0
E2 concentrations (mg/mL)
0
1
3
5
7
10
12
14
18
21
28
Time post-third injection (days)
 FIGURE 13–21  Serum MPA and estradiol levels following 
Lunelle injection.  [Reproduced, with permission, from Rahimy MH, 
Ryan KK, Hopkins NK. Lunelle monthly contraceptive injection 
(medroxyprogesterone acetate and estradiol cypionate injectable 
suspension): steady-state pharmacokinetics of MPA and E 2 in surgi-
cally sterile women.  Contraception . 1999;60:209.] 
mean serum levels of progestin after the first 6 months are 0.25 to 
0.6 ng/mL, slightly decreased at 5 years to 0.17 to 0.35 ng/mL. A 
levonorgestrel concentration below 0.2 ng/mL is associated with 
increased pregnancy rates. The site of implantation (leg, forearm, 
and arm) does not affect circulating progestin levels. Even though 
progestin levels are sufficient to prevent ovulation within the first 
24 hours, the manufacturer recommends use of a backup method 
for 3 days after insertion. On removal, the progestin levels rapidly 
decline and undetectable serum levels are achieved after 96 hours. 
As a result, most women ovulate within 1 month after removal of 
the implants. 
 Norplant provides contraception in several ways. In the first 
2 years, the levonorgestrel concentration is high enough to sup-
press the LH surge—most likely at the hypothalamic level—and 
thereby inhibits ovulation. However, given the low concentrations 
of progestin, there is no real effect on FSH. The estradiol levels 
approximate those in ovulatory women. In addition, there are 
irregular serum peaks (often prolonged) and declines in serum 
estrogen levels that may contribute to erratic bleeding. By 5 years, 
more than 50% of the cycles are ovulatory. However, ovulatory 
cycles while using Norplant have been associated with luteal phase 
insufficiency. Other mechanisms of contraception are similar to 
oral progestins and include thickening of the cervical mucus, 
alterations of the endometrium, and changes in tubal and uterine 
motility. 
 The failure rate is 0.2 to 2.1 failures per 100 woman-years (0.9 
per 100 users). Like oral progestins, body weight affects circulat-
ing levels and may result in more failures in the fourth or fifth year 
of use. Similar to oral progestins, the incidence of ectopic preg-
nancy among failures is increased to 20% (overall incidence is 
0.28-1.3 per 1000 woman-years). The continuation rate (discon-
tinuation rate of 10%-15% per year) is age-dependent and ranges 
from 33% to 78%. Menstrual disturbances are the most frequent 
side-effect; they approach 40% to 80%, especially in the first 
2 years. Although the incidence of abnormal uterine bleeding is 
similar to that of Depo-Provera, a significant difference between 
these methods is that Norplant provides only a 10% amenorrhea 
rate at 5 years. Other reported side-effects include headache (30% 
indication for removal) and possibly weight gain, mood changes, 
anxiety, and depression—as well as ovarian cyst formation (eight-
fold increase), breast tenderness, acne, galactorrhea (if insertion 
occurs on discontinuation of lactation), possible hair loss, and 
pain or other adverse reactions at the insertion site (0.8% of cases 
at discontinuation). 
 Transdermal Patch 
 The transdermal patch (Ortho Evra) is another approach to con-
traception. The thin 20-cm 2 patch is composed of a protective 
layer, a middle (medicated) layer, and a release liner that is 
removed prior to application. The system delivers 150 μg of nore-
lgestromin (active metabolite of norgestimate) and 20 μg of ethi-
nyl estradiol per day to the systemic circulation. The target 
population is similar to that described above for Lunelle. One 
advantage of this system over Lunelle is that there are no monthly 
injections, and as a result, there is greater autonomy for the 
patient. The patch is applied once a week for 3 consecutive weeks, 
followed by a patch-free week for monthly withdrawal bleeding. 
The patch should be changed on the same day each week. 
The mechanism of action, contraindications, and side effects 
are similar to what has been described in the section on oral 
contraceptives. 
 With use of the transdermal patch, the peak ethinyl estradiol and 
norelgestromin levels are 50 to 60 pg/mL and 0.7 to 0.8 ng/mL, 
respectively. Because of this unique delivery system, hormone 
levels achieve a steady state condition throughout the cycle (see 
later and  Figure 13–22 ). After the seventh day of application, 
there are adequate hormone levels to inhibit ovulation for 2 more 
days. With each consecutive patch, there is minimal accumulation 
of norelgestromin or ethinyl estradiol. The amount of hormone 
delivered is not affected by the environment, activity, or site of 
application (abdomen, buttock, arm, torso). The adhesive is very 
reliable in a variety of conditions, including exercise, swimming, 
474    CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility
humidity, saunas, and bathing. Complete detachment occurs in 
1.8% of cases and partial detachment in 2.9% of cases. 
 The failure rate is 0.7 per 100 woman-years under conditions 
of perfect use. Body weight has not been shown to affect the effi-
cacy. The compliance with perfect use ranges from 88.1% to 91% 
among all age groups. This is significantly different from what is 
achieved with oral contraceptives (67%-85%), especially with 
women under 20 years of age. The side-effect profile is similar to 
that of oral contraceptives, except that there is slightly more break-
through bleeding with the transdermal patch in the first 1 to 
2 months (up to 12.2% vs 8.1%) and less breast tenderness (6.1% 
vs 18.8%). The incidence of skin reaction was 17.4%, character-
ized as mild in 92%, resulting in discontinuation in under 2%. 
 Vaginal Rings 
 Since the early 1900s, it has been recognized that the vagina is a 
place where steroids can be rapidly absorbed into the circulation. 
A study in the 1960s revealed that silicone rubber pessaries con-
taining sex steroids would release the drug at a continuous rate. 
These studies led to the development of contraceptive vaginal 
rings. 
 As with oral contraceptives, there are combination and proges-
tin-only formulations. Several progestin-only rings have been 
introduced since the 1970s. However, they were associated with 
significant menstrual disturbances. More recently, combination 
types have been developed. The most recent (2002) FDA-approved 
vaginal ring is a combination type called the NuvaRing. 
 The NuvaRing is made of ethylene vinyl acetate that provides 
0.015 mg of ethinyl estradiol and 0.120 mg of etonogestrel per 
day. Maximum serum concentrations are achieved within 1 week 
after placement. The ring is designed to be used for 21 days and 
then removed for 1 full week to permit withdrawal bleeding. This 
device is capable of inhibiting ovulation within 3 days after inser-
tion. After removal, the time to ovulation is 19 days. The mecha-
nism of action, contraindications, and risks are similar to those of 
oral contraceptives. However, when assessing systemic exposure, 
use of the vaginal ring allows for 50% of the total exposure to 
ethinyl estradiol (15 μg in the ring compared with a 30-μg ethinyl 
estradiol-containing oral contraceptive). 
 The failure rate is similar to that reported with oral contracep-
tives. The continuation rate is 85.6% to 90%. Irregular bleeding 
is minimal (5.5%), and overall, the device is well tolerated, with 
an associated 2.5% discontinuation rate. Side-effects are similar to 
those of oral contraceptives, but cycle control appears to be 
improved. The reported incidence of vaginal discharge is 23% 
versus 14.5% with oral contraceptives. The ring does not appear 
to interfere with intercourse (1%-2% of partners reported discom-
fort); however, the device can be removed for 2 to 3 hours during 
intercourse without changing efficacy. 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
0
50
100
150
Hours
Mean norelgestromin
concentration (ng/mL)
200
Patch removed
Cycle 1/Week 1
250
Cycle 3/Week 1
Cycle 3/Week 2
Cycle 3/Week 3
0.70
CSS (ng/mL)
0.70
0.80
0.70
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
50
100
150
Hours
Mean EE concentration (pg/mL)
200
Patch removed
Cycle 1/Week 1
250
Cycle 3/Week 1
Cycle 3/Week 2
Cycle 3/Week 3
46.4
CSS (pg/mL)
47.6
59.0
49.6
0
150
0
50
100
200
150
Hours
Mean EE concentration (pg/mL)
Mean NGMN concentration
(ng/mL)
250
Patch NGMN
0.3
0.6
0.9
1.2
1.5
1.8
2.1
125
100
75
50
25
Patch EE
Oral NGMN
Oral EE
 FIGURE 13–22  Comparative serum steroid (CSS) levels of norelgestromin (NGMN) and ethinyl estradiol (EE) following patch administra-
tion.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Abrams LS, et al. Multiple-dose pharmacokinetics of a contraceptive patch in healthy women partici-
pants.  Contraception . 2001;64:287.) 
CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility     475
 Intrauterine Devices 
 Intrauterine devices (IUDs) are another modality of contraception 
that has been used clinically since the 1960s. Historically, these 
devices were made of plastic (polyethylene) impregnated with 
barium sulfate to make them radiopaque. Several other devices 
were subsequently developed, including the Dalkon Shield. After 
the introduction of the Dalkon Shield, an increase in pelvic infec-
tions was observed secondary to its multifilament tail. Furthermore, 
tubal infertility and septic abortions were increasing, and massive 
litigation occurred as a result. Consequently, even though the 
modern IUD has negligible associated risk, the use of IUDs in the 
United States is minimal—less than 1% of married women. 
 Currently, two types of IUDs are used in the United States: the 
copper- and the hormone-containing devices. The most recent 
FDA-approved intrauterine system contains levonorgestrel 
(Mirena) and is approved for 5 years of use. Several studies have 
demonstrated that these devices are unlike the Dalkon Shield and 
are very safe and efficacious. The target population is women who 
desire highly effective contraception that is long-term and rapidly 
reversible. 
 The copper (TCu-380A) IUD is a T-shaped device. The 
mechanism of action is mostly spermicidal due to the sterile 
inflammatory reaction that is created secondary to a foreign body 
in the uterus. The abundance of white blood cells that are present 
as a result kills the spermatozoa by phagocytosis. The amount of 
dissolution of copper is less than the daily amount ingested in the 
diet. However, with release of copper, salts are created that alter 
the endometrium and cervical mucus. Sperm transport is signifi-
cantly impaired, limiting access to the oviducts. 
 There are two hormone-containing intrauterine devices: the 
progesterone-releasing device (Progestasert) and the levonorg-
estrel-releasing device (Mirena). The Progestasert contains proges-
terone, which is released at a rate of 65 mg/d (approved for 
1 year). This diffuses into the endometrial cavity, resulting in 
decidualization and atrophy of the endometrium. Serum proges-
terone levels do not change with the use of Progestasert. The main 
mechanism of action is to impair implantation. Mirena contains 
52 mg of levonorgestrel, which is gradually released at a rate of 
20 μg/d (approved for 5 years). Unlike Progestasert, systemic 
absorption of levonorgestrel inhibits ovulation about half the 
time. Although women may continue to have cyclic menses, over 
40% have impaired follicular growth, with up to 23% developing 
luteinized unruptured follicles. Other mechanisms of action are 
similar to those described for Progestasert and the progestin-only 
pills. Mirena has the added advantage of significantly decreasing 
menstrual flow and has been used to treat menorrhagia. 
 The IUD should be placed within 7 days after onset of the 
menstrual cycle or at any time postpartum. Protection begins 
immediately after insertion. The failure rates after the first year of 
use are 0.5% to 0.8% for the TCu-380A, 1.3% to 1.6% for 
Progestasert, and 0.1% to 0.2% for Mirena. The expulsion rate is 
approximately 10%. 
 If a woman becomes pregnant with an IUD in place, the inci-
dence of an ectopic pregnancy is 4.5% to 25%. The incidence of 
ectopic pregnancies with IUDs varies depending on the type of 
device. With Progestasert, the ectopic rate is slightly higher 
(6.80 per 1000 woman-years), most likely because its mechanism 
of action is limited to inhibiting implantation in the endo-
metrium—in contrast to the copper or levonorgestrel IUD 
(0.2-0.4 per 1000 woman-years), both of which also interfere with 
conception. 
 The continuation rate range for the current IUDs is 40% to 
66.2% (Mirena). The side-effects of the copper IUD include dys-
menorrhea and menorrhagia. The most common adverse effect 
associated with the hormone-containing devices is erratic, albeit 
significantly less, bleeding. In fact, 40% of women experienced 
amenorrhea at 6 months and 50% at 12 months. The incidence 
of spotting in the first 6 months was 25% but decreased to 
11% after 2 years. Other reported side-effects of levonorgestrel 
include depression, headaches, and acne. There is a tendency to 
develop ovarian cysts early after insertion with the levonorgestrel-
containing device that resolves after 4 months of use. 
 The nominal risks associated with IUD use include pelvic 
infection (within 1 month after insertion), lost IUD (ie, perfora-
tion into the abdominal cavity; 1:3000), and miscarriage. There is 
no association between IUD use and uterine or cervical cancer. 
Contraindications to IUD use are active genital infection and 
unexplained bleeding. 
 EMERGENCY CONTRACEPTION 
 Postcoital contraception is a method that may be used by a woman 
who believes her contraceptive method has failed or who has had 
unprotected intercourse and feels that she may be at risk for an 
unintended pregnancy. The first study to evaluate the efficacy of 
emergency contraception with hormones was in 1963. Subsequently, 
several studies have been performed with various contraceptives 
that paved the way for more widespread use. In 1997, the FDA 
approved the use of high-dose oral contraceptives for postcoital 
contraception. Since then, pharmaceutical companies have mar-
keted specific packaging for the use of emergency contraception. 
Other methods, including mifepristone (RU-486) and the IUD 
have also been effective for postcoital contraception. 
 Similar to the formulas of oral contraception, there are both 
combination and progestin-only types of emergency contracep-
tion. The combination method (Yuzpe regimen) entails adminis-
tration of two doses of two tablets (Ovral: 50 μg ethinyl estradiol, 
0.5 mg norgestrel) 12 hours apart (total: 200 μg ethinyl estradiol, 
2 mg norgestrel). Other oral contraceptives may be used with 
adjustment in the number of pills for equivalence (ie, two doses of 
four tablets: any second-generation oral contraceptive 12 hours 
apart). The specific medication (Preven) that is FDA approved 
and marketed for postcoital contraception contains two doses of 
four tablets (ethinyl estradiol 50 μg, levonorgestrel 0.25 mg) 
12 hours apart. The progestin-only method involves two doses of 
10 pills (Ovrette 0.075 mg) 12 hours apart (Plan A). The 
marketed form (Plan B) contains two doses of one tablet 
(levonorgestrel 0.75 mg) 12 hours apart. 
 Following a single oral dose of 0.75 mg of levonorgestrel, the 
serum concentration peak (5-10 ng/mL) was at 2 hours with a rapid 
476    CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility
decline during the first 24 hours. The mechanism of action is uncer-
tain, but levonorgestrel most likely inhibits ovulation and alters the 
endometrium to prevent implantation. Studies have shown decreased 
sperm recovery from the uterine cavity, possibly due to thickened 
cervical mucus, or the alkalinization of the intrauterine environ-
ment. Others have shown that changes in other factors, such as 
integrins, can alter endometrial receptivity. The mode of action 
likely depends on the timing of intercourse relative to ovulation and 
to the administration of emergency contraception. 
 Maximum efficacy is achieved if the first dose is administered 
within 72 hours after intercourse and repeated in 12 hours. 
Combination formulas have a failure rate of 2% to 3%, and pro-
gestin-only preparations have a failure rate of 1%. Emergency 
contraception effectively reduces the rate of unintended pregnan-
cies from 8% to 2%, a 75% reduction. However, with increasing 
time since unprotected intercourse, the efficacy changes from 
0.4% to 1.2% to 2.7% for the first, second, or third 24-hour 
period after unprotected intercourse. For maximum efficacy, 
emergency contraception may be prescribed in advance so women 
will already have the correct dosing. No increase in risk-taking 
behavior has been noted with this strategy. 
 Significant nausea or emesis (51.7%) is associated with use of 
emergency contraception, although it is substantially less with 
progestin-only formulations. An antiemetic should be adminis-
tered 1 hour before each treatment. If a patient vomits within 1 hour 
after ingestion, additional pills need to be administered. 
 Contraindications to emergency contraception with the com-
bination regimen are possibly the same as those described for oral 
contraceptives; for progestin-only pills, there are no contraindica-
tions. Emergency contraception should be an optional function of 
the rape management protocol. 
 REFERENCES 
 Embryology and Anatomy 
 Ahmed SF, Hughes IA. The genetics of male under-masculinization.  Clin 
Endocrinol (Oxf) . 2002;56:1. [PMID: 11849240] 
 McElreavey K, Fellous M. Sex determination and the Y chromosome.  Am J Med 
Genet . 1999;89:76. [PMID: 10727993] 
 Oocyte Development 
 Braw-Tal R. The initiation of follicle growth: the oocyte or the somatic cells?  Mol 
Cell Endocrinol . 2002;18:18. [PMID: 11988306] 
 Erickson GF. The ovary: basic principles and concepts. In: Felig P, Frohman LA, 
eds.  Endocrinology and Metabolism . 4th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2001. 
 Findlay JK, Drummond AE, Dyson ML, Baillie AJ, Robertson DM, Ethier JF. 
Recruitment and development of the follicle: the roles of the transform-
ing growth factor-beta superfamily.  Mol Cell Endocrinol . 2002;191:35. 
[PMID: 12044917] 
 Suh CS, Sonntag B, Erickson GF. The ovarian life cycle: a contemporary view.  Rev 
Endocr Metab Disord . 2002;3:5. [PMID: 11883105] 
 Teixeira J, Maheswaran S, Donahoe PK. Müllerian inhibiting substance: an 
instructive developmental hormone with diagnostic and possible therapeutic 
applications.  Endocr Rev . 2001;22:657. [PMID: 11588147] 
 Ovarian Steroidogenesis 
 Bulun SE, Adashi EY. The physiology and pathology of the female reproductive 
axis. In: Larsen et al, ed.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 10th ed. 
Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 2003. 
 Strauss JF, Hsueh AJ. Ovarian hormone synthesis. In: DeGroot LJ, et al, ed. 
 Endocrinology . 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 2001. 
 Menstrual Cycle 
 Chabbert-Buffet N, Bouchard P. The normal human menstrual cycle.  Rev Endocr 
Metab Disord . 2002;3:173. [PMID: 12215712] 
 McGee EA, Hsueh AJW. Initial and cyclic recruitment of ovarian follicles.  Endocr 
Rev . 2000;21:200. [PMID: 10782364] 
 Amenorrhea 
 Marcus MD, Loucks TL, Berga SL. Psychological correlates of functional hypotha-
lamic amenorrhea.  Fertil Steril . 2001;76:310. [PMID: 11476768] 
 Marshall JC, Eagleson CA, McCartney CR. Hypothalamic dysfunction.  Mol Cell 
Endocrinol . 2001;183:29. [PMID: 11604221] 
 Seminara SB, Hayes FJ, Crowley WF, Jr. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone defi-
ciency in the human (idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and 
Kallmann’s syndrome): pathophysiological and genetic considerations. 
 Endocr Rev . 1998;19:521. [PMID: 9793755] 
 Ovarian Failure 
 Bakalov VK, Vanderhoof VH, Bondy CA, Nelson LM. Adrenal antibodies detect 
asymptomatic auto-immune adrenal insufficiency in young women with 
spontaneous premature ovarian failure.  Hum Reprod . 2002;17:2096. 
[PMID:12151443] 
 Christin-Maitre S, Vasseur C, Portnoi M-F, Bouchard P. Genes and premature 
ovarian failure.  Mol Cell Endocrinol . 1998;145:75. [PMID: 9933102] 
 Davison RM, Davis CJ, Conway GS. The X chromosome and ovarian failure.  Clin 
Endocrinol . 1999;51:573. [PMID: 10619970] 
 Layman LC. Human gene mutations causing infertility.  J Med Genet . 2002;3:153. 
[PMID: 11897813] 
 Minton SE, Munster PN. Chemotherapy-induced amenorrhea and fertility in 
women undergoing adjuvant treatment for breast cancer.  Cancer Control . 
2002;9:466. [PMID:12514564] 
 Anovulation Due to Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome 
 Abbott DH, Dumesic DA, Franks S. Developmental origin of polycystic ovary 
syndrome—a hypothesis.  J Endocrinol . 2002;174:1. [PMID: 12098657] 
 Azziz R, Carmina E, Dewailly D, et al; Task Force on the Phenotype of the 
Polycystic Ovary Syndrome of the Androgen Excess and PCOS Society.  The 
Androgen Excess and PCOS Society criteria for the polycystic ovary syn-
drome: the complete task force report.  Fertil Steril . 2009;91(2):456-488. 
[PMID: 18950759] 
 Ibanez L, Dimartino-Nardi J, Potau N, Saenger P. Premature adrenarche—normal 
variant or forerunner of adult disease?  Endocr Rev . 2000;21:671. [PMID: 
11133068] 
 Legro RS. Polycystic ovary syndrome: the new millennium.  Mol Cell Endocrinol . 
2001;184:87. [PMID: 11694344] 
 Poretsky L, Cataldo NA, Rosenwaks Z, Giudice LC. The insulin-related ovarian regula-
tory system in health and disease.  Endocr Rev . 1999;20:535. [PMID: 10453357] 
 Rotterdam ESHRE/ASRM-sponsored PCOS Consensus Workshop Group. Revised 
2003 consensus on diagnostic criteria and long-term health risks related to 
polycystic ovary syndrome.  Fertil Steril . 2004;81:19. [PMID: 14688154] 
 Anovulation Due to Adrenal Disorders 
 Betterle C, Dal Pra C, Mantero F, Zanchetta R. Autoimmune adrenal insufficiency 
and autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes: autoantibodies, autoantigens, 
and their applicability in diagnosis and disease prediction.  Endocr Rev . 
2002;23:327. [PMID: 12050123] 
 White PC, Speiser PW. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase 
deficiency.  Endocr Rev . 2000;21:245. [PMID: 10857554] 
CHAPTER 13 Female Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility     477
 Müllerian Anomalies 
 Homer HA, Li T-C, Cooke ID. The septate uterus: a review of management and 
reproductive outcome.  Fertil Steril . 2000;73:1. [PMID: 10632403] 
 Raga F, Bauset C, Remohi J, Bonilla-Musoles F, Simón C, Pellicer A. Reproductive 
impact of congenital Müllerian anomalies.  Hum Reprod . 1997;12(10):2277-
2281. [PMID: 9402295] 
 Menopause: General 
 Collaborative Group on Hormonal Factors in Breast Cancer. Breast cancer and 
hormone replacement therapy: collaborative reanalysis of data from 51 
epidemiological studies of 52,705 women with breast cancer and 
108,411 women without breast cancer.  Lancet . 1997;350:1047. [PMID: 
10213546] 
 Couzinet B, Meduri G, Lecce MG, et al. The postmenopausal ovary is not a major 
androgen-producing gland.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2001;86(10):5060-
5066. [PMID: 11600585] 
 Faddy MJ, Gosden RG, Gougeon A, Richardson SJ, Nelson JF. Accelerated disap-
pearance of ovarian follicles in mid-life: implications for forecasting meno-
pause.  Hum Reprod . 1992;7(10):1342-1346. [PMID: 1291557] 
 Hansen KR, Knowlton NS, Thyer AC, et al. A new model of reproductive aging: 
the decline in ovarian non-growing follicle number from birth to meno-
pause.  Hum Reprod . 2008;23:699. [PMID: 18192670] 
 Nair GV, Herrington DM. The ERA trial: findings and implications for the future. 
 Climacteric . 2000;3:227. [PMID: 11910581] 
 Nelson HD, Humphrey LL, Nygren P, Teutsch SM, Allan JD. Postmenopausal 
hormone replacement therapy: scientific review.  JAMA . 2002;288(7):872-
881. [PMID: 12186605] 
 Randolph JF, Jr, Sowers M, Bondarenko IV, Harlow SD, Luborsky JL, Little RJ. 
Change in estradiol and follicle-stimulating hormone across the early meno-
pausal transition: effects of ethnicity and age.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2004;89(4):1555-1561. [PMID: 15070912] 
 Reddy SY, Warner H, Guttuso T, et al. Gabapentin, estrogen, and placebo for 
treating hot flushes: a randomized controlled trial.  Obstet Gynecol . 
2006;108(1):41-48. [PMID: 16816054] 
 Rosen M, Sternfeld B, Schuh-Huerta SM, Reijo Pera RA, McCulloch CE, Cedars 
MI. Antral follicle count: absence of significant midlife decline.  Fertil Steril. 
2010; 94(6):2182-2185. [PMID: 20149366] 
 Soules MR, Sherman S, Parrott E, et al. Executive summary: Stages of Reproductive 
Aging Workshop (STRAW).  J Womens Health Gend Based Med . 
2001;10(9):843-848. [PMID: 11747678]
 Sowers MR, Eyvazzadeh AD, McConnell D, et al. Anti-Mullerian hormone and 
inhibin B in the definition of ovarian aging and the menopause transition.  J 
Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2008;93(9):3478-3483. [PMID: 18593767] 
 Weiss G, Skurnick JH, Goldsmith LT, Santoro NF, Park SJ. Menopause and 
hypothalamic-pituitary sensitivity to estrogen.  JAMA . 2004;292(24): 
2991-2996. [PMID: 15613667] 
 Menopause and Cardiovascular Disease 
 Anderson GL, Limacher M, Assaf AR, et al. Women’s Health Initiative Steering 
Committee. Effects of conjugated equine estrogen in postmenopausal 
women with hysterectomy: the Women’s Health Initiative randomized con-
trolled trial.  JAMA . 2004;291(14):1701-1712. [PMID: 15082697] 
 Barrett-Connor E, Grady D, Sashegyi A, et al. Raloxifene and cardiovascular events 
in osteoporotic postmenopausal women: four-year results from the MORE 
(Multiple Outcomes of Raloxifene Evaluation) randomized trial.  JAMA . 
2002;287(7):847-857. [PMID: 11851576] 
 Rossouw JE, Anderson GL, Prentice RL, et al. Risks and benefits of estrogen plus 
progestin in healthy postmenopausal women: principal results from the 
Women’s Health Initiative randomized controlled trial.  JAMA . 
2002;288(3):321-333. [PMID: 12117397] 
 U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Postmenopausal hormone replacement ther-
apy for primary prevention of chronic conditions: recommendations and 
rationale.  Ann Intern Med . 2002;137:834. [PMID: 12435221] 
 Menopause: Osteoporosis 
 Cranney A, Tugwell P, Wells G, Guyatt G. Meta-analyses of therapies for post-
menopausal osteoporosis.  Endocr Rev . 2002;23:496. [PMID: 12202464] 
 Menopause: Selective Estrogen Receptor Modulators 
 Miller CP. SERMs: evolutionary chemistry, revolutionary biology.  Curr Phar Des . 
2002;8:2089. [PMID: 12171520] 
 Hormone Replacement and Alzheimer Disease 
 Fillit HM. The role of hormone replacement therapy in the prevention of 
Alzheimer’s disease.  Arch Intern Med . 2002;162:1934. [PMID: 12230415] 
 Infertility 
 Cedars MI. Infertility in obstetrics and gynecology: a longitudinal approach. In: 
Moore TR et al, eds.  Gynecology and Obstetrics: A Longitudinal Approach. 
New York: Churchill Livingstone; 1993. 
 Legro RS, Barnhart HX, Schlaff WD, et al. Clomiphene, metformin, or both for 
infertility in the polycystic ovary syndrome.  N Engl J Med . 2007 Feb 
8;356(6):551-566.[ PMID: 17287476] 
 Te Velde ER, Dorland M, Broekmans FJ. Age at menopause as a marker of repro-
ductive ageing.  Maturitas . 1998;30:119. [PMID: 9871906] 
 Contraception 
 Abma JC, Chandra A, Mosher WD, Peterson LS, Piccinino LJ. Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics. Fertility, fam-
ily planning, and women’s health: new data from the 1995 National Survey 
of Family Growth, Report No. 19, Series 23, 1997. 
 Archer DF. New contraceptive options.  Clin Obstet Gynecol . 2001;44:122. [PMID: 
11219241] 
 Brenner PF, Mishell DR Jr, Stanczyk FZ, Goebelsmann U. Serum levels of 
d-norgestrel, luteinizing hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone, estradiol, 
and progesterone in women during and following ingestion of combination 
oral contraceptives containing dl-norgestrel.  Am J Obstet Gynecol . 
1977;129:133. [PMID: 900174] 
 Burkman RT, Collins JA, Shulman LP, Williams JK. Current perspectives on oral 
contraceptive use.  Am J Obstet Gynecol . 2001;185(2 suppl):S4. [PMID: 
11521117] 
 Croxatto HB, Devoto L, Durand M, et al. Mechanism of action of hormonal 
preparations used for emergency contraception: a review of the literature. 
 Contraception . 2001;63:(3)111. [PMID: 11368982] 
 Kaunitz AM. Injectable long-acting contraceptives.  Clin Obstet Gynecol . 
2001;44:73. [PMID: 11219248] 
 Marchbanks PA, McDonald JA, Wilson HG, et al. Oral contraceptives and the risk 
of breast cancer.  N Engl J Med . 2002;346(26):2025-2032. [PMID: 
12087137] 
 McCann MF, Potter LS. Progestin-only oral contraception: a comprehensive 
review.  Contraception . 1994;50(6 suppl):S1. [PMID: 10226677] 
 Ortiz A, Hirol M, Stanczyk FZ, Goebelsmann U, Mishell DR. Serum medroxy-
progesterone acetate (MPA) and ovarian function following intramuscular 
injection of depo-MPA.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 1977;44:32. [PMID: 
833262] 
 Rahimy MH, Ryan KK, Hopkins NK. Lunelle monthly contraceptive injection 
(medroxyprogesterone acetate and estradiol cypionate injectable suspension): 
steady-state pharmacokinetics of MPA and E2 in surgically sterile women. 
 Contraception . 1999;60;209. [PMID: 10640167] 
 
 
 
 
This page intentionally left blank
479
4
1
 Disorders of Sex 
Determination and 
Differentiation 
 Felix A. Conte, MD and Melvin M. Grumbach, MD 
 ACTH 
Adrenocorticotropic hormone 
 AKR1C2 
3α-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-3 
 
(3α-HSD-3) 
 AMH 
Anti-Müllerian hormone 
 BPES 
Blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus 
 
inversus syndrome 
 CAH 
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia 
 CIS 
Carcinoma in situ 
 CBX2 
Chromobox homolog 2, homolog of 
 
mouse m33 
 CMPD1 
Campomelic dysplasia 
 DAX1 
DSS-AHC-critical region on the X 
 
chromosome gene 1 
 DHEA 
Dehydroepiandrosterone 
 DHH 
Desert hedgehog 
 DHT 
Dihydrotestosterone 
 DMRT1 
Double sex Mab3-related transcription 
 
factor gene 1 
 DSS 
Dosage-sensitive sex reversal 
 DSD 
Disorders of sexual development—
 
congenital conditions in which 
 
development of chromosomal, 
 
gonadal, or anatomic sex is atypical 
 46,XX DSD 
Previously designated  female 
 
pseudohermaphrodite 
 46,XY DSD 
Previously designated  male 
 
pseudohermaphrodite 
 FISH 
Fluorescent in situ hybridization 
 FGF-9 
Fibroblast growth factor-9 
 FOXL2 
Forkhead box L2 
 FSH 
Follicle-stimulating hormone 
 GATA-4 
Member of the GATA family of zinc 
 
finger transcription factors 
 GH 
Growth hormone 
 GnRH 
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 hCG 
Human chorionic gonadotropin 
 HMG 
High mobility group 
 17β-HSD-3 
17β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-3 
 ICSI 
Intracytoplasmic sperm injection 
 IGF 
Insulin-like growth factor 
 LH 
Luteinizing hormone 
 MAMLD1 
Mastermind-like domain containing 1 
 MAP3K4 
Mitogen-activated protein kinase 
 
kinase kinase 4 
 Ovotesticular DSD 
Previously designated  true 
 
hermaphrodism 
 PAR 
Pseudoautosomal region 
 POR 
P450 oxidoreductase 
 PRKX 
Protein kinase X linked 
 PRKY 
Protein kinase Y linked 
 RFLP 
Testriction fragment length 
 
polymorphism 
 RSPO1 
R-spondin1 
 SF-1 
Steroidogenic factor-1 
 SHOX 
Short stature homeobox gene on the 
 
X chromosome 
SOX3 
SRY-like HMG box-3
 SOX9 
SRY-like HMG box-9 
 SRY 
Sex-determining region Y gene 
 StAR 
Steroidogenic acute regulatory protein 
 TSPY 
Testes-specific protein-Y encoded 
 WAGR 
Wilms tumor-aniridia-genital 
 
anomalies-mental retardation 
 
syndrome 
 WNT4 
Human homolog of Drosophila 
 
wingless gene 
 WT1 
Wilms tumor gene 
 XIST 
X-inactive specific transcript gene 
Lowercase letters for genes, for example,  Sry, Sox9, Fgf  9 are used to indicate the mouse homologue of the human gene where a particular function has not yet been dem-
onstrated in humans.
480    CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation
 Advances in developmental and cell biology, molecular genetics, 
experimental embryology, steroid biochemistry, and methods of 
evaluation of the interaction between the hypothalamus, pituitary, 
and gonads as well as behavioral science have helped clarify prob-
lems of sexual determination and differentiation. Anomalies may 
occur at any stage of intrauterine development of the hypothala-
mus, pituitary, gonads, and genitalia and lead to gross ambisexual 
development or to subtle abnormalities that do not become 
manifest until sexual maturity is achieved. 
 HUMAN SEX DIFFERENTIATION 
 Chromosomal Sex 
 The normal human diploid cell contains 22 autosomal pairs of 
chromosomes and two sex chromosomes (two Xs, or one X and 
one Y). When arranged serially and numbered according to size 
and centromeric position, they are known as a karyotype. Advances 
in the techniques of staining chromosomes permit positive identi-
fication of each chromosome by its unique  banding pattern. A 
technique called fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) is par-
ticularly useful in identifying quickly both sex chromosomes, 
mosaicism and structural abnormalities involving the sex chromo-
somes, the presence or absence of SRY (the testes determining gene 
on the Y chromosome), and other deleted genes ( Figure 14–1 ). 
High-resolution chromosome banding and painting techniques 
provide precise identification of each chromosome. 
 Studies in animals as well as humans with abnormalities of 
sexual differentiation indicate that the sex chromosomes (the X 
and Y chromosomes) and the autosomes harbor genes that influ-
ence sex determination and differentiation by causing the bipoten-
tial gonad to develop either as a testis or as an ovary. Two intact 
and normally functioning X chromosomes, in the absence of a Y 
chromosome or its  SRY gene, lead to the formation of an ovary 
under normal circumstances, whereas a Y chromosome (whose 
 SRY gene is intact) or the translocation of  SRY , the testis-determining 
gene on the short arm of the Y chromosome, to an X chromosome 
or autosome leads to testicular organogenesis. 
 In humans, there is a marked discrepancy in size between the 
X and Y chromosomes. Gene dosage compensation is achieved in 
all persons with two or more X chromosomes in their genetic 
constitution by partial inactivation of all X chromosomes except 
one. This phenomenon is thought to be a random process (except 
when a structurally abnormal X chromosome is present) that 
occurs in each cell in the late blastocyst stage of embryonic devel-
opment, during which either the maternally or the paternally 
derived X chromosome undergoes heterochromatinization. A 
result of this epigenetic process is formation of an X chromatin 
body (Barr body) in the interphase cells of persons having two or 
more X chromosomes. In patients with two or more X chromo-
somes, the maximum number of Barr bodies (partially inactivated 
X chromosomes) seen in interphase cells will be one less than the 
number of X chromosomes in the karyotype. A gene termed  XIST 
( X-inactive specific transcripts ) is located in the X inactivation cen-
ter at Xq13.2 on the paracentromeric region of the long arm of the 
X chromosome.  XIST is expressed only by the inactive X chromo-
some. The  XIST gene encodes a large RNA that appears to coat 
the X chromosome and facilitates inactivation of selective genes 
on the X chromosome. 
 The distal portion of the short arm of the X chromosome 
escapes inactivation and has a short (2.5-megabase [mb]) segment 
homologous to a segment on the distal portion of the short arm 
of the Y chromosome ( Figures 14–2 and  14–3 ). This segment is 
called the  pseudoautosomal region (PAR) ; it is these two lim-
ited regions of the X and Y that pair during meiosis, undergo 
obligatory chiasm formation, and allow for exchange of DNA 
between these specific regions of the X and Y chromosomes. At 
least 10 genes have been localized to the pseudoautosomal region 
on the short arm of the X and Y chromosomes. Among these are 
a gene whose deletion results in the neurocognitive defects 
observed in Turner syndrome and a gene for short stature,  SHOX 
(short stature homeobox gene), which is expressed in bone. A 
mutation or deletion of SHOX on either the X or Y chromosome 
is associated with “idiopathic” short stature as well as dyschon-
drosteosis (Leri-Weill syndrome). Homozygous mutations of this 
gene are associated with a more severe form of short stature, 
Langer mesomelic dwarfism. A pseudoautosomal region has also 
been described for the distal ends of the long arms of the X and Y 
 FIGURE 14–1  FISH (fluorescent in situ hybridization) for SRY in 
metaphase and interphase cells. Image illustrates localization of the 
SRY probe on the distal short arm of the Y chromosome (Yp11.3) in 
spectrum orange. The probe for the centromere region of the X chro-
mosome is shown in spectrum green. Note the presence of both 
probes in the interphase cell below.  (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Grumbach MM, Hughes IA, Conte FA. Disorders of sex differenti-
ation. In: Larsen PR, et al, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 
10th ed. WB Saunders; 2003.) 
CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation     481
chromosomes (see  Figures 14–2 and  14–3 ). The pseudoauto-
somal region of the long arms of the X and Y chromosomes 
contains genes that are mostly growth factors and signaling mol-
ecules. The Y chromosome (see  Figure 14–3 ) represents only 2% 
of the human genomic DNA and is about 60 mb in length. It is 
unique in that it contains few active genes compared to the X and 
autosomal chromosomes and has a large apparently noncoding 
heterochromatic region. It contains at least two genes affecting 
growth, the  SHOX gene in the PAR and the  g rowth  c ontrol gene 
on the  Y chromosome (GCY). The euchromatic region of the short 
arm of the Y chromosome contains the  SRY gene (the male deter-
mining factor) distal to the PAR region at Yp11.3. The short arm 
of the Y chromosome contains genes that when deleted produce 
the phenotype stigma of Turner syndrome. The pericentromeric region 
of the Y is the locus for the  TSPY ( testes-specific protein Y encoded ) genes 
which predispose to gonadoblastoma formation in the presence of 
dysgenetic testicular development. The  PRKY gene is homologous to 
a gene  PRKX ( protein kinase X linked ) on the X chromosome and is the 
locus for Y to X translocation observed in 46,XX SRY-positive males. 
The euchromatic region of the long arm of the Y chromosome has 
genes that when deleted result in azoospermia. 
 Genes involved in organogenesis of the bipotential
gonad 
 WT1 
 Heterozygous mutations and deletions of the  Wilms tumor 
gene  (WT1) located on 11p13 result in urogenital malformations 
Pseudoautosomal region 1
Steroid sulfatase
Chondrodysplasia punctata
Kallmann syndrome
PRKX
Genes that affect ovarian function
and prevent short stature and the
stigmata of Turner syndrome
USP9X (DFFRX) candidate gene 
involved in premature ovarian failure?
Lymphedema critical region?
Androgen receptor
ATRX(XH2)
Centromere
Genes affecting ovarian function
DIAPH2 (candidate gene involved in 
premature ovarian failure?)
Fragile site (mental retardation and macro-orchidism)
GPD
MAMLD1
Deutan
Protan
Hemophilia A
Adrenoleukodystrophy
RPS4X
XIST
Gene(s) that prevent the neuro-
cognitive defects in Turner syndrome 
SHOX/PHOG (short stature)
MIC2
DAX-1
GK
DMD
XIC
28
27
25
21
13
11
11
21
22
p Arm
q Arm
3
2
1
3
2
1
4
3
2
1
SOX3
Pseudoautosomal region 2, interleukin-9 receptor
 FIGURE 14–2  Diagrammatic representation of G-banded X chromosome. Selected X-linked genes are shown (ATRX, α-thalassemia, 
X-linked mental retardation; DAX1, DSS-AHC-critical region on the X chromosome gene 1; DIAPH2, human homolog of the Drosophila diapha-
nous gene; DMD, duchenne muscular dystrophy; GK, glycerol kinase; GPD, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase; MAMLD1, mastermind-like 
domain-containing 1; MIC2, a cell surface antigen recognized by monoclonal antibody 12E7; PRKX, a member of the cAMP-dependent serine-
threonine protein kinase gene family [illegitimate X-Y interchange occurs most frequently between PRKX and PRKY]; RPS4X, ribosomal protein 
S4; SHOX, short-stature homeobox gene; SOX3, SRY-like HMG box-3; USP9X, human x-linked homolog of the drosophila fat facets-related gene 
[DFFRX]; XIC, X-inactivation center; XIST, Xi-specific transcripts).  (Reproduced, with permission, from Grumbach MM, Hughes IA, Conte FA. 
Disorders of sex differentiation. In: Larsen PR, et al, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 10th ed. WB Saunders; 2003.) 
482    CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation
as well as Wilms tumor. Knockout of the  Wt1 gene in mice 
results in apoptosis of the metanephric blastema and as a conse-
quence, absence of the kidneys and gonads. Thus,  WT1 , a transcrip-
tional regulator, appears to act on metanephric blastema early in 
urogenital development ( Figure 14–4A ). Dominant-negative point 
mutations of W T1 in human beings results in the Denys-Drash 
and Frasier syndromes, whereas a contiguous deletion 
of the gene and surrounding DNA results in  W ilms tumor, 
 a niridia, ambiguous  g enitalia, and mental  r etardation—the 
WAGR syndrome. 
 SF-1 
 Steroidogenic factor-1 ( SF-1 ) is a nuclear receptor involved 
in transcriptional regulation of many genes, including those that 
are involved in gonadal development, adrenal development, steroid 
Heterochromatic region (genetically inactive)
Gonadoblastoma locus (GBY)
Pseudoautosomal region 2, interleukin-9 receptor
Centromere
Genes that affect growth, tooth size, H-Y antigen (T cell assay)
expression, and spermatogenesis (DAZ, AZFa,b,c) 
SRY, male-determining gene
RPS4Y
ZFY
TSPYA
TSPYB
PRKY
Genes that prevent short stature and stigmata
of Turner syndrome (lymphedema critical region Yp11.2)
11.3
11.2
11.1
11.21
11.22
11.23
12
q Arm
p Arm
Pseudoautosomal region 1
Gene(s) that prevent the neuro-
cognitive defects in Turner syndrome 
SHOX (short stature)
MIC2
 FIGURE 14–3  Diagrammatic representation of a G-banded Y chromosome (AZF, azoospermic factor; DAZ, deleted in azoospermia; MIC2, 
gene for a cell surface antigen recognized by monoclonal antibody 12E7; PRKY, a member of the cAMP-dependent serine-threonine protein 
kinase gene family; RPS4Y, ribosomal protein S4; SHOX, short stature homeobox gene; SRY, sex-determining region Y; TSPYA,B, members of the 
testes-specific factor gene family; ZFY, zinc finger Y).  (Reproduced with permission from Grumbach MM, Hughes IA, Conte FA. Disorders of sex 
differentiation. In: Larsen PR, et al, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 10th ed. WB Saunders; 2003.) 
Major Genes Involved in Sex Determination
Intermediate
mesoderm
Testis
spermatogonia
Primordial germ
cells
Supportive cell
precursors
Steroidogenic cell
precursors
Sertoli cells
AMH
WT-1
SF-1
DHT
SOX9
DMRT1
Oocytes
Granulosa cells
Estradiol
Theca cells
Androgens
Leydig cells
Testosterone
Urogenital
ridge
Bipotential
gonad
 FIGURE 14–4A  Major genes involved in sex determination from the intermediate mesoderm to the bipotential gonad. (DMRT1, doublesex 
and mab-3-related transcription factor 1; PGC, primordial germ cell [arise from an extragonadal site]; SF-1, steroidogenic factor 1; SOX9, SRY-like 
HMG-box 9; WT1, Wilms tumor suppressor gene-1) The bipotential gonad contains the precursor cells which differentiate into the supporting 
cells, steroid hormone-producing cells, and germ cells as shown. 
CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation     483
synthesis, and reproduction (see  Figure 14–4A ). SF-1 is located on 
9q33 and is expressed in the urogenital ridge as well as in steroido-
genic organs. SF-1 is required for the synthesis of testosterone in 
Leydig cells; in Sertoli cells it regulates the  anti-Müllerian hormone 
( AMH ) gene . Homozygous knockout of the gene encoding  Sf-1 
( Sf-1 is the mouse homologue of mammalian  SF-1 ) in mice results 
in apoptosis of the cells of the genital ridge that give rise to the 
adrenals and gonads and thus absence of gonadal and adrenal 
gland morphogenesis in both males and females. This gene has a 
critical role in the formation of all steroid-secreting glands (ie, 
adrenals, testes, and ovaries). Initial studies in humans with SF-1 
mutations identified individuals with adrenal insufficiency, a 
46,XY karyotype, complete gonadal dysgenesis, and the presence 
of müllerian derivatives, similar to the mouse phenotype. 
Subsequently, the spectrum of affected patients has included a 
range of 46,XY disorders of sexual development without adrenal 
insufficiency including hypospadias, anorchia, micropenis, com-
plete gonadal dysgenesis, infertility in otherwise normal males, 
and ovarian failure in 46,XX females.
 DMRT1 
 Haploinsufficiency of  DMRT1 ( double sex Mab3-
related transcription factor gene 1 )—a gene related to double sex in 
drosophila and  Mab3 in  Caenorhabditis elegans is a candidate for 
the abnormality in testis organogenesis in patients with 9p dele-
tions ( see Figure 14–4A ). 46,XY patients invariably have the stig-
mata of the 9p syndrome (mental retardation, trigonocephaly, 
upslanting palpebral fissures, etc), as well as female or ambiguous 
external genitalia and Müllerian structures associated with streak 
gonads or dysgenetic testes. Recent data suggest that ovarian func-
tion may either be compromised or normal in 46,XX females with 
the 9p syndrome.
Ambiguous genitalia has also been reported in 46,XY patients 
with deletions of 10q. However, as yet a specific mutant gene(s) 
causing this DSD has not been identified on the 10q region.
 Genes involved in testicular determination ( Figure 
14–4B ) 
 SRY 
 In studies of 46,XX males with very small Y-to-X transloca-
tions, a gene was localized to the region just proximal to the 
pseudoautosomal boundary of the Y chromosome (Yp11.3) (see 
 Figure 14–3 ) which has been named  SRY. Deletions or mutations 
of the human  SRY gene occur in about 15% to 20% of 46,XY 
females with complete XY gonadal dysgenesis and 90% of 46,XX 
males have a Y to X translocation which includes the  SRY gene. 
→
→
WNT4/β-catenin → FOXL2
XY
FGF9
SF1
?
XX
Major
Anti-ovary genes
Postulated representation of the cascade of genes involved in
mammalian gonadal determination
SRY
SOX9
CBX2
MAP3K4
Major
Anti-testis genes
RSPO1
WNT4 (duplication)
DAX1 (duplication)
b-Catenin
FOXL2
Bipotential
gonad
WT-1 +
CBX2
MAP3K4
GATA4
↑ SRY
(SOX-3)  
→↑ SOX9 
SOX9 
→DHH →SF1→Sertoli
cells 
→Testes
→
→
Bipotential
gonad
RSPO1
    DAX1
↑ WNT4/β-catenin →FOXL2 →Oogonia →Ovaries
 FIGURE 14–4B  Opposing gene signals (differential activation) determines fate of primordial gonad as a testis or ovary. RSPO1, respondin 1; 
 WNT4 , human homolog of Drosophila wingless gene; FOXL-2, forkhead box L2; β-catenin, key-regulated effector of the WNT-signaling path-
way. DAX-1 (DSS-AHC-critical region on the X chromosome gene 1) RSPO1 activates the WNT4/β-catenin canonical-signaling pathway which 
inhibits SOX9 expression and promotes ovarian differentiation. SRY upregulates SOX9 by binding to testicular enhancing elements in the  SOX9 
gene (TESCO), and both SRY and SOX9 (in mice) inhibit the β-catenin canonical-signaling pathway and promote Sertoli cell and consequent 
testicular development. A feed-forward loop involving SF-1 and FGF-9 has been demonstrated in mice which maintains SOX9 expression. 
FOXL2 “knockout” in mice causes gonadal sex reversal, i.e., ovary to testes suggesting that FOXL2 inhibits SOX9 expression. No human 
homozygous FOXL2 null mutations have been reported as yet. Duplication of DAX1 or WNT4 results in inhibition of testicular development 
and atypical genitalia—dysgenetic 46,XY DSD. MAP3K4, mitogen-activated protein kinase 4; CBX2, chromobox homologue 2. It has been sug-
gested that CBX2 is upstream of SRY. More complete understanding of the exact function of MAP3K4 remains to be elucidated. 
484    CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation
Compelling evidence that  SRY is the testis-determining factor is 
the observation that transfection of the  Sry gene into 46,XX mouse 
embryos results in transgenic 46,XX mice with testes and male sex 
differentiation. 
 The  SRY gene encodes a DNA-binding protein that has an 
80 amino acid domain similar to that found in high-mobility 
group (HMG) proteins. This domain binds to DNA in a 
sequence-specific manner (A/TAACAAT). It bends the DNA and 
thus is thought to facilitate interaction between DNA-bound 
proteins to affect the transcription of downstream genes. The 
human  SRY gene has no intron; two nuclear localization sites, 
calmodulin and importin B are critical for the function of the 
gene. In mice,  Sry facilitates the upregulation of Sox9 by binding 
to multiple enhancing elements in the  Sox9 gene and along with 
Sf-1 establishes a feed-forward pathway resulting in upregulation 
of Sox9 and its continued expression in Sertoli cells. A feed- 
forward loop involving Sox9 and Fgf9 has also been demonstrated 
in the mouse but not yet in the human gonad. Both Sry and Sox9 
in mice appear to inhibit the Rspo1 (R-spondin 1)-Wnt4-β-catenin- 
FOXL2 signaling pathway, facilitating Sertoli cell induction and 
testicular organogenesis and inhibiting ovarian development ( see 
Figure 14–4B ). In the absence of Sry, the Wnt4-β-catenin canon-
ical pathway is stabilized and Sox9 is suppressed which results in 
ovarian development. Hence, it appears that Sry and Sox9 are 
repressors of a major ovarian determining pathway—Rspo1-
Wnt4-β-catenin—which induces ovarian development along with 
the downstream gene— Fox L2 and other genes yet to be defined, 
as well as germ cells which are essential for ovarian development (but 
not testicular differentiation). Duplications of DAX1 or WNT4 in 
humans repress testicular development presumably by preventing the 
repression of β-catenin on its downstream gene FOXL2 by SRY and 
SOX9. Ovarian determination is a genetically controlled pathway and 
not, as previously thought, a  default pathway . 
 Most of the mutations thus far described in 46,XY females 
with gonadal dysgenesis have occurred in the nucleotides of the 
 SRY gene encoding the DNA-binding region (the HMG box) of 
the SRY protein. Mutations that affect DNA bending as well as 
nuclear transportation of the SRY protein have also been impli-
cated in defective testicular development. 
 SOX9 
 SOX9 has an HMG box that is more than 60% homolo-
gous to that of SRY. It is localized to 17q24.3-q25.1 and is 
expressed in the developing sex cords and, thereafter, in the Sertoli 
cells ( see Figure 14–4B ). It is also expressed in cartilage. Mutations 
in one allele of the  SOX9 gene can result in a bone abnormality 
called campomelic dysplasia (CMPD) and XY gonadal dysgenesis 
with ambiguous genitalia in affected 46,XY males. Duplication of 
the  SOX9 gene both in humans and mice results in sex reversal in 
XX individuals who are  SRY negative. It appears that  SOX9 is the 
critical gene acting downstream of  SRY for Sertoli cell differentia-
tion and consequent testicular development. 
 DHH 
 Desert hedgehog (DHH) , a gene that codes for a signaling 
molecule located on chromosome 12q13.1 in humans, is an 
important gene in mammalian testes organogenesis and function. 
Mutations in DHH have been reported in individuals with 46,XY 
gonadal dysgenesis. 
GATA4 
GATA4 is a transcription factor which interacts with 
other proteins including SF-1 and FOG2 to regulate the expres-
sion of SRY. Recently, a heterozygous missense mutation has been 
described affecting three male siblings and resulting in 46,XY 
DSD and congenital heart disease. 
 Genes involved in ovarian determination 
 DAX1 
 A mutation or deletion of  DAX1 , which encodes a tran-
scription factor, results in X-linked adrenal hypoplasia congenita 
and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism in 46,XY males ( see Figures 
14–2 ,  14–4B ). Deletion or mutation of the  DAX1 gene in 46,XY 
individuals has not resulted in an abnormality of testicular differ-
entiation in humans. However, XY gonadal dysgenesis has been 
reported in individuals with duplications of Xp21, a locus that 
contains the  DAX1 gene on the X chromosome. Duplication of 
the  DAX1 gene appears not to affect ovarian morphogenesis and 
function in 46,XX females. Thus,  DAX1 dosage plays a critical 
role in testicular development and function ( see Figure 14–4B ). 
 WNT4 
 WNT4 is a signaling molecule encoded by a gene located on 
the short arm of chromosome region 1 (1p35). Duplication of WNT4 
has been associated with dysgenetic testicular development and 
ambiguous genitalia in 46,XY, SRY, positive individuals. Testis devel-
opment is inhibited likely as a result of upregulation of  DAX1 and 
stabilization of β-catenin-FOXL2 which would inhibit SOX9 expres-
sion in the developing gonad. 46,XY patients who have duplications 
of WNT4 exhibit a heterogenous phenotype varying from cryp-
torchidism alone to female external genitalia.  WNT4 is expressed in 
the primordial ovary and is an essential signal for ovarian determina-
tion (see  Figure 14–4B ). In mice,  Wnt4 expression in the ovary pre-
vents the migration of steroid (androgen)-producing cells into the 
ovary, restrains the development of a testis-specific blood vessel (the 
coelomic vessel), and is critical for the development of the Müllerian 
ducts and the maintenance of germ cells. 
 A 46,XX female with absent Müllerian structures (atypical 
Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser syndrome) has been reported 
who had a loss of function mutation in the  WNT4 gene. Her 
phenotype was similar to that described in  Wnt4 -mutated mice. 
She had unilateral renal agenesis as well as clinical signs of andro-
gen excess as manifested by severe acne requiring antiandrogen 
therapy. Wolffian duct development was not ascertained. Two 
other similar patients have been reported. 
 RSPO1 (R-spondin 1) 
 RSPO1 (R-spondin 1) , a gene located in 
1p34.3, appears to stabilize the expression of WNT4-β-catenin-
FOXL2 and thus promotes ovarian determination (see  Figure 14–4B ). 
Mutations in  RSPO1 cause 46,XX females to develop testes and male 
sexual development, as well as palmoplantar hyperkeratosis and a pre-
disposition to squamous cell carcinoma of the skin. The fact that a 
mutation in RSPO1 can redirect gonadal development in a 46,XX 
individual from an ovary to a testes suggests that it is a critical determi-
nant in ovarian determination in humans. 
 FOXL2 is a putative forkhead transcription factor, which does not 
cause a DSD in human. Heterozygous FOXL2 mutations in affected 
46,XX human females causes premature ovarian failure with or with-
out blepharophimosis. However, induced FoxL2 deletions in the ovary 
of the mouse lead to transdifferentiation of the ovary into testes. 
CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation     485
 A 46,XY phenotypic female with normal ovaries and a muta-
tion in the  CBX2 ( chromobox homolog 2  ) gene, the human 
homolog of mouse  m33 , an ortholog of the Drosophila  Polycomb 
gene, has recently been reported. It was postulated that this gene 
is upstream of SRY and that mutations in this gene prevent the 
repression of the ovarian gene pathway presumably by decreasing 
SRY/SOX9 expression enabling the expression of RSPO1-WNT4-
β-catenin-FOXL2 and other ovarian determining genes. 
 Our lack of complete understanding of ovarian and testicular deter-
mination is illustrated in the study by Dumic et al who reported a 
familial cohort of 46,XY females. A 46,XY female was reported to have 
undergone spontaneous menarche and given birth to a 46,XY daugh-
ter with gonadal dysgenesis. Studies in this cohort have uncovered a 
mutation in a gene not previously known to be involved in the sex 
determination cascade— mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase 
4 ( MAP3K4 ). Mutations in this gene involved in the mitogen-
activated protein kinase signaling pathway cause a striking decrease in 
the expression of Sry and Sox9 in the developing mouse gonad result-
ing in sex reversal. Recently, mutations in MAP3K1 have been reported 
to 46,XY DSD leading to either partial or complete gonadal dysgen-
esis. Further studies in humans will be necessary to elucidate the exact 
mechanism which allows for repression of testicular development and 
the genesis of an apparently normal functioning ovary in SRY positive 
46,XY individuals. 
 TESTICULAR AND OVARIAN 
DIFFERENTIATION ( FIGURE 14–5 ) 
 The mammalian gonad forms on the surface of the mesonephros 
within the genital ridge as a result of proliferation of the coelomic 
epithelium. Until the 12-mm stage (∼42 days of gestation), the 
embryonic gonads of males and females are indistinguishable. By 
42 days, 300 to 1300 primordial germ cells have seeded the 
 undifferentiated gonad from their extragonadal origin in the yolk 
sac dorsal endoderm. These large cells are the progenitors of oogo-
nia and spermatogonia; lack of these cells is incompatible with 
further ovarian differentiation but not testicular differentiation. 
The undifferentiated gonad also contains supporting cells and 
steroidogenic cells. Under the influence of  SRY/SOX9 and other 
genes that encode male sex determination, the gonad begins to 
differentiate as a testis at 43 to 50 days of gestation. The support-
ing cells differentiate into pre-Sertoli cells which organize into 
seminiferous tubules and surround the germ cells which undergo 
mitotic arrest. Leydig cells derived from steroidogenic cells are 
apparent by about 60 days, and differentiation of male external 
genitalia occurs by 65 to 77 days of gestation. 
 In the undifferentiated gonad destined to be an ovary, lack of 
further differentiation persists. At 77 to 84 days—long after dif-
ferentiation of the testis in the male fetus—a significant number 
of germ cells enter meiotic prophase to characterize the transition 
of oogonia into oocytes, which marks the onset of ovarian differ-
entiation from the undifferentiated gonads. The supporting cells 
become granulosa cells and steroidogenic cells become theca cells. 
Germ cell meiosis in the developing ovary is induced by retinoic 
acid signaling. Sry induces an enzyme which metabolizes retinoic 
acid to an inactive product and prevents meiosis of germ cells in 
the developing testis. Primordial follicles (small oocytes sur-
rounded by a single layer of flat granulosa cells and a basement 
membrane) are evident after 90 days. Preantral follicles are seen 
after 6 months, and a population of fully developed oocytes with 
fluid-filled cavities and multiple layers of granulosa cells are 
Approx
gestational
age
Stage of
development
(mm)
GONADS
GENITAL TRACT
Bipotential gonad
seeded with primordial germ cells
Seminiferous tubules
Testis
Leydig cells
Onset of meiosis
Ovarian organogenesis
Female genitalia
Vagina
Prostate
Penis
37-45 d
43-50 d
60 d
80 d
11-12 wk
20-25 wk
200
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Müllerian ducts
Regressed
External genitalia
Urogenital sinus
Vaginal
organogenesis
Female ducts
Primary follicles
Stroma
 FIGURE 14–5  Schematic sequence of sexual differentiation in the human fetus. Note that testicular differentiation precedes ovarian differ-
entiation.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Grumbach MM, Hughes IA, Conte FA. Disorders of sex differentiation. In: Larsen PR, et al, eds. 
 Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 10th ed. WB Saunders; 2003. Modified from Jost A. Hormone factors in sex differentiation of the mammalian 
fetus.  Philo Trans R Soc Lond Biol . 1970;259:119.) 
486    CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation
present at birth. As opposed to the testes, there is little evidence 
of hormone production by the fetal ovary. 
 Differentiation of Genital Ducts 
( Figure 14–6 ) 
 By the seventh week of intrauterine life, the fetus is equipped with 
the primordia of both male and female genital ducts. The 
Müllerian ducts, if allowed to persist, form the uterine (fallopian) 
tubes, the corpus and cervix of the uterus, and the upper third of 
the vagina. The Wolffian ducts, on the other hand, have the 
potential for differentiating into the epididymis, vas deferens, 
seminal vesicles, and ejaculatory ducts of the male. In the presence 
of a functional testis, the Müllerian ducts undergo apoptosis 
under the influence of AMH, a dimeric glycoprotein secreted by 
fetal Sertoli cells. AMH acts locally to cause Müllerian duct repres-
sion ipsilaterally. Müllerian duct regression is the earliest indicator 
of male sex differentiation. 
 The gene for AMH encodes a 560 amino acid protein, whose 
carboxyl terminal domain shows marked homology with trans-
forming growth factor-β (TGF-β) and the B chain of inhibin and 
activin. The gene is localized to the short arm of chromosome 19. 
AMH is secreted by human fetal and postnatal Sertoli cells and is 
used as a marker for the presence of these cells. SF-1 (an orphan 
nuclear receptor) in combination with WT1, SOX9, and GATA4 
( Figure 14–7 ), regulates  AMH gene expression. The human AMH 
receptor gene maps to the q13 band of chromosome 12. The 
receptor is similar to other type II receptors of the TGF-β family. 
 The differentiation of the Wolffian duct is mediated by testos-
terone (T) secretion from the testis. SF-1 regulates steroidogenesis 
by the Leydig cell in the testes by binding to the promoter of the 
genes encoding P450 side chain cleavage enzyme (P450scc) and 
17α-hydroxylase (P450c17). In the presence of an ovary or in the 
absence of a functional fetal testis, Müllerian duct differentiation 
occurs, and the Wolffian ducts involute ( see Figure 14–6 ). 
 Differentiation of External Genitalia 
( Figure 14–8 ) 
 Up to the eighth week of fetal life, the external genitalia of both 
sexes are identical and have the capacity to differentiate into the 
genitalia of either sex. Female sex differentiation occurs in the 
presence of an ovary or streak gonads or if no gonad is present ( see 
Figure 14–8 ). The fetal ovary does not secrete sex steroids during 
gestation or AMH during the critical period of female differentia-
tion of the genital ducts and external genitalia. Studies in the past 
have indicated that the fetal adrenal gland is 3β-HSD-2 (3 beta-
hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-2) deficient and secretes primarily 
DHEA-S (dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate) until late in gestation. 
DHEA-S is converted by the placenta to DHEA which is metabo-
lized to T. T is aromatized to estrogen, thereby preventing the 
exposure of the female external genitalia to high levels of T/
dihydrotestosterone (DHT). Placental aromatase activity is low from 
8 to 12 weeks of gestation but increases markedly after the first 
trimester ( Figure 14–9 ). Recent studies indicate that the normal 
female genitalia are protected from androgen exposure early in 
gestation (8-12 weeks), a stage when placental aromatase activity 
is relatively low. Sex differentiation of the external genitalia is 
occurring by the transient expression of 3β-HSD-2 in the fetal 
adrenal, resulting in cortisol secretion, and consequently relative 
suppression of both adrenocorticotropin (ACTH) and DHEA-S 
secretion with a resultant decrease in placental testosterone syn-
thesis and secretion. Adrenally derived androgen levels appear to 
be the same during this period in both males and females. After 
12 weeks of gestation, 3β-HSD-2 activity diminishes in the fetal 
adrenal which leads to an increase in ACTH and DHEA-S secre-
tion. Testosterone is now converted by the increased placental 
aromatase to estrogen. In addition, androgen receptor activity 
diminishes in the labioscrotal folds, and excess androgen exposure 
after 12 to 14 weeks gestation results in only clitoromegaly, but 
not labioscrotal fusion. Thus, the transient expression of 3β-HSD-2 
and the consequent ability of the fetal adrenal gland to transiently 
synthesize cortisol, as well as the decrease in androgen receptor 
activity in genital skin protects the female external genitalia from 
masculinization during the window of dimorphic differentiation 
of the external genitalia. 
 Differentiation of the external genitalia along male lines 
depends on the action of DHT, the 5α-reduced metabolite of T. 
In the male fetus, T is secreted by the Leydig cells, autonomously 
at first and later under the influence of human chorionic gonad-
otropin (hCG), and later fetal pituitary luteinizing hormone 
(LH). Masculinization of the external genitalia and urogenital 
sinus of the fetus results from the action of DHT, which is syn-
thesized from T in the target cells by the enzyme 5α-reductase-2 
as well as possibly secreted by the testes via the  backdoor pathway 
( Figure 14–10 ). This pathway was first found in marsipials and 
then implicated in patients with P450 oxidoreductase (POR) 
deficiency. This backdoor pathway synthesizes DHT, a nonaro-
matized androgen, without utilizing T as a precursor. This path-
way may play a signifcant role in male differentiation; however, 
further studies are necessary to define this. 
 DHT (as well as T) is bound to a specific protein receptor in 
the nucleus of the target cell ( Figure 14–11 ). The transformed 
steroid-receptor complex dimerizes and binds with high affinity to 
specific DNA domains, initiating DNA-directed, RNA-mediated 
transcription. This results in androgen-induced proteins that lead 
to differentiation and growth of the cell. The gene that encodes 
the intracellular androgen-binding protein has been localized to 
the paracentromeric portion of the long arm of the X chromosome 
( see Figure 14–2 ). Of note, an X-linked gene controls the andro-
gen response of all somatic cell types by specifying the androgen 
receptor protein. As noted previously, there is a decrease in andro-
gen receptor activity in the labioscrotal folds after 12 to 14 weeks 
so that even with intense T/DHT stimulation, labioscrotal fusion 
does not occur although growth of the genital tubercle can con-
tinue resulting in clitoromegaly in females and penile enlargement 
in males. 
 Incomplete masculinization of the male fetus results from (1) 
impairment in the synthesis or secretion of fetal T and/or DHT 
(3α-HSD-3 deficiency) or the conversion of T to DHT 
Anus
Labioscrotal
swelling
Genital tubercle
Urogenital slit
Urethral fold
Urogenital sinus
Uterovaginal canal
Wolffian duct
Mesonephoros
Genital
ligament
Gonad
Fimbria
Müllerian
duct
A.  INDIFFERENT STAGE
B.  FEMALE DEVELOPMENT
C.  MALE DEVELOPMENT
Bladder
Bladder
Cavernous urethra
Gubernaculum
Prostate
Vaginal rudiment
(prostatic utricle)
Membranous urethra
Seminal vesicle
Vestibular glands
(Bartholin)
Clitoris
Gartner duct
Urethral meatus
Vaginal orifice
Round ligament
Epoophoron
Paroophoron
Uterine tube
Ovarian
ligament
Ovary
Hydatid
Vas deferens
Gubernaculum
Testis
Hydatid
(appendix testis)
Aberrant
ductule
Epididymis
Efferent
ductules
Mesonephros
Gartner
duct
Wolffian duct
Urogenital sinus
23 mm
Genital tubercle
Müllerian duct
Gonad
Ureter
Paroophoron
Ovary
Epoophoron
Urogenital
sinus
63 mm
Bartholin
gland
Paroophoron
Ovary
Epoophoron
Wolffian duct
Seminal vesicle
Skene
gland
162 mm
Appendix testis
Testis
Prostatic
utricle
Prostate
Bulbourethral gland
 FIGURE14–6  Embryonic differentiation of male and female genital ducts from Wolffian and Müllerian primordia. A. Indifferent stage showing large mesonephric body. B. Female 
ducts. Remnants of the mesonephros and Wolffian ducts are now termed the epoophoron, paroophoron, and Gartner duct. C. Male ducts before descent into the scrotum. The only 
Müllerian remnant is the testicular appendix. The prostatic utricle (vagina masculina) is derived from the urogenital sinus.  (Modified from Corning HK, Lehrbuch der Entwicklungsgeschichte 
des Menschen, JF Bergmann, Munich, 1921; and Wilkins L. The diagnosis and treatment of endocrine disorders. In: Charles C, ed.  Childhood and Adolescence . 3rd ed. Thomas Publishers; 
1965.) 
487
AMH
Receptor
Sertoli cells
Testes
SF-1 + SOX9
WT-1 + GATA4
AMH gene
Leydig cells
Testosterone
AMH
SF-1
5α-reductase
Duplication of DAX-1
Müllerian duct
regression
Genes encoding
steroidogenic enzymes
Stabilization of the Wolffian ducts
Male differentiation of the urogenital
sinus and external genitalia
Androgen
receptor
DHT
 FIGURE 14–7  Hypothetical diagrammatic cascade of major genes involved in male sex differentiation  (DAX1 , DSS-AHC-critical on the
X chromosome gene 1; GATA4, transcription factor; SF-1, steroidogenic factor 1; SOX9 , SRY homeobox gene 9 ; WT1 , Wilms tumor suppressor 
gene). (Modified from Grumbach MM, Hughes IA, Conte FA. Disorders of sex differentiation. In: Larsen PR, et al, eds.  Williams Textbook of 
Endocrinology . 10th ed. WB Saunders; 2003: 842-1002.) 
Glans
Genital tubercle
Urogenital slit
Urethral folds
Labioscrotal
swelling
Anus
49 mm
45 mm
16.8 mm
Tail
Anal pit
Labioscrotal swelling
Urogenital slit
Urethral folds
Genital tubercle
Glans penis
Clitoris
Urethral meatus
Labia
  minora
Vaginal
  orifice
Labia
  majora
Scrotum
Raphe
Anus
 FIGURE 14–8  Differentiation of male and female external genitalia from bipotential primordia.  (Adapted from Spaulding MH. The develop-
ment of the external genitalia in the human embryo.  Contrib Embryol. [Carnegie Institute of Washington] 1921;13:69-88,. Reproduced with per-
mission from Grumbach MM, Hughes IA, Conte FA. Disorders of sex differentiation. In: Larsen PR, et al, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 
10th ed. WB Saunders, 2003.) 
CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation     489
(5α-reductase-2 deficiency, (2) deficient or defective androgen recep-
tor activity, or (3) defective production and local action of AMH. 
 PSYCHOSEXUAL DIFFERENTIATION 
 Psychosexual differentiation can be classified into four broad cat-
egories: (1) gender identity, defined as the identification of self as 
either male or female; (2) gender role (ie, those aspects of behavior 
in which males and females differ from one another in one’s cul-
ture at this time); (3) gender orientation, the choice of sexual 
partner; and (4) cognitive differences. 
 For much of the past 50 years, the prevailing dogma has been 
that newborns are born psychosexually neutral and that gender 
identity is imprinted postnatally by words, attitudes, family 
dynamics, and comparisons of one’s body with that of others. 
Gender identity had been hypothesized to be neutral at birth and 
not established until 12 to 18 months of age. During the last 
decade, this hypothesis has been rigorously challenged. It has 
become evident that prenatal exposure to T/DHT and possibly 
genes on the Y chromosome can influence gender identity in the 
individual with a DSD. A growing body of evidence indicates that 
gender identity is more plastic than previously thought. If, at 
puberty, discordant secondary sexual characteristics are allowed to 
mature, some individuals, especially those with 5α-reductase defi-
ciency, 45,X/46,XY mosaicism, or 17β-HSD-3 deficiency, have 
had doubts about their gender identity and have chosen to change 
their assigned sex from female to male . However, in general, it has 
been demonstrated that most patients with DSD (except for those 
mentioned above) will accept their gender assignment even when 
it is not concordant with their sex chromosome constitution—a 
phenomenon which underscores both the complexity and plastic-
ity of the processes that determine gender identity. This suggests 
that androgens have a  facultative and not a  deterministic role in 
gender identity. Androgens have a significant effect on childhood 
play behavior, maternal interest, and sexual orientation. It is 
apparent that both genes and hormones (nature) and environment 
and experience (nurture) are critical factors in the development 
and maintenance of gender identity. Further studies on patients 
with ambiguous genitalia, including long-term outcomes of the 
factors influencing gender identity, gender role, and sexual activity 
in DSD patients, are critical to furthering our understanding of 
the multifaceted complexities of the differentiation of gender 
identity and to support more evidence-based guidelines for deci-
sions about sex assignment. 
 CLASSIFICATION AND NOMENCLATURE 
OF DISORDERS OF SEX DETERMINATION 
(AND DIFFERENTIATION) ( TABLE 14–1 ) 
 An International Conference on Management of Intersex was held 
in Chicago, Illinois, in 2005 because of ethical issues and patient 
Fertilization
8 wk
12 wk
ACTH
Cortisol
Male sexual
differentiation
+
AR
..........converted to estrogen in presence of aromatase (CYP19)
Cortisol
24 wk
Term
Aromatase (CYP19)
Testosterone
 FIGURE 14–9  Sex differentiation of the external genitalia of males is induced by dihydrotestosterone (DHT) which is synthesized in the 
cells of the external genitalia from fetal testicular testosterone by the enzyme 5alpha-reductase-2.  DHT may also be produced via the “back 
door pathway”. Male differentiation of the external genitalia  occurs from 8 to 12 weeks of gestation when aromatase activity of the liver and 
placenta is relatively low. During this  critical window of dimorphic sexual differentiation, the fetal adrenal transiently expresses 3β-HSD-2, result-
ing in adrenal secretion of cortisol and a consequent downregulation of fetal ACTH and T precursor (DHEA-S) secretion from the fetal adrenal as 
well as putative adrenal testosterone secretion. Thus, the female external genitalia are protected from T/DHT exposure and virilization during 
this period when aromatase activity is low. After 12 weeks of gestation, 3β-HSD-2 activity in the adrenal is extinguished until 24 weeks of gesta-
tion resulting in an increase in DHEA-S (T precursor) from the fetal adrenal. However, increased placental aromatase activity and a decrease in 
androgen receptor activity in the labioscrotal folds of 46,XX females occurs so that excess T/DHT exposure after 12 weeks of gestation results 
only in clitoromegaly.  (Modified from Hanley NA, Arlt W. The human fetal adrenal cortex and the window of sexual differentiation.  Trends 
Endocrinol Metab . 2006;17:391.) 
5α-reductase-1
 AKRCs
CYP17
POR
 AKR1Cs
17β-HSD-3
‘Backdoor’
Placenta
External genitalia
StAR
P450scc
CYP17
POR
CYP17
POR, b5
SULT2A1
17β-HSD-6
Aromatase
3β-HSD-2
3β-HSD-1 & 2
3β-HSD-1 & 2
CYP17
POR
3β-HSD-1
17β-HSD-1
17β-HSD-3
Testis
Fetal adrenal
CYP21
5α-reductase-2
CYP11β1
Adrenal 8-12 wk gestation
24 wk and thereafter
17α-hydroxyprogesterone
5α-pregnane-17α-ol-3, 20-dione
Androsterone
Periphery
Androstanediol
5α-pregnane-3α, 17α-diol-20-one
Cholesterol
Pregnenolone
Progesterone
17α-hydroxypregnenolone
11-deoxycortisol
Dihydro-
testosterone
Cortisol
Androstenedione
Testosterone
Estradiol
‘Periphery’
DHEA
Androstenedione
Testosterone
Aromatase
DHEAS
FIGURE 14–10 The enzymatic pathway of testosterone synthesis in the adrenal and testes is shown in blue on the left. A backdoor pathway first described by Wilson and Auchus from 
studies in marsupials is shown on the right. This pathway utilizes 17-OH progesterone to synthesize dihydrotestosterone independent of testosterone synthesis. The backdoor pathway as 
well as traditional testosterone synthesis by the fetal testis may be essential for normal male external genitalia differentiation. It has been suggested that virilization in 46,XX individuals 
with CAH (such as 21-hydroxylase, 11-hydroxylase, P450 oxidoreductase, and possibly 3β-HSD-2 deficiency) who have elevated levels of 17-OH progesterone in utero may involve DHT syn-
thesis via the backdoor pathway. The fetal adrenal is relatively 3β-HSD-2 deficient from 12 to 24 weeks of gestation and DHEA-S is primarily secreted and converted in the liver to 16-OH 
DHEAS. DHEA-S is converted by placental sulfatase to DHEA which then is metabolized to T and subsequently to estradiol by placental aromatase. Similarly, 16OH-DHEAS is aromatized to 
estriol. Androstenedione can be directly converted to estrone by (3α-HSD-3 (AKRCs), 3-alpha-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-3; b5, cytochrome b5; 3β-HSD-1, 3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehy-
drogenase type 1; 3β-HSD-2, 3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2; 17β-HSD-1, 17-beta hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1; 17β-HSD-3, 17-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 
type 3; CY17, CYP21, 21 hydroxylase; CYP11B1, 11 hydroxylase;17hydroxylase; DHEA, dehydroepiandrosterone; P450scc, P450 side chain cleavage; POR, P450 oxidoreductase; StAR, ste-
roidogenic acute regulatory protein; Sulf2A1, sulfatase).
490
CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation     491
concerns about the venerable but antiquated terms  intersex, 
pseudohermaphrodite, true hermaphrodite , and so forth, which were 
perceived by patients as pejorative. A new nomenclature was pro-
posed and accepted. The term, disorders of sexual development 
(DSD), connoting all conditions in which chromosomal, gonadal, 
or anatomic sex are atypical, was coined. (See Lee PA et al for the 
complete consensus statement.) 
 DSDs are the result of abnormalities in complex processes that 
originate in genetic information on the X and Y chromosomes as 
well as on the autosomes. A 46,XY DSD (previously male her-
maphrodite) is one whose gonads are exclusively testes in origin 
but whose genital ducts or external genitalia (or both) exhibit 
incomplete masculinization. A 46,XX DSD (previously female 
hermaphrodite) is a person whose gonadal tissue is exclusively 
HSP
Androgen-response
element
DNA
binding
Ligand binding
Testosterone
DHT
Coactivator
recruitment
Dimerization and
phosphorylation
Androgen-responsive cell
Target gene activation
Biological responses
AR
AR
HSP
AR
P
P
AR
AR
P
P
AR
GTA
ARA70
SHBG
5α-reductase
 FIGURE 14–11  Diagrammatic representation of the mechanism of action of testosterone on target cells. Testosterone (T) circulates in 
association with sex hormone–binding globulin (SHBG) but dissociates to enter the cells, where it is either 5α-reduced to dihydrotestosterone 
(DHT) or aromatized to estradiol (E2). Dihydrotestosterone binds to the androgen receptor (AR) in the cytoplasm and activates it with the 
release of heat shock proteins (HSP). The activated AR complex is then translocated to the nucleus, where it binds as a dimer to specific hor-
mone response elements of the DNA and, along with coactivators (eg, ARA), initiates transcription, leading to protein synthesis with conse-
quent androgenic effects.  (Redrawn and modified from Feldman BJ, Feldman D. The development of androgen-independent prostate cancer. 
 Nat Rev Cancer . 2001;1:34.) 
492    CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation
TABLE 14–1 Classification of disorders of sex development.
I.  Sex chromosome DSD (disorders of gonadal differentiation)
   A. Seminiferous tubule dysgenesis and its variants (Klinefelter 
   syndrome) : 46,XX testicular DSD
    1. 46,XX males, SRY positive
    2. 46,XX males, SRY negative
    3. SOX9 duplication
    4. RSPO1 mutation
    5. SOX3 mutation
   B. Syndrome of gonadal dysgenesis and its variants (Turner 
   syndrome)
   C. Complete and incomplete forms of XX and XY gonadal 
   dysgenesis
   D. Individuals with both testicular and ovarian tissue: ovotesticular 
   DSD (true hermaphroditisma)
   E. 46,XY ovarian DSD–Fertile 46,XY female; MAP3K4 mutation
II.  46,XX DSD (female pseudohermaphrodisma)
   A. Androgen induced
    1. Fetal source
     a. Congenital virilizing adrenal hyperplasia (defective 
      21-hydroxylation, 11β-hydroxylation, 3β-hydroxysteroid 
      dehydrogenase-2, P450 oxidoreductase (POR)
     b. Glucocorticoid receptor mutation
    2. Fetoplacental source
     a.  P450 aromatase deficiency
     b.  P450 oxidoreductase deficiency (affecting aromatase)
    3. Maternal source
     a. Iatrogenic
       i. Testosterone and related steroids
      ii. Certain synthetic oral progestagens
     b. Virilizing ovarian or adrenal tumor
     c. Virilizing luteoma of pregnancy
     d. Congenital virilizing adrenal hyperplasia in motherb
   B. Non–androgen-induced
    1. Disturbances in differentiation of urogenital structures 
   
associated with malformations of intestine and lower urinary 
   
tract (non–androgen-induced XX, DSD) (eg, cloacal anomalies, 
   
Müllerian agenesis [MURCS], vaginal atreasia, labial adhesions)
III. 46, XY DSD (male pseudohermaphrodisma)
   A. hCG/LH receptor mutation (Leydig cell agenesis or hypoplasia)
   B. Inborn errors of testosterone biosynthesis
    1. Enzyme deficits affecting synthesis of both corticosteroids and 
   
 testosterone (variants of congenital adrenal hyperplasia)
     a. StAR deficiency (congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia): 
      side chain (P450scc) cleavage deficiency
     b. 3β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-2 deficiency
     c. P450c17 (17α-hydroxylase) deficiency
     d. P450 oxidoreductase deficiency
     e. 7-dehydrocholesterol reductase deficiency 
      (Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome)
    2. Enzyme defects primarily affecting testosterone biosynthesis 
    
by the testes
     a. P450c17 (17,20-lyase) deficiency
     b. 17β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-3 deficiency
   3. Enzyme defects affecting DHT synthesis
     a. 5α-Reductase-2 deficiency (pseudovaginal perineoscrotal 
      hypospadias) (peripheral)
   C. Defects in androgen-dependent target tissues
    1. End-organ resistance to androgenic hormones (androgen 
    
receptor and postreceptor defects)
     a. Syndrome of complete androgen resistance and its 
      variants (testicular feminization and its variant forms)
     b. Syndrome of partial androgen resistance and its variants 
      (Reifenstein syndrome)
     c. Androgen resistance in infertile men
     d. Androgen resistance in fertile men
   D. Dysgenetic 46,XY DSD
    1. XY gonadal dysgenesis (incomplete)
    2. XO/XY mosaicism, SRY mutation structurally abnormal Y 
  
  
chromosome, Xp+ (DAX-1 dupl.), 9p−, 10q−
    3. Denys-Drash, Frasier syndrome (WT-1 mutation)
    4. WAGR syndrome (WT-1 deletion)
    5. Campomelic dysplasia (SOX9 mutation)
    6. SF-1 mutation
    7. WNT-4 duplication
    8. DHH (mutation)
    9. ATRX syndrome (XH2 mutation)
   10. ARX mutation
   11. CBX2 mutationc
   12. MAP3K4 mutation
   13. Testicular regression syndrome
   14. GATA4 mutation
   15. FOG2 mutation
   E. Defects in synthesis, secretion, or response to AMH
   1. Female genital ducts in otherwise normal men—herniae 
   
uteri inguinale; persistent Müllerian duct syndrome
   F. Environmental chemicals (endocrine disrupters)
IV. Unclassified forms of disorders of sexual development
   A. In males
    1. Hypospadias: MAMLD-1 mutation
    2. Aphallia
    3. Ambiguous external genitalia in 46,XY males with 
    
multiple congenital anomalies
    4. Intrauterine growth retardation with incomplete 
    
masculinization of external genitalia
    5. Cloacal exstrophy
    6. Panoply of syndromes associated with incomplete 
    
masculinization of external genitalia (Robinow, Aarskog, 
    
hand-foot-genital, etc)
   B. In females
    1. Absence or anomalous development of the vagina, 
    
uterus, and Müllerian ducts (Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser 
    
[MRKH] syndrome) (WNT-4 mutation rare)
aThese terms are previous terminology and are no longer recommended; they should be abandoned. They are listed in parentheses during this transition period.
bIn pregnant patient with CAH whose disorder is poorly controlled or who is noncompliant especially during the first trimester.
cThe patient reported had strikingly elevated gonadotropins in infancy and only sparse primordial follicles on biopsy at 4 years of age suggesting gonadal dysgenesis.
Modified from Grumbach MM, Conte FA. Disorders of sex differentiation. In: Wilson JD, Foster DW, Kronenberg HM, Larsen PR, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology. 9th ed.
WB Saunders; 1998: 1303-1425.
CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation     493
ovarian in origin but whose genital development exhibits ambigu-
ous or even a male appearance. Persons who possess both ovarian 
and testicular tissue were previously referred to as true hermaph-
rodites and now called ovotesticular DSD. 
 KLINEFELTER SYNDROME AND ITS 
VARIANTS: SEMINIFEROUS TUBULE 
DYSGENESIS—SEX CHROMOSOME DSD 
(SEE ALSO CHAPTER 12) 
 Klinefelter syndrome is one of the most common forms of pri-
mary hypogonadism and infertility in males. Surveys of the preva-
lence of 47,XXY fetuses by karyotype analysis of unselected 
newborn infants indicate a prevalence of about 1:700 newborn 
males. However, there is a striking disparity between the preva-
lence diagnosed at birth by karyotype screening and the frequency 
of Klinefelter syndrome identified in adults. It has been estimated 
that only 25% of individuals with Klinefelter syndrome are diag-
nosed during life and less than 10% in childhood. This most likely 
is due to the broad spectrum of phenotypes, testicular function, 
and psychosocial status found in patients with this syndrome. 
Ninety percent of affected patients have a 47,XXY sex chromo-
some constitution and an X chromatin-positive buccal smear, the 
rest demonstrate a variety of sex chromosome constitutions, 
including mosaicism. Virtually all of these variants have at least 
two X chromosomes and a Y chromosome in common, except for 
the rare group that has only an XX sex chromosome complement 
(3%-4%). 
 Hormonal levels are variable, and T levels may be in the low-
normal to normal range. In addition, variability in phenotype can 
result in part from sex chromosome mosaicism with a normal XY 
cell line as well as variability in androgen sensitivity. The androgen 
receptor is a ligand-dependent transcription factor that has a poly-
morphism involving CAG (glutamine) trinucleotide repeats. The 
longer the length of the CAG repeat, the less the transactivation 
activity of the ligand-bound receptor. In a study of 35 patients 
with Klinefelter syndrome, the one genetic factor affecting pheno-
type was the CAG repeat length of the functional androgen recep-
tor. The repeat lengths correlated inversely with penile length, a 
T-sensitive organ. Neither an effect of parental origin of the X 
chromosome (imprinting) nor evidence of skewed X chromosome 
inactivation affected the phenotype. In a study of 77 patients with 
Klinefelter syndrome, preferential inactivation of the shorter CAG 
allele was detected. 
 The most consistent feature of Klinefelter syndrome is small 
atrophic testes due to seminiferous tubule dysgenesis and conse-
quent azoospermia. Tall stature is common in Klinefelter syn-
drome, reflecting the presence of three  SHOX genes. Adult males 
with a 47, XXY karyotype tend to be taller than average, with 
adult height close to the 75th percentile, mainly because of the 
disproportionate length of their legs, which is present prepuber-
tally. Untreated adult males, especially those with subnormal sex 
steroid levels, are at increased risk of osteoporosis. In addition, 
individuals with Klinefelter syndrome have an increased prevalence of 
mild diabetes mellitus, autoimmune thyroid disorders, early tooth 
decay, varicose veins, stasis dermatitis, cerebrovascular disease, 
chronic pulmonary disease, deep vein thrombosis, carcinoma of 
the breast, midline germ cell tumors, and Hodgkin lymphoma. 
The data on carcinoma of the breast are controversial. There were 
no cases in a cohort of 696 men with Klinefelter  syndrome from 
the Danish cytogenetic register; however, 7 of 93 men with breast 
cancer in a Swedish study had Klinefelter syndrome. Life expec-
tancy is reduced by about 2.1 years over controls, with a lower 
death rate than expected from ischemic heart disease and prostate 
cancer. 
 Prepubertally, Klinefelter syndrome is characterized by small 
undescended testes (> 25% of patients), relatively reduced penile 
length, clinodactyly, hypotonia, disproportionately long legs, per-
sonality and behavioral disorders, and a lower mean verbal IQ 
score. There is no significant difference in full-scale IQ. Deficits 
are found primarily in specific areas of cognition such as language 
and problem solving. Severe mental retardation requiring special 
schooling is uncommon. Gynecomastia and signs of androgen 
deficiency such as diminished facial and body hair, a small phallus, 
and poor muscular development occur postpubertally in affected 
patients. 
 Patients with Klinefelter syndrome may have delayed adoles-
cence although a recent study suggested that the onset of puberty 
and early progression were relatively normal. There is an increased 
risk of malignant extragonadal germ cell tumors in the central 
nervous system, mediastinum, and sacral region. The germ cell 
tumors often secrete hCG and cause sexual precocity in the 
affected prepubertal individual. Accordingly, we recommend that 
boys with hCG-secreting midline germ cell tumors have a karyo-
type analysis. 
 The testicular lesion is progressive and gonadotropin dependent. 
Gonadal germ cells become depleted at an accelerated rate after the 
onset of puberty, and there appears to be a maturation arrest of sper-
matogenesis. The testes are characterized in the adult by extensive 
seminiferous tubular hyalinization and fibrosis, absent or severely 
deficient spermatogenesis, and pseudoadenomatous clumping of the 
Leydig cells. Although hyalinization of the tubules is usually exten-
sive, it varies considerably from patient to patient and even between 
testes in the same patient. Azoospermia is the rule; patients reported 
to be spontaneously fertile invariably have been 46,XY/47,XXY 
mosaics. Using surgical techniques, sperm has been found in 50% of 
the  nonmosaic patients with Klinefelter syndrome. In biopsied testes 
of patients with 47,XXY Klinefelter syndrome, only a minor fraction 
of tubules contain germ cells. FISH analysis revealed that the sper-
matocytes were euploid, suggesting that the spermatogonia that 
undergo mitosis have only one X chromosome thus allowing for 
progression in cell differentiation and the ability to engage in meio-
sis. Intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) with sperm retrieved 
surgically from testes (TESE) of patients with Klinefelter syndrome 
has been used with success for ovum fertilization. Using ICSI, most 
infants born to fathers with Klinefelter syndrome have had normal 
karyotypes. However, there is an increased incidence of sex chromo-
some and autosomal aneuploidy, possibly related to the assisted fer-
tility technique (ART). Preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) is 
recommended. However, the potential risk to the embryo of PGD 
494    CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation
must be weighed against the risk of chorionic villus biopsy or amnio-
centesis in the event of a successful pregnancy. 
 Nondisjunction during the first or second meiotic division of 
gametogenesis plays an important role in the genesis of a 47,XXY 
karyotype. Fifty-three percent of cases appear to result from pater-
nal nondisjunction at the first meiotic division, 34% from meiotic 
nondisjunction during the first maternal meiotic division, and 9% 
from nondisjunction at the second meiotic division. Only 3% of 
patients appear to have arisen from postzygotic mitotic nondis-
junction. Early studies suggested that parental age was a factor in 
the etiology of Klinefelter syndrome, but in a study of 228 
patients, no association with advanced parental age was found. 
 Diagnosis: Klinefelter syndrome is suggested by the classic 
phenotype and hormonal changes. It is confirmed by the finding 
of an X chromatin-positive buccal smear or an FISH analysis 
which demonstrates an XXY constitution or the demonstration of 
a 47,XXY karyotype in blood, skin, or gonads. After puberty, 
levels of serum gonadotropins especially follicle-stimulating hor-
mone (FSH) are raised. The T production rate, the total and free 
levels of T, and the metabolic clearance rates of T and estradiol 
tend to be low, whereas plasma estradiol levels are relatively 
normal or high for a male. Testicular biopsy reveals the classic 
findings of hyalinization of the seminiferous tubules, severe defi-
ciency of spermatogonia, and pseudoadenomatous clumping of 
Leydig cells. 
 Hormonal evaluation in the newly diagnosed patient with 
Klinefelter syndrome should include plasma LH and FSH by 
immunochemiluminescence (ICMA). These levels are usually in 
the normal range prior to the onset of puberty. Thereafter, a rise 
in FSH and subsequently LH is usually observed. A plasma estra-
diol and T by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry 
(LCMSMS) should be obtained. In the adolescent or postadoles-
cent patient, a bone density is indicated to determine whether the 
patient has osteopenia/osteoporosis and requires therapy for this. 
 Treatment: Treatment in adolescents and adults with Klinefelter 
syndrome should be directed toward health maintenance and the 
options for fertility (eg, cryopreservation of sperm from ejaculate in 
adolescence or TESE in older patients, T replacement if necessary, 
and prevention of osteopenia/osteoporosis and deep vein thrombo-
sis). Klinefelter patients are born with spermatogonia, and testicular 
failure is progressive beginning at puberty. Obtaining ejaculated 
sperm in early adolescence for cryopreservation, if possible, might 
obviate the need for TESE at a later time. Although several studies 
have reported that sperm have been found in 8% of ejaculated serum 
sample fron nonmosaic 47,XXY patients, a recent study reported 
lack of sperm in samples from 13 patients less than 20 years of age. 
Because of the progressive nature of testicular failure which occurs 
after the onset of puberty, surgical sperm retrieval is less successful 
with advancing age. T therapy in the hypogonadal patient will 
enhance secondary sexual characteristics and sexual performance, 
increase muscle mass, prevent or help ameliorate osteopenia/osteo-
porosis and possibly prevent the development of gynecomastia. If T 
deficiency is evident in adolescence, therapy with T enanthate in oil 
at a dose of 50 mg intramuscularly monthly may be initiated. 
Alternatively, testosterone by patch or gel may be used. The plasma 
concentration of T can be assessed midway between injections, and 
the doses gradually increased to attain a level in the mid-normal 
range for stage of development and/or age. 
 In the adult patient, transdermal T by patch or gel can be used 
for replacement therapy. T levels can be assessed 1 week after the 
start of therapy and adjusted to maintain levels in the mid-normal 
range for age. Patients should be informed of the possibility of 
deep vein thrombosis and the T discontinued if the hematocrit 
rises above 54% because of the risk of hypercoagulability associ-
ated with elevated hematocrit levels. If gynecomastia is present 
and is not ameliorated by T therapy, surgical reduction is required 
if it is psychologically disturbing to the patient. 
 Early diagnosis with remedial therapy for speech and behavior 
problems, counseling for the patient and parents, as well as 
 support group services appears to improve the well being and over-
all quality of life in patients diagnosed with Klinefelter syndrome. 
 Variants of Chromatin-Positive 
Seminiferous Tubule Dysgenesis 
 Variants of Klinefelter syndrome  Variants of Klinefelter syn-
drome include 46,XY/47,XXY mosaics as well as patients with multi-
ple X and Y chromosomes. With increasing numbers of X chromosomes 
in the genome, both mental retardation and other developmental 
anomalies such as radioulnar synostosis become prevalent. 
 46,XX males (46,XX testicular DSD)  Phenotypic males with a 
46,XX karyotype have been described since 1964; the incidence of 
46,XX males is approximately 1:20,000 births. In general, these indi-
viduals have a male phenotype, male psychosocial gender identity, and 
testes with histologic features similar to those observed in patients 
with a 47,XXY karyotype. At least 10% of patients have hypospadias 
or ambiguous external genitalia, primarily those patients who are SRY 
negative. 46,XX males have normal body proportions and a mean 
final height that is shorter than that of patients with a 47,XXY sex 
chromosome constitution or normal males but taller than that of 
normal females. There is a higher incidence of undescended testes in 
46,XX males than in 47,XXY patients. As in 47,XXY individuals, T levels 
are low or low-normal, gonadotropins are elevated, and spermatogen-
esis is impaired postpubertally. Gynecomastia is more frequent than 
that observed in 47,XXY males. 
 Males with a 46,XX karyotype have acquired one X chromosome 
from each of their parents. Approximately 90% of XX males have 
a Y chromosome–specific DNA segment from the distal portion 
of the Y short arm translocated to the distal portion of the short 
arm of the paternal X chromosome. This translocated segment is 
variable in length but always includes the  SRY gene, which 
encodes testis-determining factor as well as the pseudoautosomal 
region of the Y chromosome. Thus, in at least 90% of XX males, 
an abnormal X-Y terminal exchange during paternal meiosis has 
resulted in two products: an X chromosome with an  SRY gene and 
a Y chromosome deficient in this gene (the latter would result in 
a female with XY gonadal dysgenesis). Fewer than 10% of XX 
males tested have lacked Y chromosome–specific DNA sequences 
(including the  SRY gene) and the pseudoautosomal region of the 
Y chromosome. These XX, SRY-negative males tend to have 
hypospadias and may have relatives with ovotesticular DSD. 
CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation     495
 The finding of XX males who lack any evidence of Y chromo-
some–specific genes suggests that testicular determination—and, 
thus, male differentiation—can occur in the absence of a gene or 
genes from the Y chromosome. This could be a result of (1) muta-
tion (upregulation) or duplication of a  downstream autosomal 
gene involved in male sex determination (eg, SOX9 which if 
duplicated in a 46,XX individual causes sex reversal both in mice 
and humans); or (2) mutation, deletion, or aberrant inactivation 
of a gene sequence, which causes repression of testis determina-
tion. Two families with multiple 46,XX phenotypically normal 
males who had palmoplantar hyperkeratosis and a predisposition 
to squamous cell carcinomas have been reported. All affected 
males had a homozygous deletion of 2700 base pairs of the 
 R-spondin1 gene.  RSPO1 , an ovary-determining gene, has no role 
in testes determination as evidenced by the description of a 46,XY 
male with a homozygous mutation of  RSPO1 who had normal 
testicular function; or (3) circumscribed Y chromosome mosa-
icism (eg, occurring only in the gonads); (4) A 46,XX SRY nega-
tive male has recently been described with a mutation in SOX3. 
SOX3 is a member of the SRY HMG box family of genes and is 
found on the X chromosome at Xp26-27. This mutation is postu-
lated to cause aberrant expression of SOX3 in gonadal primordia 
and thereby upregulating SOX9 expression resulting in testicular 
determination. 
 SYNDROME OF GONADAL DYSGENESIS: 
TURNER SYNDROME AND ITS VARIANTS 
 Turner Syndrome: 45,X Gonadal 
Dysgenesis 
 One in 2000 to 2500 newborn females have an absence of a sec-
ond sex chromosome (either an X or Y), a structural rearrange-
ment of the X chromosome, and/or mosaicism. Patients with a 
45,X karyotype represent approximately 50% of all patients with 
X chromosome abnormalities. It has been estimated that 99% of 
45,X fetuses do not survive beyond 28 weeks of gestation probably 
related to congenital heart anomalies, and 15% of all first-trimester 
abortuses have a 45,X karyotype. In about 70% to 80% of 45,X 
individuals, the X chromosome is of maternal origin. 
 The cardinal features of 45,X gonadal dysgenesis are a variety 
of somatic anomalies, sexual infantilism at puberty secondary to 
gonadal dysgenesis, and short stature. Patients with a 45,X karyo-
type can be recognized in infancy, usually because of lymphedema 
of the extremities and loose skin folds over the nape of the neck. 
In later life, the typical patient is often recognizable by her distinc-
tive facies in which micrognathia, epicanthal folds, prominent 
low-set ears, a fish-like mouth, and ptosis are present to varying 
degrees. The chest is shield-like, and the neck is short, broad, and 
webbed (40% of patients). Additional anomalies associated with 
Turner syndrome include renal abnormalities (30%), pigmented 
nevi, cubitus valgus, congenital hip subluxation, a tendency to 
keloid formation, lymphedema of the lower extremities or puffi-
ness of the dorsum of the hands and feet, short fourth metacarpals 
and metatarsals, Madelung deformity of the wrist, scoliosis, and 
recurrent otitis media, which may lead to conductive hearing loss. 
The high prevalence of otitis media is a consequence of an abnor-
mal relationship between the Eustachian tube and the middle ear. 
Sensorineural hearing loss increases with age and is present in 61% 
of women with Turner syndrome over 35 years of age. All patients 
should have routine periodic auditory screening. 
 Patients with Turner syndrome have an increased prevalence of 
cardiovascular anomalies. The incidence of bicuspid aortic valves 
diagnosed by echocardiography has varied between 9% and 34%. 
A bicuspid aortic valve is a risk factor for subacute bacterial endo-
carditis. With age there is an increased tendency for a stenotic 
and/or insufficient aortic valve. Coarctation of the aorta is present 
in 10% of patients, especially individuals with a webbed neck. 
Bicuspid aortic valves, coarctation, aortic dilation, and hyperten-
sion are critical risk factors for aneurysm formation and death due 
to aortic rupture. Thus, all patients with Turner syndrome should 
have a complete cardiac evaluation by a cardiologist at diagnosis as 
well as periodic follow-up echocardiography or magnetic reso-
nance imaging (MRI) as necessary to monitor aortic diameter and 
cardiovascular status. Routine intravenous urography or renal 
sonography is indicated to detect a surgically correctable renal 
abnormality. The most common renal anomalies are a horseshoe 
kidney, duplication of the renal pelvis and ureter, and hydroneph-
rosis secondary to uteropelvic obstruction. Complete absence of a 
kidney and gross renal ectopia have been reported. The internal 
ducts as well as the external genitalia of these patients are invari-
ably female except in rare patients with a 45,X karyotype, in 
whom a Y-to-autosome or Y-to-X chromosome translocation or 
cryptic mosaicism for a Y-containing cell line has been found. 
 Short stature is an invariable feature of the syndrome of gonadal 
dysgenesis. Mean final height in 45,X patients is 143 cm, with a 
range of 133 to 153 cm. Short stature found in patients with the 
syndrome of gonadal dysgenesis is not due to a deficiency of growth 
hormone (GH), insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I), sex steroids, or 
thyroid hormone. It is related, at least in part, to haploinsufficiency 
of the  SHOX gene in the pseudoautosomal region of the X and Y 
chromosome (see earlier sections). The administration of high-dose 
recombinant human GH leads to an increase in final height. 
 Gonadal dysgenesis is a cardinal feature of patients with a 45,X 
chromosome constitution. The gonads at adolescence are typically 
streak-like and usually contain only fibrous stroma arranged in 
whorls. Longitudinal studies of both basal and gonadotropin-
releasing hormone (GnRH)-evoked gonadotropin secretion in 
patients with gonadal dysgenesis indicate a lack of feedback inhi-
bition of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis by the dysgenetic gonads 
in affected infants and adolescents ( Figure 14–12 ). Plasma and 
urinary gonadotropin levels, particularly FSH levels, are high dur-
ing early infancy and after 9 to 10 years of age. Because ovarian 
function is impaired, puberty does not usually ensue spontane-
ously; sexual infantilism is a hallmark of this syndrome. Rarely, 
patients with a 45,X karyotype may undergo spontaneous puber-
tal maturation, menarche, and even pregnancy. It has been sug-
gested that measurable levels of inhibin B may indicate the 
presence of functional follicles and the possibility of spontaneous 
pubertal development while low levels of AMH might herald 
ovarian failure. A variety of other disorders are associated with this 
496    CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation
syndrome, including obesity, nonosteoporotic fractures in child-
hood and osteoporotic fractures in adulthood, congenital disloca-
tion of the hip, type 2 diabetes mellitus, an increased number of 
melanocytic nevi but no increase in melanoma, orthodontic prob-
lems, Hashimoto thyroiditis, rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory 
bowel disease, intestinal telangiectasia with bleeding, hyperten-
sion, coeliac disease, ischemic heart disease, stroke, and anorexia 
nervosa. Abnormal liver enzymes with elevation of transaminases, 
alkaline phosphatase, and gamma-glutaryl transferase have been 
reported in more than 50% of adults. Most patients with Turner 
syndrome have normal intelligence. Only a small percentage of 
patients have significant developmental delay. However, 70% have 
learning disabilities involving spatial relationships, nonverbal 
problem-solving, and attention. Early testing and remediation is 
recommended, as well as psychologic support. 
 Diagnosis: Phenotypic females with the following features 
should have a karyotype analysis: (1) short stature (>2.5 standard 
deviations [SDs] below the mean value for age) with or without 
somatic anomalies associated with the syndrome of gonadal dysgen-
esis; and (2) delayed adolescence with an increased concentration of 
plasma FSH; (3) patients with clinical findings suggestive of Turner 
syndrome (eg, lymphedema of hands or feet, left-sided cardiac 
anomalies, characteristic facies, short fourth metacarpals, etc). 
 The initial evaluation of a patient with Turner syndrome should 
include karyotype analysis as well as FISH of 200 cells to rule out 
mosaicism or the presence of a Y chromosome in individuals with a 
45,X karyotype and in those in whom a small nonidentifiable marker 
chromosome is present. A renal ultrasound is indicated to rule out 
surgically correctable anomalies. A cardiac evaluation with echocardio-
gram or MRI should be done to evaluate aortic size and rule out 
coarctation of the aorta and an anomaly of the aortic valve. Besides 
routine chemistries, gonadotropins, AMH (provides an estimate of the 
number of antral follicles), and inhibin B should be assessed in order 
to determine the status of the gonads. Periodic assessment of the 
cardiac status, especially in those with bicuspid aortic valves and/or 
hypertension, is indicated throughout the lifetime of the patient. 
Other systems which need periodic evaluation include: (1) thyroid 
function studies, (2) assessment of tissue transglutaminase activity for 
celiac disease, (3) hearing evaluation, (4) orthodontics, and (5) psycho-
social and school performance issues. In view of the increased inci-
dence of specific learning defects involving spatial relationships, 
executive skills, and so forth, it is prudent to evaluate these functions 
at 4 to 5 years of age so that appropriate remedial therapy can be 
undertaken as early as possible if warranted. 
 At adolescence, in addition to the continuing above assess-
ments, lipids, fasting glucose and insulin, and liver function 
should be assessed. Psychosocial and educational issues should 
continue to be addressed with the patient and the parents. 
 Treatment: Maximizing growth and hormone replacement at 
puberty in order to engender an orderly progressive development 
of secondary characteristics at a time concordant with peers are two 
of the main goals of therapy in patients with Turner syndrome. 
 Individuals with Turner syndrome treated with recombinant 
GH (0.375 mg/kg/wk divided into seven once-daily doses (maxi-
mum dose 15-18 mg/wk), with or without oxandrolone (0.0625 
mg/kg/d by mouth), have an increase in the rate of growth that is 
sustained and results in a mean increase in height of 7 to 10 cm 
after 3 to 7 years of therapy. The serum IGF-1 level should be fol-
lowed and the dose titered to maintain the IGF-1 level below the 
upper limit of normal for age. Beginning GH therapy earlier (as 
soon as growth failure is evident) in childhood allows for a longer 
duration of therapy which results in a greater gain in height and 
fosters initiation of estrogen replacement at an age commensurate 
with normal puberty. Before initiation of GH therapy, a thorough 
analysis of the costs, benefits, and possible side-effects must be 
discussed with the parents and the child. Significant side effects 
include: (1) the accelerated onset of diabetes mellitus in the pre-
diabetic, (2) pseudotumor cerebri, (3) slipped femoral epiphysis, 
and (4) unknown long-term side effects. The influence of the gain 
in height on any of the quality of life parameters in individuals 
Mean normal subjects
Age (y)
(2 d)
1
2 3 4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
10
20
40
60
80
100
200
210
Plasma
FSH
ng/mL
(LER 869)
(3 d)
FIGURE 14–12 Diphasic variation in basal levels of plasma follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) (ng/mL-LER 869) in patients with a 45,X 
karyotype (solid triangles) and patients with structural abnormalities of the X chromosome and mosaics (solid circles). Note that mean basal 
levels of plasma FSH in patients with gonadal dysgenesis are in the castrate range before 4 years and after 10 years of age. (Reproduced with 
permission from Conte FA, Grumbach MM, Kaplan SL. A diphasic pattern of gonadotropin secretion in patients with the syndrome of gonadal 
dysgenesis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1975;40:670.)
CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation     497
with Turner syndrome treated with GH has been questioned by 
some. There is no synergistic effect of combined estrogen replace-
ment and GH therapy on final height in this disorder. However, 
in a recent study, percutaneous estrogen administration for puber-
tal induction was associated with a 2.1 cm greater adult height 
than oral estrogen administration. These data suggest that, as 
observed in adult women, oral estrogens decrease the plasma con-
centrations of IGF-1 and suppress IGF-1’s metabolic effects. In 
patients who have been treated with GH and have achieved an 
acceptable height and in those who have refused GH therapy and 
have evidence of gonadal dysgenesis, estrogen replacement therapy 
is usually initiated after 11 to 13 years of age. 
 Increasingly, transcutaneous estrogen administration by patch or 
gel, which avoids first pass through the liver, is the treatment of choice 
to induce female secondary sexual characteristics in hypogonadal girls. 
In a study of 15 patients, an estradiol patch was placed nocturnally for 
12 hours to simulate the diurnal  pattern of estradiol secretion in early 
puberty. By cutting the 25-μg patch (Vivelle-Dot) when necessary and 
measuring serum estradiol concentrations, it was concluded that 0.08 
to 0.12 μg/kg of body weight was an appropriate starting dose of 
estradiol transcutaneously. Plasma concentrations of estradiol were 
measured in the morning and maintained in a range appropriate for 
Tanner stage by adjusting the dose. The starting dose was usually 
maintained for 9 months before increasing the dose. The aim was to 
achieve midpuberty estradiol levels by 15 months. A progestin was 
added to the estradiol within 2 years after the start of estradiol. 
 Conjugated estrogens (0.3 mg or less) or ethinyl estradiol 
(3-5 μg) can be given orally for the first 21 days of the calendar 
month. Thereafter, the dose of estrogen is gradually increased over 
the next several years to 1.25 mg of conjugated estrogens or 10 μg 
of ethinyl estradiol daily for the first 21 days of the month. The 
minimum dose of estrogen necessary to initiate and maximize 
uterine development, secondary sexual characteristics, and men-
ses, as well as to prevent osteoporosis should be administered. 
After the first 18 to 24 months of estrogen therapy, medroxypro-
gesterone acetate (5 mg) or a comparable progestin is given on the 
tenth to twenty-first days of the month to ensure physiologic 
menses and to reduce the risk of endometrial carcinoma, which is 
associated with unopposed estrogen stimulation. 
 We recommend a transition program when transferring adoles-
cent or young adult patients to an adult caregiver. Ideally, this 
program will introduce the patient to the physicians who will be 
involved in her future care which may include an internist, endo-
crinologist, reproductive endocrinologist, ENT specialist, adult 
cardiologist, and psychologist. 
 Many of the morbidities that contribute to the decrease in 
lifespan are detectable with comprehensive medical surveillance 
and are amenable to medical and/or surgical therapy. Protocols for 
the management of the adult Turner syndrome patient have been 
published (see Gravholt et al; Bondy et al; Conway in reference list 
at the end of this chapter). Individuals with Turner syndrome by 
nature are very maternal. They should be reassured about their 
sexual function and informed about their potential for maternity 
with donor eggs and in vitro fertilization in an age-appropriate 
manner. The success rate of ovum donation is 40% per treatment 
cycle, and only 50% of pregnancies achieve a live birth due to a 
high miscarriage rate. In one study, 38% of patients had preg-
nancy associated hypertensive problems. There is an increased risk 
of aortic dissections during pregnancy. Thus, all women with 
Turner syndrome who desire a pregnancy should have a careful, 
complete cardiac evaluation prior to egg implantation and close 
continued monitoring if pregnancy ensues. We recommend cae-
sarian delivery to avoid the increased stress to the cardiovascular 
system associated with labor and because of the risk of cephalopel-
vic dystocia in these women. 
 X Chromatin–Positive Variants of the 
Syndrome of Gonadal Dysgenesis 
 Patients with structural abnormalities of the X chromosome (dele-
tions and additions) and sex chromosome mosaicism with a 45,X 
cell line may manifest the somatic as well as the gonadal features 
of the syndrome of gonadal dysgenesis . Evidence suggests that 
genes on both the long and short arms of the X chromosome 
control gonadal differentiation, whereas genes primarily on the 
short arms of the X prevent the short stature and somatic anoma-
lies that are seen in 45,X patients ( see Figure 14–2 ). In general, 
45,X/46,XX mosaicism modifies the 45,X phenotype toward nor-
mal and can even result in normal gonadal function and fertility. 
Patients with duplication of the long arms of the X chromosome 
and deletion of the short arm—the so-called Xq isochromosome—
appear to have an increased prevalence of autoimmune thyroiditis, 
type 2 diabetes, and inflammatory bowel disease in comparison to 
those with a 45,X karyotype. Patients with a 46,XrX (ring) cell 
line in their karyotype may manifest mental retardation and con-
genital anomalies not usually associated with Turner syndrome. 
These abnormalities are related to lack of inactivation of small ring 
X chromosomes and, hence, functional disomy for genes on the 
ring X chromosome and the normal X chromosome. 
 X Chromatin–Negative Variants of the 
Syndrome of Gonadal Dysgenesis 
 These patients usually have mosaicism with a 45,X and a Y-bearing cell 
line—45,X/46,XY; 45,X/47,XXY; 45,X/46,XY/47,XYY—or perhaps 
a structurally abnormal Y chromosome. They range from phenotypic 
females with the features of Turner syndrome to patients with ambigu-
ous genitalia to completely normal-appearing males with few stigmas 
of Turner syndrome and short stature. The variations in gonadal dif-
ferentiation range from bilateral streaks to bilateral dysgenetic testes to 
apparently normal testes, and there may be asymmetric development 
(eg, a streak on one side and a dysgenetic testis or, rarely, a normal 
testis on the other side)—sometimes called mixed gonadal dysgenesis. 
The development of the external genitalia and of the internal ducts 
correlates with the degree of testicular differentiation and the capacity 
of the fetal testes to secrete AMH and T. 
 The risk of gonadal tumors is greatly increased in patients with 
45,X/46,XY mosaicism and streak or dysgenetic gonads; hence, 
prophylactic removal of streak gonads or dysgenetic undescended 
testes in this syndrome is indicated. Breast development at or after 
the age of puberty in these patients is commonly associated with a 
gonadal neoplasm, usually a gonadoblastoma. Pelvic sonography, 
computed tomography (CT), or MRI may be useful in screening 
498    CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation
for neoplasms in these patients. Gonadoblastomas are calcified 
and so may be visible even on a plain film of the abdomen. 
 Diagnosis: The diagnosis of 45,X/46,XY mosaicism can be 
established by the demonstration of both 45,X and 46,XY cells in 
blood, skin, or gonadal tissue. In some mosaics, a marker chromo-
some is found that is cytogenetically indistinguishable as X or Y. 
In these cases, either FISH or molecular analyses with X- and 
Y-specific probes is indicated to definitively determine the origin 
of the marker chromosome, because gonadoblastomas have been 
reported in patients with deleted Y chromosomes—even those 
with deletions of the  SRY gene. Ninety percent of patients with 
45,X/46,XY mosaicism ascertained by amniocentesis have normal 
male genitalia and normal testicular histology. Thus, the ambigu-
ity of the genitalia invariably described in patients with 45,X/46,XY 
mosaicism is due to ascertainment bias. We have observed a short 
30-year-old male with documented 45,X/46,XY mosaicism who 
has normal male genitalia and is fertile. 
 Treatment: The decision regarding the sex of rearing in this 
variant of the syndrome of gonadal dysgenesis should be based on 
the age at diagnosis and the potential for normal function of the 
external genitalia. In phenotypic females with 45,X/46,XY mosa-
icism assigned a female gender role, the dysgenetic gonads should 
be removed because of the risk of malignancy. Estrogen therapy 
should be initiated at the age of puberty, as in patients with a 
45,X karyotype (see earlier). In affected infants who are assigned 
a male gender role, all gonadal tissue except that which appears 
functionally and histologically normal and is in the scrotum 
should be removed. An excellent phallic response to T can be 
anticipated. Repair of hypospadias is also indicated. At puberty, 
depending on the functional integrity of the retained gonads, T 
replacement therapy may be indicated in doses similar to those 
prescribed for patients with the incomplete form of XY gonadal 
dysgenesis. In patients with retained scrotal testes, frequent clini-
cal examinations and ultrasonography is indicated. A gonadal 
biopsy postpubertally to rule out the possibility of carcinoma in 
situ (CIS), a premalignant lesion, should be performed. If CIS is 
present, low-dose radiation therapy or gonadectomy after sperm 
retrieval is indicated. 
 In infants and children with 45,X/46,XY mosaicism who have 
normal genitalia and normal testicular integrity as assessed by AMH, 
inhibin B, gonadotropin levels, and ultrasonography, the gonads 
should be retained and followed closely both hormonally and by ultra-
sound. In those 45,X/46,XY individuals with presumably “normal” 
testes, a gonadal biopsy should be performed, post-pubertally. If biopsy 
and sonography show no evidence of CIS, a second biopsy at 20 years 
of age is recommended. The risk of gonadal malignancies in males 
with 45,X/46,XY mosaicism, who have normal male genitalia and 
histologically and functionally normal testes in the scrotum, remains 
to be ascertained, although we hypothesize it may be no higher than 
that seen in 46,XY males. 
 Dysgenetic 46,XX and 46,XY DSD 
(46,XX and 46,XY Gonadal Dysgenesis) 
 The terms complete XX and XY gonadal dysgenesis have been 
applied to 46,XX or 46,XY patients who have bilateral streak 
gonads, a female phenotype, and no somatic stigmas of Turner 
syndrome. After the age of puberty, these patients exhibit sexual 
infantilism, castrate levels of plasma and urinary gonadotropins, 
normal or tall stature, and eunuchoid proportions. 
 Dysgenetic 46,XX DSD (46,XX Gonadal 
Dysgenesis) 
 Normal ovarian determination is dependent on X chromosomal 
genes as well as autosomal genes. Unlike the testes, the ovary 
requires the presence of germ cells in order to develop and function. 
Therefore, mutations in genes on the autosomes and X chromo-
some that affect gonadal determination (eg, DMRT1 and SF-1) as 
well as those that affect germ cell differentiation and development, 
migration into the gonadal ridge, and maturation into oocytes can 
cause XX gonadal dysgenesis. Expansion of the CAG repeat region 
of the fragile X locus can cause accelerated oocyte depletion and 
premature ovarian failure. Haploinsufficiency of  FOXL2 , a gene
on chromosome 3q23, is a cause of autosomal dominant
blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES 
type 1) and XX gonadal dysgenesis. A woman with a FOXL2 muta-
tion, but without the BPES phenotype, has been described. 
Recently, SF-1 mutations in members of four families as well as 
2/25 subjects with isolated ovarian insufficiency have extended the 
spectrum of phenotypes associated with SF-1 mutations. A multi-
plicity of genes involved in meiosis, DNA repair and folliculogenesis 
have recently been implicated as a cause of ovarian dysgenesis. 
 Familial and sporadic cases of XX gonadal dysgenesis are 
reported with an estimated incidence as high as 1:8300 females in 
Finland. Pedigree analysis of familial cases is consistent with auto-
somal recessive inheritance. Analysis of familial cases in Finland 
linked a locus on chromosome 2p to XX gonadal dysgenesis in 
females; the gene for the FSH receptor resides on chromosome 2p. 
A mutation in exon 7 of the gene encoding the FSH receptor 
segregates with XX gonadal dysgenesis. This mutation is in the 
extracellular ligand-binding domain of the FSH receptor and 
reduces the binding capacity and, consequently, signal transduc-
tion of the receptor. At puberty, this resulted in variable ovarian 
function, including streak ovaries and hypergonadotropic hypogo-
nadism in some girls. Several studies of females with 46,XX 
gonadal dysgenesis in Western Europe and the United States were 
negative for  FSH receptor gene mutations, suggesting that a muta-
tion in this gene is a rare cause of XX gonadal dysgenesis outside 
of Finland. Males homozygous for this mutation are phenotypi-
cally normal, with spermatogenesis varying from normal to 
absent. 
 Studies of familial cohorts have supported heterogeneity in the 
pathogenesis of this syndrome. Siblings, one with a 46,XX karyo-
type and the other with a 46,XY karyotype, both with gonadal 
agenesis, have been reported, supporting the involvement of an 
autosomal gene in this family. However, in view of the normal 
phenotype in XY males observed with a mutation in the FSH 
receptor, it seems unlikely that these patients have an FSH recep-
tor defect. In one family, four affected women had an inherited 
interstitial deletion of the long arm of the X chromosome involv-
ing the q21-q27 region (see  Figure 14–2 ). This region apparently 
CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation     499
contains a gene or genes critical to ovarian development and func-
tion. In several affected families, XX gonadal dysgenesis was asso-
ciated with deafness of the sensorineural type as well as other 
neurologic dysfunction. 
 Diagnosis: 46,XX gonadal dysgenesis should be suspected in 
phenotypic females with sexual infantilism and normal Müllerian 
structures who lack the somatic stigmas of the syndrome of 
gonadal dysgenesis (Turner syndrome). Karyotype analysis 
reveals only 46,XX cells. As in Turner syndrome, gonadotropin 
levels are high, inhibin A and B and AMH levels as well as 
estrogen levels are low. Ultrasound or MRI reveals a streak or 
dysgenetic ovary, and treatment consists of cyclic estrogen and 
progesterone replacement as previously discussed for patients 
with Turner syndrome. 
 Sporadic cases of XX gonadal dysgenesis, similar to familial 
cases, may represent a heterogeneous group of patients from a 
pathogenetic point of view. XX gonadal dysgenesis should be 
distinguished from ovarian failure due to radiation and chemo-
therapy for childhood malignancies, infections such as mumps, 
antibodies to gonadotropin receptors, biologically inactive FSH, 
gonadotropin-insensitive ovaries, and galactosemia. 
 46,XY DSD (Complete or Partial
Gonadal Dysgenesis) 
 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis occurs both sporadically and in familial 
aggregates. Patients with the complete form of this syndrome have 
female external genitalia, normal or tall stature, bilateral streak 
gonads, Müllerian duct development, sexual infantilism, eunu-
choid habitus, and a 46,XY karyotype. Clitoromegaly is common 
and, in familial cases as well as sporadic cases, a continuum of 
involvement ranging from the complete syndrome to ambiguity of 
the external genitalia has been described. The phenotypic differ-
ence between the complete and incomplete forms of XY gonadal 
dysgenesis is related to the degree of differentiation of testicular 
tissue and the functional capacity of the fetal testis to produce T 
and AMH. Early in infancy and after the age of puberty, plasma 
gonadotropin levels are markedly elevated. 
 Analyses of familial and sporadic cases of 46,XY gonadal dys-
genesis indicate that about 15% to 20% of patients have a muta-
tion of the  SRY gene that affects DNA binding or bending by the 
SRY protein or a mutation in the calmodulin or importin 
domains of the  SRY gene that affects the nuclear localization 
signals. Most patients in whom mutations have been detected 
have had complete gonadal dysgenesis. Patients with deletions of 
the short arm of the Y chromosome may have, in addition to 
gonadal dysgenesis, stigmas of Turner syndrome. A mutation in 
the HMG box of the  SRY gene has been described in normal 
46,XY fathers of daughters who had 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis. 
These familial cohorts suggest the possibility of germ cell mosa-
icism in the father or that a mutation or modifier genes may 
affect either the level or the timing of  SRY expression and in this 
manner result in either normal or abnormal testicular differentia-
tion. Mutations outside the HMG box region of the  SRY gene or 
in X-linked or autosomal genes involved in testicular determina-
tion and function may be responsible for those individuals in 
whom no molecular abnormality in the  SRY gene has been found. 
Three of six 46,XY patients with complete gonadal dysgenesis in 
one study had homozygous mutations of the gene encoding 
DHH (Desert Hedgehog). 
 A number of patients with 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis has been 
reported with a duplication of the Xp21.2 → p22.11 region of the 
X chromosome. This region contains the  DAX1 gene. Deletion or 
mutation of  DAX1 in males causes adrenal hypoplasia congenita 
and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. The finding that 46,XY 
males with adrenal hypoplasia and hypogonadotropic hypogonad-
ism have normal sex differentiation suggests that  DAX1 is not 
required for testicular differentiation in the human; duplication of 
 DAX1 , however, impairs testis differentiation possibly by upregu-
lating B-catenin/WNT4, which downregulates SOX9 preventing 
testicular development. 
 XY gonadal dysgenesis associated with campomelic dysplasia is 
due to a mutation of one allele of an  SRY -related gene,  SOX9 on 
chromosome 17. Sometimes the mutation occurs in upstream 
regulatory elements of the gene. In addition, XY gonadal dysgen-
esis has been associated with 9p–(DMRT1) and 10q–deletions, 
mutations in, as well as duplication of, 1p31-35 (WNT4). 
 Steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1) is a transcriptional regulator of 
adrenal and gonadal development, hormone synthesis, and func-
tions with other genes in the sex determination and differentiation 
cascade. The phenotype is variable and depends on whether the 
individual has a heterozygous or homozygous mutation as well as 
the functional deficiency in SF-1 activity as a result of the specific 
mutation. The phenotype is also most likely affected by back-
ground genetic factors and cofactors. Mutations in the gene 
encoding SF-1 are associated with 46,XY DSD. Similar to the 
mouse knockout, the severely affected XY individual presents with 
gonadal streaks with female sex differentiation and neonatal onset 
adrenal insufficiency. Recently, 46,XY patients with ambiguous 
genitalia (and in one case, female external genitalia) with or with-
out Müllerian ducts and normal adrenal function have been 
reported, which suggests that adrenal development and function 
are less sensitive to SF-1 dosage levels than gonadal development 
and function. The phenotypic spectrum of SF-1 deficiency 
includes 46,XY males with micropenis and in one case normal 
male external genitalia and anorchia as well as infertile males and 
46,XX females with primary or secondary ovarian failure. The 
phenotypic spectrum was recently expanded to include a 46,XY 
newborn with hypospadias and micropenis who virilized normally 
at puberty but had evidence of progressive Sertoli cell deficiency 
as evidenced by elevated FSH levels and low inhibin B levels. 
Thus, as with other genes in the sex determination cascade, gene 
dosage and cofactors play a critical role in phenotypic expression. 
Both heterozygous and homozygous mutations in SF-1 have been 
described in 46,XX females with isolated primary ovarian insuffi-
ciency. 
 Mutations and deletions of the Wilms tumor repressor gene 
 WT1 are a cause of XY gonadal dysgenesis and renal disease (eg, 
Denys-Drash syndrome, Frasier syndrome, and the WAGR syn-
drome). Denys-Drash syndrome is due to a mutation in a coding 
exon of the  WT1 gene. These mutations act in a dominant-
negative fashion to produce the Denys-Drash phenotype, which 
500    CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation
is characterized by testicular dysgenesis, early renal failure due to 
mesangial sclerosis, and a predisposition to the development of 
Wilms tumor. Müllerian ducts may be present or absent depend-
ing on the degree of Sertoli cell dysfunction. The external genitalia 
are undervirilized. Frasier syndrome is due to a mutation in the 
donor splice site of exon 9, resulting in loss of three amino acids—
lysine, threonine, and serine (KTS), thus changing the ratio of 
KTS+ to KTS− isoforms of this protein. The resultant phenotype 
is characterized by streak gonads, the presence of Müllerian struc-
tures, female external genitalia, late-onset nephropathy due to 
segmental glomerulosclerosis, and an increased risk of gonadoblas-
toma. WAGR syndrome is due to a deletion of a segment of 
11p13, which contains the  WT1 gene and the  PAX6 gene causing 
haploinsufficiency of these genes. The resultant phenotype includes 
 W ilms tumor,  a niridia  g enitourinary abnormalities, and mental 
 r etardation. 
 A 46,XY patient with normal female genitalia and Müllerian 
structures had a homozygous mutation of CBX2—the human 
homologue of  m33 , a gene that when mutated causes sex reversal 
in mice. This gene is postulated to be upstream of SRY in the ever-
expanding gene cascade of sex development. The patient had ele-
vated FSH levels in infancy and the presence of “bilateral ovaries” 
with sparse primordial follicles on biopsy at 4½ years of age sug-
gesting gonadal dysgenesis. 
Mutations in the Map3k1 have been recently demonstrated to 
cause sex reversal in mice as well as 46,XY humans. Recently, 
mutations in this gene have been described in patients with partial 
and complete gonadal dysgenesis. In two families, the mutation 
was inherited as a sex limited autosomal dominant. Interestingly, 
in these families the mutation resulted in activation of the MAPK 
pathway as opposed to inactivation as observed in the mouse and 
in a 46,XY fertile female. A resolution to this apparent discrepancy 
in action is still to be clarified.
 Therapy: Therapy for phenotypic females with 46,XY gonadal 
dysgenesis involves prophylactic gonadectomy at diagnosis, due to 
the high risk of malignancy in these gonads, and estrogen substitu-
tion at puberty. In the incomplete form of XY gonadal dysgenesis, 
assignment of a male gender is possible and treatment with testos-
terone to augment phallic size in infancy is recommended. 
Prophylactic gonadectomy must be considered, because fertility is 
unlikely (gonadotropins are invariably elevated, and AMH and 
inhibin B levels are low or unmeasurable). In addition, there is an 
increased risk of malignant transformation of the dysgenetic 
gonads in these patients, especially those who are SRY-positive and 
have intra-abdominal dysgenetic gonads and those with Frasier 
and Denys-Drash syndrome. If a gonad is preserved in the scro-
tum because it is histologically normal and hormonally functional, 
it should be followed closely by physical examination and ultra-
sound and biopsied postpubertally to rule out CIS, a premalignant 
lesion. In affected individuals raised as males, we recommend that 
prosthetic testes be implanted at the time of gonadectomy and 
androgen substitution therapy instituted at the age of puberty. 
Testosterone enanthate in oil (or another long-acting T ester) is 
used, beginning with 50 mg intramuscularly every 4 weeks and 
gradually increasing after a bone age of 14½ years to a full replacement 
dose of 200 mg intramuscularly every 2 weeks. Alternatively T 
patches or gels may be used. 
 OVOTESTICULAR DSD (INDIVIDUALS WITH 
BOTH OVARIAN AND TESTICULAR TISSUE) 
 In these individuals, both ovarian and testicular tissues are present 
in one or both gonads. Differentiation of the internal and external 
genitalia is highly variable. The external genitalia may simulate 
those of a male or female, but most often they are atypical. 
Cryptorchidism and hypospadias are common. A testis or ovotes-
tis, if present, is located in the labioscrotal folds in one-third of 
patients, in the inguinal canal in one-third, and in the abdomen 
in the remainder. A uterus is usually present, although it may be 
hypoplastic or unicornuate. The differentiation of the genital 
ducts usually follows that of the ipsilateral gonad. The ovotestis is 
the most common gonad found in these individuals (60%), fol-
lowed by an ovary and, least commonly, by a testis. At puberty, 
breast development is usual in untreated patients, and menses 
occur in over 50% of cases. Whereas the ovary or the ovarian por-
tion of an ovotestis may function normally, the testis or testicular 
portion of an ovotestis is invariably dysgenetic and should be 
removed in 46,XX patients raised as females. 
 Sixty percent have a 46,XX karyotype, 20% are 46,XY, and 
about 20% have sex chromosome mosaicism or 46,XX/46,XY 
chimerism. Those with a 46,XX karyotype are genetically hetero-
geneous. Only a small proportion, including some in family 
cohorts with 46,XX males, are  SRY positive. In these individuals, 
Y-to-X and Y-to-autosome translocations, hidden sex chromosome 
mosaicism, or chimerism may explain the pathogenesis. A number 
of families have been reported in which both  SRY -negative 46,XX 
males and 46,XX ovotesticular DSDs occurred. This latter obser-
vation suggests a common genetic pathogenesis in these patients. 
Possible genetic mechanisms to explain  SRY -negative individuals 
include (1) mutation of a downstream autosomal gene or modifier 
gene involved in testicular determination; (2) mutation, deletion, 
or anomalous inactivation of an X- or autosome-linked locus 
involved in repression of testis determination. A 46,XX ovotes-
ticular DSD with palmoplantar keratoderma, congenital bilateral 
corneal opacification, onychodystrophy, and hearing impairment 
has been reported. This patient had a homozygous splice site 
mutation in the  RSPO1 gene. This is the first demonstration of a 
mutation in a single gene (in the ovarian determining pathway) 
causing ovotesticular DSD; or (3) circumscribed chimerism or 
mosaicism that occurred only in the gonads. Studies of eight 
ovotestes from 46,XX individuals detected low levels of the  SRY 
gene. Immunohistochemistry has identified SRY protein localized 
predominantly in Sertoli and germ cells. 
 Diagnosis: Ovotesticular DSD should be considered in all 
patients with ambiguous genitalia. The finding of a 46,XX/46,XY 
karyotype or a bilobulate gonad compatible with an ovotestis in 
the inguinal region or labioscrotal folds suggests the diagnosis. 
Basal plasma T levels are elevated above 40 ng/dL in affected 
patients under 6 months of age, and T levels increase after hCG 
stimulation. The estradiol and inhibin A response to human 
CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation     501
menopausal gonadotropins or recombinant human FSH is a reli-
able test for the presence of ovarian tissue. This test, when coupled 
with the hCG-induced rise in T, differentiates infants with both 
ovarian and testicular tissue from those with other disorders of 
sexual differentiation. 
 If all other forms of 46,XY and 46,XX DSD have been 
excluded and hormonal studies are nondiagnostic, laparotomy 
and histologic confirmation of both ovarian and testicular tissue 
establish the diagnosis. The management of these individuals is 
contingent on both the age at diagnosis and of a careful assessment 
of the functional capacity of the gonads, the genital duct differen-
tiation, and the appearance of the external genitalia. In general, 
46,XX individuals are raised as females, with the possible excep-
tion of the well-virilized patient in whom no uterus is found. 
Preservation of the ovarian tissue and removal of all testicular tis-
sue are sometimes possible in patients who have an ovary on one 
side or an ovotestis with distinct margins of separation (bilobate). 
Fertility has been reported in 46,XX individuals with functional 
ovarian gonadal tissue. 
 Gonadal Neoplasms in Dysgenetic Gonads 
 Gonadal tumors are rare in patients with 47,XXY Klinefelter syn-
drome and 45,X gonadal dysgenesis. However, the prevalence of 
gonadal neoplasms is greatly increased in patients with 46,XY 
DSDs with dysgenetic testes ( Table 14–2 ). The frequency is 
increased in 45,X/46,XY mosaics who have female or ambiguous 
genitalia; in those with a structurally abnormal Y chromosome; 
and in those with XY gonadal dysgenesis, either with a female 
phenotype or with ambiguous genitalia (eg, Frasier [60%], Denys-
Drash syndrome [40%]) (see  Table 14–2 ). Gonadoblastomas, 
germinomas, seminomas, and teratomas are found most fre-
quently. Prophylactic gonadectomy is indicated in these patients 
as well as in those with Turner syndrome who manifest signs of 
virilization, regardless of karyotype. The significance of hidden 
mosaicism for Y chromosomal DNA determined by polymerase 
chain reaction analysis in patients with 45,X Turner syndrome is 
controversial with respect to the risk of gonadal neoplasms. 
Registry studies in Denmark indicate that the incidence of gonad-
oblastoma in patients with Turner syndrome without a cytoge-
netically identified Y chromosome is rare. Thus, routine use of 
polymerase chain reaction studies of all patients with 45,X Turner 
syndrome is not indicated. Gonadoblastomas have been reported 
in patients with marker chromosomes of Y origin lacking the  SRY 
gene. Thus, screening by FISH for Y chromosomal DNA in blood 
seems prudent in these patients, as well as other patients with 
Turner syndrome, as it enables one to count a large number of 
cells with a minimum of effort and time. The testis should be 
preserved in patients who are to be raised as males, only if it is 
histologically and functionally normal, and it is or can be situated 
in the scrotum. The fact that a testis is palpable in the scrotum 
does not preclude malignant degeneration and tumor dissemina-
tion, because seminomas tend to metastasize at an early stage 
before a mass is obvious. 
 Malignant testicular germ cell tumors including seminomas, 
embryonal carcinomas, teratomas, and yolk sac tumors appear to 
develop from CIS. These cells are thought to arise in utero from 
fetal gonocytes and to metamorphose with time in the dysgenetic 
TABLE 14–2 Risk of germ cell malignancy in various forms of 46,XY DSD.
Risk 
Condition 
Risk (%) 
Proposed Management
Number of 
Studies 
Number of 
Patients
High
GD (Y+), intra-abda
PAIS, nonscrotala
Frasier syndrome (Y+)a  
Denys-Drash (Y+)a
15-35 
15
60
40
Gonadectomy 
Gonadectomy
Gonadectomy
Gonadectomy
12 
  3
  1
  1
>350
80
15
5
Intermediate
Turner (Y+) 
17β-HSD
12
28
Gonadectomy
Strict follow-up; biopsy if raised as males.
Gonadectomy if female GID
11
  2
43
7
Low
CAISb
Ovotesticular (DSD)
Turner (Y−) 
0.8
3
1
Biopsy/in case of CIS: irradiation 
or gonadectomy
Removal of testicular tissue in case of 
female sex assignment
None
  3
  
3
11
120
426 
557
Unknown
5α reductase deficiency
Leydig cell hypoplasia
GD (Y+), scrotal
PAIS, scrotal gonads
0
0
?
?
Unknown
Unknown
Biopsy; in case of CIS: irradiation? 
Biopsy, in case of CIS: irradiation?
  1
  1
  0
  0
3
2
0
0
aGonadectomy is recommended in these patients at diagnosis because germ cell tumors in these patients may occur in infancy and childhood.
bPatients with CAIS should be allowed to feminize spontaneously at puberty. In CAIS patients who refuse prophylactic gonadectomy, a biopsy of the gonads to rule out CIS is 
recommended. In XO/XY males with scrotal testes being raised as males, careful follow-up with ultrasound prepubertally and biopsy postpubertally to rule out CIS is indicated.
CAIS, complete androgen insensitivity syndrome; CIS, carcinoma in situ; GD, gonadal dysgenesis; GID, gender identity; intra-abd, intra-abdominal gonads; PAIS, partial 
androgen insensitivity syndrome. 
Modified from Cools M, Drop SL, Wolffenbuttel KP, et al. Germ cell tumors in the intersex gonad: old paths, new directions, moving frontiers. Endocr Rev. 2006;27:468. 
502    CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation
Urethra
Urogenital sinus
Vagina
Urogenital sinus
Urogenital sinus
FIGURE 14–13 46,XX DSD (female pseudohermaphroditism) induced by prenatal exposure to androgens. Exposure after the 12th fetal 
week leads only to clitoral hypertrophy (diagram at left). Exposure at progressively earlier stages of differentiation (depicted from left to right in 
drawings) leads to retention of the urogenital sinus and labioscrotal fusion. If exposure occurs sufficiently early, the labia will fuse to form a 
penile urethra. (Reproduced, with permission, from Grumbach MM, Ducharme J. The effects of androgens on fetal sexual development: andro-
gen-induced female pseudohermaphroditism. Fertil Steril. 1960;11:757.)
environment into testicular malignancies. The incidence of CIS 
and seminomas is low in patients with complete androgen insen-
sitivity but significantly higher in patients with partial androgen 
insensitivity with intra-abdominal gonads (see  Table 14–2 ). Clues 
to the presence of CIS are the presence of an inhomogeneous 
testicular parenchyma and testicular microlithiasis, as well as a low 
inhibin B level. It has been suggested that immunohistochemistry 
for  Oct 3/4 is mandatory when evaluating testicular biopsies for 
CIS, since  Oct 3/4 is a gene that may be involved in germ cell 
tumors and is not normally expressed in postpubertal testes. An 
increased prevalence of low sperm counts, cryptorchidism, hypos-
padias, and testicular cancer has been reported in Denmark com-
pared to Finland. This has been called the  testicular dysgenesis 
syndrome and ascribed to both genetic and environmental factors 
such as exposure to endocrine disrupters. 
 46,XX DSD ANDROGEN INDUCED 
(FEMALE PSEUDOHERMAPHRODITISM) 
 Affected individuals have normal ovaries and Müllerian deriva-
tives associated with ambiguous external genitalia. In the absence 
of testes, a female fetus is masculinized if subjected to increased 
circulating levels of androgens derived from a fetal or maternal 
source. The degree of masculinization depends on the stage of dif-
ferentiation at the time of exposure ( Figure 14–13 ). After 12 weeks of 
gestation, androgens produce only clitoral hypertrophy. Rarely, 
ambiguous genitalia that superficially resemble those produced by 
androgens are the result of other teratogenic factors. 
 Fetal Source: Congenital Adrenal 
Hyperplasia ( Figure 14–14 ,  Table 14–3 ) 
 Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is responsible for most 
cases of 46,XX DSD and about 50% of all cases of ambiguous 
genitalia. There are six major types of CAH, all transmitted as 
autosomal recessive disorders. The common denominator of all six 
types is a defect in the synthesis of cortisol that results in an 
increase in ACTH and consequently adrenal hyperplasia and the 
secretion of steroids synthesized prior to the enzymatic block. 
Both males and females can be affected, but males are rarely diag-
nosed at birth unless they have ambiguous genitalia, are salt-losers 
and manifest adrenal crises, are identified during newborn screen-
ing, or are known to be at risk because they have an affected sib-
ling. Defects in 21-hydroxylation and 11β-hydroxylation are 
confined to the adrenal gland and produce virilization. 
 A new form of CAH has been described due to mutations in 
the gene encoding P450 oxidoreductase (POR), a single flavopro-
tein that donates electrons to all microsomal cytochrome P450 
enzymes, including 17α-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase, 21-hydroxylase, 
and aromatase. The mothers of affected fetuses are at risk for viril-
ization during pregnancy if aromatase activity is significantly 
affected by the mutation. 46,XX patients with this defect in adre-
nal and ovarian steroidogenesis have ambiguous genitalia, whereas 
those with a 46,XY karyotype have incomplete masculinization of 
the external genitalia. 
 P450c21 Hydroxylase Deficiency 
 21-Hydroxylase activity is mediated by P450c21, a microsomal 
cytochrome P450 enzyme that is expressed as an autosomal reces-
sive. A deficiency of this enzyme results in the most common type 
of adrenal hyperplasia, with an overall prevalence of 1:14,000 live 
births in Caucasians. More than 90% of patients with CAH in 
North America and Europe have 21-hydroxylase deficiency. The 
locus for the gene that encodes 21-hydroxylation is on the short 
arm of chromosome 6, close to the locus for C4 (complement) 
between HLA-B and HLA-D. DNA analysis has detected two 
genes, designated  P450c21A  (CYP21p) and  P450c21B  (CYP21) , in 
this region in tandem with the two genes for complement,  C4A 
and  C4B , as well as two genes  Xa and  Xb , which overlap one 
another on the opposite strands of DNA from  P450c21A and 
 P450c21B .  Xa and  Xb code for an extracellular matrix protein 
called Tenascin-X.  P450c21A is a nonfunctional pseudogene (ie, it 
is missing critical structural sequences and does not encode a func-
tional 21-hydroxylase). Seventy-five to eighty percent of patients 
Cholesterol
Δ5-Pregnenolone
Progesterone
P450scc
3β-HSD-2
17α-OH-Δ5
Pregnenolone
3β-HSD-2
POR
Deoxycorticosterone (DOC)
P450c21
Corticosterone 
P450c11B
18-OH-Corticosterone 
(18-OH) P450c11B2
Aldosterone 
MINERALOCORTICOIDS 
(18-Oxidase) P450c11B2
SEX STEROIDS 
GLUCOCORTICOIDS 
P450c17
POR
POR, b5
POR
17α-OH-
Progesterone
P450c21
POR
P450arom
POR
P450arom
POR
Deoxycortisol
P450c11B1
Cortisol
P450c17
Dehydroepiandros-
terone
3β-HSD
P450c17
Δ4-Androstenedione
Estrone
Δ5-Androstenediol
3β-HSD
17β-HSD-3
Testosterone
Estradiol
17β-HSD-3
17β-HSD-3
Cholesterol StAR
FIGURE 14–14 A diagrammatic representation of the steroid biosynthetic pathways in the adrenals and gonads. (OH, hydroxy or hydroxy-
lase; StAR, steroidogenic regulatory protein; P450scc, cholesterol side-chain cleavage, previously termed 20,22 desmolase; 3β-HSD-2, 
3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase and Δ5-isomerase type 2; P450c17, 17-hydroxylase; POR, P450 oxidoreductase—the flavoprotein that con-
tributes electrons to microsomal cytochrome P450; P450c21, 21-hydroxylase; P450c17, 17-hydroxylase also mediates 17,20-lyase activity; b5, 
cytochrome b5; P450arom, aromatase; 17β-HSD-3, 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 3; P450c11B2 (aldosterone synthase) mediates 
18-hydroxylase and 18-oxidase reactions; P450c11B1 mediates 11-hydroxylation of deoxycortisol to cortisol and deoxycorticosterone to corti-
costerone). The dashed arrow indicates that this reaction occurs at a low rate in humans. (Modified and reproduced, with permission, from 
Conte FA, Grumbach MM. Pathogenesis, classification, diagnosis, and treatment of anomalies of sex. In: DeGroot L, ed. Endocrinology. Grune 
& Stratton; 1989.)
with classic P450c21 deficiency have point mutations that change 
a portion of the  P450c21B to a sequence similar to that in the 
nonfunctional  P450c21A gene—hence a microgene conversion. 
Approximately 15% of severely affected  21-OH genes have a dele-
tion extending from a position between exon 3 and exon 8 of the 
 P450c21A pseudogene to a similar region of the  21-OHB gene, 
resulting in a nonfunctional fusion  21-OHA/21-OHB gene. This is 
the result of misalignment and unequal crossing over. The remain-
der have de novo point mutations and macrogene conversions. 
 Classic salt-wasting 21-hydroxylase deficiency is associated 
with point mutations, deletions, or gene conversions that abolish 
or severely reduce 21-hydroxylase activity. Most patients with 
21-hydroxylase deficiency are compound heterozygotes (ie, they 
have a different genetic mutation on each of their  P450c21B 
allelic genes) having inherited a mutant gene from each of their 
parents. A spontaneous mutation in the  21-hydroxylase gene 
occurs in 1% to 2% of patients. 
 The phenotypic spectrum—salt loss with severe virilization, 
simple virilization, or late onset of virilization—is a consequence 
of the degree of enzymatic deficiency. The phenotype is  determined 
in patients with compound heterozygosity by the functionally less 
severely mutated  P450c21B allele. In rare cases, there is variability 
between genotype and phenotype. The gene for P450c21 (21-
hydroxylase) deficiency is not only closely linked to the HLA super-
gene complex, but certain specific HLA subtypes are found to be 
statistically increased in patients with 21-hydroxylase deficiency. 
 P450c21 hydroxylase deficiency with virilization and 
salt loss 
 The salt-losing variant of P450c21 hydroxylase defi-
ciency accounts for about 80% of patients with classic 21-hydrox-
ylase deficiency and involves a severe reduction (98%) in 
P450c21-hydroxylase activity, leading to impaired secretion of 
both cortisol and aldosterone. This results in electrolyte and fluid 
losses after the fifth day of life and, as a consequence, hypona-
tremia, hyperkalemia, acidosis, dehydration, and vascular collapse. 
Rarely, this can occur as late as 6 to 12 weeks, usually associated 
with a concomitant physiologic stress. In the female fetus before 
12 weeks’ gestation, high fetal DHT levels result from increased T 
and DHEA-S secreted from the 21-hydroxylase-deficient adrenal 
gland which cannot synthesize cortisol when aromatase activity is 
CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation     503
TABLE 14–3 Clinical manifestations of the various types of congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
Enzymatic 
Defect
StARa(Defect in 
Cholesterol 
Transport)
3β-Hydroxysteroid 
Dehydrogenase
P450c17 (17α-
Hydroxylase)
P450c11 (11β-
Hydroxylase)
P450c21 (21α-
Hydroxylase)
P450sccb
PORc
Chromosomal
XX
XY
XX
XY
XX
XY
XX
XY
XX
XY
XX
XY
XX
XY
External
genitalia
(at birth)
Female
Female
(classic),
Male 
(nonclas-
sic form)
Female, 
w/wo
clitoro-
megaly
Ambiguous
(hypospa-
dias)
Female
Female 
or 
ambig-
uous
Ambiguousd
Male
Ambiguous
Femaled
(nonclassic 
form)
 
Male
Female
Ambiguous
male
(mild
 form)
Ambiguous 
→normal 
female
Ambiguous 
→
micro
penis
normal 
male
Postnatal
virilization
Normal 
female 
puberty, 
later pri-
mary 
ovarian 
failure 
Sexual
infantil-
ism at 
puberty
(classic),
normal
pubertal
develop-
ment
(nonclas-
sic form)
+ or −
Mild to 
moderate
–
(Sexual infantilism at 
puberty)
+
+
Normal 
female
Sexual 
infantilism 
at puberty
–      –
Addisonian 
crises
+
+ or −
−
−
+ in 80% (classic)e
− (nonclassic)
+f
+
Hypertension
−
   −
+
+
−
−
−
aStAR, steroidogenic acute regulatory protein. StAR deficiency leads to secondary P450scc deficiency.
bA nonclassic form has been reported.
cPatients may manifest dysmorphic features (Antley-Bixler syndrome). Virilization is not progressive in females. Males with mild mutations may have normal genitalia and infertility.
dNormal female genitalia in nonclassic late-onset and cryptic form. These forms do not manifest clinical or biochemical evidence of aldosterone deficiency.
eThe 20% of patients who appear to be non-salt losers may manifest classic adrenal crises with severe illness and will develop hyponatremia when challenged with a low sodium diet.
fLate-onset form with ambiguous or hypospadiac male genitalia and cortisol insufficiency in childhood.
Reproduced, with permission, from Grumbach MM, Hughes IA, Conte FA. Disorders of sex differentiation. In: Larson PR, et al, ed. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology. 10th ed. WB Saunders; 2003.
504
CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation     505
relatively low. In addition, P450c21-21-hydroxylase deficiency 
results in an elevated level of 17OH progesterone which is not 
readily converted to androstenedione in humans but may be con-
verted via a backdoor steroid pathway to DHT, a nonaromatizable 
androgen ( see Figure 14–10 ). It has been suggested that DHT 
synthesis from elevated 17OH progesterone levels may contribute 
to the fetal masculinization of the external genitalia and the post-
natal virilization of patients with P450c21-hydroxylase deficiency. 
Elevated DHT levels from 8 to 12 weeks of gestation results in vary-
ing degrees of labioscrotal fusion and clitoromegaly in affected 
46,XX females. After 12 weeks, androgen receptor activity in the 
labioscrotal folds diminishes, and only clitoromegaly ensues from 
the elevated DHT levels. 
 Masculinization of the external genitalia of affected females 
who are salt-losers tends to be more severe than individuals with 
apparent non–salt-losing P450c21-hydroxylase deficiency. Affected 
males may have macrogenitosomia. Recently, patients with 21- 
hydroxylase and 11β-hydroxylase deficiency have been shown to 
have adrenomedullary hypofunction secondary to low intra-adre-
nal concentrations of cortisol and developmental defects in forma-
tion of the adrenal medulla. This defect in catecholamine synthesis 
may predispose these patients to hypoglycemia with stress in 
infancy. 
 P450c21 hydroxylase deficiency with virilization 
alone 
 The simple virilizing form of P450c21 (21-hydroxy-
lase) deficiency results in impaired cortisol synthesis, increased 
ACTH levels, and increased adrenal androgen precursor and 
androgen secretion. It accounts for about 20% of individuals 
with classic P450c21 hydroxylase deficiency and is primarily due 
to missense mutations such as I172N, which retain enough 
P450c21-hydroxylase activity to produce sufficient aldosterone 
to prevent hyponatremia/hyperkalemia under normal circum-
stances. In general, affected females have a less severe degree of 
masculinization of their external genitalia than those with the 
salt-wasting form of P450c21 hydroxylase deficiency. In the 
male fetus, no abnormalities in the external genitalia are evident 
at birth, but the phallus may be enlarged. These patients pro-
duce sufficient amounts of aldosterone to prevent the signs and 
symptoms of mineralocorticoid deficiency except when they are 
salt-deprived. They may also manifest a defect in mineralocorti-
coid synthesis as evidenced by an elevated plasma renin level. 
Virilization continues after birth in untreated patients. This 
results in rapid growth and bone maturation as well as the 
physical signs of excess androgen secretion (eg, acne, seborrhea, 
increased muscular development, premature development of 
pubic or axillary hair, and phallic enlargement). True (central) 
precocious puberty can occur following initiation of glucocorti-
coid therapy in affected children with advanced bone ages. 
 Nonclassic P450c21 hydroxylase deficiency 
 Mild defects 
in P450c21 (21-hydroxylase) activity not causing a DSD have 
been reported. Patients can be symptomatic (late-onset or non-
classic) or asymptomatic (cryptic form). These mild forms of 
P450c21 hydroxylase deficiency are HLA-linked, as is classic 
P450c21 hydroxylase deficiency; however, they occur much more 
frequently than the classic form of the disease in certain ethnic 
populations. It has been postulated that nonclassic P450c21 
hydroxylase deficiency is the most common autosomal recessive 
disorder. The frequency of nonclassic P450c21 hydroxylase defi-
ciency is thought to be as high as 1 in 27 for Ashkenazi Jews, 1 in 
53 for Hispanics, 1 in 333 for Italians, and 1 in 1000 for other 
Caucasians. The prevalence of heterozygosity for a nonclassic allele 
has varied from 1.2 to 6%. Affected patients with nonclassical 21- 
hydroxylase deficiency are either homozygous for a mild mutation 
(eg, V281L) or are compound heterozygotes with the other allele 
harboring a severe mutation (27%-76% of the time). Thus, it is 
prudent to genotype the partners of a nonclassic patient who is 
carrying a severe mutation, in order to offer genetic counseling 
and, if necessary, prenatal diagnosis. The clinical expression of 
nonclassical congenital adrenal hyperplasia is very variable in indi-
viduals with the same genotypes within families with some being 
asymptomatic (cryptic). Females with late-onset P450c21 hydrox-
ylase deficiency have normal female genitalia at birth. Mild viril-
ization occurs later in childhood and adolescence manifesting 
primarily as hirsutism. Other signs of excess androgen secretion, 
such as the premature development of pubic or axillary hair (pre-
mature pubarche), slight clitoral enlargement, advanced bone age, 
menstrual irregularities acne, polycystic ovary syndrome, decreased 
fertility, may also occur. Affected males have normal male genitalia at 
birth. Later in childhood, some become symptomatic and exhibit 
premature growth of pubic or axillary hair, and advancement of their 
bone age. Although they are tall as children, they end up short as adults 
due to advanced bone maturation and premature epiphysial fusion 
unless they are treated. 
 Diagnosis: The diagnosis of P450c21 hydroxylase deficiency 
should always be considered in the following: (1) patients with 
ambiguous genitalia who have a 46,XX karyotype with a uterus 
and ovaries on ultrasonography; (2) apparent cryptorchid males; 
(3) infants who present with shock, hypoglycemia, and serum 
chemistries compatible with adrenal insufficiency; and (4) males 
or females with signs of virilization before puberty, including pre-
mature pubarche. In the past, the diagnosis of P450c21 hydroxy-
lase deficiency was based on the finding of elevated levels of 
17-ketosteroids and pregnanetriol in the urine. Although urinary 
steroid determinations are still useful, they have been replaced by 
the simpler and more cost-effective measurement of plasma 
17-hydroxyprogesterone, androstenedione, and T levels by liquid 
chromatography and tandem mass spectroscopy (LCMSMS). 
 The concentration of plasma 17-hydroxyprogesterone is ele-
vated in umbilical cord blood but rapidly decreases into the range 
of 100 to 200 ng/dL (3-6 nmol/L) by 48 hours after delivery. In 
premature infants and in stressed full-term newborns, the levels of 
17-hydroxyprogesterone are higher than those observed in non-
stressed full-term infants. In patients with P450c21 hydroxylase 
deficiency, the 17-hydroxyprogesterone values usually are greater 
than 5000 ng/dL (150 nmol/L) on baseline samples drawn after 
48 hours, depending on the age of the patient and the severity of 
P450c21 hydroxylase deficiency. Patients with mild P450c21 
hydroxylase deficiency (eg, late-onset and cryptic forms) may have 
borderline basal 17-hydroxyprogesterone values, but they can be 
distinguished from heterozygotes by the magnitude of the 
506    CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation
17-hydroxyprogesterone response to the parenteral administra-
tion of ACTH as well as by genotyping. Patients with baseline 
17-OH progesterone levels over 10,000 μg/dL after 2 days of age 
or those with ACTH-induced responses that are over 10,000 μg/dL 
have classic 21-hydroxylase deficiency. Those who have levels at 
baseline which are above the normal range and who respond to 
ACTH with levels at 1500 to 10,000 ng/dL probably have non-
classic 21-hydroxylase deficiency. Those who are unaffected or 
heterozygotes respond to ACTH with a rise to less than 1500 ng/dL. 
Patients with borderline 17-OH progesterone responses can be 
genotyped to ascertain their status. As 17-OH progesterone levels 
are elevated in patients with 11-hydroxylase deficiency, 3-beta-
dehydrogenase, 17,20-lyase, and P450 oxidoreductase deficien-
cies, it is prudent to do an ACTH stimulation test measuring 
17-OH progesterone, 11-deoxycortisol, 17-OH pregnenolone, 
DOC, progesterone, T, and cortisol at baseline and at 1 hour 
before reaching a definitive diagnosis. Elevated 21-deoxycortisol 
levels are a specific and sensitive indicator of 21-hydroxylase defi-
ciency. 21-deoxycortisol measurements can be used to differenti-
ate between patients with elevated 17-hydroxyprogesterone levels, 
who have 21-hydroxylase deficiency and sick newborns and pre-
mature infants who have false positive 17-hydroxyprogesterone 
levels on screening. 
 In patients with the salt-losing form of 21-hydroxylase defi-
ciency, aldosterone levels in both plasma and urine are low in rela-
tion to the serum sodium concentration, while plasma renin activity 
is markedly elevated. The plasma aldosterone-renin ratio will be low. 
Breast milk and infant formulas have a low concentration of sodium 
which usually unmasks the diagnosis of salt loss by 7 to 14 days. The 
salt-losing episode is heralded by a rise in serum potassium with a 
subsequent fall in sodium and bicarbonate. The diagnosis of non-
classic (late-onset 21-hydroxylase deficiency) can be made in the 
symptomatic patient (eg, one with early development of pubic hair, 
acne, and other signs of androgen excess) by measuring a plasma 
17-OH progesterone level between 7 to 9 AM. Levels below 
200 ng/dL rule out late-onset CAH. Higher levels should be evalu-
ated by an ACTH test which will distinguish 21-hydroxylase defi-
ciency from other causes of elevated 17-OH progesterone levels. 
 The diagnosis of 21-hydroxylase deficiency in newborn males 
has been facilitated by routine neonatal screening or 17-OH pro-
gesterone by filter paper (Guthrie cards) at 2 to 3 days of life. 
Screening reduces the morbidity and mortality associated with late 
or nondiagnosis especially in male infants with the salt-losing 
form of 21-hydroxylase deficiency. Males with simple virilization 
may not be diagnosed until later in infancy when virilization and 
advanced bone maturation associated with prepubertal testes are 
evident. Prematurity and illness are confounding factors since 
both are associated with elevated levels of 17-OH progesterone. If 
the patient is reported positive by the laboratory and the levels are 
borderline or moderately elevated, it is prudent to examine the 
patient, review the history (especially confounders such as prema-
turity, concomitant stress, day of life specimen obtained, etc.), and 
repeat the 17-OH progesterone screen by LCMSMS (liquid chro-
matography, tandem mass spectrometry) from a venous sample. 
The parents should be counseled about possible symptomatology 
until the results return. If the screening value is a lot higher than 
the cutoffs, then examination, electrolytes, plasma 17-OH proges-
terone, androstenedione, and T levels by LCMSMS should be 
obtained. Depending on the age and clinical status of the infant, 
hospitalization, an ACTH test and therapy should be considered. 
A karyotype and pelvic ultrasound are always indicated in any 
infant with atypical genitalia and in apparent males with unde-
scended testes especially those with evidence of salt loss. 
 P450c11 hydroxylase deficiency 
 Classic P450c11 hydrox-
ylase deficiency (virilization with hypertension) is rare. It occurs in 
1:100,000 births in persons of European ancestry. However, in the 
Middle Eastern population, it is much more common. In the 
patient with classic disease, a defect in 11-hydroxylation leads 
to decreased cortisol levels with a consequent increase in ACTH 
and the hypersecretion of DOC (deoxycorticosterone) and 
11-deoxycortisol in addition to adrenal androgens. Marked het-
erogeneity in the clinical and hormonal manifestations of this 
defect has been described, including mild, late-onset, and even 
cryptic forms. Patients with this form of adrenal hyperplasia clas-
sically exhibit virilization, secondary to increased androgen pro-
duction, and hypertension, related to increased DOC secretion. 
Plasma renin activity is either normal or suppressed. The hyper-
tension is variable; it occurs in approximately two-thirds of 
patients and may be associated with hypokalemic alkalosis. 
Newborns with 11-hydroxylase deficiency may manifest transient 
salt loss probably related to their salt-restricted diet and relative 
resistance to mineralocorticoids. 
 Two P450c11 hydroxylase genes have been localized to the 
long arm of chromosome 8: P450c11b1 and P450c11b2. Similar 
to 21-hydroxylase, these two genes are 95% homologous. 
P450c11b1 encodes the enzyme for 11-hydroxylation and is 
expressed in the zona fasciculata and zona reticularis and is ACTH 
dependent. It primarily mediates 11-hydroxylation of 11-deoxy-
cortisol to cortisol and DOC to corticosterone. It has about one-
twelfth the capacity of P450c11b2 for 18-hydroxylation and does 
not oxidize 18-hydroxycorticosterone to aldosterone. P450c11b2 
encodes the angiotensin-dependent isozyme aldosterone synthase 
and is only expressed in the zona glomerulosa, where it mediates 
11-hydroxylation, 18-hydroxylation, and 18-oxidation. Mutations, 
deletions, and gene duplications of these genes can produce a wide 
variety of clinical manifestations from virilization and hyperten-
sion (P450c11b1 deficiency) to isolated salt-wasting (P450c11b2 
[aldosterone synthase] deficiency) to glucocorticoid-remedial 
hypertension (due to fusion of the ACTH-dependent regulatory 
region of the 11-hydroxylase gene with the coding region of aldos-
terone synthase). Both genes encoding P450c11b1 and P450c11b2 
are located on chromosome 8 and thus are not linked to HLA. 
ACTH stimulation tests have thus far failed to demonstrate a 
consistent biochemical abnormality in obligate heterozygotes. 
 Diagnosis: The diagnosis of P450c11b1-hydroxylase defi-
ciency can be confirmed by demonstration of elevated basal or 
ACTH-induced plasma levels of 11-deoxycortisol and DOC, at 
least three times higher than the 95th percentile for age, and 
increased excretion of their metabolites in urine (mainly tetra-
hydro-11-deoxycortisol). As previously noted, these patients have 
CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation     507
elevated 17-OH progesterone levels and need to be distinguished 
from those with other forms of CAH by measuring the steroid 
levels at baseline or after ACTH stimulation. 
 StAR, 
P450scc, 
17α-hydroxylase 
(17,20-lyase), 
3β-HSD 
 Defects in steroidogenic acute regulatory protein 
(StAR), P450scc (side chain cleavage), 17α-hydroxylase (17,20-
lyase), and 3β-HSD type II have in common blocks in cortisol 
and sex steroid synthesis in both the adrenals and the gonads. The 
latter types produce chiefly incomplete masculinization in the 
male and little or no virilization in the female ( Table 14–3 ). 
Consequently, these are discussed primarily as forms of 46,XY 
DSD (disorders of androgen synthesis). 
 Treatment 
 Treatment of patients with salt-losing adrenal hyperplasia may be 
divided into acute and chronic phases. In acute adrenal crises, a 
deficiency of both cortisol and aldosterone results in hypoglyce-
mia, hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, hypovolemia, acidosis, and 
shock. If the patient is hypoglycemic, an intravenous bolus of 
glucose (0.25-0.5 g/kg; maximum 25 g), should be administered. 
If the patient is in shock, an infusion of normal saline (20 mL/kg) 
may be given over the first hour; thereafter, replacement of glu-
cose, fluid, and electrolytes is calculated on the basis of deficits and 
standard maintenance requirements. Hydrocortisone sodium suc-
cinate (50 mg/m 2) should be given as a bolus and another 50 to 
100 mg/m 2 over 24 hours, divided into every 6 hour doses. If 
hyponatremia and hyperkalemia are present, fludrocortisone 
(0.05-0.1 mg) by mouth may be given along with the intravenous 
saline and hydrocortisone. Because hydrocortisone has mineralo-
corticoid activity, it may suffice to correct the electrolyte abnor-
mality along with the saline. In extreme cases of hyponatremia, 
hyperkalemia, and acidosis, sodium bicarbonate and a cation 
exchange resin (eg, sodium polystyrene sulfonate) may be needed. 
In patients with presumed chronic hyponatremia, it is always 
prudent to raise the sodium cautiously and slowly to avoid the 
possibility of central pontine myelinolysis. Initially, in newly diag-
nosed patients and newborns in the first few days of treatment, 
hydrocortisone in doses of 25 to 50 mg/m 2 /d are commonly used 
to facilitate suppression of the CRH-ACTH-adrenal axis. This 
dose should be reduced as soon as the steroid levels are suppressed 
to the desired range, usually after 5 to 7 days. 
 Once the patient is stabilized and a definitive diagnosis has 
been arrived at by means of appropriate steroid studies, the patient 
should receive suppressive doses of glucocorticoids to permit nor-
mal growth, development, and bone maturation (hydrocortisone, 
∼10-15 mg/m 2 /d by mouth in three divided doses). The dose of 
hydrocortisone must be titrated in each patient depending on 
steroid hormone levels in plasma and urine, linear growth, bone 
maturation, and clinical signs of steroid overdose or of virilization. 
Therapy can be monitored by consistently timed (in relation to 
dose administration) steroid determinations, for example, the 
measurement of 17-OH progesterone, androstenedione, and T at 
8 AM before the morning dose of hydrocortisone. A target 
concentration for 17-OH progesterone (400-1200 ng/dL) with 
androstenedione and T levels in the normal range has been sug-
gested. However, these levels will vary depending on when the 
evening dose of hydrocortisone is administered. Salt-losers need 
treatment with mineralocorticoid (fludrocortisone, 0.05-0.2 mg/d 
by mouth) and added dietary salt (1-3 g/d) in infancy. The dose 
of mineralocorticoid should be adjusted so that the electrolytes 
and blood pressure, as well as the plasma renin activity, are in the 
normal range. 
 Recently, as a result of the difficulty of optimally treating 
these patients, several novel therapies have been proposed. 
These include adrenalectomy in patients with null mutations 
of P450c21, GH to augment final height, and the use of 
physiologic doses of hydrocortisone (8 mg/m 2 ), fludrocorti-
sone, flutamide (an androgen receptor blocker), and an aro-
matase inhibitor in combination. 
 The parents need to be presented the  whole picture diagnosis, 
natural history, possible medical and surgical therapy, risks, com-
plications, and unknowns. It is critical that they have the knowl-
edge and time to make an informed decision about any surgical 
procedures on their child. Only patients with markedly ambigu-
ous external genitalia (Prader III-V) should be considered for 
surgery. Vaginoplasty and clitoral recession or clitoroplasty for 
markedly enlarged clitori— not clitoridectomy —is indicated. 
Surgical reconstruction done in infancy may need refinement at 
puberty. Surgery, if done, must emphasize function rather than 
cosmesis. It should be performed by a surgeon who is experienced 
in the operative procedure and is cognizant of the importance of 
preserving the functional integrity of the genital area. The vari-
ability of  normalcy in relationship to size and appearance of the 
external genitalia of adult women has recently been quantified. 
These data can serve as a reference with respect to the need for 
surgery in older patients with CAH. The timing of any surgery 
remains controversial. This is a decision that needs to be made 
after careful discussion with the parents. It should be noted that 
there are no outcome data for delaying functionally cosmetic sur-
gery on an infant with ambiguous genitalia until an age of consent 
as suggested by some psychologists and patient advocates. 
 The dose of glucocorticoid needs to be increased in response to 
stress, for example, temperature above 100°F orally, gastroenteritis 
with dehydration, trauma, and surgery. The daily maintenance 
hydrocortisone dose should be tripled and divided into every 
6 hour doses around the clock until the fever or gastroenteritis has 
abated for 12 hours. Thereafter, the child may resume his/her 
maintenance dose. In the event that the oral dose cannot be 
administered, hydrocortisone (50 mg/m 2 ) or its equivalent can be 
given intramuscularly and the child maintained on a dose of 50 to 
100 mg/m 2 /d in divided doses until he/she is able to take medica-
tion by mouth. It is prudent to check electrolytes in any patient 
who is a salt-loser, manifests vomiting, and is a candidate for par-
enteral hydrocortisone. Even if electrolytes are normal, patients 
who are unable to take medication and fluid orally for longer than 
6 to 8 hours usually require hospitalization for parenteral fluids, 
especially if they are salt-losers. All caregivers should be prepared 
to administer hydrocortisone in an emergency, and all patients 
should have a medi-alert notification with them.
508    CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation
 Prenatal therapy of pregnant women who are at risk of carrying 
a female fetus with atypical genitalia due to 21-hydroxylase defi-
ciency is controversial. Therapy with oral dexamethasone given to 
the mother beginning at 6 to 7 weeks of gestation has been advo-
cated to reduce or eliminate virilization of the affected female 
genitalia. Statistically, only one in eight fetuses will be a female 
with CAH. Although this therapy is effective, in diminishing 
genital ambiguity, more long-term studies are needed to ascertain 
the long-term morbidities, both physical and psychological.  
 In postpubertal patients who have reached their final height, 
glucocorticoid replacement can be implemented with more potent 
glucocorticoids that have longer half-lives than hydrocortisone 
such as prednisone (5-7 mg/d divided into two doses) or methyl-
prednisolone (4-6 mg/d in two doses). As with children, the low-
est dose of medication required to optimally suppress adrenal 
androgen secretion and prevent glucocorticoid side-effects should 
be used. The dose needs to be titrated to the plasma steroid values, 
or better yet, the urinary 17 ketosteroids—an integrated 24-hour 
assessment of androgen secretion. Similar to hydrocortisone, the 
dose is a function of absorption, metabolism, and sensitivity and 
varies from patient to patient. 
 A host of studies indicate that the vast majority of 46,XX 
females with 21-hydroxylase deficiency and consequent viriliza-
tion of their external genitalia have a female gender identity. 
Gender dysphoria, although rare, is more prevalent in these 
patients than in the general population. Behavior characterized as 
masculinization/defeminization occurs in affected females who 
play more with traditionally boys’ toys, are more aggressive, and 
show less interest in infants than their unaffected female siblings. 
 Treatment of adults with CAH should be directed toward pre-
venting and remediating the morbidities of long-term glucocorti-
coid therapy and optimizing sexual, reproductive, and bone health 
(see Auchus PMID 20613954). Continued monitoring of serum 
17-OH progesterone, androstenedione, and T levels (in females) 
and/or 24-hour urinary 17-ketosteroids is indicated in order to 
prevent further virilization or the morbidity of excess glucocorti-
coid therapy. While many salt-losers appear not to need mineralo-
corticoid due to increased salt intake or extra adrenal 
21-hydroxylation, it is prudent to follow plasma renin activity, 
since elevated plasma renin levels are a marker of mineralocorti-
coid deficiency and are associated with the need for higher doses 
of glucocorticoids to suppress adrenal androgen secretion. Multiple 
factors play a role in the decreased fertility rate seen in women 
with CAH. These include decreased sexual activity due to vaginal 
stenosis which results in painful intercourse, poor surgical repairs 
resulting in lack of sensation, lack of desire for maternity, and poor 
self-image. In males, spermatogenesis and Leydig cell function 
may be compromised by poor hormonal control or testicular adre-
nal rest tumors which can be readily identified by ultrasound. 
 Dual energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA) scans have shown 
that osteopenia is present in 40% to 50% of patients less than 
30 years and 70% of patients over 30 years old. The severity of the 
osteopenia/osteoporosis is related to the severity of the CAH, the 
age of the patient, and dose of glucocorticoid given. Thus, peri-
odic DXA scans and vitamin D and calcium supplementation are 
indicated, both prophylactically and therapeutically. Quality of 
life issues need to be addressed. These include physical and psy-
chological status as well as social and sexual relationships. 
 Glucocorticoid Receptor Gene Mutation 
 Glucocorticoid resistance due to a homozygous mutation in 
the gene encoding the glucocorticoid receptor reportedly 
induces 46,XX DSD. Glucocorticoid resistance results in an 
increase in ACTH levels with a consequent increase in corti-
sol, mineralocorticoids, and adrenal androgens. The latter 
steroids induce virilization, which in the female infant results 
in 46,XX DSD. 
 Feto-Placental Source 
 P450 oxidoreductase 
 P450 oxidoreductase (POR) is a flavo-
protein that transfers electrons from nicotinamide adenine dinu-
cleotide to all microsomal P450s. These include P450c21, P450 
17-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase and P450 aromatase which are 
involved in steroidogenesis, lanosterol 14-alpha-demethylase 
(P45014DM), and squalene monooxidase (SQLE), which are 
involved in cholesterol synthesis. POR deficiency is inherited as an 
autosomal recessive, and affected individuals are either homozy-
gous or compound heterozygotes, predominantly for an A287P 
mutation in Caucasians and an R487H mutation in Japanese. 
More than 50 different mutations have been described. A 
broad range of phenotypes has been reported related to the degree 
of enzymatic function determined by the mutation and the speci-
ficity of the mutation for each one of the enzymes involved. Most, 
but not all patients reported with this condition, have skeletal 
abnormalities such as craniosynostosis, midfacial hypoplasia, and 
radioulnar synostosis. The phenotype of the skeletal dysmorphism 
has been termed the Antley-Bixler syndrome and appears to cor-
relate with the degree of decrease in enzyme activity resulting from 
the mutations. The skeletal abnormalities of Antley-Bixler syn-
drome are digenic in origin. Individuals with normal genitalia and 
the Antley-Bixler phenotype have a mutation in the gene encoding 
fibroblast growth factor receptor-2 (FGFR-2) and no abnormality 
in steroidogenesis, whereas those with one or more of the above-
mentioned skeletal abnormalities and ambiguous genitalia are 
found to have mutations in POR. 
 POR deficiency can cause ambiguous genitalia in both males 
and females, and micropenis, hypospadias, and infertility in males 
with mild mutations. The spectrum of patients reported includes 
females with normal genitalia who present with PCOS-like symp-
toms and have primary amenorrhea. There is evidence to suggest 
that virilization of the external genitalia in females with POR 
deficiency results from the synthesis of DHT in utero via the 
“backdoor” pathway (see  Figure 14–10 ). Androgen excess can also 
result from a decrease in P450 aromatase activity in the placenta, 
which can cause maternal and fetal virilization during pregnancy. 
In patients with mild mutations, maternal virilization is not pres-
ent, and males may have normal genitalia and rarely micropenis. 
The virilization in females is not progressive. After birth, however, 
in a Japanese cohort, pubertal maturation was definitely affected 
in females. 
CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation     509
 Diagnosis: POR deficiency should be suspected in males and 
females with ambiguous genitalia and the Antley-Bixler pheno-
type, in females whose virilization does not progress postnatally, 
and in patients with modestly elevated 17-OH progesterone lev-
els. The diagnosis can be suspected from ACTH-induced steroid 
levels. Cortisol levels are normal at baseline, but there is a blunted 
response to ACTH. Both serum progesterone and 17-OH proges-
terone values in response to ACTH are higher than normal sug-
gesting a defect in both 17- and 21-hydroxylation, whereas 
DHEA and androstenedione levels may be low. Genotyping will 
verify the diagnosis. Depending on the baseline concentration and 
ACTH-induced cortisol level, cortisol replacement may be indi-
cated in some patients. In view of the blunted cortisol responses 
observed, it is prudent to give stress steroid coverage for illness, 
surgical procedures, and severe trauma. 
 P450 AROMATASE DEFICIENCY 
 Another form of androgen-induced 46,XX DSD is due to aro-
matase deficiency. Mutations in the gene  CYP19 , encoding P450 
aromatase, result in defective placental conversion of C 19 steroids 
to estrogens (C 18 ), leading to exposure of the fetus to excessive 
amounts of T and to masculinization of the external genitalia of 
the female fetus. Virilization of the mother during gestation 
occurs commonly. The female fetus is virilized, due to the inability 
of the placenta to aromatize testosterone produced by the placenta 
from the conversion of fetal adrenal DHEA. At puberty, defective 
aromatase activity in the ovary leads to pubertal failure, hypergo-
nadotropic hypogonadism, polycystic ovaries, mild virilization, 
tall stature, and osteopenia. A striking delay in bone age with 
continuing growth occurs in both affected males and females, 
despite increased concentrations of plasma T, supporting the con-
cept that estrogens, rather than androgens, are the major sex ste-
roids affecting bone maturation, bone turnover, and epiphyseal 
fusion in males as well as females. A nonclassic phenotype has 
been described in two females with sufficient aromatase activ-
ity to result in the development of Tanner stage 2 and 4 breast 
development. 
 Diagnosis: The diagnosis of aromatase deficiency is suggested 
by the above clinical picture as well as elevated plasma androstene-
dione and T levels in the face of low estrogen levels, elevated 
gonadotropins, and ovarian cysts in females. Gonadotropin levels 
are elevated due to lack of estrogen feedback. There is striking 
osteopenia. Low plasma concentrations of maternal estriol during 
pregnancy associated with maternal virilization can facilitate the 
prenatal diagnosis. Affected males have normal genitalia, normal 
pubertal development, osteoporosis, and tall stature due to lack of 
epiphyseal fusion as a result of estrogen deficiency. 
 MATERNAL SOURCE ANDROGENS
AND PROGESTOGENS 
 Masculinization of the external genitalia of a female infant can 
occur, if the mother is given T, other androgenic steroids, or certain 
synthetic progestational agents during pregnancy. Norethindrone, 
ethisterone, norethynodrel, and medroxyprogesterone acetate have 
all been implicated in masculinization of the female fetus. These 
drugs were given in the past in an effort to control threatened or 
habitual abortions. Nonadrenal 46,XX DSD can occur as a conse-
quence of maternal ingestion of danazol, the 2,3-D - isoxazol deriva-
tive of 17α-ethinyl T. In rare instances, masculinization of a female 
fetus is due to a virilizing maternal ovarian or adrenal tumor, con-
genital virilizing adrenal hyperplasia in the mother, or a luteoma of 
pregnancy. The fetus is protected from excess T exposure by the 
ability of the fetal-placental unit to aromatize T to estrogens, espe-
cially after the first trimester. The diagnosis of 46,XX DSD arising 
from transplacental passage of androgenic steroids is based on 
exclusion of other forms of female pseudohermaphrodism and a 
history of drug exposure. Surgical correction of the genitalia, if 
needed, is the only therapy necessary. 
 Nonadrenal 46,XX DSD can be associated with imperforate 
anus, renal anomalies, and other malformations of the lower intes-
tine and urinary tract and in some affected individuals. There may 
be anomalies of the ovaries and Müllerian structures. Sporadic as 
well as familial cases have been reported. 
 46,XY DSD (Male Pseudohermaphrodism) 
 Patients with 46,XY DSD have gonads that are testes, but the 
genital ducts or external genitalia, or both, that are not completely 
masculinized. 46,XY DSD can result from deficient T secretion as 
a consequence of (1) defective testicular differentiation (testicular 
dysgenesis); (2) failure of T secretion by Leydig cell due to a muta-
tion in the Leydig cell hCG/LH receptor which is associated with 
Leydig cell hypoplasia as well as an inability to respond to hCG/
LH stimulation; (3) impaired secretion of T; (4) failure of conver-
sion of T to DHT; (5) failure of target tissue response to T and 
DHT; (6) impaired secretion of AMH or defective AMH recep-
tors; and (7) environmental influences. 
 Testicular Unresponsiveness to hCG
and LH (Leydig Cell Hypoplasia) 
 Male sexual differentiation is dependent on the production of T 
by fetal Leydig cells. Leydig cell T secretion is initially autono-
mous and then later hCG dependent during the critical period of 
male sexual development in the latter part of the first trimester. 
After the first trimester, Leydig cell T secretion is dependent on 
stimulation by pituitary LH, as evidenced by the finding of micro-
penis in 46,XY patients associated with anencephaly, apituitarism, 
or congenital hypothalamic hypopituitarism. 
 Absence, hypoplasia, or unresponsiveness of Leydig cells to 
hCG-LH results in deficient T production and, consequently, 
ambiguous male genitalia. The extent of the genital ambiguity is a 
function of the degree of T deficiency. The phenotype ranges from 
complete forms with female external genitalia, undescended testes, 
absent Müllerian ducts, rudimentary Wolffian ducts, and hyper-
gonadotropic hypogonadism to milder forms with micropenis or 
males with normal male genitalia and hypergonadotropic hypogo-
nadism at puberty. Testes are small postpubertally and have 
510    CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation
decreased or absent Leydig cells, normal-appearing Sertoli cells, 
and seminiferous tubules with spermatogenic arrest. A number of 
patients with absent, hypoplastic, or unresponsive Leydig cells due 
to a mutation in the gene encoding the LH-hCG receptor have 
been reported. Studies in patients with the clinical and chemical 
features of Leydig cell hypoplasia indicate that 50% of the patients 
with this phenotype have had no identifiable mutation in the 
LH-hCG receptor. Recently a mutation in a previously unrecog-
nized exon has been described in some of these patients. 46,XX 
females with mutations in the LH beta subunit of LH receptor 
have female external genitalia, feminization at puberty, oligo-
amenorrhea, and infertility. 
 Diagnosis: Plasma 17α-hydroxyprogesterone, androstene-
dione, and T levels are low, and hCG elicits little or no response 
in T or its precursors in the complete form and a blunted T 
response in the partial form, in which partial virilization can occur 
at puberty. Adrenal steroidogenesis is normal in these patients. 
 Treatment depends on the age at diagnosis and the extent of mas-
culinization. A female sex assignment has usually been chosen in 
patients with female external genitalia. In patients with predominantly 
male external genitalia, T augments penile development in infancy and 
childhood and virilizes the patient at puberty. 
 Inborn Errors of Testosterone Biosynthesis 
 Figure 14–15 demonstrates the major pathway in T biosynthesis 
in the testes; each step is associated with an inherited defect that 
results in T deficiency and, consequently, 46,XY DSD. Steps 1, 2, 
and 3 are enzymatic deficiencies that occur in both the adrenals and 
gonads and result in defective synthesis of both corticosteroids and 
T. Thus, they represent forms of CAH, whereas steps 4 and 5 in 
T synthesis are confined to the testes. 
 Star deficiency (congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia), 
P450scc 
 46,XY DSD with female or ambiguous genitalia, 
sexual infantilism, and adrenal insufficiency are consequences of 
very early defects in the synthesis of all steroids affecting the con-
version of cholesterol to Δ 5 -pregnenolone and result in severe 
adrenal and gonadal deficiency. Recessive mutations in the gene 
encoding StAR, a protein that effects transport of cholesterol 
from the outer to the inner mitochondrial membrane (where it is 
converted to pregnenolone), have been identified in almost all 
patients with the clinical syndrome of congenital lipoid adrenal 
hyperplasia. Mutations in this gene located on chromosome 8 are 
prevalent in Japan and Korea where patients with lipoid adrenal 
hyperplasia represent the second most common form of CAH 
Cholesterol (inner mitochondrial membrane)
Δ5-Pregnenolone
Progesterone
17α-OH-Progesterone
Δ4-Androstenedione
Estrone
Testosterone
Estradiol
1
3
2
4
5
P450scc (side-
chain cleavage)
Dehydroepiandrosterone
P450c17 (17, 20-Lyase)
POR, b5
Δ5-Androstenediol
17β-HSD-3
 (17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-3)
17α-OH-Δ5-Pregnenolone
Dihydrotestosterone
SRD5α2
5α-reductase
P450c17  (17α-hydroxylase)
POR
P450
aromatase
Cholesterol (outer mitochondrial membrane)
STAR
3β-HSD-2
 (3β-hydroxsteroid dehydrogenase-2)
FIGURE 14–15 Enzymatic defects in the biosynthetic pathway for testosterone. All five of the enzymatic defects cause 46,XY DSD (male 
pseudohermaphroditism) in affected males. Although all of the blocks affect gonadal steroidogenesis, those at steps 1, 2, and 3 are associated 
with major abnormalities in the biosynthesis of glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids in the adrenal. Chemical names for enzymes are shown 
with traditional names in parentheses. (Modified and reproduced, with permission, from Conte FA, Grumbach MM. Pathogenesis, classification, 
diagnosis, and treatment of anomalies of sex. In: DeGroot L, ed. Endocrinology. Grune & Stratton; 1989.)
CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation     511
after 21-hydroxylase deficiency. StAR is expressed in the adrenals 
and gonads but not in the placenta. Hence, placental synthesis of 
progesterone, which is required to maintain pregnancy after midg-
estation, is not affected by mutations in StAR. Affected males 
usually have female or, less commonly, ambiguous external genita-
lia with a blind vaginal pouch and hypoplastic male genital ducts, 
no Müllerian derivatives, adrenal insufficiency, and hypergonado-
tropic hypogonadism. Many infants with StAR deficiency do not 
manifest evidence of salt wasting until after several weeks of life. 
The accumulation of cholesterol in steroidogenic organs that are 
functioning in utero (adrenals and testes) destroys the function of 
these organs resulting in the phenotype, for example, adrenal 
insufficiency and impaired differentiation of the genitalia in 
males. Death in early infancy from adrenal insufficiency is not 
uncommon. Affected females have normal genitalia and go into 
puberty as the ovaries are relatively quiescent until puberty and 
roughly 14% of steroidogenesis is not StAR-dependent, appar-
ently allowing for estrogen production until cholesterol engorge-
ment destroys the function of the ovary and results in 
hypergonadotropic hypogonadism and large polycystic ovaries 
filled with cholesterol. The absence of Müllerian anlage distin-
guishes StAR/P450scc deficiency from patients with a similar 
phenotype due to SF-1 deficiency. As in other genetic defects, 
phenotypic variability results from the magnitude of the func-
tional activity of the mutation. A nonclassic late-onset form of this 
condition has been described. Affected males have normal external 
genitalia; they develop, usually in the first decade of life, cortisol 
deficiency with or without mineralocorticoid deficiency. Those 
individuals with only cortisol deficiency need to be distinguished 
from those with isolated familial glucocorticoid deficiency due to 
mutations in the ACTH receptor (MC2R) and the melanocortin-2 
receptor accessory protein (MRAP).
 Diagnosis: The diagnosis is confirmed by the lack of or low 
levels of all C 21 , C 19 , and C 18 steroids in plasma and urine and an 
absent response to ACTH and hCG stimulation. Large lipid-laden 
adrenals, that displace the kidneys downward, may be demon-
strated by intravenous urography, abdominal ultrasonography, or 
CT scan. Treatment involves replacement with appropriate doses of 
glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids, prophylactic orchiectomy 
in affected 46,XY patients raised as females, and estrogen replace-
ment at puberty. Since the adrenals are not functionally hyperplas-
tic, the glucocorticoid dose needed in these patients is less than is 
the case of P450c21-hydroxylase deficiency. A nonclassic late-onset 
form of this condition has been described.  
 P450scc 
 The  P450scc gene has been cloned and localized to 
chromosome 15. It codes for the enzyme scc, which is the first step 
in the  conversion of cholesterol to pregnenolone in all steroido-
genic organs. Seven patients with mutations in the  P450scc gene(s) 
have been reported. All seven cases reported have had a 46,XY 
karyotype. Female genitalia were present in five of seven, clitoro-
megaly in one patient, and midshaft hypospadias in another. The 
onset of adrenal insufficiency varied from the neonatal period to 
as late as 9 years of age in the patient with hypospadias. The latter 
patient and two more recently described patients with compound 
heterozygosity for P450scc mutations had residual P450scc activity. 
These patients had later onset of adrenal insufficiency than seen in 
classic patients and the males had hypospadias. These patients are 
similar to the non-classic form of StAR deficiency, both clinically 
and hormonally, except none had normal or enlarged adrenals on 
MRI or ultrasound. It has been suggested that patients with 
P450scc deficiency survive gestation due to either residual P450scc 
activity or due to continuing progesterone secretion beyond mid-
gestation by the maternal corpus luteum.
 Diagnosis: P450scc deficiency is suggested by the finding of a 
46,XY DSD with undervirilization of the external genitalia, 
absent Müllerian ducts, adrenal insufficiency, and low baseline 
and deficient steroid responses to ACTH and hCG. The absence 
of adrenal enlargement on MRI or ultrasound distinguishes 
P450scc deficiency from a StAR deficiency. 
 3β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 Δ 5 -isomerase 
deficiency 
 3β-HSD type 2 Δ 5 -isomerase deficiency is an early 
defect in steroid synthesis that results in inability of the adrenals 
and gonads to convert 3β-hydroxy-Δ 5 steroids to 3-keto-Δ 4 ste-
roids. Deficiency leads to 46,XY or 46,XX DSD and adrenal 
insufficiency. This enzyme is encoded for by a recessive gene on 
the short arm of chromosome number 1. There are two highly 
homologous genes encoding 3β-HSDs on chromosome 1. The 
type 1  3β-HSD gene is expressed in the placenta, liver, skin, and 
other peripheral tissues, whereas type 2 is expressed in the adrenals 
and gonads. 3β-HSD is not a cytochrome P450 enzyme, and it 
requires NAD + as a cofactor. 
 Mutations causing frame-shifts, stops, and missense have been 
reported in the  type 2 gene in affected patients. Mutations which 
decrease enzymatic activity of the type 2 enzyme significantly 
result in a severe deficiency of aldosterone, cortisol, T, and estra-
diol secretion ( see Figure 14–15 ). Males with this defect are 
incompletely masculinized due to the defect in 3β-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase in the testes. They have a small penis, hypospadias, 
a blind vaginal pouch, and absent Müllerian structures. Females 
have normal female genitalia or mild clitoromegaly. 
 The undervirilization in males is readily explainable by the 
block in T synthesis in the testes during the critical period of male 
genital differentiation. However, the mild virilization observed in 
some females is still not readily explained. It has been suggested 
that the conversion of Δ 5 -17-OH pregnenolone to 17-hydroxy-
progesterone in utero by peripheral 3β-HSD-1 facilitates the 
production of low levels of DHT via the backdoor pathway ( see 
Figure 14–10 ). Alternatively, the conversion of excess DHEA-S to 
T by 3β-HSD-1 in the placenta during the critical window of sex 
differentiation, when aromatase activity is relatively low, may be 
implicated. Further studies of steroidogenesis in affected patients 
with null mutations may shed light on this question. 
 Adrenal crises with salt loss usually occurs in early infancy in 
affected patients. Affected males may experience normal male 
puberty but often have prominent gynecomastia. Rare cases with 
normal puberty and fertility have been reported. Individuals with 
a mild non-salt-losing form of 3β-HSD type 2 deficiency are 
reported as well as a late-onset form in individuals presenting with 
premature pubarche alone. These patients had elevated Δ 5 steroids 
as well as mutations in the  3β-HSD type 2 gene. 
512    CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation
 Diagnosis: The diagnosis of 3β-HSD deficiency type 2 is 
based on finding elevated concentrations of Δ 5 -pregnenolone, Δ 5 -
17α-hydroxypregnenolone, DHEA and its sulfate, and other 
3β-hydroxy-Δ 5 steroids in the plasma and urine. 3-Keto-Δ 4 ste-
roids (ie, 17-hydroxyprogesterone and androstenedione) may be 
elevated due to peripheral conversion of 3β-hydroxy-Δ 5 to 
3-keto-Δ 4 steroids by the enzyme encoded by the  type 1 gene. The 
diagnosis of 3β-HSD-2 deficiency may be facilitated by detecting 
abnormal levels of serum Δ 5 -17α-hydroxypregnenolone and 
DHEA and its sulfates as well as abnormal ratios of Δ 5 to Δ 4 ste-
roids after intravenous administration of ACTH. For example, 
after ACTH stimulation, 17-hydroxypregnenolone levels are more 
than 5.3 SD above the mean for normal individuals in affected 
infants, more than 35 SD above the mean in prepubertal children, 
and more than 21 SD above the mean in adults. The 17-hydroxy-
pregnenolone-cortisol ratio is more than 6.4 SD above the mean 
in infants, more than 23 SD above the mean in prepubertal chil-
dren, and more than 221 SD above the mean in adults. The 
diagnosis is confirmed by detecting mutations in the  type 2 
3β-HSD-Δ 5 isomerase gene. Suppression of the increased plasma 
and urinary 3β-hydroxy-Δ 5 steroids by the administration of dex-
amethasone distinguishes 3β-HSD deficiency from a virilizing 
adrenal tumor. 
 Treatment of this condition is similar to that of other forms of 
adrenal hyperplasia. 
 P450c17 deficiency, 17α-hydroxylase deficiency 
 A sin-
gle gene on chromosome 10 encodes both adrenal and testicular 
P450c17 hydroxylase as well as 17,20-lyase activity. This enzyme 
catalyzes the 17-hydroxylation of pregnenolone and progesterone 
to 17-hydroxypregnenolone and 17-hydroxyprogesterone as well 
as the scission (lyase) of 17-hydroxypregnenolone to the C 19 ste-
roid (DHEA) in the adrenal cortex and gonads. Mutations affect-
ing 17-hydroxylase activity have included stop codons, frame-shifts, 
deletions, and missense substitutions. P450c17 deficiency is trans-
mitted in a manner similar to other enzymatic defects in steroido-
genesis as an autosomal recessive trait. 
 A defect in 17α-hydroxylation in the zona fasciculata of the adre-
nal and in the gonads results in impaired synthesis of 17- 
hydroxyprogesterone and 17-hydroxypregnenolone and, consequently, 
cortisol and sex steroids. The secretion of large amounts of corticos-
terone and DOC leads to hypertension, hypokalemia, and alkalosis. 
Although these patients are cortisol-deficient, the excess mineralocor-
ticoid secretion, as well as elevated levels of corticosterone, prevents 
symptomatic adrenal insufficiency except during stress. Increased 
DOC secretion from the zona fasciculata results in hypertension and 
hypokalemia, and suppression of renin (low renin hypertension) and, 
decreased aldosterone secretion. Affected 46,XY individuals with less 
than 25% enzymatic activity present with female genitalia with a 
blind vaginal pouch or hypoplastic male genitalia, hypertension, and 
hypokalemic alkalosis with hypergonadotropic hypogonadism at 
puberty. Müllerian structures are absent; Wolffian structures are hyp-
oplastic. Partial forms of 17-hydroxylase deficiency have been 
described with hypospadias, with or without hypertension. 
 Affected 46,XX females have normal development of the inter-
nal ducts and external genitalia but manifest sexual infantilism 
with elevated gonadotropin concentrations at puberty and low 
renin hypertension. Affected females with 5% or greater activity 
of the enzyme can make estrogen at puberty and feminize, 
although menses are usually irregular. 
 Diagnosis: 17α-Hydroxylase deficiency should be suspected in 
a 46,XY DSD with hypokalemic alkalosis and hypertension, as 
well as a 46,XX female with the above findings and sexual infantil-
ism at puberty. ACTH stimulation testing will reveal elevated 
levels of DOC, corticosterone, and 18-hydroxycorticosterone as 
well as progesterone and Δ 5 pregnenolone, but low levels of 
17-hydroxyprogesterone, 17-hydroxypregnenolone, sex steroids, 
and cortisol. Glucocorticoid therapy, as given for 21-hydroxylase 
deficiency, suppresses ACTH and hence deoxycorticosterone pro-
duction. This decreases the blood pressure and returns the potas-
sium and aldosterone levels to normal. These patients usually 
require sex steroid replacement at puberty. 
 Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome 
 The phenotypic spectrum of 
this syndrome typically includes microcephaly, mental retardation, 
ptosis, micrognathia, severe hypospadias, micropenis, growth fail-
ure, and, rarely, adrenal insufficiency. The genitalia in affected 
46,XY males may range from normal male to female. The syn-
drome is caused by a mutation in the gene encoding sterol Δ-7-
reductase,  DHCR7 , causing defective cholesterol synthesis. The 
diagnosis is made by the clinical features and confirmed by dem-
onstration of low levels of cholesterol and increased levels of 
7-dehydrocholesterol. 
 Enzyme Defects Primarily Affecting 
Testosterone Biosynthesis by the Testes 
 7,20-lyase deficiency 
 The enzyme encoded by the  P450c17 
gene mediates both the 17-hydroxylation of pregnenolone and 
progesterone to 17-hydroxypregnenolone and 17-hydroxyproges-
terone and the scission of the C 17,20 bond of 17-hydroxypreg-
nenolone to yield DHEA in the adrenals and gonads (see
 Figure 14–15 ). In humans, the scission of 17-hydroxyprogesterone 
to androstenedione occurs at a low level. In this rare autosomal 
recessive disorder, the defect involves only the scission of the C 21 
steroids to C 19 steroids. This results in a defect in T synthesis and, 
as a consequence, 46,XY DSD in the male and affected females 
with estradiol deficiency, hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, and 
giant ovarian cysts. The initially reported 46,XY DSD individuals 
both had micropenis, perineal hypospadias, a bifid scrotum, a 
blind vaginal pouch, and cryptorchidism. The administration of 
hCG resulted in a marked rise in plasma 17-hydroxyprogesterone 
with a poor response in plasma DHEA, androstenedione, and T 
consistent with a diagnosis of isolated 17,20-lyase deficiency. 
Analyses of the  P450c17 gene in affected individuals has revealed 
mutations that result in a specific decrease in 17,20-lyase activity 
encoded by the  P450c17 gene, but not 17-hydroxylase activity. 
 Affected 46,XY males with 17,20-lyase deficiency may present 
with female external genitalia. Patients with 17,20-lyase deficiency 
have low circulating levels of T, androstenedione, DHEA, and 
estradiol in the face of markedly elevated levels of progesterone 
CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation     513
and 17-hydroxyprogesterone. At puberty, poor virilization occurs 
with elevated gonadotropins in affected 46,XY patients. 
 Cytochrome b5 reductase is a cofactor for 17,20-lyase. 
Mutations in this gene cause methemoglobinemia as well as a 
defect on 17,20-lyase. Two patients have been reported with 
mutations in b5 reductase causing 46,XY DSD. 
 Diagnosis: The diagnosis of 17,20-lyase deficiency can be 
confirmed by demonstration of an increased ratio of 17-hydroxy 
C 21 steroids to C 19 steroids (T, DHEA, Δ 5 -androstenediol, and 
androstenedione) after stimulation with ACTH or hCG and by 
DNA analysis of the  P450c17 gene. Patients require sex steroid 
replacement at puberty. 
 17β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-3 (17β-HSD-3)
deficiency 
 At least six isoenzymes of 17β-HSD mediate ste-
roidogenesis in humans. The last step in T biosynthesis by the 
testes involves the reduction of androstenedione to T, and estrone 
to estradiol by 17-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-3, an NADPH-
dependent microsomal enzyme. This gene is located on chromo-
some 9q22 and is expressed primarily in the testes. As with other 
genes which code for enzymes, it is autosomal recessive. 17β-
HSD-3 is not expressed in the ovary. The conversion of estrone to 
estradiol is mediated by 17β-HSD-1 expressed in the granulosa 
cells of the ovary. 
 Mutations in 17β-HSD-3 are a cause of 46,XY DSD. At birth, 
males with a deficiency of the enzyme 17β-HSD-3 have pre-
dominantly female or mildly ambiguous external genitalia result-
ing from T deficiency during the critical period of male 
differentiation. They have male duct development, absent 
Müllerian structures with a blind vaginal pouch, and inguinal or 
intra-abdominal testes. Affected infants with female genitalia are 
invariably raised as females, and the phenotypic appearance of the 
genitalia, along with the absence of Müllerian duct derivatives, 
can be confused with complete androgen insensitivity. The finding 
of Wolffian ducts, associated with female external genitalia in 
these patients, is not yet well explained. At puberty, progressive 
virilization with clitoral hypertrophy occurs as a result of periph-
eral extraglandular conversion of androstenedione to T by 17β-
HSD-5. This is often associated with the concurrent development 
of gynecomastia related to increased estrone levels. Plasma gonad-
otropin, androstenedione, and estrone levels are elevated, whereas 
T and estradiol concentration are relatively low. 
 Analysis of a cohort of 17 patients with classic 17β-HSD-3 
deficiency revealed 14 mutations in the  17 β-HSD-3 gene. Twelve 
patients had homozygous mutations, four were compound 
heterozygotes, and one was a presumed heterozygote. In a large 
cohort from the Gaza Strip, an Arg 80 → Gln mutation was found 
with partial (15%-20%) enzymatic activity. In this isolate, viriliza-
tion at puberty generally resulted in a change of gender identity 
from female to male. 
 Diagnosis: 17-HSD-3 deficiency should be included in the 
differential diagnosis of (1) 46,XY DSDs with absent Müllerian 
derivatives who have no abnormality in glucocorticoid or miner-
alocorticoid synthesis; and (2) 46,XY DSDs who virilize at 
puberty, especially if they also exhibit gynecomastia. The diagnosis 
of 17β-HSD-3 deficiency is confirmed by the demonstration of 
inappropriately high plasma levels of estrone and androstenedione 
and increased ratios of plasma androstenedione to T and estrone 
to estradiol after prolonged stimulation with hCG in infants and 
children. 
 Management of affected individuals depends on the age at 
diagnosis, the degree of ambiguity of the external genitalia, surgi-
cal options, and family and cultural views, as it does with those 
with other forms of 46,XY DSD. In the patient assigned a male 
sex identity, plastic repair of the genitalia and T augmentation of 
phallic growth prepubertally, as well as T replacement therapy at 
puberty, is necessary to suppress the pituitary gonadotropin levels 
and, consequently, the elevated estrone levels that result in gyne-
comastia in untreated pubertal patients. Retained testes must be 
observed closely by palpation and ultrasound because an increased 
incidence of malignancy has been reported in a small cohort of 
patients. In patients reared as females, the appropriate treatment is 
castration or prevention of virilization with GnRH agonist at 
puberty until the individual’s gender identity can be confirmed. 
Affected 46,XX females have no abnormalities in phenotype or 
gonadal function because 17β-HSD-3 is not expressed in the 
ovary. 
 The prevalence of a female-to-male gender role change in 
patients with 17β-HSD-3 deficiency appears to approximate that 
found in patients with 5α-reductase-2 deficiency. Both these con-
ditions are associated with spontaneous virilization at puberty in 
patients whose testes were not removed. However, a number of the 
large cohorts of patients with 17β-HSD-3 deficiency summarized 
in the literature are from areas where a primacy is placed on a male 
role by the cultural advantages of the society. In individuals diag-
nosed in infancy, the information on the change in sex makes 
discussion of this issue with the parents mandatory before they 
make an informed decision about sex assignment. 
 Enzyme Defects Affecting DHT Synthesis; 
5α-Reductase-2 Deficiency (Pseudovaginal 
Perineoscrotal Hypospadias, Peripheral) 
 The products of two genes catalyze the conversion of T to DHT. 
They are termed type 1 and type 2 5α-reductase. The type 1 
enzyme is expressed in skin postnatally until 2 to 3 years of age 
and thereafter remains low until puberty. No instances of muta-
tion in the  type 1 gene as yet have been reported. The type 2 
isoenzyme is found in fetal genital skin, male accessory glands, and 
the prostate. 5α-Reductase-2 deficiency is transmitted as an auto-
somal recessive trait, and the enzymatic defect exhibits genetic 
heterogeneity. In patients with 5α-reductase deficiency, the 
isozyme with a pH 5.5 optimum is deficient (type 2). The gene 
encoding this enzyme contains five exons and is located on chro-
mosome 2, band p23. A variety of mutations are reported, includ-
ing deletions, nonsense, splicing defects, and the more common 
missense mutations. Two-thirds of patients are homozygous for a 
single mutation, and the remainder are compound heterozygotes. 
 The defective conversion of T to DHT produces a unique form 
of 46,XY DSD. Phenotypically, these individuals may vary from 
those with a microphallus to individuals with pseudovaginal 
514    CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation
 perineoscrotal hypospadias. At birth, in the most severely affected 
individuals, ambiguous external genitalia are characterized by a 
small hypospadiac phallus bound down in chordee, a bifid scro-
tum, and a urogenital sinus that opens onto the perineum. A blind 
vaginal pouch is present, opening either into a urogenital sinus or 
directly into the urethra. The testes are either inguinal or labial. 
Müllerian structures are absent, and the Wolffian structures are 
well differentiated. At puberty, affected males virilize; the voice 
deepens, muscle mass increases, and the phallus enlarges. The 
bifid scrotum becomes rugose and pigmented. The testes enlarge 
and descend into the labioscrotal folds, and spermatogenesis may 
ensue. Gynecomastia is notably absent in these patients. Of note 
is the absence of acne, temporal hair recession, and hirsutism. The 
striking virilization noted at puberty, as opposed to its absence in 
utero, is attributed to the expression and function of the  type 1 
gene at puberty and, as a consequence, the generation of sufficient 
amounts of DHT by peripheral conversion to induce phallic 
growth and other signs of masculinization. A remarkable feature 
of this form of 46,XY DSD is the change in gender identity by 
many from female to male at puberty. 
 In the first 1 to 3 months of life after the onset of puberty, 
patients with 5α-reductase-2 deficiency have normal to ele-
vated T concentrations and slightly elevated plasma concentra-
tions of LH. As expected, plasma DHT is low, and the T/DHT 
ratio is abnormally high. Apparently, lack of 5α reduction of 
T to DHT in utero, during the critical phases of male sex dif-
ferentiation, results in incomplete masculinization of the 
urogenital sinus and external genitalia. However, T-dependent 
Wolffian structures are normally developed. Partial and mild 
forms of 5α-reductase deficiency have been described, in 
which affected individuals can present with hypospadias and/
or microphallus. Compound heterozygotes for 5α-reductase-2 
deficiency are described who had a hypospadias repair in 
infancy and, as adults, were fertile. 
 Diagnosis: 5α-Reductase-2 deficiency should be suspected in 
46,XY DSDs with a blind vaginal pouch and in males with hypos-
padias and microphallus. The diagnosis can be confirmed by 
demonstration of an abnormally high plasma T/DHT ratio, either 
under basal conditions (>10.5) or after hCG stimulation (>8.5). 
The T-DHT levels need to be measured accurately, preferably by 
LCMSMS. Other confirmatory findings, especially in newborns, 
include an increased 5β/5α ratio of urinary C 19 and C 21 steroid 
metabolites. 5α-reductase deficiency should be ruled out in all 
46,XY DSDs who have a normal or elevated T response to 
hCG. In the event that the T/DHT ratio in blood or the 5β/5α 
ratio of urinary steroids is not diagnostic, genotyping should be 
performed. 
 The early diagnosis of this condition is particularly critical. In 
view of the natural history of this disorder, a male gender assign-
ment is indicated, and DHT or high-dose T therapy should be 
initiated in order to augment phallic size. Repair of hypospadias 
should be performed in infancy or early childhood. In patients 
who are diagnosed after infancy in whom gender identity is 
unequivocally female after the age of informed consent, genito-
plasty, prophylactic orchiectomy, and estrogen substitution ther-
apy are still the treatments of choice. 
 Disorders of Androgen Action (Androgen 
Receptor and Postreceptor Defects) 
 Syndrome of complete androgen resistance (insensitiv-
ity) and its variants 
 The androgen receptor gene is located 
on the X chromosome between Xq11 and Xq13. Androgen resis-
tance is transmitted as an X-linked recessive trait. Of note about 
30% of mutations occur spontaneously. The gene is composed of 
eight exons. Exon 1 encodes the amino terminal end of the andro-
gen receptor protein and is involved in the regulation of transcrip-
tion. Exons 2 and 3 encode the DNA-binding zinc finger. The 5′ 
portion of exon 4 is called the hinge region and plays a role in 
nuclear targeting. Exons 5 to 8 specify the carboxyl terminal por-
tion of the androgen receptor—the androgen-binding domain. 
The gene has eight serine residues that can be phosphorylated, 
three lysine residues that can be acetylated, and two lysine residues 
that can be sumoylated. More than 600 mutations in the andro-
gen receptor are described. 
 The syndrome of complete androgen resistance (insensitivity) 
is characterized by a 46,XY karyotype, bilateral testes, absent or 
hypoplastic Wolffian ducts, female-appearing external genitalia 
with a hypoplastic clitoris and labia minora, a blind vaginal 
pouch, and absent or rudimentary Müllerian derivatives. Testes 
are present in the labial folds, inguinal canal or intra-abdominally. 
At puberty, female secondary sexual characteristics develop, but 
menarche does not ensue. Pubic and axillary hair is usually sparse 
and in one-third of patients is totally absent. Affected patients are 
taller than average females (mean height 162.3 cm). Some patients 
have a variant form of this syndrome and exhibit slight clitoral 
enlargement. These patients may exhibit mild virilization in addi-
tion to the development of breasts and a female habitus at 
puberty. 
 Androgen resistance during embryogenesis prevents masculin-
ization of the external genitalia and complete differentiation of the 
Wolffian ducts. The finding of Wolffian duct derivatives in some 
patients with apparent complete androgen resistance has been 
attributed to mutant receptors that have some residual activity and 
can respond to high local levels of T in vivo or to cofactors which 
modulate androgen sensitivity. Secretion of AMH by the fetal 
Sertoli cells leads to regression of the Müllerian derivatives—the 
ducts, uterus, and upper one-third of the vagina. At puberty, 
androgen resistance results in augmented LH secretion with 
increases in T secretion and estradiol production due to lack of T 
feedback on the hypothalamus. FSH levels are normal because of 
inhibin B and estradiol feedback. Estradiol arises mainly from 
peripheral conversion of T and androstenedione as well as from 
direct secretion by the testes. Androgen resistance, coupled with 
increased testicular estradiol secretion and conversion of T to 
estradiol, results in the development of female secondary sexual 
characteristics at puberty. The timing of the onset of the pubertal 
growth spurt is similar to that in normal females. 
 Patients with complete androgen resistance exhibit heterogene-
ity in DHT binding to the androgen receptor. Receptor-negative 
and receptor-positive individuals with qualitative defects such as 
thermolability, instability, and impaired binding affinity as well as 
individuals with presumed normal binding are reported. Analysis 
CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation     515
of the androgen receptor gene in individuals with androgen resis-
tance has shed light on the heterogeneity of DHT binding. 
Patients with the receptor-negative form of complete androgen 
resistance usually have point mutations or substitutions in exons 5 
to 8, which encode the androgen-binding domain of the receptor; 
a striking number of missense mutations occur in the ligand-
binding region of the androgen receptor. 
 Other genetic defects such as deletions, mutations in a splice 
donor site, and nonsense mutations causing premature termina-
tion codons are less common in this group of patients. Mutations 
in exon 1 commonly cause complete androgen resistance; almost 
all code for a premature stop codon that results in a truncated 
nonfunctional androgen receptor. Mutations in exon 3 (which 
encodes the DNA-binding segment of the androgen receptor) are 
associated with normal binding of DHT to the receptor but the 
inability of the ligand-receptor complex to bind to DNA and 
initiate mRNA transcription. These mutations result in receptor-
positive complete androgen resistance. The phenotype of the 
affected patient correlates better with the transcriptional activity 
of the ligand-androgen receptor complex than with in vitro studies 
of the androgen receptor–binding activity. 
 Other factors that play a role in genotype-phenotype variations 
include somatic mosaicism, transcriptional coregulatory proteins, 
and other  modifier genes. Somatic mutations—mutations that 
occur after zygote formation—result in the presence of both wild-
type and mutant androgen receptor. Individuals with a somatic 
mutation may exhibit virilization at puberty owing to the presence 
of the wild-type receptor, even though some of these patients may 
present in infancy with the clinical picture of apparent complete 
androgen resistance. 
 Diagnosis: In the absence of a family history, the presence of a 
testis-like mass in the inguinal canal or labia majora may be the 
only clue to the diagnosis. Approximately 1% to 2% of females 
with inguinal herniae have androgen resistance. Postpubertally, 
the patients present with primary amenorrhea, normal breast 
development, and absent or sparse pubic or axillary hair. Pelvic 
examination or ultrasound confirms the absence of a cervix and 
uterus. 
 The complete and incomplete forms of androgen resistance 
must be distinguished from other forms of 46,XY DSD due to 
androgen deficiency, such as biosynthetic defects in T synthesis 
and 5α-reductase deficiency. There is no readily available, rapid, 
in vivo or in vitro assay to determine androgen sensitivity. The 
diagnosis is suggested by the clinical picture, the family history, 
and the presence of elevated basal and hCG-induced T levels with 
normal levels of DHT. Neonates with complete androgen resis-
tance do not have elevated basal LH and T levels and do not 
experience a postnatal rise in these values, as is observed in normal 
infants and in those with incomplete androgen resistance. It has 
been suggested that an elevated AMH concentration is a marker 
of androgen resistance and androgen deficiency. It is not specific, 
as it may be elevated in other causes of 46,XY DSD. Defective or 
absent androgen receptor expression in Sertoli cells is responsible 
for the absence of AMH suppression. Determination of abnor-
malities in androgen binding as well as transactivation studies 
are diagnostic, but they are labor intensive and not universally 
available, whereas mutational analysis of the androgen receptor 
gene is commercially available. 
 Management: The of patients with complete androgen resis-
tance, as with most other patients with DSD, is complex. It 
requires a team of experienced physicians—an endocrinologist, 
psychologist and/or psychiatrist, a surgeon, and a social worker, as 
well as a primary care physician. When the diagnosis is definitive, 
the parents need to be fully informed about the karyotype, genet-
ics, pathophysiology, medical and surgical options, and the natural 
history of complete androgen resistance. They should be informed 
that so far, except for very rare patients, gender identity, role, and 
behavior are female. Inguinal herniae, if present, need to be 
repaired. A gonadal malignancy rate of 1% to 2% is present after 
14 years of age. Thus, it is prudent to allow these girls to feminize 
spontaneously at puberty and after full disclosure, discuss the 
question of prophylactic gonadectomy with them and their par-
ents (who have been previously informed of this possibility). 
Spontaneous feminization at puberty may help to reinforce their 
sense of being a normal although infertile female. Allowing them 
to make an informed decision about gonadectomy reinforces their 
sense of autonomy. Hormonal replacement will be necessary post-
gonadectomy. 
 Postpubertally, the functional adequacy of the vagina should be 
assessed. Vaginoplasty is rarely necessary. Vaginal dilation with 
plastic molds is invariably successful in augmenting vaginal size 
and should be initiated if necessary postpubertally with the 
patient’s informed consent. 
 The continuing involvement of the psychologist or psychiatrist 
will facilitate the question of when, how, and by whom the 
patients should be fully informed of their karyotype, infertility, 
and therapeutic options. There is no mandated guideline for this, 
and the approach needs to be individualized for each patient and 
family. In general, information is given in an age-appropriate way, 
taking into consideration the patient’s age, cognitive abilities, and 
psychologic development. It is a gradual process, done in an 
understandable, caring way, which culminates in full disclosure. 
Continuing psychologic/psychiatric counseling should be avail-
able concerning sexual relationships and psychosocial issues. The 
Androgen Insensitivity Society (http://www.aissg.org) is a valuable 
support group for patients as well as parents and provides informa-
tion, experiences from older, affected patients and parents, and the 
ability to meet and talk with females who have similar DSDs. 
 Syndrome of partial androgen resistance (insensitivity) 
and its variants (Reifenstein syndrome) 
 Patients with 
partial androgen resistance manifest a wide spectrum of pheno-
types as far as the degree of masculinization is concerned. The 
external genitalia at birth are classically characterized by perinos-
crotal hypospadias, micropenis, and a bifid scrotum. The testes 
may be undescended. Isolated hypospadias may occur in the mild-
est form of partial androgen resistance. There is variability of 
masculinization of affected males even within kinships. Müllerian 
duct derivatives are absent and Wolffian duct derivatives are pres-
ent, but they are usually hypoplastic. At puberty, virilization usu-
ally recapitulates that seen in utero and is generally poor; pubic 
and axillary hair as well as gynecomastia are usually present. The 
516    CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation
most common phenotype postpubertally is the male posthypospa-
dial repair with a small phallus and gynecomastia. Axillary and 
pubic hairs are normal. The testes remain small and exhibit azoo-
spermia as a consequence of germinal cell arrest. Unlike patients 
with complete androgen resistance, in infancy the levels of plasma 
LH and T are elevated. Postpubertally, as in individuals with com-
plete androgen resistance, LH, T, and estradiol are elevated. 
However, the degree of feminization in these individuals, despite 
increased estradiol levels, is less than that found in those with the 
syndrome of complete androgen resistance. 
 Androgen receptor studies in these patients have usually shown 
quantitative or qualitative abnormalities in androgen binding. 
Mutations leading to partial reduction of androgen action result 
in incomplete virilization. As previously noted, the best correla-
tion with the phenotype is the degree of impairment of transcrip-
tional activity of the ligand-androgen receptor complex. A wide 
variety of androgen receptor gene mutations may result in the 
same phenotype, and a specific mutation is not always associated 
with the same phenotype. In general, point mutations that result 
in more conservative amino acid substitutions are more likely to 
result in partial rather than complete androgen resistance. In 111 
individuals with partial androgen resistance in which DNA was 
sequenced, only 27 (24%) had an identifiable mutation. The 
majority of the patients with mutations had abnormal DHT bind-
ing to the androgen receptor. 
 Diagnosis: The differential diagnosis of patients with ambigu-
ous genitalia and absent Müllerian structures includes partial 
androgen resistance, all the forms of dysgenetic 46,XY DSD, 
Leydig cells unresponsive to hCG/LH, biosynthetic errors in T 
synthesis, 5α-reductase deficiency, and SF-1 mutations. These 
entities may be parsed by steroid analysis in response to ACTH 
and hCG stimulation. A protocol frequently used for hCG stimu-
lation is as follows: (1) a baseline LH, FSH by ICMA, AMH, 
inhibin B, androstenedione, T/DHT; (2) 2000 U/m 2 hCG × 3 
days; (3) serum androstenedione, T/DHT, and urine for steroid 
analysis 24 hours after the third dose of hCG. hCG will elicit an 
augmented T response in patients with partial androgen resistance 
and 5α-reductase deficiency. 5α-Reductase deficiency can be gen-
erally ruled out by a T/DHT ratio <8.5 after hCG or by the ratio 
of 5β/5α steroid metabolites in urine. However, in some reported 
cases with mild mutations, only genotyping was diagnostic. All 
the above entities, except for partial androgen resistance, will 
result in a “normal” penile response to a trial of administration of 
T enanthate in oil, 25 mg intramuscularly × 3 months in infants. 
We have utilized this test to diagnose partial androgen insensitivity 
syndrome (PAIS) before assigning a definitive sex of rearing. 
 Follow-up data have indicated dissatisfaction in many patients 
with PAIS, whether they are raised as males or females. The 
prevalence of gender dysphoria in partial androgen resistance is 
estimated at 10%. In individuals reared as males, a major decrease 
in all aspects of sexual function has been documented. If a deci-
sion is made to raise the infant in a female sex role, then gonadec-
tomy prior to puberty or GnRH therapy pending definitive 
ascertainment of gender identity is indicated to avoid the possible 
risk of signs of virilization at puberty. In view of the incidence of 
gender dysphoria and the apparent unhappiness about their 
assigned sex in individuals with partial androgen resistance, a male 
sex of rearing is a judicious choice in individuals with Prader III 
or greater ambiguous genitalia or hypoplastic male genitalia 
because it preserves a choice. In some patients, high doses of T has 
engendered penile enlargement. Psychologic/psychiatric consulta-
tion is important in these individuals whether raised as males or 
females, since available follow-up studies indicate dissatisfaction with 
the outcome when they are assigned a male or female sex of rearing. 
 Androgen resistance in men with normal male
genitalia 
 Partial androgen resistance has been described in a 
group of infertile men who have a normal male phenotype but 
may exhibit gynecomastia. Unlike other patients with androgen 
resistance, some of these patients have normal plasma LH and T 
levels. Infertility in otherwise normal men may be the only clinical 
manifestation of androgen resistance. Infertility, however, is always 
associated with androgen resistance. Five phenotypic males in one 
affected family had gynecomastia and a small penis. Plasma LH 
and T levels were elevated, and a subtle qualitative abnormality in 
ligand binding was found. Fertility was documented in four of the 
five males. This is the mildest form of androgen resistance. 
 Dysgenetic 46,XY DSD (Ambiguous 
Genitalia due to Dysgenetic Gonads) 
 See previous discussions of sex determination, XY gonadal dysgenesis, 
XO/XY mosaicism, Denys Drash/Frasier/WAGR syndromes, etc. 
 Testicular Regression Syndrome 
(Vanishing Testes Syndrome; XY 
Agonadism; Rudimentary Testes 
Syndrome; Congenital Anorchia) 
 Cessation of testicular function during the critical phases of male sex 
differentiation can lead to various clinical syndromes depending on 
when testicular function ceases. At one end of the clinical spectrum 
of these heterogeneous conditions are the XY patients in whom 
testicular deficiency occurred before 8 weeks of gestation, which 
results in female differentiation of the internal and external 
genitalia—so-called XY gonadal dysgenesis. At the other end of the 
spectrum are the patients with anorchia or vanishing testes in which 
the testes are lost later in gestation after the critical period of male 
genital differentiation from 8 to 12 weeks. These patients have nor-
mal male differentiation of their internal and external structures, 
but gonadal tissue is absent. The phallus varies in size dependent 
upon when Leydig cell failure occurs. Testicular regression may 
occur unilaterally especially on the left side or bilaterally, and the 
condition is seen in family cohorts. The latter suggests a genetic 
etiology, but only one individual with a mutation in the gene ( SF-1 ) 
has been reported. 
 Diagnosis: Bilateral anorchia should be suspected in all 46,XY 
phenotypic males with undescended testes especially those with 
micropenis. MRI usually reveals absence of the gonads in the 
inguinal canal and no Müllerian duct derivatives. Plasma gonado-
tropins, especially FSH are elevated under 4 years of age and after 
CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation     517
10 years of age. Inhibin B and AMH levels, measures of Sertoli cell 
integrity, are unmeasurable and a lack of rise in T at 1 to 3 
months—“the window of opportunity”—will be evident. The 
absence of Leydig cell function is documented by the failure of the 
administration of hCG to elicit a rise in T. Finally, laparoscopic 
exploration, if necessary, indicates that 90% of patients lack tes-
ticular tissue, and in 10%, a testicular remnant without germ cells 
is present. Treatment of these males includes T therapy in child-
hood for microphallus, and at 12 to 13 years administration 
of T to induce male secondary sex characteristics and, thereafter, 
as replacement therapy. 
 Persistent Müllerian Duct Syndrome 
(Defects in the Synthesis, Secretion, or 
Response to Antimüllerian Hormone) 
 This male-limited autosomal recessive syndrome is associated with 
normal male development of the external genitalia but with 
Müllerian duct derivatives. The retention of Müllerian structures 
is either due to failure of the Sertoli cells to synthesize and secrete 
AMH or to an end-organ defect in the response of the Müllerian 
duct to AMH. The gene for AMH maps to chromosome 19; a 
variety of mutations in the  AMH gene cause the syndrome as well 
as mutations in the gene encoding the AMH receptor. Individuals 
with mutations in the AMH receptor have Müllerian ducts, 
despite the normal to high concentrations of plasma AMH. 
Therapy involves removal of the Müllerian structures. 
 Environmental Chemicals 
 An increase in disorders of development and function of the uro-
genital tract in males has been noted over the past 50 years. It has 
been hypothesized that this increased incidence of reproductive 
abnormalities observed in human males is related to increasing 
exposure in utero to endocrine disrupters especially estrogens and 
androgen receptor blockers found in the diet both naturally and as 
a result of chemical contamination. It has been demonstrated that 
p,p′-DDE (dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene)—the major and 
persistent DDT metabolite—binds to the androgen receptor and 
inhibits androgen action in developing rodents. Other chemicals 
such as phthalates, herbicides, and fungicides inhibit androgen 
actions. The term  testicular dysgenesis syndrome describes a 
phenotype that has been attributed to endocrine disrupters. 
Further studies on the levels as well as the risks to humans of 
environmental chemicals and other endocrine disruptors are nec-
essary before abnormalities of the reproductive tract can be confi-
dently ascribed to these agents. 
 UNCLASSIFIED FORMS OF ABNORMAL 
SEXUAL DEVELOPMENT IN MALES 
 Hypospadias 
 Hypospadias is one of the most common genital abnormalities. It 
has an incidence of 1 in 125 live male births in the United States. 
It is often associated with ventral curvature of the penis, a condi-
tion called chordee. The aberrant urethral meatus can open any-
where along the shaft of the penis, penoscrotally (at the base of the 
shaft), or even on the perineum. 
 The etiology of hypospadias is multifactorial, and both genetic 
and environmental factors appear to play a role in its pathogenesis. 
Deficient virilization of the male genitalia implies subnormal fetal 
testosterone production or action at the end organ. Hence, muta-
tions in genes such as  WT1, SF-1, SRY, SOX9, and  DHH can 
result in dysgenetic 46,XY DSD with varying degrees of hypospa-
dias and other genital abnormalities. Mutations in genes that 
encode steroidogenic enzymes (eg,  3β-HSD, 17α-hydroxylase, 
17,20-lyase, POR , and  SF-1 ) or those that affect androgen action 
and lead to partial androgen resistance as well as 5α-reductase-2 
deficiency are all uncommon causes of hypospadias. In the major-
ity of cases of isolated hypospadias with no other genital abnor-
mality, the etiology is uncertain. Hypospadias is also a component 
of a number of dysmorphic syndromes, including Smith-Lemli-
Opitz syndrome (a defect in cholesterol synthesis), as well as hand, 
foot, and genital syndrome due to a mutation in  HOX13 . 
 Several paternal and maternal risk factors have been associated 
with the occurrence of hypospadias in a fetus. These include sub-
fertility and/or genital anomalies in the father, maternal age, 
IUGR, and fetal exposure to oral progestins or combined proges-
tins and estrogens. These all are associated with an increased risk 
of hypospadias. Ten percent of hypospadias cases occur in familial 
cohorts. An increase in hypospadias has also been noted in infants 
conceived by in vitro fertilization. However, advanced maternal 
age and subfertility, as well as the administration of progestational 
agents to the mother, may play a role in these patients. 
 There is a 15% risk of hypospadias in the sibling of a child 
with hypospadias and a 7% risk if the father has hypospadias, sug-
gesting a genetic etiology. A mutation in a gene called  MAMLD1 
(mastermind-like domain containing 1, previously known as 
CXorf6 (chromosome X open reading frame 6), which appears to 
impair T secretion during the critical period (8-12 weeks) of male 
external genital differentiation, results in hypospadias. 
 Analysis of international demographic trends for hypospadias 
indicates that it is highly variable in different countries worldwide. 
The prevalence of hypospadias in Denmark is 1.1%, which is 
significantly higher than the prevalence in other Scandinavian 
countries, especially Finland. Hypospadias was associated with 
fetal growth retardation (small for gestational age), lower placental 
weight, and elevated plasma FSH levels at 3 months. Androgen 
receptor mutations were not found, and the CAG repeats in the 
androgen receptors were normal for the Danish population. It was 
suggested that environmental exposure is a likely explanation, but 
data of environmental exposure including demographic differ-
ences in endocrine disruptors (eg, organochloride, phalathes, 
xenoestrogens) are lacking. 
Patients with severe hypospadias (perineoscrotal) especially 
those with micropenis and/or cryptorchidism should be evaluated. 
The evaluation should include gonadotropin, AMH, inhibin B, 
and an assessment of testosterone secretion either during the “win-
dow of opportunity” at 1-3 months of age or in response to hCG 
stimulation.
518    CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation
 Micropenis 
 Micropenis without hypospadias results from a heterogeneous 
group of disorders; the most common cause is fetal T deficiency. 
Micropenis is rarely associated with 5α-reductase deficiency or 
mild defects in the androgen receptor ( Table 14–4 ). In the human 
male fetus, T synthesis by the fetal Leydig cell during the critical 
period of male differentiation (8-12 weeks) appears to be autono-
mous at first, then influenced by hCG. After midgestation, fetal 
pituitary LH modulates fetal T synthesis by the Leydig cell and, 
consequently, affects the growth of the differentiated penis. Thus, 
males with congenital hypopituitarism or isolated gonadotropin 
deficiency and late fetal testicular failure (after 8-12 weeks) present 
with normal male differentiation and micropenis at term birth (by 
definition a penis length <2.5 cm) ( Table 14–5 ). 
 Evaluation of the infant with micropenis should include ante-
rior pituitary functions (ie, determination of the plasma concen-
tration of GH, prolactin, ACTH, cortisol, thyroid-stimulating 
hormone, thyroxine, and gonadotropins), to rule out multiple 
pituitary hormone deficiencies. In infancy, there is a “window of 
opportunity” at 1 to 3 months of age when the perinatal rise in 
gonadotropin and T/DHT occurs. A lack of rise in T/DHT and 
LH and FSH suggests hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, while an 
abnormally high (>10.5 on unstimulated sample) T/DHT ratio 
suggests 5α-reductase-type 2 deficiency. All patients with micro-
penis should receive a trial of T therapy to ascertain the phallic 
response and to augment its length into the normal range for age. 
Infants with fetal T deficiency as a cause of micropenis—whether 
due to gonadotropin deficiency or to a primary testicular disor-
der—respond to 25 mg of T enanthate in oil intramuscularly 
monthly for 3 months with a mean increase of 2 cm in penile 
length. Older children require higher doses—50 mg intramuscu-
larly monthly × 3 doses. A long-term study of eight males with 
micropenis, due to congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 
who were followed in our clinic, revealed that fetal deficiency of 
gonadotropins and T did not prevent the penis from responding 
to T in infancy and at the age of puberty. Final penile length for 
all patients who were treated with one or more short courses of 
repository T in infancy or childhood and with replacement doses 
of T in adolescence was in the normal adult range. Furthermore, 
these patients had a male gender identity, erections, ejaculation, 
and orgasm. No clinical, psychologic, or physiologic indication 
supports conversion of males with micropenis, due to diminished 
fetal T secretion, to females. 
 Aphallia 
 Complete absence of the phallus is a rare anomaly. The urethra 
may open on the perineum or into the rectum. Assignment of a 
female sex of rearing, castration, and plastic repair of the genitalia 
and urethra has been the approach followed in the past; however, 
this policy is currently questioned by some investigators because 
TABLE 14–5  Normal values for stretched penile 
length.
Age
Length (cm) (mean ± SD)
Newborn: 30 wka
               2.5 ± 0.4
Newborn: full-terma
               3.5 ± 0.4
0-5 mob
               3.9 ± 0.8
6-12 mob
               4.3 ± 0.8
1-2 yb
               4.7 ± 0.8
2-3 yb
               5.1 ± 0.9
3-4 yb
               5.5 ± 0.9
5-6 yb
               6.0 ± 0.9
10-11 y
               6.4 ± 1.1
Adultc
               12.4 ± 2.7
aData from Feldman and Smith (1975); see Tuladhar et al (1998) for the normal range 
of penile length in preterm infants between 24 and 36 weeks of gestational age.
bData from Schonfeld and Beebe (1942).
cData from Wessels et al (1996).
From Bin-Abbas B, Conte FA, Grumbach MM, et al. Congenital hypogonadotropic 
hypogonadism and micropenis: effect of testosterone treatment on adult penile 
size—why sex reversal is not indicated. J Pediatr. 1999;134:579. 
TABLE 14–4 Etiology of micropenis.
  I. Deficient testosterone secretion
 
A. Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
   1. Isolated, including Kallmann syndrome
   2. Associated with other pituitary hormone deficiencies
   3. Prader-Willi syndrome
   4. Laurence-Moon-Biedl syndrome
   5. Bardet-Biedl syndrome
   6. Rudd syndrome
 
B. Primary hypogonadism
   1. Anorchia
   2. Klinefelter and poly X syndromes
   3. Gonadal dysgenesis (incomplete form)
   4. LH receptor defects (incomplete forms)
   5. Genetic defects in testosterone steroidogenesis 
   
(incomplete forms)
   6. Noonan syndrome
   7. Testicular dysgenesis syndrome
   8. Trisomy 21
   9. Robinow syndrome
 II. Defects in testosterone synthesis and action
 
A. P450 oxidoreductase deficiency (mild enzymatic defect)
 
B. 5α-Reductase deficiency (incomplete forms)
 
C. Androgen receptor defects (incomplete forms)
 
D. GH/IGF-1 deficiency
 
E. Fetal hydantoin syndrome
III. Developmental anomalies
 
A. Aphallia
 
B. Cloacal exstrophy
IV. Idiopathic
 V. Associated with other congenital malformation
From Bin-Abbas B, Conte FA, Grumbach MM, et al. Congenital hypogonadotropic 
hypogonadism and micropenis: effect of testosterone treatment on adult penile 
size—why sex reversal is not indicated. J Pediatr. 1999;134:579. [PMID: 10228293]
CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation     519
of concern about the action of normal male fetal levels of circulat-
ing T on the fetal brain and its potential effect on postnatal psy-
chosexual development and gender identity. There are no long-term 
follow-up studies of gender identity in patients with aphallia. A 
study investigated 46,XY patients with cloacal extrophy who were 
castrated in the neonatal period and assigned a female gender role. 
Fifty percent of this cohort announced their gender identity as 
male in childhood or adolescence. These data suggest that prenatal 
exposure to normal amounts of T during gestation is probabilistic 
but not deterministic in the establishment of gender identity. 
 UNCLASSIFIED FORMS OF ABNORMAL 
SEXUAL DEVELOPMENT IN FEMALES 
 Müllerian duct agenesis is characterized by congenital absence of 
the uterus and the upper one-third of the vagina and is termed the 
Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser (MRKH) syndrome. Ovarian 
function is usually normal. If Müllerian agenesis is associated with 
renal abnormalities and cervicothoracic dysplasia, it is referred to 
as the MURCS syndrome. Patients with the MRKH syndrome or 
the MURCS syndrome have not as yet had genetic mutations 
identified, although familial cases have been reported. Recently, an 
atypical form of the MRKH syndrome has been described in three 
patients who had primary amenorrhea with normal breasts and 
pubic hair development, lack of Müllerian duct development, and 
clinical and biochemical evidence of androgen excess. All three 
patients had a heterozygous mutation of the  WNT4 gene. These 
patients illustrate the role of  WNT4 in Müllerian duct develop-
ment in humans as well as in inhibiting Leydig cell development 
and androgen synthesis by the ovary. 
 Features Which Suggest a DSD 
 A DSD should be suspected in apparent females with clitoro-
megaly (>0.9 cm) at birth in those with a mass in the labia, ingui-
nal canal or with an inguinal herniae, and in those with edema of 
the distal extremities and/or loose skin folds over the nape of the 
neck. A DSD should be suspected in infants with truly ambiguous 
genitalia, in putative males with cryptorchidism, micropenis (<2.5 
cm), and hypospadias, especially perineal, siblings or relatives of 
patients with DSDs, and in infants whose prenatal genital appear-
ance by sonography is not congruent with their karyotype on 
amniocentesis. 
 MANAGEMENT OF PATIENTS WITH DSD 
 The evaluation and management of the patient with atypical 
genitalia is complex and best undertaken by a team consisting of 
a pediatric endocrinologist, psychiatrist or psychologist, pediatric 
surgeon or urologist, social worker, religious counselor if appropri-
ate, and an informed primary care physician at a center of excel-
lence. The goal of management of patients with atypical genitalia 
is to establish an etiologic diagnosis promptly and with the 
informed consent of the parents, assign a sex of rearing which is 
most compatible with the prospect for a stable gender identity, 
well-adjusted life, sexual adequacy, and fertility if possible. 
Steps in the diagnosis of the infant with a DSD are set forth in 
 Figures 14–16 and  14–17 . 
 Before any decision about sex assignment is made, a thorough, 
comprehensive evaluation must be undertaken. The diagnostic 
evaluation should include a karyotype, pelvic sonography and 
determination of gonadotropins, and adrenal and gonadal ste-
roids, AMH, and inhibin B levels. Depending on the karyotype 
and ultrasound, further analysis of steroids after hCG and ACTH 
stimulation may be indicated (see  Figure 14–17 ). In all 46,XY 
DSDs with a micropenis ( Tables 14–4 and  14–5 ), it is prudent to 
assess the phallic response to T to exclude partial androgen resis-
tance before the decision about definitive sex assignment is made 
by the parents. Clitoral enlargement ( Table 14–6 ) in 46,XX 
females suggests either an endogenous or exogenous source of 
androgens. 
 Gender identity—the identification of oneself as either male or 
female—is a complex and incompletely understood dimorphic 
phenomenon. During the last 20 years, it has been increasingly 
evident that both  nature (eg, prenatal exposure to T) as well as 
genes on the X and Y chromosome, and  nurture (sex assignment, 
psychosocial and experiential factors) play a role in determining 
one’s gender identity. In any given infant, one can never be sure 
whether nature or nurture will be deterministic or prevail. Thus, 
physicians are faced with the daunting task of helping parents to 
make a critical decision about the sex of rearing of their child in 
the face of incomplete understanding of the complexity of gender 
identity. The task is further complicated by the limited ability to 
make a definitive etiologic diagnosis in many 46,XY DSDs, as well 
as by the lack of outcome data that incorporate modern guide-
lines, recent surgical advances, and advances in psychologic/
psychiatric support for both the child and the parents. 
 It is the physician’s and consultant’s tasks to evaluate the 
patient thoroughly and to fully inform the parents. The ultimate 
decision of sex of rearing is made by the completely well-informed 
parents. It must be clearly stated which anatomic abnormalities 
can be surgically repaired, that hormone therapy can be given at 
an appropriate time and that continuing psychosocial support 
will be available both from the physicians involved and from 
community-based support groups. Repeated, lucid, simple, com-
prehensive discussions about the cause of their child’s atypical 
genitalia and what is known about the long-term follow-up of 
similar patients with DSD, as well as the results of reconstructive 
surgery in terms of sexual gratification and fertility, must be dis-
cussed. The discussion needs to take into account parental con-
cerns, religious views, cultural factors, social mores, and the 
parents’ level of understanding. The parents need to be assured 
that an expeditous, definitive diagnosis can be made, but that 
naming the baby, sending out birth announcements, and filing 
the birth certificate may need to be delayed. They will need sup-
port, reassurance, and counseling as to how to deal with relatives 
and others. 
 In the individual with atypical genitalia, the option of assign-
ing a sex of rearing but deferring surgery unless it is medically 
520    CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation
Ovotesticular DSD
Ovotesticular DSD
Atypical external genitalia
46,XX DSD*
Congenital adrenal
hyperplasia
1.  History: family history, pregnancy (hormones, virilization
     inspection). Physical examination: palpation of inguinal      
     region and labioscrotal folds.     
     Karyotype analysis/FISH. Sonogram or MRI of kidneys,        
       ureters, and pelvic contents.      
     Provisional diagnosis.     
     Initial studies: plasma 17-hydroxyprogesterone and        
       17-hydroxypregnenolone, androstenedione,         
       dehydroepiandrosterone, testosterone, dihydrotestosterone,       
       AMH, inhibin B.    
     Serum electrolytes.
2.   ACTH / hCG stimulation, genotype (see Figure 14-17)    
     *Plasma 17-hydroxyprogesterone levels may be modestly       
     elevated in patients with P450c11β, 3β-hydroxysteroid      
     dehydrogenase deficiency-2, P450 oxidoreductase deficiency, and are       
     low in patients with P450c17 and P450scc deficiency.
3.  Vaginogram (urogenital sinogram): selected cases.      
     Endoscopy, laparotomy, gonadal biopsy: restricted to XY,DSD,         
       ovotesticular DSD, and selected instances of nonadrenal XX,DSD.
Gonads
palpable
Absent
Müllerian structures
(MRI or ultrasound)
17-OH-progesterone*
Karyotype
Absent
Present
Present
Normal
Normal
Normal
Elevated
Normal
Normal
XY
46, XY DSD
46, XY DSD
Dysgenetic 46, XY DSD
Dysgenetic 46, XY DSD
Nonadrenal 46, XX DSD
P450 aromatase deficiency
XX
XX
XY
Poly
X + Y
Variant of seminiferous
tubule dysgenesis
XY
XO/XY
XX, XY
or
XX/XY
XX, XY
or
XX/XY
XO, XY
or
XY
Gonads
not palpable
FIGURE 14–16 Steps in the diagnosis of intersexuality in infancy and childhood. Step 1 involves evaluation and provisional diagnosis. 
Step 2 is used in selected cases, and step 3 can be used for specific disorders. 
necessary until the patient has the opportunity to give his or her 
informed consent, has been proposed by advocacy groups and 
espoused by some DSD clinics. However, it should be noted that 
there are no data on patients with DSD and atypical genitalia to 
support the efficacy of this approach. On the other hand, a long-
term study of 41 patients with DSD suggested that early surgical 
intervention accompanied by endocrinologic and psychologic/
psychiatric support for the patient and parents resulted in positive 
outcomes in terms of cosmesis, minimal impairment in quality of 
life and appropriate gender identity. We concur with this position 
and feel that it is desirable to initiate plastic repair of the external 
genitalia as soon as is feasible with the informed consent of the 
parents. Surgeons experienced in genital repair recommend a one-
stage repair by 4 to 6 months of age. In children raised as females, 
clitoroplasty should be performed only by experienced surgeons 
with the emphasis being on function rather than cosmesis. We do 
not recommend routine clitoroplasty for mild to moderate clitoro-
megaly (Prader II or III). Vaginoplasty can be deferred until ado-
lescence when the patient may participate in the decision for 
surgery. Each patient is unique and must be treated as such. There 
is no rubric that can be applied to the management of all patients. 
However, the following are a few guidelines. 
 Male sex assignment is recommended in 46,XY DSDs, with 
the exception of those with complete androgen resistance syn-
drome; those who have completely female external genitalia; those 
with partial androgen resistance, who have less than Prader III 
ambiguity; or those who have a compelling reason for female sex 
assignment, including the parents’ informed decision. In the latter 
case, extensive discussion with the family is especially warranted, 
particularly in the 46,XY infant whose ambiguous genitalia is 
evidence of significant fetal T exposure. The parents need to be 
aware of the effect of T during gestation on gender identity and 
counseled about the possibility of gender dysphoria if the child is 
assigned a female sex of rearing. In this case, it may be prudent to 
do no surgery unless medically indicated, until the child’s gender 
identity can be verified, and informed consent for surgery 
obtained from the patient. In patients with XO/XY mosaicism, 
17β-HSD-3 deficiency, and 5α-reductase deficiency diagnosed in 
infancy, the significant occurrence of female to male gender role 
change should be discussed with the parents. In some societies, the 
CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation     521
Family history, physical examination, karyotype, pelvic ultrasound, or MRI. Plasma C19/C21 steroids
(testosterone, DHT, androstenedione, 17-OH progesterone, Δ5-17-OH pregnenolone, progesterone, 
pregnenolone), and LH, FSH, AMH inhibin B
Müllerian duct derivatives
46, XY DSD
ABSENT
hCG stimulation
PRESENT
Abnormalities of testosterone/
DHT synthesis
Persistent Müllerian duct syndrome  
• XY gonadal dysgenesis (incomplete)
• XO/XY mosaicism, structurally abnormal Y 
   chromosome or Xp+ (DAX-1 duplication), 9p−, 10q−
• DENYS-DRASH, Frasier (WT-1 mutation)
• WAGR (WT-1 deletion)
• Campomelic dysplasia (SOX-9 mutation)
• SF-1 mutation
• WNT-4 (duplication)
• DHH mutation
• ATRX (XH2 mutation)
• ARX mutation
• CBX2 mutation
• MAP3K4 mutation
• Testicular regression syndrome
Testosterone and
testosterone
precursors
↓
Testosterone
Testosterone
precursors
↓
↑
↑ T/DHT ratio
↑ Ratio of 5β/5α urinary
   steroids
or normal T, normal DHT, and
AMH levels, increased
↑
↑
↑
• CYP17
• 3β-HSD-2 (↑Δ5-17-OH preg, DHEA)
• 17β-HSD-3 (↑androstenedione, ↓testosterone)
prog
preg
(
)
17-OH prog
Δ5-17-OH preg
(
)
b
• 3β-HSD-2 (↑Δ5-17 OH preg, Δ5-17OH preg/cortisol)
                       or
• CYP17
  mutation
↑prog, ↓17-OH preg
↑DOC, corticosterone)
(
• 5α-reductase
  (SRD5A2)
  deficiency)
• Androgen
  resistance
• LH receptor
  mutation
• SF-1
  mutation
• StARc
  mutation
• P450scc
• 17β-HSD-3
  mutation
Cortisol response
Cortisol response
• Unexplained
• Environmental
   chemicals
ACTH
Normal
Normal
Decreased
or absent
Decreased
or absent
Positive
Negative
ACTH
Dysgenetic 46, XY DSDa
• POR (↑ prog, 17-OH prog, 21-deoxycortisol, ↓DHEA, cortisol)d
a
LH
FIGURE 14–17 Steps in the differential diagnosis of 46,XY DSD.
aThe phenotype and comorbidities of any mutation causing a 46,XY DSD are variable and depend on the degree of enzymatic activity resulting 
from the particular mutation. Thus, in these patients, the degree of ambiguity of the external genitalia varies, and the Müllerian structures may 
or may not be present.
bCYP17 (P450c17) catalyzes the 17-hydroxylation of progesterone and pregnenolone to 17-hydroxyprogesterone and 17-hydroxypregnenolone, 
as well as the scission (lyase) of 17-hydroxypregnenolone to DHEA. Patients with 17,20-lyase have elevated basal and hCG-induced levels of 
522    CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation
social, cultural, and economic benefits of a male sex assignment 
are more compelling than phallic adequacy and are a prevailing—if 
not the most important—factor in the parents’ sex of rearing deci-
sion. Male sex assignment in 46,XY DSD individuals, especially 
those who can respond to T allows for a choice later in adoles-
cence, by not removing functional genital structures which cannot 
be replaced. 
 All 46,XX DSDs with Prader I to IV (see  Figure 14–13 ) exter-
nal genitalia should be raised as females. 46,XX DSDs with Prader 
V genitalia (penile urethra) represent a management dilemma. As 
with other forms of DSD, there are at present insufficient long-
term outcome data on these patients. Raising the child as male 
would require gonadectomy of a potentially fertile female. These 
infants are raised as females if diagnosed in infancy. If diagnosed 
after infancy and a male gender assignment has been made, a full 
discussion with the parents and psychologic/psychiatric evaluation 
of the child should ensue before any definitive decisions are made 
regarding gender assignment. Reassignment of sex in childhood is 
always a difficult psychosocial problem for the patient, the par-
ents, and the physicians involved. Although easier in the infant 
under 1 year of age, it should only be undertaken after much 
deliberation and with provision for long-term medical and psychi-
atric supervision and counseling. 46,XX males and 46,XX ovotes-
ticular DSDs with male genitalia and absent Müllerian ducts are 
exceptions to the suggestion that a female sex assignment be con-
sidered in 46,XX DSDs. 
 Psychologic studies in 46,XX DSD secondary to CAH suggests 
that the vast majority of 46,XX DSDs with CAH have a female 
gender identity. In some individuals, sex-specific behavior may be 
more masculine. The incidence of bisexuality and homosexuality 
is increased. In one study, the prevalence of bisexuality and homo-
sexuality correlated modestly with the degree of masculinization of 
nonsexual behavior and the genitalia. 
 Removal of rudimentary gonads in children with Y-containing 
cell lines and gonadal dysgenesis should be performed at the time 
of initial repair of the external genitalia; gonadoblastomas, 
seminomas, and germinomas can occur during the first decade 
(see  Table 14–2 ). Histologically and functionally normal scrotal 
testes can be retained in 45,X/46,XY males and others with regular 
monitoring as previously discussed. 
 In a patient with complete androgen resistance, the testes 
may be left in situ (provided they are not situated in the labia 
majora) to provide endogenous estradiol at puberty. There is 
one possible exception that of the rare somatic mosaics for the 
androgen receptor who are at risk of virilization at puberty, due 
to the presence of a population of cells with normal androgen 
receptors. Having had the female identity reinforced by normal 
feminization at puberty, prophylactic castration can then be 
performed, if informed consent by the patient and parents is 
obtained. 
 In patients with partial androgen resistance reared as females or 
in patients with errors of  T biosynthesis reared as females in 
whom some degree of masculinization occurs at puberty, orchi-
dectomy should be performed before the age of puberty or later if 
doubt exists about the gender identity. GnRH agonists can be 
given to prevent androgen secretion and virilization until the gen-
der identity is confirmed. Cyclic estrogen and progestin replace-
ment therapy are used in individuals reared as females in whom a 
uterus is present. In males, masculinization is achieved by the 
administration of repository or topical preparations of T. 
 Continuing endocrinologic and psychologic support are 
critical aspects of follow-up and should be available throughout 
infancy, childhood, adolescence, and adulthood for the patient 
17-hydroxyprogesterone and 17-hydroxypregnenolone and low levels of androstenedione and DHEA. Cytochrome b5 is a cofactor for 17,20 
lyase activity of 17α-hydroxylase. Mutations result in ambiguous genitalia and methhemoglobinuria.
cThe StAR (steroidogenic acute regulatory) protein is involved in the transport of cholesterol from the outer to the inner mitochondrial mem-
brane, where the enzyme CYP11A1 (P450scc) resides. StAR mutations result in a markedly diminished ability to convert cholesterol to Δ5 preg-
nenolone, although side chain cleavage (CYP11A1) activity is intact. WAGR, Wilms tumor, aniridia, genital anomalies, and mental retardation; 
SF-1, steroidogenic factor-1; CYP17, 17α-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase; 3β-HSD 2, 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/Δ5-isomerase; 17β-HSD 3, 17β-
hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (oxidoreductase) type 3; T, testosterone; DHT, dihydrotestosterone; AMH, anti-Müllerian hormone; DHEA, dehy-
droepiandrosterone; POR, P450 oxidoredutase; b5, cytochrome b5.
dPOR, P450 oxidoreductase, the definitive steroid pattern for POR is variable depending on the severity of the POR mutation and its specificity 
for one of the three P450s it interacts with. However, 17OH progesterone levels are invariably elevated at baseline and after ACTH. Cortisol lev-
els are blunted on ACTH stimulation. Many patients also manifest the Antley-Bixler phenotype; virilization in the affected female is not progres-
sive postnatally; in utero it is due to deficient placental aromatase activity. (Modified from Grumbach MM, Hughes IA, Conte FA. Disorders of sex 
differentiation. In: Larsen PR, et al, ed. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology. 10th ed. W.B. Saunders, 2003.)
TABLE 14–6 Clitoral size.
Clitoral Size
Newborn, 
full-term
Lengtha
0.4 + 0.12 cm
Width
0.33 + 0.078 cm
Adult women
Nulliparous
Lengthb
1.6 + 0.45 cmb
1.9 + 0.87 cm (range 0.5-3.5 cm)c
aData from Oberfield SE, Mondok A, Shahrivar F, et al. Clitoral size in full-term infants. 
Am J Perinatol. 1989;6:453-454. [PMID: 2789544]
bData from Verkauf BS, Von Thron J, O’Brien WF. Clitoral size in normal women. Obstet 
Gynecol. 1992;80:41-44. [PMID: 1603495]
cData from Lloyd J, Crouch NS, Minto CL, et al. Female genital appearance: “normality” 
unfolds. BJOG. 2005;112:643-646. [PMID:15842291]
CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation     523
as well as for the parents. Patients should have progressive, step-
by-step, age-appropriate discussions about their diagnosis, its 
pathophysiology, their quality of life, and the potential for fertil-
ity. Disclosure is critical! However, in those mature adult DSD 
patients who are well-adjusted and happy with their lives and 
their assigned sex and who in the past have not had the oppor-
tunity of having full disclosure, disclosure may be on a  need to 
know basis. Patients have access to their medical records. It is 
infinitely better to proceed with full disclosure if the patient 
has expressed a desire to know more about their diagnosis and 
management. Full disclosure should be approached in a similar 
manner as that carried out with parents and with the coopera-
tion and help of a psychologist or psychiatrist familiar with the 
patient and issues of gender identity. The patient (when possible) 
and the parents should always be involved in decisions about 
surgery and sex hormone replacement. 
 In sum, the physician and the medical team concerned with 
the diagnosis, selection of sex of rearing, and management of the 
infant with DSD must be prepared to address the complex ethical, 
cultural, social, religious, clinical, legal, and surgical issues pre-
sented by the DSD patient in order to maximize the patient’s 
potential for a well-adjusted, normal life. This task remains com-
plicated by deficiencies in the availability of long-term outcome 
data as well as the inability to diagnose specifically many patients 
with a DSD especially those with a 46,XY karyotype. 
 REFERENCES 
 Ankarberg-Lindgren C, Elfving M, Wikland KA, Norjavaara E. Nocturnal applica-
tion of transdermal estradiol patches produces levels of estradiol that mimic 
those seen at the onset of spontaneous puberty in girls.  J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab . 2001;86:3039. [PMID: 11443165] 
 Arnhold IJ, Lofrano-Porto A, Latronico AC. Inactivating mutations of luteinizing 
hormone beta-subunit or luteinizing hormone receptor cause oligo-amenor-
rhea and infertility in women.  Horm Res . 2009;71:75. [PMID: 19129711] 
 Asklund C, Jørgensen N, Kold Jensen T, Skakkebaek NE. Biology and epidemiol-
ogy of testicular dysgenesis syndrome.  BJU Int . 2004;93:6. [PMID: 
15086436] 
 Auchus RJ. The backdoor pathway to dihydrotestosterone.  Trends Endocrinol 
Metab . 2004;15:432. [PMID: 15519890] 
Auchus RJ. Management of the adult with congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Int J 
Pediatr Endocrinol. 2010;2010:614107. [PMID: 20613954]
 Berenbaum SA, Bailey JM. Effects on gender identity of prenatal androgens and 
genital appearance: evidence from girls with congenital adrenal hyperplasia. 
 J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2003;88:1102. [PMID: 12629091] 
 Berenbaum SA, Korman Bryk K, Duck SC, Resnick SM. Psychological adjustment 
in children and adults with congenital adrenal hyperplasia. J Pediatr. 2004; 
144:741, 2004. [PMID: 15192620] 
 Bernard P, Sim H, Knower K, Vilain E, Harley V. Human SRY inhibits beta-
catenin-mediated transcription.  Int J Biochem Cell Biol . 2008;40:2889. 
[PMID: 18598779] 
 Berra M, Liao LM, Creighton SM, Conway GS. Long-term health issues of 
women with XY karyotype.  Maturitas . 2010;65:172. [PMID: 20079588] 
 Biason-Lauber A, Konrad D, Meyer M, DeBeaufort C, Schoenle EJ. Ovaries and 
female phenotype in a girl with 46,XY karyotype and mutations in the 
CBX2 gene.  Am J Hum Genet . 2009;84:658. [PMID: 19361780] 
 Biason-Lauber A, Konrad D, Navratil F, Schoenle EJ. A WNT4 mutation associ-
ated with Müllerian-duct regression and virilization in a 46,XX woman. 
 N Engl J Med . 2004;351:792, 2004. [PMID: 15317892] 
 Bidet M, Bellanné-Chantelot C, Galand-Portier MB, et al. Clinical and molecular 
characterization of a cohort of 161 unrelated women with nonclassical con-
genital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency and 330 family 
members.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2009;94:1570. [PMID: 19208730] 
 Bin-Abbas B, Conte FA, Grumbach MM, Kaplan SL. Congenital hypogonadotro-
pic hypogonadism and micropenis: effect of testosterone treatment on adult 
penile size—why sex reversal is not indicated.  J Pediatr . 1999;134:579. 
[PMID: 10228293] 
Bogani D, Siggers P, Brixey R, et al. Loss of mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 
kinase 4 (MAP3K4) reveals a requirement for MAPK signalling in mouse sex 
determination. PLoS Biol. 2009;7:e1000196. [PMID: 19753101]
 Boisen KA, Chellakooty M, Schmidt IM, et al. Hypospadias in a cohort of 1072 
Danish newborn boys: prevalence and relationship to placental weight, 
anthropometrical measurements at birth, and reproductive hormone levels at 
three months of age.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2005;90:4041. [PMID: 
15870122] 
 Bondy CA; Turner Syndrome Study Group. Care of girls and women with Turner 
syndrome: a guideline of the Turner Syndrome Study Group.  J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab . 2007;92:10. [PMID: 17047017] 
 Boukari K, Meduri G, Brailly-Tabard S, et al. Lack of androgen receptor expression 
in Sertoli cells accounts for the absence of anti-Müllerian hormone repres-
sion during early human testis development.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2009;94:1818. [PMID: 19276236] 
 Bouvattier C, Carel JC, Lecointre C, et al. Postnatal changes of T, LH, and FSH 
in 46,XY infants with mutations in the AR gene.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2002;87:29. [PMID: 11788616] 
 Bouvattier C, Mignot B, Lefèvre H, Morel Y, Bougnères P. Impaired sexual activity 
in male adults with partial androgen insensitivity.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2006;91:3310. [PMID: 16757528] 
 Canto P, Söderlund D, Reyes E, Méndez JP. Mutations in the desert hedgehog 
(DHH) gene in patients with 46,XY complete pure gonadal dysgenesis.  J 
Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2004;89:4480. [PMID: 15356051] 
 Capel B. R-spondin1 tips the balance in sex determination.  Nat Genet . 
2006;38:1233. [PMID: 17072299] 
 Carel JC. Growth hormone in Turner syndrome: twenty years after, what can we 
tell our patients?  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2005;90:3793. [PMID: 
15917486] 
 Carel JC, Ecosse E, Bastie-Sigeac I, et al. Quality of life determinants in young 
women with Turner’s syndrome after growth hormone treatment: results of 
the StaTur population-based cohort study.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2005;90:1992. [PMID: 15644402] 
 Chassot AA, Gregoire EP, Magliano M, Lavery R, Chaboissier MC Genetics of 
ovarian differentiation: Rspo1, a major player.  Sex Dev . 2008;2:219. [PMID: 
18987496] 
 Chassot AA, Ranc F, Gregoire EP, et al. Activation of beta-catenin signaling by 
Rspo1 controls differentiation of the mammalian ovary.  Hum Mol Genet . 
2008;17:1264. [PMID: 18250098] 
Chevalier N, Letur H, Lelannou D, et al. Materno-Fetal cardiovascular com-
plications in Turner Syndrome after oocyte donation: insufficient 
prepregnancy screening and pregnancy follow-up are associated with 
poor outcome. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Dec 8. [Epub ahead of 
print] [PMID: 21147890]
Clayton PE, Miller WL, Oberfield SE, Ritzen EM, Sippell WG, Speiser PW.  Joint 
LWPES/ESPE CAH Working Group. Consensus statement on 21-hydroxy-
lase deficiency from the Lawson Wilkins Pediatric Endocrine Society and the 
European Society for Paediatric Endocrinology.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2002;87:4048. [PMID: 12213842] 
 Cohen-Kettenis PT. Gender change in 46,XY persons with 5-alpha-reductase-2 
deficiency and 17-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-3 deficiency.  Arch Sex 
Behav . 2005;34:399. [PMID: 16010463] 
 Cohen-Kettenis P. Psychological long-term outcome in intersex conditions.  Horm 
Res . 2005;64:27. [PMID: 16286767] 
 Conte FA, Grumbach MM. Diagnosis and management of ambiguous external 
genitalia.  Endocrinologist . 2003;13:260.  
 Conte FA, Grumbach MM, Ito Y, Fisher CR, Simpson ER. A syndrome of female 
pseudohermaphrodism, hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, and multicystic 
ovaries associated with missense mutations in the gene encoding aromatase 
(P450arom).  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 1994;78:1287. [PMID: 8200927] 
 Conway GS. Adult care of pediatric conditions: lessons from Turner’s syndrome.  J 
Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2009;94:3185. [PMID: 19734446] 
 Cools M, Drop SL, Wolffenbuttel KP, Oosterhuis JW, Looijenga LH. Germ cell 
tumors in the intersex gonad: old paths, new directions, moving frontiers. 
 Endocr Rev . 2006;27:468-484. [PMID: 16735607] 
524    CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation
 Coutant R, Mallet D, Lahlou N, et al. Heterozygous mutation of steroidogenic 
factor-1 in 46,XY subjects may mimic partial androgen insensitivity syn-
drome.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2007;92:2868. [PMID: 17488792] 
 Crawford JM, Warne G, Grover S, Southwell BR, Hutson JM. Results from a 
pediatric surgical centre justify early intervention in disorders of sex develop-
ment.  J Pediatr Surg . 2009;44:413. [PMID:19231546] 
 Davenport ML, Crowe BJ, Travers SH, et al. Growth hormone treatment of early 
growth failure in toddlers with Turner syndrome: a randomized, controlled, 
multicenter trial.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2007;92:3406-3416. [PMID: 
17595258] 
 Deeb A, Mason C, Lee YS, Hughes IA. Correlation between genotype, phenotype 
and sex of rearing in 111 patients with partial androgen insensitivity syn-
drome.  Clin Endocrinol . 2005;63:56. [PMID: 15963062] 
 Dessens AB, Slijper FM, Drop SL. Gender dysphoria and gender change in chro-
mosomal females with congenital adrenal hyperplasia.  Arch Sex Behav . 
2005;34:389. [PMID: 16010462] 
 DiNapoli L, Capel B. SRY and the standoff in sex determination.  Mol Endocrinol . 
2008;22:1. [PMID: 17666585] 
 Dumic M, Lin-Su K, Leibel NI, et al. Report of fertility in a woman with a pre-
dominantly 46,XY karyotype in a family with multiple disorders of sexual 
development.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2008;93:182. [PMID: 18000096] 
 Elzinga-Tinke JE, Sirre ME, Looijenga LH, van Casteren N, Wildhagen MF, 
Dohle GR. The predictive value of testicular ultrasound abnormalities for 
carcinoma in situ of the testis in men at risk for testicular cancer.  Int J Androl . 
2009. [Epub ahead of print] [PMID: 19845800] 
 Feldman KW, Smith DW. Fetal phallic growth and penile standards for newborn 
male infants.  J Pediatr . 1975;86:395. [PMID: 1113226] 
Ferraz-de-Souza B, Lin L, Achermann JC. Steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1, NR5A1) 
and human disease. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2010 Nov 13. [Epub ahead of 
print] [PMID: 21078366]
 Flück CE, Tajima T, Pandey AV, et al. Mutant P450 oxidoreductase causes disor-
dered steroidogenesis with and without Antley-Bixler syndrome.  Nat Genet . 
2004;36:228. [PMID: 14758361] 
 Fukami M, Nishimura G, Homma K, et al. Cytochrome P450 oxidoreductase 
deficiency: identification and characterization of biallelic mutations and 
genotype-phenotype correlations in 35 Japanese patients.  J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab . 2009;94:1723. [PMID: 19258400] 
 Goto M, Piper Hanley K, Marcos J, et al. In humans, early cortisol biosynthesis 
provides a mechanism to safeguard female sexual development.  J Clin Invest . 
2006;116:953. [PMID: 16585961] 
 Gravholt CH. Clinical practice in Turner syndrome.  Nat Clin Pract Endocrinol 
Metab . 2005;1:41. [PMID: 16929365] 
 Gravholt CH, Fedder J, Naeraa RW, Müller J. Occurrence of gonadoblastoma in 
females with Turner syndrome and Y chromosome material: a population 
study.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2000;85:3199. [PMID: 10999808] 
 Grumbach MM. Commentary. A window of opportunity: the diagnosis of 
gonadotropin deficiency in the male infant.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2005;90:3122. [PMID: 15728198] 
 Grumbach MM, Hughes IA, Conte FA. Disorders of sex differentiation. In: Larsen 
PR, Kronenberg HM, Melmed S, Polonsky KS, eds.  Williams Textbook of 
Endocrinology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 2003. 
 Handelsman DJ, Liu PY. Klinefelter’s syndrome—a microcosm of male repro-
ductive health.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2006;91:1220. [PMID: 
16601196] 
 Hanley NA, Arlt W. The human fetal adrenal cortex and the window of 
sexual differentiation.  Trends Endocrinol Metab . 2006;17:391. [PMID: 
17046275] 
 Hines M, Ahmed SF, Hughes IA. Psychological outcomes and gender-related 
development in complete androgen insensitivity syndrome.  Arch Sex Behav . 
2003;32:93. [PMID: 12710824] 
 Hines M, Brook C, Conway GS. Androgen and psychosexual development: core 
gender identity, sexual orientation and recalled childhood gender role behav-
ior in women and men with congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH).  J Sex Res . 
2004; 41:75. [PMID: 15216426] 
 Hiort O, Holterhus PM, Werner R, et al. Homozygous disruption of P450 side-
chain cleavage (CYP11A1) is associated with prematurity, complete 46,XY 
sex reversal, and severe adrenal failure.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2005;90:538. 
[PMID: 15507506] 
 Jameson JL. Of mice and men: the tale of steroidogenic factor-1.  J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab . 2004;89:5927. [PMID: 15579738] 
 Kalfa N, Philibert P, Sultan C. Is hypospadias a genetic, endocrine or environmen-
tal disease, or still an unexplained malformation?  Int J Androl . 2009;32:187. 
[PMID: 18637150] 
 Kim CJ, Lin L, Huang N, et al. Severe combined adrenal and gonadal deficiency 
caused by novel mutations in the cholesterol side chain cleavage enzyme, 
P450scc.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2008;93:696. [PMID: 18182448] 
 Köhler B, Lin L, Mazen I, et al. The spectrum of phenotypes associated with muta-
tions in steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1, NR5A1, Ad4BP) includes severe 
penoscrotal hypospadias in 46,XY males without adrenal insufficiency.  Eur J 
Endocrinol . 2009;161:237. [PMID: 19439508] 
 Köhler B, Lumbroso S, Leger J, et al. Androgen insensitivity syndrome: somatic 
mosaicism of the androgen receptor in seven families and consequences for 
sex assignment and genetic counseling.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2005;90:106. 
[PMID: 15522944] 
 Kok RC, Timmerman MA, Wolffenbuttel KP, Drop SL, de Jong FH. Isolated 
17,20-lyase deficiency due to the cytochrome b5 mutation W27X.  J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab . 2010;95:994. [PMID: 20080843] 
 Lanfranco F, Kamischke A, Zitzmann M, Nieschlag E. Klinefelter’s syndrome. 
 Lancet . 2004;364:273. [PMID: 15262106] 
 Lau YF, Li Y. The human and mouse sex-determining SRY genes repress the Rspol/
beta-catenin signaling.  J Genet Genomics . 2009;36:193. [PMID: 19376480] 
 Dumic M, Lin-Su K, Leibel NI, et al. Consensus statement on management of 
intersex disorders. International Consensus Conference on Intersex. 
 Pediatrics . 2006;118:e488-500 [PMID: 16882788] 
 Lin L, Ercan O, Raza J, et al. Variable phenotypes associated with aromatase 
(CYP19) insufficiency in humans.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2007;92:982. 
[PMID: 17164303] 
 Liu CF, Bingham N, Parker K, Yao HH. Sex-specific roles of beta-catenin in mouse 
gonadal development.  Hum Mol Genet . 2009;18:405 [PMID: 18981061] 
 Lloyd J, Crouch NS, Minto CL, Liao LM, Creighton SM. Female genital appear-
ance: “normality” unfolds.  BJOG . 2005;112:643. [PMID: 15842291] 
 Lourenço D, Brauner R, Lin L, et al. Mutations in NR5A1 associated with ovarian 
insufficiency.  N Engl J Med . 2009;360:1200, 2009. [PMID: 19246354] 
Lourenço D, Brauner R, Rybczynska M, Nihoul-Fékété C, McElreavey K, 
Bashamboo A. Loss-of-function mutation in GATA4 causes anomalies of 
human testicular development. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011. [PMID: 
21220346]
 Lutfallah C, Wang W, Mason JI, et al. Newly proposed hormonal criteria via 
genotypic proof for type II 3 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency. 
 J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2002;87:2611. [PMID: 12050224] 
 Maatouk DM, DiNapoli L, Alvers A, Parker KL, Taketo MM, Capel B. 
Stabilization of beta-catenin in XY gonads causes male-to-female sex-rever-
sal.  Hum Mol Genet . 2008;17:2949. [PMID: 18617533] 
 Matura LA, Ho VB, Rosing DR, Bondy CA. Aortic dilatation and dissection in 
Turner syndrome.  Circulation . 2007;116:1663. [PMID: 17875973] 
 Mazur T. Gender dysphoria and gender change in androgen insensitivity or micro-
penis.  Arch Sex Behav . 2005;34:411. [PMID: 16010464] 
 McElreavey K. Genetic disorders of sex differentiation. Proceedings of the 2nd 
World Conference: Hormonal and Genetic Basis of Sexual Differentiation 
Disorders, January 15-17, 2010, Miami Beach, FL. 
 Mendez JP, Schiavon R, Diaz-Cueto L, et al. A reliable endocrine test with human 
menopausal gonadotropins for diagnosis of true hermaphroditism in early 
infancy.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 1998;83:3523. [PMID: 9768658] 
 Mendonca BB, Domenice S, Arnhold IJ, Costa EM. 46,XY disorders of sex devel-
opment (DSD).  Clin Endocrinol . 2009;70:173. [PMID: 18811725] 
 Mendonca BB, Leite MV, de Castro M, et al. Female pseudohermaphrodism 
caused by a novel homozygous missense mutation of the GR gene.  J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab . 2002;87:1805. [PMID: 11932321] 
 Merke DP. Approach to the adult with congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 
21-hydroxylase deficiency.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2008;93:653. [PMID: 
18326005] 
 Metherell LA, Naville D, Halaby G, et al. Nonclassic lipoid congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia masquerading as familial glucocorticoid deficiency.  J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab . 2009;94:3865. [PMID: 19773404] 
 Meyer-Bahlburg HF. Attitudes of adult 46,XY intersex persons to clinical manage-
ment policies.  J Urol . 2004;171:1615. [PMID: 15017234] 
CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation     525
 Meyer-Bahlburg HF. Gender identity outcome in female-raised 46,XY persons 
with penile agenesis, cloacal exstrophy of the bladder, or penile ablation.  Arch 
Sex Behav . 2005;34:423. [PMID: 16010465] 
 Meyer-Bahlburg HF, Dolezal C, Baker SW, Carlson AD, Obeid JS, New MI. 
Prenatal androgenization affects gender-related behavior but not gender 
identity in 5-12-year-old girls with congenital adrenal hyperplasia.  Arch Sex 
Behav . 2004;33:97. [PMID: 15146142] 
 Meyer-Bahlburg HF, Dolezal C, Baker SW, Ehrhardt AA, New MI. Gender devel-
opment in women with congenital adrenal hyperplasia as a function of dis-
order severity.  Arch Sex Behav . 2006;35:667. [PMID: 16902816] 
 Meyer-Bahlburg HF, Dolezal C, Baker SW, New MI. Sexual orientation in 
women with classical or non-classical congenital adrenal hyperplasia as a 
function of degree of prenatal androgen excess.  Arch Sex Behav . 2008;37:85. 
[PMID: 18157628] 
Miller WL, Auchus RJ. The molecular biology, biochemistry, and physiology of 
human steroidogenesis and its disorders. Endocr Rev. 2010 Nov 4 [Epub 
ahead of print] [PMID: 21051590].
 Morel Y, Rey R, Teinturier C, et al. Aetiological diagnosis of male sex ambiguity: 
a collaborative study. Eur J Pediatr. 2002; 161:49. [PMID: 11808880] 
 Morishima A, Grumbach MM, Simpson ER, Fisher C, Qin K. Aromatase defi-
ciency in male and female siblings caused by a novel mutation and the 
physiological role of estrogens.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 1995;80:3689. 
[PMID: 8530621] 
 Nef S, Vassalli JD. Complementary pathways in mammalian female sex determina-
tion.  J Biol . 2009;8:74. [PMID: 19735582] 
 Oberfield SE, Mondok A, Shahrivar F, Klein JF, Levine LS. Clitoral size in full-
term infants.  Am J Perinatol . 1989;6:453. [PMID: 2789544] 
 Ogata T, Laporte J, Fukami M. MAMLD1 (CXorf6): a new gene involved in 
hypospadias.  Horm Res . 2009;71:245. [PMID: 19339788] 
 Ortenberg J, Oddoux C, Craver R, et al. SRY gene expression in the ovotestes of 
XX true hermaphrodites.  J Urol . 2002;167:1828. [PMID: 11912443] 
 Ottolenghi C, Omari S, Garcia-Ortiz JE, et al. FoxL2 is required for commitment 
to ovary differentiation.  Hum Mol Genet . 2005;14:2053. [PMID: 
15944199] 
 Paduch DA, Bolyakov A, Cohen P, Travis A. Reproduction in men with Klinefelter 
syndrome: the past, the present, and the future.  Semin Reprod Med . 2009;27:137. 
[PMID: 19247915] 
 Parma P, Radi O, Vidal V, et al. R-spondin1 is essential in sex determination, skin 
differentiation and malignancy.  Nat Genet . 2006;38:1304. [PMID: 
17041600] 
Pearlman A, Loke J, Le Caignec C, et al. Mutations in MAP3K1 cause 46,XY 
disorders of sex development and implicate a common signal transduction 
pathway in human testis determination. Am J Hum Genet. 2010; 87:898-
904. [PMID: 21129722]
 Philibert P, Biason-Lauber A, Rouzier R, et al. Identification and functional analy-
sis of a new WNT4 gene mutation among 28 adolescent girls with primary 
amenorrhea and Müllerian duct abnormalities: a French collaborative study. 
 J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2008;93:895. [PMID: 18182450] 
 Philibert P, Polak M, Colmenares A, et al. Predominant Sertoli cell deficiency in a 
46,XY disorders of sex development patient with a new NR5A1/SF-1 muta-
tion transmitted by his unaffected father. Fertil Steril. 2010 Dec 14. [PMID: 
21163476]
Practice Committee, American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Increased 
maternal cardiovascular mortality associated with pregnancy in women with 
Turner syndrome.  Fertil Steril . 2005;83:1074. [PMID: 15820837] 
 Ravel C, Lakhal B, Elghezal H, et al. Novel human pathological mutations. Gene 
symbol: SRY. Disease: XY sex reversal.  Hum Genet . 2009;126:333. [PMID: 
19694000] 
 Reiner WG, Gearhart JP. Discordant sexual identity in some genetic males with 
cloacal exstrophy assigned to female sex at birth.  N Engl J Med . 2004;350:333. 
[PMID: 14736925] 
 Reiner WG. Gender identity and sex-of-rearing in children with disorders of sexual 
differentiation.  J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab . 2005;18:549. [PMID: 
16042322] 
 Richards JS, Pangas SA. The ovary: basic biology and clinical implications.  J Clin 
Invest . 2010;120:963. [PMID: 20364094] 
 Rosler A. 17 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 3 deficiency in the Mediterranean 
population.  Pediatr Endocrinol Rev . 2006;3:455. [PMID: 17551466] 
 Rubtsov P, Karmanov M, Sverdlova P, Spirin P, Tiulpakov A. A novel homozygous 
mutation in CYP11A1 gene is associated with late-onset adrenal insuffi-
ciency and hypospadias in a 46,XY patient.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2009;94:936, 2009. [PMID: 19116240] 
 Safe S. Clinical correlates of environmental endocrine disruptors.  Trends Endocrinol 
Metab . 2005;16:139. [PMID: 15860409] 
 Sahakitrungruang T, Huang N, Tee MK, et al. Clinical, genetic, and enzymatic 
characterization of P450 oxidoreductase deficiency in four patients.  J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab . 2009;94:4992. [PMID: 19837910] 
Sahakitrungruang T, Soccio RE, Lang-Muritano M, Walker JM, Achermann JC, 
Miller WL. Clinical, genetic, and functional characterization of four patients 
carrying partial loss-of-function mutations in the steroidogenic acute regula-
tory protein (StAR). J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010;95:3352. [PMID: 
20444910]
Sahakitrungruang T, Tee MK, Blackett PR, Miller WL. Partial defect in the cho-
lesterol side-chain cleavage enzyme P450scc (CYP11A1) resembling nonclas-
sic congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. Dec 15 
[Epub ahead of print][PMID: 21159840]
 Schoemaker MJ, Swerdlow AJ, Higgins CD, Wright AF, Jacobs PA; United 
Kingdom Clinical Cytogenetics Group. Mortality in women with Turner 
syndrome in Great Britain: a national cohort study.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2008;93:4735. [PMID: 18812477] 
Schlessinger D, Garcia-Ortiz JE, Forabosco A, Uda M, Crisponi L, Pelosi E. 
Determination and stability of gonadal sex. J Androl. 2010;31:16. [PMID: 
19875493]
 Schonfeld WA, Beebe GW. Normal growth and variation in male genitalia from 
birth to maturity.  J Urol . 1942;64:759. 
 Sciurano RB, Luna Hisano CV, Rahn MI, et al. Focal spermatogenesis originates 
in euploid germ cells in classical Klinefelter patients.  Hum Reprod . 
2009;24:2353. [PMID: 19443454] 
 Scott RR, Miller WL. Genetic and clinical features of p450 oxidoreductase defi-
ciency.  Horm Res . 2008;69:266. [PMID: 18259105] 
 Sekido R. SRY: a transcriptional activator of mammalian testis determination.  Int 
J Biochem Cell Biol . 2010;42:417. [PMID: 20005972] 
 Sekido R, Lovell-Badge R. Sex determination and SRY: down to a wink and a 
nudge?  Trends Genet . 2009;25:19. [PMID: 19027189] 
 Simard J, Ricketts ML, Gingras S, Soucy P, Feltus FA, Melner MH. Molecular 
biology of the 3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/delta5-delta4 isomerase 
gene family.  Endocr Rev . 2005;26:525. [PMID: 15632317] 
 Sinclair A, Smith C. Females battle to suppress their inner male.  Cell . 2009;139:1051. 
[PMID: 20005799] 
 Slijper FM, Drop SL, Molenaar JC, de Muinck Keizer-Schrama SM. Long-term 
psychological evaluation of intersex children.  Arch Sex Behav . 1998;27:125. 
[PMID: 9562897] 
 Speiser PW, White PC. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia.  N Engl J Med . 
2003;349:776. [PMID: 12930931] 
Speiser PW, Azziz R, Baskin LS, et al. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to ste-
roid 21-hydroxylase deficiency: an Endocrine Society clinical practice guide-
line. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010;95:4133. [PMID: 20823466]
Sutton E, Hughes J, White S, et al. Identification of SOX3 as an XX male sex 
reversal gene in mice and humans. J Clin Invest. 2011;121:328. [PMID: 
21183788]
 Swain A. Sex determination: time for meiosis? The gonad decides.  Curr Biol . 
2006;16:R507. [PMID: 16824913] 
 Szarras-Czapnik M, Lew-Starowicz Z, Zucker KJ. A psychosexual follow-up study 
of patients with mixed or partial gonadal dysgenesis.  J Pediatr Adolesc 
Gynecol . 2007;20:333. [PMID: 18082854] 
 Tang P, Park DJ, Marshall Graves JA, Harley VR. ATRX and sex differentiation. 
 Trends Endocrinol Metab . 2004;15:339. [PMID: 15350606] 
 Tomaselli S, Megiorni F, De Bernardo C, et al. Syndromic true hermaphroditism 
due to an R-spondin1 (RSPO1) homozygous mutation.  Hum Mutat . 
2008;29:220. [PMID: 18085567] 
 Tomizuka K, Horikoshi K, Kitada R, et al. R-spondin1 plays an essential role in 
ovarian development through positively regulating Wnt-4 signaling.  Hum 
Mol Genet . 2008;17:1278. [PMID: 18250097] 
 Tuladhar R, Davis PG, Batch J, Doyle LW. Establishment of a normal range of 
penile length in preterm infants.  J Paediatr Child Health . 1998;34:471. 
[PMID: 9767514] 
526    CHAPTER 14 Disorders of Sex Determination and Differentiation
 Uhlenhaut NH, Jakob S, Anlag K, et al. Somatic sex reprogramming of adult 
ovaries to testes by FOXL2 ablation.  Cell . 2009;139:1130. [PMID: 
20005806] 
 van Casteren NJ, de Jong J, Stoop H, et al. Evaluation of testicular biopsies for 
carcinoma in situ: immunohistochemistry is mandatory.  Int J Androl . 
2008;32:666. [PMID: 18798762] 
Veitia RA. FOXL2 versus SOX9: a lifelong “battle of the sexes”. Bioessays. 
2010;32:375. [PMID: 20414895]
 Virtanen HE, Rajpert-De Meyts E, Main KM, Skakkebaek NE, Toppari J. 
Testicular dysgenesis syndrome and the development and occurrence of male 
reproductive disorders.  Toxicol Appl Pharmacol . 2005;207:501. [PMID: 
16005920] 
 Warne GL. Long-term outcome of disorders of sex development.  Sex Dev . 
2008;2:268. [PMID: 18987501] 
 White PC. Ontogeny of adrenal steroid biosynthesis: why girls will be girls.  J Clin 
Invest . 2006;116:872. [PMID: 16585958] 
 Wilhelm D, Palmer S, Koopman P. Sex determination and gonadal development 
in mammals.  Physiol Rev . 2007;87:1. [PMID: 17237341] 
 Wisniewski AB, Mazur T. 46,XY DSD with female or ambiguous external 
genitalia at birth due to androgen insensitivity syndrome, 5alpha-
reductase-2 deficiency, or 17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase defi-
ciency: a review of quality of life outcomes.  Int J Pediatr Endocrinol . 
2009:567430. [PMID: 19956704] 
 Wisniewski AB, Migeon CJ, Malouf MA, Gearhart JP. Psychosexual outcome in 
women affected by congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase 
deficiency.  J Urol . 2004;171:2497. [PMID: 15126884] 
 Zitzmann M, Depenbusch M, Gromoll J, Nieschlag E. X-chromosome inactiva-
tion patterns and androgen receptor functionality influence phenotype and 
social characteristics as well as pharmacogenetics of testosterone therapy in 
Klinefelter patients.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2004;89:6208. [PMID: 
15579779] 
 
527
5
1
 Puberty 
 Dennis Styne, MD 
 ACTH 
Adrenocorticotropin 
 AZF 
Azoospermia factor 
 cAMP 
Cyclic adenosine monophosphate 
 DHEA 
Dehydroepiandrosterone 
 DHEAS 
Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate 
 FSH 
Follicle-stimulating hormone 
 GH 
Growth hormone 
 GnRH 
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
 hCG 
Human chorionic gonadotropin 
 HESX-1 
Hesx-1 homeodomain 
 HDL 
High-density lipoprotein 
HPLC MS/MS High performance liquid chromatography
 
tandem mass spectroscopy
 hGH 
Human growth hormone 
 ICMA 
Immunochemiluminometric assay 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 IGF-1 
Insulin-like growth factor 1 
 KAL1 
Kallmann syndrome 
 LDL 
Low-density lipoprotein 
 LH 
Luteinizing hormone 
 LHX3 
LIM homeobox gene 3 
 PROP-1 
Prophet of PIT 1 
 PROK1 
Prokineticin receptor 2 
 PRL 
Prolactin 
 PSA 
Prostate-specific antigen 
 SHBG 
Sex hormone–binding globulin 
 SF-1 
Steroidogenic factor 1 
 SHOX 
Short stature homeobox 
 SRIF 
Somatostatin 
 TGF-` 
Transforming growth factor 
 
alpha 
 Puberty is best considered as one stage in the continuing pro-
cess of growth and development that begins during gestation 
and continues until the end of reproductive life. After an inter-
val of childhood quiescence—the juvenile pause—the hypo-
thalamic pulse generator increases activity in the peripubertal 
period, just before the physical changes of puberty commence. 
This leads to increased secretion of pituitary gonadotropins 
and, subsequently, gonadal sex steroids that bring about sec-
ondary sexual development, the pubertal growth spurt, and 
fertility. Historical records show that the age at onset of par-
ticular stages of puberty in boys and girls in Western countries 
has steadily declined over the last several hundred years; this is 
probably due to improvements in socioeconomic conditions, 
nutrition, and, therefore, the general state of health during that 
period. This trend appears to be continuing but now due more 
to the effects of the obesity epidemic than the improvement in 
general health. 
 Many endogenous and exogenous factors can alter age at onset 
of puberty. While obesity may decrease the age of onset of 
puberty, chronic illness and malnutrition often delay puberty. 
There is a significant concordance of age at menarche between 
mother-daughter pairs and within ethnic populations, indicating 
the influence of genetic factors. Recent study of genetic loci asso-
ciated with the age of onset of puberty suggests the existence of 
several genes that are likely involved in the regulation of menar-
che and puberty. 
 PHYSIOLOGY OF PUBERTY 
 Physical Changes Associated with Puberty 
 Descriptive standards proposed by Tanner for assessing pubertal 
development in males and females are in wide use (denoted as 
Sexual Maturation stages or, often, Tanner stages). They focus 
attention on specific details of the examination and make it pos-
sible to objectively record subtle progression of secondary sexual 
development that may otherwise be overlooked. Self-assessment of 
pubertal development by subjects using reference pictures is used 
in clinical studies but reliability is less than that achieved by 
physical examination. 
528    CHAPTER 15 Puberty
 A. Female changes 
 The first sign of puberty in the female, 
as noted in longitudinal studies, is an increase in height velocity 
that heralds the beginning of the pubertal growth spurt; girls are 
not usually examined frequently enough to demonstrate 
this change in clinical practice, so breast development is the first 
sign of puberty noted by most examiners. Breast development 
( Figure 15–1 ) is stimulated chiefly by ovarian estrogen secretion, 
although other hormones also play a part. The size and shape of 
the breasts may be determined by genetic and nutritional factors, 
but the characteristics of the stages in  Figure 15–1 are similar in 
all females. Standards are available for the change in areolar (nip-
ple) plateau diameter during puberty: nipple diameter changes 
little from stages B1 to B3 (mean of 3-4 mm) but enlarges sub-
stantially in subsequent stages (mean of 7.4 mm at stage B4 to 
10 mm at stage B5), presumably as a result of increased estrogen 
secretion at the time of menarche. Areolae become more pig-
mented and erectile as development progresses. Other features 
reflecting estrogen action include enlargement of the labia minora 
and majora, dulling of the vaginal mucosa from its prepubertal 
reddish hue to more of a pink color (due to cornification of the 
vaginal epithelium), and production of a clear or slightly whitish 
vaginal secretion prior to menarche. Pubic hair development 
( Figure 15–2 ) is determined chiefly by adrenal and ovarian andro-
gen secretion. Breast development and growth of pubic hair usu-
ally proceed at similar rates, but because discrepancies in rates of 
advancement are possible, it is best to stage breast development 
separately from pubic hair progression. 
 Uterine size and shape change with pubertal development as 
reflected by ultrasonographic studies. With prolonged estrogen 
stimulation, the fundus-cervix ratio increases, leading to a bulbous 
form, and the uterus elongates. An endometrial stripe appears 
with the onset of puberty that is not found in premature thelarche. 
Ovaries enlarge with pubertal progression. Small cysts are nor-
mally present in prepubertal girls and a multicystic appearance 
develops during puberty, but the polycystic appearance seen in 
abnormalities of puberty or during the reproductive years in nor-
mal girls is not present. Experienced ultrasonographers can deter-
mine the developmental stage of the uterus and ovaries by 
comparing the results with established standards. 
 It is important to note that girls achieve reproductive maturity 
prior to physical maturity and certainly prior to psychologic 
maturity. 
 B. Male changes 
 The first sign of normal puberty in boys is 
usually an increase in the size of the testes to more than 2.5 cm in 
the longest diameter, excluding the epididymis: this is equivalent 
to a testicular volume of 4 mL or more. Most of the increase in 
testicular size is due to seminiferous tubular development second-
ary to stimulation by follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), with a 
smaller component due to Leydig cell stimulation by luteinizing 
hormone (LH). Thus, if only Leydig cells are stimulated, as with 
a human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG)-secreting tumor, the 
testis does not grow as large as in normal puberty. Pubic hair 
development is brought about by adrenal and testicular androgen 
secretion and is classified separately from genital development, as 
noted in  Figure 15–3 . A longitudinal study of more than 500 boys 
suggests adding a stage 2a (absence of pubic hair in the presence 
of a testicular volume of 3 mL or more) to the classic five stages of 
pubertal development. Further pubertal development occurred in 
82% of the subjects in stage 2a after the passage of 6 months: thus, 
reaching stage 2a would allow the examiner to reassure a patient 
that further spontaneous development is likely soon. The appear-
ance of spermatozoa in early morning urinary specimens (sper-
marche) occurs at a mean chronologic age of 13.4 years or a 
similar mean bone age; this usually occurs at gonadal stage 3 to 4 
and pubic hair stage 2 to 4. Remarkably, spermaturia is more com-
mon earlier in puberty than later, suggesting that sperm are 
directly released into the urine early in puberty while ejaculation 
may be required for the presence of sperm in the urines of older 
children. However, boys are reported with spermaturia and no 
secondary sexual development. 
 It is important to note that boys achieve reproductive maturity 
prior to physical maturity and certainly prior to psychologic 
maturity. 
 FIGURE 15–1  Stages of breast development, according to 
Marshall and Tanner.  (Photographs from Van Wieringen JC, et al. 
Growth Diagrams 1965 Netherlands: Second National Survey on
0 -24 Year Olds. Institute for Preventive Medicine NO Leiden, Wolters-
Noordhoff Publishing; 1971; with permission.)  Stage B1: 
Preadolescent; elevation of papilla only. Stage B2: Breast bud stage; 
elevation of breast and papilla as a small mound, and enlargement of 
areolar diameter. Stage B3 (not shown): Further enlargement of 
breast and areola with no separation of their contours. Stage B4: 
Projection of areola and papilla to form a secondary mound above 
the level of the breast (not shown). Stage B5: Mature stage; projec-
tion of papilla only, due to recession of the areola to the general con-
tour of the breast. 
CHAPTER 15 Puberty     529
 C. Age at onset 
 Ideally, the upper and lower boundaries 
encompassing the age at onset of puberty should be set at 
2.5 standard deviations (SDs) above and below the mean (encom-
passing 98.8% of the normal population). Previously, there was no 
comprehensive study of the start of secondary sexual development 
adequate to determine the lower limits of normal in US children, 
as national studies began reporting children who were already 
12 years of age or older. Thus, European standards, primarily 
those of Tanner, were modified for use in the United States. 
However, a study conducted in medical offices by specially trained 
pediatricians studying 17,070 girls brought in for routine visits 
provided information on girls in the United States as young as 
3 years. The study revealed that 3% of white girls reach stage 2 
breast development by 6 years of age and 5% by 7 years, whereas 
6.4% of black girls had stage 2 breast development by 6 years and 
15.4% by 7 years. Although this was not a randomly chosen 
population sampled by longitudinal study (and this led to contro-
versy), it is the largest study available. These data led to the 
Lawson Wilkins Pediatric Endocrine Society statement that the 
diagnosis of precocious puberty could be defined as secondary 
sexual development starting prior to 6 years in black girls and 
prior to 7 years in white girls who are otherwise healthy. Recent 
analysis of data from NHANES III demonstrated that children of 
normal BMI values rarely have breast or pubic hair development 
before 8 years, although increased BMI in a subset of girls or 
Hispanic and African American ethnicity led to earlier develop-
ment.  It is essential to use any such guidelines only in healthy girls 
with absolutely no signs of neurologic or other disease that might 
pathologically advance puberty or a grave diagnosis may be missed. 
 Recent data indicate that boys with elevated body mass indices 
have earlier onset of puberty. However, there has been no change 
in the age at onset of puberty in boys in the general population, 
so 9 years is taken as the lower limit of normal pubertal develop-
ment in males, whereas 13½ years is the upper limit of normal 
development (although 14 years is often used as a simplified 
limit). The mean age at menarche in the United States is 
12.8 years since the last government study was published in 
1974. White girls have menarche later (12.9 years) than black girls 
(12.3 years), but this 6-month difference is less than the 1-year 
difference in the age at onset of puberty between the two groups. 
A compensation occurs in pubertal development so that those girls 
who enter puberty at the earliest ages of the normal range take 
more time to reach menarche, and those who enter at older ages 
of the normal range progress faster to menarche. 
 There is frequent discussion about an earlier age of puberty in 
children in the United States, which is demonstrated in some 
longitudinal studies in the US and abroad. The Bogalusa Heart 
Study shows that the gap between the age of menarche in Blacks 
and Whites has widened in the past decades, and this may be due to 
differing patterns of weight (and fat) gain. However longitudinal 
 FIGURE 15–2  Stages of female pubic hair development, according to Marshall and Tanner.  (Photographs from Van Wieringen JC, et al. 
Growth Diagrams 1965 Netherlands: Second National Survey on 0 -24 Year Olds. Institute for Preventive Medicine NO Leiden, Wolters-Noordhoff 
Publishing; 1971; with permission.)  Stage P1: Preadolescent; the vellus over the area is no further developed than that over the anterior 
abdominal wall (ie, no pubic hair). Stage P2: Sparse growth of long, slightly pigmented, downy hair, straight or only slightly curled, appearing 
chiefly along the labia. This stage is difficult to see on photographs and is subtle. Stage P3: Hair is considerably darker, coarser, and curlier. The 
hair spreads sparsely over the superior junction of the labia majora. Stage P4: Hair is now adult in type, but the area covered by it is still consid-
erably smaller than in most adults. There is no spread to the medial surface of the thighs. Stage P5: Hair is adult in quantity and type, distrib-
uted as an inverse triangle of the classic feminine pattern. Spread is to the medial surface of the thighs but not up the linea alba or elsewhere 
above the base of the inverse triangle. 
530    CHAPTER 15 Puberty
study from the Fells Institute shows that those girls who develop 
early have a tendency to increase their body mass index values after 
more than those who start puberty later. The presence or absence 
of menarche however, does not affect the interpretation of a BMI 
value. Late onset of pubertal development above the upper age 
limit of normal may indicate hypothalamic, pituitary, or gonadal 
failure or, alternatively, normal variation (constitutional delay). 
The time from onset of puberty until adult development is com-
plete is also of importance; significant delays in reaching subse-
quent stages may indicate any type of hypogonadism. 
 D. Growth spurt 
 The striking increase in growth velocity in 
puberty (pubertal growth spurt) is under complex endocrine con-
trol involving thyroid hormone, growth hormone (GH), and 
estrogen. Hypothyroidism decreases or eliminates the pubertal 
growth spurt. The amplitude of GH secretion increases in puberty, 
as does production of insulin-like growth factor (IGF-I); peak 
serum IGF-I concentrations are reached about 1 year after peak 
growth velocity, and serum IGF-I levels remain above normal 
adult levels for up to 4 years thereafter. GH and estrogen are 
important in the pubertal growth spurt; when either or both are 
deficient, the growth spurt is decreased or absent. Estrogen indi-
rectly stimulate IGF-I production by increasing the secretion of 
GH. It also directly stimulates IGF-I production in cartilage. 
Estrogen is the most important factor in stimulating maturation 
of the chondrocytes and osteoblasts, ultimately leading to epiphy-
sial fusion. A patient reported with estrogen receptor deficiency 
was tall, with continued growth past the age of 20 years with a 
remarkable retardation of skeletal maturation (and decreased bone 
density). Patients with aromatase deficiency, and therefore, 
impaired conversion of testosterone to estrogen, also demonstrate 
diminished advancement of bone age and decreased bone density, 
as well as continued growth extending into the third decade. With 
exogenous estrogen administration, the bone age advanced, and 
the bone density increased. Such patients demonstrate the key role 
played by estrogen in advancing bone age and bringing about the 
 FIGURE 15–3  Stages of male genital development and pubic hair development, according to Marshall and Tanner. Genital: Stage G1: 
Preadolescent. Testes, scrotum, and penis are about the same size and proportion as in early childhood. Stage G2: The scrotum and testes have 
enlarged, and there is a change in the texture and some reddening of the scrotal skin. There is no enlargement of the penis. Stage G3: Growth 
of the penis has occurred, at first mainly in length but with some increase in breadth; further growth of testes and scrotum. Stage G4: Penis 
further enlarged in length and girth with development of glans. Testes and scrotum further enlarged. The scrotal skin has further darkened. 
Stage G5: Genitalia adult in size and shape. No further enlargement takes place after stage G5 is reached. Pubic hair: Stage P1: Preadolescent. 
The vellus is no further developed than that over the abdominal wall (ie, no pubic hair). Stage P2: Sparse growth of long, slightly pigmented, 
downy hair, straight or only slightly curled, appearing chiefly at the base of the penis. This is subtle. Stage P3: Hair is considerably darker, 
coarser, and curlier and spreads sparsely. Stage P4: Hair is now adult in type, but the area it covers is still considerably smaller than in most 
adults. There is no spread to the medial surface of the thighs. Stage P5: Hair is adult in quantity and type, distributed as an inverse triangle. 
Spread is to the medial surface of the thighs but not up the linea alba or elsewhere above the base of the inverse triangle. Most men have fur-
ther spread of pubic hair.  (Photographs from Van Wieringen JC, et al. Growth Diagrams 1965 Netherlands: Second National Survey on 0-24 Year 
Olds. Institute for Preventive Medicine NO Leiden, Wolters-Noordhoff Publishing; 1971; with permission.) 
CHAPTER 15 Puberty     531
cessation of growth by epiphysial fusion as well as the importance 
of estrogen in increasing bone density. 
 In girls, the pubertal growth spurt begins in early puberty 
and is mostly completed by menarche. In boys, the pubertal 
growth spurt occurs toward the end of puberty, at an average 
age 2 years older than in girls. Total height attained during the 
growth spurt in girls is about 25 cm; in boys, it is about 28 cm. 
The mean adult height differential of 12 cm between men and 
women is due in part to heights already attained before onset of 
the pubertal growth spurt and in part to the height gained dur-
ing the spurt. 
 Twin studies from Finland demonstrate that the heritability 
estimate ( proportion of variance of age of onset of puberty attribut-
able to genetic variance ) for age at onset of pubertal growth spurt 
was 0.91, 0.93 for age at peak height velocity, and 0.97 for adult 
height. In addition, the age at onset of the pubertal growth spurt 
was negatively associated with BMI in childhood. 
 Precocious puberty may coexist with GH deficiency: this situa-
tion may occur, for example, in a child with a brain tumor causing 
central precocious puberty, who is treated with central nervous sys-
tem radiation that subsequently causes GH deficiency. The preco-
cious puberty may raise the growth rate to the normal range, 
cloaking the GH deficiency but the child does not grow at the exces-
sive rate characteristic of precocious puberty with GH sufficiency. 
 E. Changes in body composition  Changes in body composi-
tion are also prominent during pubertal development. Prepubertal 
boys and girls start with equal lean body mass, skeletal mass, and body 
fat, but at maturity men have approximately 1½ times the lean body 
mass, skeletal mass, and muscle mass of women, whereas women have 
twice as much body fat as men. Attainment of peak values of percent-
age of body fat, lean body mass, and bone mineral density is earlier by 
several years in girls than in boys, as is the earlier peak of height veloc-
ity and velocity of weight gain in girls. 
 The most important phases of bone accretion occur during 
infancy and during puberty. Girls reach peak mineralization 
between 14 and 16 years of age, whereas boys reach a later peak at 
17.5 years; both milestones occur after peak height velocity 
( Figure 15–4 ). The density of bone is determined by genetic fac-
tors; decreased bone mass is found in familial patterns even if 
subjects are studied before puberty. Patients with delay in puberty 
for any reason have a significant decrease in bone accretion and a 
delay in reaching peak bone mineral density, although bone den-
sity may later reach normal values in those with constitutional 
delay in puberty. Moderate exercise increases bone mass, but 
excessive exercise itself delays puberty; the ultimate outcome of 
excessive exercise in girls is the combination of exercise-induced 
amenorrhea, premature osteoporosis, and disordered eating, 
which is known as the female athletic triad. 
 Unfortunately, in the United States, only a minority of adoles-
cents receive the recommended daily allowance of calcium (>1000 
mg/d depending on age) and vitamin D, and a future epidemic of 
osteopenia or even osteoporosis in normal subjects who have this 
deficiency is a possibility although genetic influences are prominent 
in later adult bone density. It is especially important to ensure ade-
quate calcium intake and vitamin D in patients with delayed or 
absent puberty and in patients treated with gonadotropin-releasing 
hormone (GnRH) agonists. 
 F. Other changes of puberty 
 Other changes that are charac-
teristic of puberty are mediated either directly or indirectly by the 
change in sex steroids. For example, seborrheic dermatitis may 
appear, the mouth flora changes, and periodontal disease, rare in 
childhood, may occur. Insulin resistance intensifies in normal 
adolescents as well as those with type 1 diabetes mellitus. 
 Endocrine Changes from 
Fetal Life to Puberty 
 Pituitary gonadotropin secretion is controlled by the hypothala-
mus, which releases pulses of GnRH into the pituitary-portal 
system to reach the anterior pituitary gland by 20 weeks of gesta-
tion. Control of GnRH secretion is exerted by a  hypothalamic pulse 
generator in the arcuate nucleus. It is sensitive to feedback control 
from sex steroids and inhibin, a gonadal protein product that 
controls the frequency and amplitude of gonadotropin secretion 
during development in both sexes and during the progression of 
the menstrual cycle in females (see Chapter 13). 
 In males, LH stimulates the Leydig cells to secrete testosterone, 
and FSH stimulates the Sertoli cells to produce inhibin. Inhibin 
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
Apex strength 
spurt
Height spurt
Penis
Testis
Pubic hair
101/2-16
13-171/2
11-141/2
131/2-17
10-131/2
141/2-18
2
3
4
5
10-15
14-18
Age (y)
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
Height spurt
Menarche
Breast
Pubic hair
91/2-141/2
Bud
10-161/2
8-13
2
3
4
5
8-14
Age (y)
5
4
3
2
A
B
 FIGURE 15–4  Sequence of secondary sexual development in 
British males (A) and females (B). The range of ages in Britain is indi-
cated. American boys and girls start pubertal stages earlier than 
British children (see text) but the sequence is the same.  (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Marshall WA, Tanner JM. Variations in the pat-
tern of pubertal changes in boys.  Arch Dis Child . 1970;45:13.) 
532    CHAPTER 15 Puberty
feeds back on the hypothalamic-pituitary axis to inhibit FSH. 
Inhibin is also released in a pulsatile pattern, but concentrations 
do not change with pubertal progression. 
 In females, FSH stimulates the granulosa cells to produce 
estrogen and the follicles to secrete inhibin, and LH appears to 
play a minor role in the endocrine milieu until menarche. Then 
LH triggers ovulation and later stimulates the theca cells to secrete 
androgens (see Chapter 13). 
 A. Fetal life 
 The concept of the continuum of development 
between the fetus and the adult is well illustrated by the changes 
that occur in the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis. 
Gonadotropins are demonstrable in fetal pituitary glands and 
serum during the first trimester. The pituitary content of gonado-
tropins rises to a plateau at midgestation. Fetal serum concentra-
tions of LH and FSH rise to a peak at midgestation and then 
gradually decrease until term. During the first half of gestation, 
hypothalamic GnRH content also increases, and the hypophyseal-
portal circulation achieves anatomic maturity. These data are 
compatible with a theory of early unrestrained GnRH secretion 
stimulating pituitary gonadotropin secretion, followed by the 
appearance of central nervous system factors that inhibit GnRH 
release and decrease gonadotropin secretion after midgestation. 
Because the male fetus has measurable serum testosterone concen-
trations but lower serum gonadotropin concentrations than the 
female fetus, negative feedback inhibition of gonadotropin secre-
tion by testosterone appears to operate after midgestation. 
 B. Changes at birth 
 At term, serum gonadotropin concen-
trations are suppressed in the neonate, but with postnatal clear-
ance of high circulating estrogen concentrations, negative 
inhibition is reduced and postnatal peaks of serum LH and FSH 
are measurable for several months to up to a few years after birth. 
Serum testosterone concentrations may be increased to midpuber-
tal levels during the several months after birth in normal males, 
and serum estradiol rises in pulses for the first 2 years in infant 
girls. These peaks of gonadotropins and sex steroids in normal 
infants complicate the diagnosis of central precocious puberty at 
these youngest ages, because it is difficult to decide whether to 
attribute the gonadotropin and sex steroid peaks to central preco-
cious puberty or to normal physiology (the mini-puberty of 
infancy). While episodic peaks of serum gonadotropins may occur 
until 2 years of age, serum gonadotropin concentrations are low 
during later years in normal childhood. 
 C. The juvenile pause or the midchildhood nadir of 
gonadotropin secretion 
 While serum gonadotropin con-
centrations are low in midchildhood, sensitive assays indicate that 
pulsatile secretion occurs and that the onset of puberty is heralded 
more by an increase in amplitude of secretory events than a change 
in frequency. Twenty-four-hour mean concentrations of LH, 
FSH, and testosterone rise measurably within 1 year before the 
development of physical pubertal changes. Patients with gonadal 
failure—such as those with the syndrome of gonadal dysgenesis 
(Turner syndrome)—demonstrate an exaggeration of the normal 
pattern of gonadotropin secretion, with exceedingly high concen-
trations of serum LH and FSH during the first several years of life. 
Such patients show that negative feedback inhibition is active dur-
ing childhood; without sex steroid or inhibin secretion to exert 
inhibition, serum gonadotropin values are greatly elevated. During 
midchildhood, normal individuals and patients with primary 
hypogonadism have lower serum gonadotropin levels than they do 
in the neonatal period, but the range of serum gonadotropin con-
centrations in hypogonadal patients during midchildhood is still 
higher than that found in healthy children of the same age. The 
decrease in serum gonadotropin concentrations in primary ago-
nadal children during midchildhood is incompletely understood, 
but has been attributed to an increase in the central nervous sys-
tem inhibition of gonadotropin secretion during these years. 
Thus, the juvenile pause in normal children and those with pri-
mary gonadal failure appears to be due to central nervous system 
restraint of GnRH secretion. 
 D. Peripubertal gonadotropin increase 
 Prepubertal chil-
dren demonstrate a circadian rhythm of LH and FSH secretion of 
low amplitude with a pattern of low levels of sex steroid secretion 
lagging behind the gonadotropin rhythm. The delay is presumably 
due to the time necessary for biosynthesis and secretion of sex 
steroids. Thus, the changes that are described later and that occur 
at puberty do not arise de novo but are based on preexisting pat-
terns of endocrine secretion. In the peripubertal period, endoge-
nous GnRH secretion increases in amplitude and frequency 
during the early hours of sleep and serum testosterone and estro-
gen concentrations rise several hours later, suggesting that biosyn-
thesis or aromatization occurs during the period of delay—
a pattern that differs from the prepubertal period mainly in the 
increased amplitude of the secretion encountered in puberty. As 
puberty progresses in both sexes, the peaks of serum LH and FSH 
occur more often during waking hours; and, finally, in late 
puberty, the peaks occur at all times, eliminating the diurnal 
variation. 
 During the peripubertal period of endocrine change prior to 
secondary sexual development, gonadotropin secretion becomes 
less sensitive to negative feedback inhibition. Before this time, a 
small dose of exogenous sex steroids virtually eliminates gonado-
tropin secretion, whereas afterward a far larger dose is required to 
suppress serum FSH and LH. Thus, an equilibrium of pubertal 
concentrations of gonadotropins and sex steroids is reached. 
 The switch that triggers the onset of puberty is unknown, but 
several neurotransmitters are invoked in the process, including 
gamma-aminobutyric acid and  N -methyl-D-aspartate. Most 
recently, KISS1, a human metastasis suppressor gene at locus 
19p13.3, which codes for metastin (or kisspeptin), a 145 amino acid 
peptide, has been implicated. Metastin is the endogenous agonist 
for GPR54, a Gq/11-coupled receptor of the rhodopsin family 
(metastin receptor), which is found in the brain, mainly in the 
hypothalamus and basal ganglia, as well as in the placenta. KISS1 
mRNA levels increase with puberty in intact male and female mon-
keys from the juvenile to midpubertal stages. Furthermore, adminis-
tration of KISS1 via intracerebral catheters to GnRH-primed 
CHAPTER 15 Puberty     533
juvenile female rhesus monkeys stimulates GnRH release, release 
that is abolished by infusion of GnRH antagonist. Thus, it is pos-
tulated that KISS1 signaling through the GPR54 receptor of pri-
mate hypothalamus may be activated at the end of the juvenile 
pause and contribute to the pubertal resurgence of pulsatile 
GnRH release of puberty, serving as a trigger for the onset of 
puberty. 
 Highly sensitive  sandwich assays (immunoradiometric [IRMA]) 
and immunochemiluminometric assays (ICMA) are available for 
gonadotropin determination. They can be used to indicate the 
onset of pubertal development solely with basal samples usually 
without the necessity for GnRH testing (see GnRH and GnRH 
agonist testing in the Central Precocious Puberty section). Elevated 
basal LH values (>0.3 IU/L) determined by third-generation assays 
in random blood samples are highly predictive of elevated peak 
GnRH-stimulated LH and therefore indicate the onset of central 
precocious puberty or normal puberty. These third-generation 
assays further reflect the remarkable logarithmic increase in spon-
taneous LH secretion in the latest stages of prepuberty and earliest 
stages of puberty as the testicular volume increases from 1 mL to 
10 mL; these increases in serum LH are far greater proportionately 
than those found in the last stages of pubertal development. The 
magnitude of increase in serum testosterone is also greater in the 
early stages of puberty and correlates with the increase in serum 
LH during this same period of early pubertal development. Note 
that standard LH and FSH assays are not sensitive enough 
to detect the changes seen with the ultrasensitive assays. 
Furthermore, the laboratory must have pubertal standard values 
available to permit accurate interpretation of the measurements. 
Since both types of assays are available commercially, care in 
ordering is needed. 
 E. Sex steroid secretion 
 Sex steroid secretion is correlated 
with the development of gonadotropin secretion. During the post-
natal period of increased episodic gonadotropin secretion, plasma 
concentrations of gonadal steroids are episodically elevated. This 
indicates the potential for secretory activity in the neonatal gonad. 
Later, when gonadotropin secretion decreases in midchildhood, 
gonadal activity decreases, but the testes can still be stimulated by 
LH or hCG and the ovaries by FSH, with resulting secretion of 
gonadal steroids. An ultrasensitive estradiol assay demonstrates 
higher values of serum estradiol in prepubertal girls than prepu-
bertal boys, indicating definite basal ovarian activity during the 
juvenile pause. With the onset of puberty, serum gonadal steroid 
concentrations progressively increase. While sex steroids are 
secreted in a diurnal rhythm in early puberty, as are gonadotro-
pins, sex steroids are bound to sex hormone–binding globulin 
(SHBG), so that the half-life of sex steroids is longer than that of 
gonadotropins. Thus, random daytime measurements of serum 
sex steroids are more helpful in determining pubertal status than 
random measurements of serum gonadotropins but still are not 
infallible. 
 Most (97%-99%) of the circulating estradiol and testosterone 
is associated with SHBG. The free hormone is the active fraction, 
but SHBG modulates the activity of the total testosterone and 
estradiol. Prepubertal boys and girls have equal concentrations of 
SHBG, but because testosterone decreases SHBG and estrogen 
increases SHBG, adult males have only half the concentration of 
SHBG compared with adult females. Thus, lower SHBG levels 
amplify androgen effects in men. While adult men have 20 times 
the amount of plasma testosterone that adult women have, adult 
men have 40 times the amount of free testosterone that adult 
women have. 
 F. GnRH stimulation 
 The use of intravenous, exogenous 
GnRH has further clarified the pattern of pubertal development. 
When GnRH is administered to children less than 2 years of age, 
pituitary secretion of LH and FSH increases markedly. During the 
juvenile pause, the period of low basal gonadotropin secretion 
(after age 2 until the peripubertal period), exogenous GnRH has 
less effect on LH release. By the peripubertal period, intravenous 
GnRH or GnRH agonist induces a greater rise in LH concentra-
tions in boys and girls, and this response continues until adult-
hood. There is no significant change in the magnitude of FSH 
secretion after GnRH with the onset of puberty, though females 
at all ages release more FSH than males. 
 Gonadotropins are released in secretory spurts in response to 
endogenous GnRH, which itself is secreted episodically about 
every 90 to 120 minutes in response to a central nervous system 
 pulse generator . GnRH can be administered to patients in episodic 
boluses by a programmable pump that mimics the natural secre-
tory episodes. A prepubertal subject without significant gonado-
tropin peaks demonstrates the normal pubertal pattern of episodic 
secretion of gonadotropins after only a few days of exogenously 
administered GnRH boluses. Hypogonadotropic patients, who in 
the basal state do not have normal secretory episodes of gonado-
tropin release, may be converted to a pattern of normal adult 
episodic gonadotropin secretion by this method of pulsatile 
GnRH administration. 
 This phenomenon is used in clinical practice to bring about 
ovulation or spermatogenesis to foster fertility. Varying the timing 
of pulsatile GnRH administration can regulate the ratio of FSH to 
LH just as the frequency of endogenous hypothalamic GnRH 
release shifts during the menstrual cycle and puberty to alter this 
ratio naturally. Increasing the frequency of GnRH pulses increases 
the LH-FSH ratio; an increased ratio is characteristic of midcycle 
and peripubertal dynamics. Alternatively, if GnRH is administered 
continuously rather than in pulses or if long-acting superactive 
analogs of GnRH are given, a brief period of increased gonadotro-
pin secretion is followed by LH and FSH suppression (see later). 
This phenomenon is responsible for the therapeutic effects of 
GnRH analogs in conditions such as central precocious puberty. 
 G. Leptin and puberty 
 Leptin is a hormone produced in 
adipose cells that suppresses appetite through interaction with its 
receptor in the hypothalamus. Leptin plays a major role in puber-
tal development in mice and rats. Genetically leptin-deficient 
mice (ob/ob) do not initiate puberty. Leptin replacement pro-
motes pubertal development in this mouse, and leptin administra-
tion causes an immature normal mouse to progress through 
534    CHAPTER 15 Puberty
puberty. A leptin-deficient girl at 9 years of age was remarkably 
obese and had a bone age of 13 years (usually appropriate for the 
onset of normal puberty) but no significant gonadotropin pulses 
and no physical evidence of pubertal development. With leptin 
treatment, gonadotropin peaks appeared, and pubertal develop-
ment followed. Individuals with leptin receptor deficiency also 
have disordered puberty. While these and other data suggested 
that leptin might be the elusive factor that triggers the onset of 
puberty, clinical data proved otherwise. Longitudinal studies dem-
onstrate that leptin increases in girls during puberty in synchrony 
with the increase in fat mass, while leptin decreases in boys, with 
increased lean body mass and decreased fat mass in relation to 
testosterone production. While leptin does not appear to trigger 
the onset of puberty in normal adolescents, leptin may accompany 
pubertal changes rather than cause them. Leptin is a necessary 
component of pubertal development in human beings but not a 
major stimulant to this development. 
 Ovulation and Menarche 
 The last stage in hypothalamic-pituitary development is the onset 
of positive feedback, leading to ovulation and menarche. The 
ovary contains a paracrine system that regulates follicular atresia or 
development; it is only in the last stages of puberty that gonado-
tropins come into play in the maturation of the follicle. After 
midpuberty, estrogen in the appropriate amount at the appropri-
ate time can stimulate gonadotropin release, whereas higher doses 
of estrogen can suppress gonadotropin secretion. The frequency of 
pulsatile GnRH release increases during the late follicular phase of 
the normal menstrual cycle and raises the ratio of LH to FSH 
secretion. This stimulates the ovary to produce more estrogen and 
leads to the midcycle LH surge that causes ovulation. Administration 
of pulsatile GnRH by programmable pump can be used to bring 
about fertility in patients with hypothalamic GnRH deficiency by 
mimicking this natural pattern as noted earlier. 
 However, even if the midcycle surge of gonadotropins is pres-
ent, ovulation may not occur during the first menstrual cycles; 
90% of menstrual cycles are anovulatory in the first year after 
menarche, and it is not until 4 to 5 years after menarche that the 
percentage of anovulatory cycles decreases to less than 20%. This 
high prevalence of anovulatory periods may be due to unrecog-
nized PCOS in the young rather than a normal developmental 
phenomenon in some individuals. However, some of the first 
cycles after menarche may be ovulatory, and fertility is possible in 
the first cycle. 
 Just as boys are reproductively mature prior to physical matu-
rity, girls may become fertile and even pregnant prior to physical 
or emotional maturity. 
 Adrenarche 
 Although the hypothalamic-pituitary axis has been well characterized 
in recent years, our understanding of the mechanism of control of 
adrenal androgen secretion is still somewhat rudimentary. The 
adrenal cortex normally secretes the weak androgens dehydroepi-
androsterone (DHEA), its sulfate, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate 
(DHEAS), and androstenedione in increasing amounts beginning 
at about 6 to 7 years of age in girls and 7 to 8 years of age in boys 
( Table 15–1 ). A continued rise in adrenal androgen secretion per-
sists until late puberty. Thus, adrenarche (the secretion of adrenal 
androgens) occurs years before gonadarche (the secretion of 
gonadal sex steroids). The observation that patients with Addison 
disease, who do not secrete adrenal androgens, and patients with 
premature adrenarche, who secrete increased amounts of adrenal 
TABLE 15–1 Pubertal gonadotropin and adrenal and gonadal sex steroid values.
Boys
Girls
Tanner 
Stage
LH (IU/L)
FSH (IU/L)
Testosterone 
(ng/d L)
DHEAS (μg/d L)
LH (IU/L)
FSH (IU/L)
Estradiol (pg/mL)
DHEAS 
(μg/dL)
I
≤0.52
≤3.0
≤5
≤89
≤0.15
0.50-4.50
≤16
≤46
II
≤1.76
0.30-4.00
≤167
≤81
≤2.91
0.40-6.50
≤65
15-113
III
≤4.06
0.30-4.00
21-719
22-126
≤7.01
0.40-6.50
≤142
42-162
IV
0.06-4.77
0.40-7.40
25-912
33-177
0.10-14.7
0.80-8.50
≤283
42-241
V
0.06-4.77
0.40-7.40
110-975
110-510
0.10-14.7
0.80-8.50
aSee below
45-320
aEstradiol, ultrasensitive by HPLC MS/MS, in cycling females:
Follicular stage 39-375 pg/mL
Midcycle stage 94-762 pg/mL
Luteal stage 48-440 pg/mL
LH-pediatric is an immunometric (sandwich) electrochemiluminescent (ECL) ultrasensitive assay. FSH-pediatric is a immunometric (sandwich) chemiluminescent ultrasensitive 
ELISA (C-ELISA) assay.
Testosterone by HPLC MS/MS.
Estradiol, ultrasensitive is a tandem mass spectrometry by HPLC MS/MS as say.
DHEA-S is a competitive chemiluminescent immunoassay.
Values according to Quest Diagnostics, 2010; other laboratories will return other standards.
CHAPTER 15 Puberty     535
androgens at an early age, usually enter gonadarche at a normal 
age. This suggests that age at adrenarche does not significantly 
influence age at gonadarche. Furthermore, patients treated with a 
GnRH agonist to suppress gonadotropin secretion progress 
through adrenarche despite their suppressed gonadarche. 
 Miscellaneous Metabolic Changes 
 The onset of puberty is associated with many changes in labora-
tory values that are either directly or indirectly caused by the rise 
of sex steroid concentrations. Thus, in boys, hematocrit rises, and 
high-density lipoprotein (HDL) concentrations fall as a conse-
quence of increasing testosterone. In both boys and girls, alkaline 
phosphatase rises normally during the pubertal growth spurt 
(often this rise is incorrectly interpreted as evidence for a tumor or 
liver abnormality). Serum IGF-I concentrations rise with the 
growth spurt, but IGF-I is more closely correlated with sex steroid 
concentration than with growth rate. IGF-I levels peak 1 year after 
peak growth velocity is reached and remain elevated for 4 years 
thereafter, even though growth rate is decreasing. Prostate-specific 
antigen (PSA) is measurable after the onset of puberty in boys and 
provides another biochemical indication of pubertal onset. 
 DELAYED PUBERTY OR ABSENT 
PUBERTY (SEXUAL INFANTILISM) 
 Any girl of 13 or boy of 14 years of age without signs of pubertal 
development falls more than 2.5 SD above the mean and is con-
sidered to have delayed puberty ( Table 15–2 ). By this definition, 
0.6% of the healthy population is classified as having delay in 
growth and adolescence. These normal patients need reassurance 
rather than treatment and ultimately progress through the normal 
stages of puberty, albeit later than their peers. The examining 
physician must make the sometimes difficult decision about 
which patients older than these guidelines are constitutionally 
delayed and which have organic disease. 
 Constitutional Delay in Growth 
and Adolescence 
 A patient with delayed onset of secondary sexual development, 
whose stature is shorter than that of age-matched peers but who 
consistently maintains a normal growth velocity for bone age 
and whose skeletal development is delayed more than 2 SD 
from the mean, is likely to have constitutional delay in puberty 
( Figure 15–5 ). These patients are at the older end of the normal 
distribution curve describing the age at onset of puberty. A family 
history of a similar pattern of development in a parent or sibling 
supports the diagnosis. The subject is usually thin as well. In many 
cases, even if they show no physical signs of puberty at the time of 
examination, the initial elevation of gonadal sex steroids has 
already begun, and their basal LH concentrations measured by 
ultrasensitive third-generation assays or their plasma LH response to 
intravenous GnRH or GnRH agonist is pubertal. In boys, an 8 AM 
serum testosterone value above 20 ng/dL (0.7 mmol/L) also indicates 
that secondary sexual development will commence within a period 
of months. 
 In some cases, observation for endocrine or physical signs of 
puberty must continue for a period of months or years before the 
diagnosis is made. Generally, signs of puberty appear after the 
patient reaches a skeletal age of 11 years (girls) or 12 years (boys), 
but there is great variation. Patients with constitutional delay in 
adolescence almost always manifest secondary sexual development 
by 18 years of chronologic age, although there is one reported case 
of spontaneous puberty occurring at 25 years of age. Reports of 
patients with Kallmann syndrome and others with constitutional 
delay in puberty within one family suggest a possible relationship 
between the two conditions (see later and Chapter 4). Adrenarche 
is characteristically delayed—along with gonadarche—in consti-
tutional delay in puberty. 
 Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism 
 The absent or decreased ability of the hypothalamus to secrete 
GnRH or of the pituitary gland to secrete LH and FSH leads to 
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. This classification suggests an 
irreversible condition requiring replacement therapy. If the pitu-
itary deficiency is limited to gonadotropins, patients are usually 
TABLE 15–2 Classification of delayed puberty.
Constitutional delay in growth and adolescence
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
Central nervous system disorders
 Congenital disorders of the hypothalamus or pituitary
 Tumors
 Other acquired disorders
 Infection
 Trauma
 Irradiation
Defects of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis
Isolated gonadotropin deficiency
 Kallmann syndrome
 Gonadotropin deficiency with normal sense of smell
Multiple pituitary hormonal deficiencies
Miscellaneous disorders
 Prader-Willi syndrome
 Laurence-Moon, Bardet-Biedl syndromes
 Chronic disease
 Weight loss
 Anorexia nervosa
 Increased physical activity in female athletes
 Hypothyroidism
Hypergonadotropic hypogonadism
Male phenotype
 Klinefelter syndrome
 Other forms of primary testicular failure (including chemotherapy)
 Enzymatic defects of androgen production
 Anorchia or cryptorchism
Female phenotype
 Turner syndrome
 Other forms of primary ovarian failure (including chemotherapy
Pseudo–Turner syndrome
Noonan syndrome
XX and XY gonadal dysgenesis
536    CHAPTER 15 Puberty
close to normal height for age until the age of the pubertal growth 
spurt, in contrast to the shorter patients with constitutional delay. 
Bone age is usually not delayed in childhood but does not progress 
normally after the patient reaches the age at which sex steroid 
secretion ordinarily stimulates maturation of the skeleton. Patients 
may reach taller stature than expected. However, if GH deficiency 
accompanies gonadotropin deficiency, severe short stature will 
result. 
 A. Central nervous system disorders 
 1. Tumors— A tumor involving the hypothalamus or pituitary 
gland can interfere with hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal func-
tion as well as control of GH, adrenocorticotropic hormone 
(ACTH), thyrotropin (TSH), prolactin (PRL), and vasopressin 
secretion. Thus, delayed puberty may be a manifestation of a 
central nervous system tumor accompanied by any or all of the 
following: GH deficiency, secondary hypothyroidism, second-
ary adrenal insufficiency, hyperprolactinemia, and diabetes 
insipidus. The combination of anterior and posterior pituitary 
deficiencies acquired after birth makes it imperative that a 
hypothalamic-pituitary tumor be considered as the cause. 
 Craniopharyngioma is the most common type of 
 hypothalamic-pituitary tumor leading to delay or absence of 
pubertal development. This neoplasm originates in Rathke 
pouch but may develop into a suprasellar tumor. The peak age 
incidence of craniopharyngioma is between 6 and 14 years. 
Presenting symptoms may include headache, visual deficiency, 
growth failure, polyuria, and polydipsia; presenting signs may 
include visual defects (bitemporal hemianopsia is classic), optic 
atrophy, or papilledema. Clinical manifestations and labora-
tory evaluation may reflect endocrinopathies (found in 
70%-75% including GH, axis abnormalities in 75%, hyper-
prolactinemia 48%, hypothyroidism in 25%, adrenal insuffi-
ciency in 25%, diabetes insipidus (DI) in 4.%, as well as 
gonadotropin deficiency in 40% in one series. Bone age is 
often retarded at the time of presentation. 
 Calcification in the suprasellar region is the hallmark of 
craniopharyngiomas; 80% of cases have calcifications on lateral 
skull x-ray, and a higher percentage show this on computed 
tomography (CT); however, calcifications cannot be seen on 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The tumor often presents 
a cystic appearance on CT or MRI scan and at the time of 
surgery may contain dark, cholesterol-laden fluid. The rate of 
growth of craniopharyngiomas is quite variable—some are 
indolent and some are quite aggressive. Small intrasellar tumors 
may be resected by transsphenoidal surgery; larger ones require 
partial resection and radiation therapy (see Chapter 4). 
Recurrence of this tumor after apparent complete removal is 
noted and lends support to the use of radiation therapy in 
addition to surgery. 
 FIGURE 15–5  Girl, 13-4/12 years old, with constitutional delay in growth and puberty. History revealed a normal growth rate but short 
stature at all ages. Physical examination revealed a height of 138 cm (−4.5 SD) and a weight of 28.6 kg (−3 SD). The patient recently had early 
stage 2 breast development, with 1 cm of glandular tissue on the right breast and 2 cm on the left breast. The vaginal mucosa was dulled, and 
there was no pubic hair. Karyotype was 46,XX. Bone age was 10 years. After administration of GnRH, LH, and FSH rose in a pubertal pattern. 
Estradiol was 40 pg/mL. She has since spontaneously progressed through further pubertal development.  (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Styne DM, Kaplan SL.  Pediatr Clin North Am . 1979;26:123.) 
CHAPTER 15 Puberty     537
 Extrasellar tumors that involve the hypothalamus and 
produce sexual infantilism include germinomas, gliomas 
(sometimes with neurofibromatosis), and astrocytomas (see 
Chapter 4). However, depending on endocrine secretory activ-
ity or location, these tumors may alternatively produce central 
precocious puberty. Intrasellar tumors such as chromophobe 
adenomas are quite rare in children compared with adults. 
Hyperprolactinemia—with or without a diagnosed microade-
noma or galactorrhea—may delay the onset or progression of 
puberty; with therapy to decrease PRL concentrations, puberty 
progresses. 
 2. Other acquired central nervous system disorders— These 
disorders may lead to hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunction. 
Granulomatous diseases such as Hand-Schüller-Christian dis-
ease or histiocytosis X, when involving the hypothalamus, most 
frequently lead to diabetes insipidus, but any other hypotha-
lamic defect may also occur, including gonadotropin defi-
ciency. Tuberculous or sarcoid granulomas, other postinfectious 
inflammatory lesions, vascular lesions, and trauma more rarely 
cause hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. 
 3. Developmental defects— Developmental defects of the cen-
tral nervous system may cause hypogonadotropic hypogonad-
ism or other types of hypothalamic dysfunction. Cleft palate or 
other midline anomalies may also be associated with hypotha-
lamic dysfunction. Optic dysplasia is associated with small, 
hypoplastic optic disks and, in some patients, absence of the 
septum pellucidum on CT or MRI (septo-optic dysplasia); 
associated hypothalamic deficiencies are often present (see 
Chapters 4 and 6) (Hesx-1 homeodomain, HESX-1 *601802. 
 Homeobox gene expressed in ES cells; HESX-1 #182230, sep-
tooptic dysplasia). 
 Optic hypoplasia or dysplasia must be differentiated from 
optic atrophy; optic atrophy implies an acquired condition and 
may indicate a hypothalamic-pituitary tumor. Both anterior 
and/or posterior pituitary deficiencies may occur with either 
congenital midline defects or acquired hypothalamic-pituitary 
defects.  Early-onset GH deficiency or early onset of a com-
bination of anterior and posterior pituitary deficiencies 
suggests a congenital defect. Patients who have isolated defi-
ciency of gonadotropins tend to be of normal height until the 
teenage years but lack a pubertal spurt. They have eunuchoid 
proportions of increased span for height and decreased upper 
to lower segment ratios. Their skeletal development is delayed 
for chronologic age during the teenage years, they continue to 
grow after an age when normal adolescents stop growing. Adult 
height is often increased in hypogonadotropic hypogonadal 
individuals. 
 4. Radiation therapy— Central nervous system radiation therapy 
involving the hypothalamic-pituitary area can lead to hypogo-
nadotropic hypogonadism with onset at 6 to 18 months (or 
longer) after treatment. GH is more frequently affected than 
gonadotropin secretion, and GH deficiency occurs with expo-
sure to as little as an 18-Gy dose. Other hypothalamic deficien-
cies such as gonadotropin deficiency, hypothyroidism, and 
hyperprolactinemia occur more often with higher doses of 
radiation. 
 B. Isolated gonadotropin deficiency 
 Kallmann syn-
drome 1 is the most common genetic form of isolated gonadotro-
pin deficiency ( Figure 15–6 ). Gonadotropin deficiency in these 
patients is associated with hypoplasia or aplasia of the olfactory 
lobes and olfactory bulb causing hyposmia or anosmia. Remarkably, 
patients may not notice that they have no sense of smell, although 
olfactory testing reveals the finding. GnRH-containing neurons 
fail to migrate from the olfactory placode (where they originate) 
to the medial basal hypothalamus in Kallmann syndrome. This is 
a familial syndrome of variable manifestations in which anosmia 
may occur with or without hypogonadism in a given member of a 
kindred.  X-linked Kallmann syndrome is due to gene deletions 
in the region of Xp22.3 (+308700.KAL1), causing the absence of 
the  KAL1 gene which codes for anosmin, which appears to code 
for an adhesion molecule that plays a key role in the migration of 
GnRH neurons and olfactory nerves to the hypothalamus. There 
is an association of Kallmann syndrome 1 with X-linked ichthyo-
sis due to steroid sulfatase deficiency, developmental delay, and 
chondrodysplasia punctata, probably due to a microdeletion. 
Associated abnormalities in Kallmann syndrome 1 may affect the 
kidneys and bones, and patients may have undescended testes, 
gynecomastia, and obesity. Mirror hand movements (bimanual 
synkinesia) are reported, with MRI evidence of abnormal develop-
ment of the corticospinal tract. Adult height is normal, although 
patients are delayed in reaching adult height.  Kallmann syn-
drome 2 is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern and is due 
to a mutation in the  FGFR1 ( fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 
[*136350]) gene.  Kallmann syndrome 3 (*607002) exhibits an 
autosomal recessive pattern and appears to be related to mutations 
in PROKR2 (*607123) and PROK2 (PROK2 *607002), encod-
ing pokineticin receptor-2 and prokineticin-2. FGF8 may also be 
involved. 
 While kisspeptin and GRP54 (G protein–coupled receptor 54) 
play roles of importance in the onset of puberty, only rare patients 
have been reported with defects in the kisspeptin-GPR54 axis due 
to a mutation in the gene for the GRP54 receptor. The first 
human beings with defects in these molecules were reported in 
several kindreds, some consanguineous, presenting with hypogo-
nadotropic hypogonadism. Other cases of hypogonadotropic 
hypogonadism may occur sporadically or in an autosomal reces-
sive pattern without anosmia. The  GnRH gene would seem a 
likely candidate for the cause of the condition, but while muta-
tions of the  GnRH  receptor gene,  GnRHR , were noted years ago, 
not until 2009 were mutations in the  GnRH1 gene demonstrated. 
Other mutations causing hypogonadotropic hypogonadism with-
out anosmia include the  GPR56 ,  SF-1 ( steroidogenic factor 1 ), 
 HESX-1 ( Hesx-1 homeodomain ),  3 LHX3 (*600577) ( LIM homeo-
box gene 3 )  PROP-1 ( prophet of PIT1 ) (*601538) genes. X-linked 
congenital adrenal hypoplasia is associated with hypogonadotro-
pic hypogonadism ( DAX1 #300200). Adrenal hypoplasia, con-
genital AHC, glycerol kinase deficiency, and muscular dystrophy 
have also been linked to this syndrome. The gene locus is at 
Xp21.3-p21.2 and involves a mutation in the  DAX1 gene in many 
but not all patients. An autosomal recessive form of congenital 
adrenal hypoplasia is reported. Some hypogonadal patients lack 
only LH secretion and have spermatogenesis without testosterone 
production (fertile eunuch syndrome); others lack only FSH (see 
Chapters 12 and 13). While a specific genetic diagnosis for 
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism suggests a permanent defect, 
538    CHAPTER 15 Puberty
long-term studies do not bear this out. Men with a variety of 
mutations followed for years are reported to revert to normal or 
near-normal gonadotropin function in some cases. Thus, long-
term follow-up is indicated. 
 C. Idiopathic hypopituitary dwarfism (growth hormone 
deficiency in the absence of defined anatomic or organic 
defects) 
 Patients with congenital GH deficiency have early 
onset of growth failure ( Figure 15–7 ); this feature distinguishes 
them from patients with GH deficiency due to hypothalamic 
tumors, who usually have late onset of growth failure. Even with-
out associated gonadotropin deficiency, untreated GH-deficient 
patients often have delayed onset of puberty associated with their 
delayed bone ages. With appropriate human growth hormone 
(hGH) therapy; however, onset of puberty occurs at a normal age. 
Patients who have combined GH and gonadotropin deficiency do 
not undergo puberty even when bone age reaches the pubertal 
stage. Idiopathic hypopituitarism is usually sporadic, but may fol-
low an autosomal recessive or X-linked inheritance pattern due to 
one of the gene defects listed earlier. 
 The syndrome of microphallus (penile length <2 cm at birth 
due to congenital gonadotropin or GH deficiency) and neonatal 
hypoglycemic seizures (due to congenital ACTH deficiency 
or GH deficiency) must be diagnosed and treated early to avoid 
central nervous system damage due to hypoglycemia (these find-
ings may occur in septo-optic dysplasia). Patients with this syn-
drome do not undergo spontaneous pubertal development. 
Testosterone in low doses (testosterone enanthate, 25 mg intra-
muscularly every month for three doses) can increase the size of 
the penis in infants diagnosed with congenital hypopituitarism 
without significantly advancing the bone age. Males with isolated 
GH deficiency can also have microphallus; the penis enlarges with 
hGH therapy in these patients. It is important to note that 
microphallus due to hypopituitarism may be successfully treated 
with testosterone leading to adult male sexual function, and sex 
reversal should not be considered (see Chapter 14). 
 Birth injury, asphyxia, or breech delivery is more common in 
the neonatal history of patients with idiopathic hypopituitarism, 
especially affected males. While some subjects with breech deliv-
ery have central nervous system MRI abnormalities including 
interrupted pituitary stalk and ectopic posterior pituitary gland, 
cause and effect is not established as some individuals with breech 
delivery and hypopituitarism have no such MRI findings. 
 D. Miscellaneous disorders 
 1. Prader-Willi syndrome— Prader-Willi syndrome (#176270) 
occurs sporadically and is associated with fetal and infantile 
hypotonia, short stature, poor feeding in infancy but insatiable 
 FIGURE 15–6  Boy, 15-10/12 years old, with Kallmann syndrome. His testes were originally undescended, but they descended into the scrotum after 
human chorionic gonadotropin treatment was given. His height was 163.9 cm (−1.5 SD), and the US-LS ratio was 0.86 (eunuchoid). The penis prepuber-
tal measurement was 6.3 cm × 1.8 cm. Each testis was 1 cm × 2 cm, prepubertal. Plasma LH was not detectable and rose little after administration of 100 
μg of GnRH; FSH rose minimally. Testosterone did not change from 17 ng/dL. He had no ability to smell standard odors.  (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Styne DM, Grumbach MM. In: Yen SSC, Jaffe RB, eds.  Reproductive Endocrinology. WB Saunders; 1978.) 
CHAPTER 15 Puberty     539
hunger later, leading to remarkable obesity, characteristic facies 
with almond-shaped eyes, small hands and feet after infancy, 
mental retardation, and emotional instability in patients of 
either sex. Delayed menarche in females and micropenis and 
cryptorchism in males is common; while there is hypothalamic 
hypogonadism, there is also testicular dysfunction in males. 
Osteoporosis is common in these patients during the teenage 
years, but sex steroid replacement, when indicated, may 
increase bone density, although the effects are not proven to be 
long lasting if sex steroids administration cease. Behavioral 
modification may improve the usual pattern of rampant weight 
gain, but the constant vigilance of caregivers is necessary. 
Patients have deletion or translocation of chromosome 
15q11-13 derived from their fathers. If an abnormality in this 
area derives from the mother, Angelman syndrome results. 
Fluorescent in situ hybridization for this area of the chromo-
some is available commercially for diagnosis. 
 2. Laurence-Moon and Bardet-Biedl syndromes —These auto-
somal recessive conditions are characterized by obesity, short 
stature, mental retardation, and retinitis pigmentosa. 
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and primary hypogonadism 
have variously been reported in affected patients. A distinction 
between Bardet-Biedl syndrome (#209900) a disorder thought 
to be linked to a defect in the basal body of ciliated cells) and 
Laurence-Moon syndrome has been made, with the latter dem-
onstrating polydactyly and obesity and the former being char-
acterized by paraplegia. Recently it has been suggested that 
these two syndromes really represent a single entity, as was the 
case in the past. 
 3. Chronic disease and malnutrition— A delay in sexual matu-
ration may be due to chronic disease or malnutrition. For 
example, children with intractable asthma have delayed puber-
tal development leading to short stature during the teenage 
years, although they ultimately reach an appropriate adult 
height for family. Children with other chronic diseases may not 
fare so well in long-term follow-up; for example, HIV infection 
in adolescence causes poor growth and pubertal progression. 
Weight loss to less than 80% of ideal body weight, caused by 
disease or voluntary dieting, may result in gonadotropin defi-
ciency; weight gain toward the ideal usually restores gonado-
tropin function. 
 Chronic disease may have effects on sexual maturation 
separate from nutritional state. For example, there is a high 
incidence of hypothalamic hypogonadism in thalassemia 
major, even with regular transfusion and chelation therapy. 
 4. Anorexia nervosa —Anorexia nervosa involves weight loss 
associated with a significant psychologic disorder. This condi-
tion usually affects girls who develop a disturbed body image 
and exhibit typical behavior such as avoidance of food and 
induction of regurgitation after ingestion. Weight loss may be 
so severe as to cause fatal complications such as immune dys-
function, fluid and electrolyte imbalance, or circulatory col-
lapse. Primary or secondary amenorrhea is a classic finding in 
these patients and has been correlated with the degree of 
weight loss, although there is evidence that patients with 
anorexia nervosa may cease to menstruate before their sub-
stantial weight loss is exhibited. Other endocrine abnormali-
ties in anorexia nervosa include elevated serum GH and 
decreased IGF-I (these are characteristic of other types of star-
vation), decreased serum triiodothyronine, decreased serum 
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D and elevated 24,25-hydroxyvitamin 
D  levels. Weight gain to the normal range for height, however, 
does not ensure immediate resumption of menses. There is an 
increased incidence of anorexia nervosa in ballet dancers or 
ballet students; the incidence of scoliosis and mitral valve 
insufficiency is also increased in these patients. Functional 
amenorrhea may also occur in women of normal weight, some 
of whom demonstrate evidence of psychologic stress. Decreased 
LH response to GnRH administration, impaired monthly 
cycles of gonadotropin secretion, and retention of a diurnal 
rhythm of gonadotropin secretion are found in anorexia ner-
vosa patients, patterns that indicate a reversion to an earlier 
stage of the endocrine changes of puberty. 
 5. Increased physical activity— Girls who regularly participate 
in activities such as strenuous athletics and ballet dancing may 
have delayed thelarche, delayed menarche, and irregular or 
absent menstrual periods. Increased physical activity and not 
decreased weight appears to be the cause of the amenorrhea in 
some girls; such amenorrheic patients may resume menses 
while temporarily bedridden even though weight does not yet 
change. Statistical analysis of mothers’ ages at menarche and 
the type of sport pursued by their daughters indicates that late 
maturation of some gymnasts may be referable to a familial 
tendency to late menarche, suggesting that gymnastic activity 
may not be the primary cause of late menarche. On the other 
hand, there are studies indicating that intensive gymnastics 
training at an early age leads to a decrease in ultimate stature. 
 FIGURE 15–7  Twenty-year-old male with congenital deficiency 
of GRF, GnRH, TRF, and CRF. Height was 8 SD below the mean, and 
the phallus was 2 cm × 1 cm. Bone age was 10 years, and the sella 
turcica was small on lateral skull x-ray. LH rose minimally from a low 
basal value after administration of 100 μg of GnRH. Testosterone was 
virtually undetectable and did not rise after administration of GnRH. 
 (Reproduced, with permission, from Styne DM, Grumbach MM. In: 
Yen SSC, Jaffe RB, eds.  Reproductive Endocrinology. WB Saunders; 1978.) 
540    CHAPTER 15 Puberty
 6. Hypothyroidism— Hypothyroidism can delay all aspects of 
growth and maturation, including puberty and menarche. 
Galactorrhea may occur in severe primary hypothyroidism due 
to concomitant elevation of serum PRL due to TSH stimula-
tion. With thyroxine therapy, catch-up growth and resumed 
pubertal development and menses occur. Conversely, severe 
primary hypothyroidism may be associated with precocious 
puberty and galactorrhea (due to elevated serum PRL) in some 
patients (Van Wyk-Grumbach syndrome). There is evidence 
that excessive TSH can stimulate FSH receptors, leading to 
estrogen secretion and breast development. 
 Hypergonadotropic Hypogonadism 
 Primary gonadal failure is heralded by elevated gonadotropin con-
centrations due to the absence of negative feedback effects of 
gonadal sex steroids and inhibin. The most common causes of 
hypergonadotropic hypogonadism are associated with chromo-
somal and somatic abnormalities (see Chapter 14), but isolated 
gonadal failure can also present with delayed puberty without 
other physical findings. When hypergonadotropic hypogonadism 
is present in patients with a Y chromosome or a fragment of a Y 
chromosome (genetic males or conditions noted later), testicular 
dysgenesis must be considered in the differential diagnosis. The 
risk of testicular cancer rises in testicular dysgenesis (testicular 
cancer in normal boys is rare; eg, the incidence in Scandinavia is 
rising but still 0.5 per 100,000 in childhood). 
 A. Syndrome of seminiferous tubule dysgenesis 
(Klinefelter syndrome) 
 A common form of primary testicu-
lar failure is Klinefelter syndrome (47,XXY karyotype), with an 
incidence of 1:1000 males. Before puberty, patients with Klinefelter 
syndrome have decreased upper segment-lower segment ratios, 
small testes, and an increased incidence of developmental delay 
and personality disorders. Onset of puberty is not usually delayed, 
because Leydig cell function is characteristically less affected than 
seminiferous tubule function in this condition and testosterone is 
adequate to stimulate pubertal development. Serum gonadotropin 
levels rise to castrate concentrations after the onset of puberty; the 
testes become firm and are rarely larger than 3.5 cm in diameter. 
After the onset of puberty, there are histologic changes of seminif-
erous tubule hyalinization and fibrosis, adenomatous changes of 
the Leydig cells, and impaired spermatogenesis. Gynecomastia is 
common, and variable degrees of male secondary sexual develop-
ment are found. Surviving sperm have been found by microdissec-
tion of some seminiferous tubules in a few patients leading to 
successful fertilization of a partner’s ovum. Other forms of male 
hypergonadotropic hypogonadism are found with 46,XX/47,XXY, 
48,XXYY, 48,XXXY, and 49,XXXXY karyotypes. Phenotypic 
males are described with 46,XX karyotypes and some physical 
features of Klinefelter syndrome; they may have the  SRY gene 
translocated to an X chromosome (see Chapter 14). 
 B. Other forms of primary testicular failure 
 Patients 
surviving treatment for malignant diseases form a growing cate-
gory of testicular failure. Chemotherapy—primarily with alkylat-
ing agents—or radiation therapy directed to the gonads may lead 
to gonadal failure. Injury is more likely if treatment is given dur-
ing puberty than if it occurs in the prepubertal period, but even 
prepubertal therapy leads to risk. Normal pubertal development 
may occur in boys treated with chemotherapy before puberty, 
although they demonstrate elevated peak serum LH and elevated 
basal and peak serum FSH after GnRH, as well as a high incidence 
of decreased or absent sperm counts. This indicates that prepuber-
tal status does not protect a child against testicular damage from 
chemotherapy and that normal physical development may hide 
significant endocrine and reproductive damage. 
 The  Sertoli cell only syndrome (germinal cell aplasia) is a 
congenital form of testicular failure manifested by azoospermia 
and elevated FSH concentrations but generally normal secondary 
sexual characteristics, normal testosterone concentrations, and no 
other anomalies. A mutation in a gene at Yq11.23, the azoo-
spermia factor  (AZF) (#415000 spermatogenic failure, nonob-
structive, Y-linked) appears to play a role in the lack of production 
of spermatocytes. 
 Patients with Down syndrome may have elevated LH and FSH 
levels even in the presence of normal testosterone levels, suggesting 
some element of primary gonadal failure. 
 C. Cryptorchism or anorchia 
 Phenotypic males with a 
46,XY karyotype but no palpable testes have either cryptorchism 
or anorchia. Cryptorchid males should produce a rise in testoster-
one levels greater than 2 ng/mL 72 hours after intramuscular 
administration of hCG (3000 U/m 2 ) in the newborn period, 
although repeated doses are required after the first postnatal 
months. Testes may also descend during 2 weeks of treatment with 
hCG given three times a week. 
 Patients with increased plasma testosterone levels in response 
to hCG administration, but without testicular descent, have cryp-
torchism. Their testes should be brought into the scrotum by 
surgery to decrease the likelihood of further testicular damage due 
to the elevated intra-abdominal temperature and to guard against 
the possibility of undetected tumor formation. Cryptorchid testes 
may demonstrate congenital abnormalities and may not function 
normally even if brought into the scrotum early in life. Furthermore, 
the descended testis in a unilaterally cryptorchid boy may itself 
show abnormal histologic features; such patients have a 69% inci-
dence of decreased sperm counts. Thus, unilateral cryptorchid 
patients can be infertile even if they received early treatment of 
their unilateral cryptorchism. Since both the descended and the 
undescended testes may be affected, there may be preexisting dis-
ease that is manifested by the lack of descent of one testis. Lack of 
normal descent of the testes is hypothesized to cause the testicular 
dysgenesis syndrome (TDS), which explains the late occurrence of 
testicular disease. In addition, patients undergoing orchiopexy 
may sustain subtle damage to the vas deferens, leading to the later 
production of antibodies to sperm that may result in infertility. 
This finding may depend on the surgical technique used. 
 It is important to determine if any testicular tissue is present in 
a boy with no palpable testes, because unnoticed malignant degen-
eration of the tissue is a possibility. The diagnosis of anorchia due to 
the testicular regression syndrome may be pursued by ultrasound, 
CHAPTER 15 Puberty     541
MRI, laparotomy, or laparoscopic examination. There are other 
endocrine evaluations besides the hCG test that may help in diag-
nosis. The presence of anti-Müllerian factor in a young child indi-
cates the presence of testicular tissue, although during puberty 
anti-Müllerian factor becomes undetectable, and this test cannot be 
employed at that stage. Inhibin may be measured as an indication 
of functioning testicular tissue. Except for the absence of testes, 
46 XY patients who are otherwise normal and have the  vanishing 
testes syndrome of late fetal loss of the testes have normal infantile 
male genital development, including Wolffian duct formation and 
Müllerian duct regression. The testes were presumably present in 
these patients early in fetal life during sexual differentiation, but 
degenerated after the 13th week of gestation for unknown reasons 
(see Chapter 14). When these boys reach adulthood, they are 
reported to establish a normal male gender identity. The presence of 
normal basal gonadotropin levels in a prepubertal boy without pal-
pable testes at least suggests the presence of testicular tissue even if 
the testosterone response to hCG is low, whereas the presence of 
elevated gonadotropin levels without any testosterone response to 
hCG suggests anorchia. 
 D. Syndrome of gonadal dysgenesis (Turner syn-
drome) 
 45,XO gonadal dysgenesis is associated with short 
stature, female phenotype with sexual infantilism, and a chroma-
tin-negative buccal smear. We do not recommend routinely order-
ing a buccal smear; it is now difficult for laboratories to perform 
the test reliably, and it has been replaced with modern karyotyping 
procedures. Patients have streak gonads consisting of fibrous tissue 
without germ cells. Other classic but variable phenotypic features 
include micrognathia,  fish mouth (downturned corners of the 
mouth), ptosis, low-set or deformed ears, a broad shield-like chest 
with the appearance of widely spaced nipples, hypoplastic areolae, 
a short neck with low hairline and webbing of the neck (ptery-
gium colli), short fourth metacarpals, cubitus valgus, structural 
anomalies of the kidney, extensive nevi, hypoplastic nails, and 
vascular anomalies of the left side of the heart (most commonly 
coarctation of the aorta associated with hypertension proximal to 
the coarctation). However, some affected girls can have almost 
normal female phenotypes. The medical history of patients with 
the syndrome of gonadal dysgenesis often reveals small size at 
birth, lymphedema of the extremities most prominent in the new-
born period, and loose posterior cervical skin folds. (The terms 
 Bonnevie-Ullrich syndrome and  infant Turner syndrome are applied 
to this neonatal appearance.) Affected patients often have a history 
of frequent otitis media with conductive hearing loss. There may 
be frequent urinary tract infections associated with a horseshoe-
shaped kidney, duplication of ureters, or other anatomic defects. 
Intelligence is normal, but there is often impaired spatial orienta-
tion, which may lead to difficulty in mathematics, especially 
geometry. Patients have no pubertal growth spurt, and reach a 
mean final height of 143 cm. Short stature is a classic feature of 
Turner syndrome, but not of other forms of hypergonadotropic 
hypogonadism that occur without karyotype abnormalities. The 
short stature is linked to the absence of the ( short stature homeobox ) 
SHOX homeobox gene of the pseudoautosomal region of the X 
chromosome (Xpter-p22.32) (OMIM*312865). GH function is 
usually normal in Turner syndrome. However, exogenous hGH 
treatment improves growth rate and increases adult stature toward 
the normal range in affected girls. It improves lipid profiles and 
decreases diastolic blood pressure (see Chapter 6). Pubic hair may 
appear late and is usually sparse in distribution owing to the 
absence of any ovarian secretions; thus, adrenarche progresses in 
Turner syndrome even in the absence of gonadarche. Autoimmune 
thyroid disease (usually hypothyroidism) is common in Turner 
syndrome, and determination of thyroid function and thyroid 
antibody levels is important in evaluation of these patients. 
 Serum gonadotropin concentrations in Turner syndrome are 
extremely high between birth and about age 4 years. They decrease 
toward the normal range in prepubertal patients in the juvenile 
pause and then rise again to castrate levels after age 10 years (see 
Chapter 14). 
 Sex chromatin–positive variants of gonadal dysgenesis include 
45,X/46,XX, 45,X/47,XXX, and 45,X/46,XX/47,XXX mosaicism 
with chromatin-positive buccal smears. Patients with these karyo-
types may resemble patients with the classic syndrome of gonadal 
dysgenesis, or they may have fewer manifestations and normal or 
nearly normal female phenotypes. Streak gonad formation is not 
invariable; some patients have had secondary sexual development, 
and menarche and rare pregnancies have been reported. 
 Sex chromatin–negative variants of the syndrome of gonadal 
dysgenesis have karyotypes with 45,X/46,XY mosaicism. Physical 
features vary; some patients have the features of classic Turner 
syndrome, whereas others may have ambiguous genitalia or even 
the features of phenotypic males. Gonads are usually dysgenetic 
but vary from streak gonads to functioning testes. These patients 
are at risk for gonadoblastoma formation; this is a benign tumor 
that has the potential for malignant transformation and then may 
metastatize. Because gonadoblastomas may secrete androgens or 
estrogens, patients with gonadoblastoma may virilize or feminize 
as though they had functioning gonads, confusing the clinical 
picture. Gonadoblastomas may demonstrate calcification on 
abdominal x-ray. Malignant germ cell tumors may arise in dysge-
netic testes, and orchiectomy is generally indicated. In some 
mosaic patients with one intact X chromosome and one chromo-
somal fragment, it is difficult to determine whether the fragment 
is derived from an X chromosome or a Y chromosome. Polymerase 
chain reaction techniques to search for specific Y chromosome 
sequences may be helpful if a karyotype reveals no Y chromosomal 
material. 
 Patients with Turner syndrome who desire fertility can be 
treated with in vitro fertilization techniques. After exogenous hor-
monal preparation, a fertilized ovum (possibly a sister’s ovum fer-
tilized by the patient’s male partner, or an extra fertilized ovum 
from another couple undergoing in vitro fertilization) can be 
introduced into the patient’s uterus, and the pregnancy is then 
brought to term by support with exogenous hormone administra-
tion. A serious possible complication is uterine rupture. 
 E. Other forms of primary ovarian failure 
 Ovaries appear 
to be more resistant to damage from the chemotherapy used in the 
542    CHAPTER 15 Puberty
treatment of malignant disease than are testes. Nonetheless, ovar-
ian failure can occur with medical therapy. Damage is common if 
the ovaries are not surgically  tacked out of the path of the beam or 
shielded by lead in abdominal radiation therapy. Normal gonadal 
function after chemotherapy does not guarantee normal function 
later. Late-onset gonadal failure has been described after chemo-
therapy. Bone marrow transplantation with whole-body irradia-
tion for acute lymphoblastic leukemia or non–Hodgkin lymphoma 
appear to cause the most damage to endocrine function. 
 Premature menopause has also been described in otherwise 
healthy girls owing to the presence of anti-ovarian antibodies. 
Patients with Addison disease may have autoimmune oophoritis 
as well as adrenal failure. A sex steroid biosynthetic defect 
due to 17α-hydroxylase deficiency (P450c17) manifests as 
sexual infantilism and primary amenorrhea in a phenotypic 
female (regardless of genotype) with hypokalemia and 
hypertension (see Chapter 14). A patient with 17α-hydroxylase 
deficiency may have ovaries or testes and still present as a phe-
notypic female. 
 F. Noonan syndrome (pseudo–Turner syndrome, Ullrich 
syndrome, male Turner syndrome (OMIM#163950 
Noonan syndrome 1; NS1) 
 Noonan syndrome is associated 
with phenotypic manifestations of Turner syndrome such as 
webbed neck, ptosis, short stature, cubitus valgus, and lym-
phedema, but other additional clinical findings such as a normal 
karyotype, triangular facies, pectus excavatum, right-sided heart 
disease, and an increased incidence of developmental delay dif-
ferentiate these patients from those with Turner syndrome. Males 
may have undescended testes and variable degrees of germinal cell 
and Leydig cell dysfunction. Noonan syndrome follows an auto-
somal dominant pattern of inheritance with incomplete pene-
trance (gene locus 12q24). hGH is approved by the FDA to 
increase stature in these patients. 
 G. Familial and sporadic forms of 46,xx or 46,xy gonadal 
dysgenesis 
 These forms of gonadal dysgenesis are character-
ized by structurally normal chromosomes and streak gonads 
or partially functioning gonads. They do not have the physical 
features of Turner syndrome. If there is some gonadal function, 
46,XY gonadal dysgenesis may present with ambiguous genitalia 
or virilization at puberty. If no gonadal function is present, 
patients appear as phenotypic sexually infantile females. Patients 
with 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis and dysgenetic testes should 
undergo gonadectomy to eliminate the possibility of malignant 
germ cell tumor formation. 
 H. Primary amenorrhea associated with normal sec-
ondary sexual development 
 If a structural anomaly of the 
uterus or vagina interferes with the onset of menses but the endo-
crine milieu remains normal, the patient presents with primary 
amenorrhea in the presence of normal breast and pubic hair devel-
opment. A transverse vaginal septum may seal the uterine cavity 
from the vaginal orifice, leading to the retention of menstrual 
flow—as may an imperforate hymen. The Rokitansky-Küster-
Hauser syndrome (OMIM #277000) combines congenital absence 
of the vagina with abnormal development of the uterus, ranging 
from a rudimentary bicornuate uterus that may not open into the 
vaginal canal to a virtually normal uterus; surgical repair may be 
possible in patients with minimal anatomic abnormalities, and 
fertility has been reported. Associated abnormalities include major 
urinary tract anomalies and spinal or other skeletal disorders. The 
rarest anatomic abnormality in this group is absence of the uterine 
cervix in the presence of a functional uterus. 
 46,XY disorder of sexual development (DSD), previously 
called male pseudohermaphroditism, is an alternative cause of 
primary amenorrhea if a patient has achieved thelarche. The syn-
drome of complete androgen resistance leads to female external 
genitalia and phenotype without axillary or pubic hair develop-
ment in the presence of pubertal breast development (syndrome of 
testicular feminization; see Chapter 14). 
 Differential Diagnosis of Delayed 
Puberty ( Table 15–3 ) 
 Patients who do not begin secondary sexual development by age 13 
(girls) or age 14 (boys) and patients who do not progress through 
development on a timely basis (girls should menstruate within 5 years 
TABLE 15–3 Differential diagnosis of delayed puberty.
Serum Gonadotropins
Serum Gonadal 
Steroidsa
Miscellaneous
Constitutional delay in 
 growth and 
 adolescence
Prepubertal (low)
Low
Patient usually has short stature for chronologic age but appropriate 
height and growth rate for bone age. Both adrenarche and gonadarche 
are delayed.
Hypogonadotropic 
 hypogonadism
Prepubertal (low)
Low
Patient may have anosmia (Kallmann syndrome) or other associated 
pituitary hormone deficiencies. If gonadotropin deficiency is isolated, 
the patient usually has normal height and growth rate but lacks a 
pubertal growth spurt. Adrenarche may occur at a normal stage in spite 
of absent gonadarche (serum DHEAS may be pubertal).
Hypergonadotropic 
 hypogonadism
Elevated
Low
Patient may have abnormal karyotype and stigmatas of Turner syn-
drome or Klinefelter syndrome.
aIn a pediatric specific assay.
CHAPTER 15 Puberty     543
after breast budding; boys should reach stage 5 pubertal development 
4½ years after onset) should be evaluated for hypogonadism. The yield 
of diagnosable conditions is quite low in children younger than these 
ages, but many patients and families request evaluation well before 
these limits. Without significant signs or symptoms of disorders dis-
cussed above, it is best to resist evaluation and offer support until these 
ages in most cases. 
 A patient with constitutional delay may have a characteristic 
history of short stature for age with normal growth velocity for 
bone age and a family history of delayed but spontaneous puberty. 
The patient’s mother may have had late onset of menses, or the 
father may have begun to shave late or continued growing after 
high school. Not all patients with constitutional delay are so clas-
sic, and gonadotropin-deficient patients may have some features 
similar to those of constitutional delay in adolescence. Indeed, 
patients with Kallmann syndrome and others with constitutional 
delay are occasionally found in the same kindred. 
 If the diagnosis is not obvious on the basis of physical or historical 
features, the differential diagnostic process begins with determination 
of whether plasma gonadotropins are (1) elevated due to primary 
gonadal failure or (2) decreased due to secondary or tertiary hypogo-
nadism or constitutional delayed puberty. Gonadotropins must be 
measured in a third generation assay with pediatric standards as the 
customary gonadotropin determinations are too insensitive to reveal 
the small changes of puberty. A single ultrasensitive, third-generation 
determination of serum LH concentration in the pubertal range sug-
gests that puberty is progressing. Determination of the rise in LH after 
administration of GnRH or GnRH agonist is helpful in differential 
diagnosis; secondary sexual development usually follows within 
months after conversion to a pubertal LH response to GnRH. Because 
it is difficult, if not impossible, to obtain GnRH presently, GnRH 
agonists are more frequently used for diagnosis with serum LH values 
measured 2 hours after administration. Frequent nighttime sampling 
(every 20 minutes through an indwelling catheter) to determine the 
amplitude of peaks of LH secretion during sleep is an alternative to 
GnRH or GnRH agonist testing but is too cumbersome for most 
clinical settings. Unfortunately, the results of GnRH infusions or 
nighttime sampling are not always straightforward. Patients may have 
pubertal responses to exogenous GnRH but may not spontaneously 
secrete adequate gonadotropins to allow secondary sexual develop-
ment. In females with amenorrhea, the frequency and amplitude of 
gonadotropin secretion may not change to allow monthly menstrual 
cycles. The retention of a diurnal rhythm of gonadotropin secretion 
(normal in early puberty) into late puberty is a pattern linked to inad-
equate pubertal progression. In males, a morning serum testosterone 
concentration over 20 ng/dL (0.7 mmol/L) indicates the likelihood of 
pubertal development within 6 months. Measurement of testosterone 
or estradiol must be done in an ultrasenstivie assay with pediatric stan-
dards or, as with gonadotropin assays, the small changes of pubertal 
development will be missed. Presently highly sensitive high perfor-
mance liquid chromatography  tandem mass spectroscopy (HPLC 
MS/MS) assays are available at national laboratories for this purpose.
 Other methods of differential diagnosis between constitutional 
delay and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism have been proposed 
but are complex or are not definitive. Clinical observation for 
signs of pubertal development and laboratory evaluation for the 
onset of rising levels of sex steroids may have to continue until the 
patient is 18 years of age before the diagnosis is definite. In most 
cases, if spontaneous pubertal development is not noted by 18 years 
of age, the diagnosis is gonadotropin deficiency. Of course, the 
presence of neurologic impairment or other endocrine deficiencies 
should immediately lead to investigation for central nervous sys-
tem tumor or congenital defect in a patient with delayed puberty. 
CT or MRI scanning is helpful in this situation. 
 Treatment of Delayed Puberty 
 A. Constitutional delay in growth and adolescence 
 Psychologic support. 
 Teenagers who are so embarrassed about 
short stature and lack of secondary sexual development that they have 
significant psychologic problems may require psychological evaluation 
and therapy if they have passed the ages of 13 years for girls or 14 years 
for boys. Patients with constitutional delay in growth and adolescence 
should be counseled that normal pubertal development will occur 
spontaneously. Peer pressure and teasing can be oppressive. Although 
the majority of these patients do quite well, severe depression must be 
treated appropriately, because short patients with pubertal delay have 
become suicidal. In some cases, it helps to excuse the patient from 
physical education class, because the lack of development is most 
apparent in the locker room. In general, boys feel more stress than girls 
when puberty is delayed. 
 Sex steroids. 
 New preparations of topical sex steroids, that 
have different systemic effects and length of action than parenteral 
or oral sex steroids, have enlarged the therapeutic armamentarium 
for delayed puberty. The classic recommendation for girls has been 
a 3-month course of conjugated estrogen (0.3 mg) or ethinyl 
estradiol (5-10 µg) given orally each day. Topical estrogen is said 
to carry less risk of hypertension, gallstones, increased fat mass, 
decreased insulin sensitivity, and increased triglycerides (topical 
estrogen does not, however, increase HDL cholesterol and decrease 
low-density lipoprotein [LDL] cholesterol, as does oral estrogen). 
Estrogen-impregnated patches are available and might be used to 
initiate puberty, but the lowest dose available leads to serum estro-
gen values higher than physiologic levels found in early puberty. 
They might be used for only a few days each week to reduce the 
delivered dose. Alternatively, 17-beta estradiol patches (0.025 mg/
patch; Vivelle Dot matrix patch) may be cut into fragments the 
size of one-eighth to one-fourth of a patch fragments to initiate 
pubertal development with more physiologic estrogen values. 
However, the use of such topical estrogen preparations is not 
approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). 
 The classic recommendation for boys is a 3-month course of 
testosterone enanthate or cypionate (50 mg) given intramuscularly 
once every 28 days for three doses. The possibility that a higher 
dose will cause priapism limits the initial dose to 50 mg. New 
patch or testosterone gel preparations could be used to initiate 
puberty, but the dose in manufactured packets is too high to 
mimic the physiologic levels found in early puberty. These prepa-
rations are made for full replacement in adult males. The entire gel 
packet or  lowest-dose patch could be used every other day over the 
3-month period of treatment, although this leads to variable daily 
544    CHAPTER 15 Puberty
dosage. The gel is available in a pump but even one pump dose is 
too high for the initial therapy. The testosterone patches are not 
impregnated like the estrogen patches and cannot be cut down in 
size. Thus, to date, the low-dosage injection of testosterone or the 
use of an estimated one-half or less of the 5 mg testosterone gel 
packet are the only methods of reaching appropriate dosage. The 
topical use of testosterone is not approved by the FDA for such 
purposes. Therapy with oxandrolone has been suggested as a 
method of increasing secondary sexual development and increas-
ing growth without advancing skeletal development. This method 
is not widely preferred. Furthermore, testosterone, which can be 
aromatized, increases the generally low endogenous GH secretion 
in constitutional delayed puberty to normal, whereas oxandrolone, 
which cannot be aromatized, does not increase GH secretion. 
 Hormonal treatment of boys or girls elicits noticeable second-
ary sexual development and a slight temporary increase in stature. 
The low doses recommended do not advance bone age substan-
tially and do not significantly change adult height if used for 
3 months. Low-dose sex steroid treatment has been reported to 
promote spontaneous pubertal development after sex steroid 
therapy is discontinued, although responding individuals may 
include those boys who are on the brink of further pubertal devel-
opment and are, therefore, most likely to achieve a growth 
response to androgen therapy. However, a short course of therapy 
may improve patients’ psychologic outlook and allow them to 
await spontaneous pubertal development with greater confidence. 
Continuous gonadal steroid replacement in these patients is not 
indicated, because it advances bone age and leads to epiphyseal 
fusion and a decrease in ultimate stature. After a 3- to 6-month 
break to observe spontaneous development, a second course of 
therapy may be offered if no spontaneous pubertal progression 
occurs during observation. 
 B. Permanent hypogonadism 
 Once a patient has been 
diagnosed as having delayed puberty due to permanent primary or 
secondary hypogonadism, replacement therapy must be consid-
ered at the average age of onset of puberty, in most cases when the 
diagnosis is made in childhood. 
 Males with hypogonadism may be treated with testosterone gel, 
testosterone patches, or testosterone enanthate or cypionate given 
intramuscularly every month, as described earlier for temporary 
conditions. Treatment as for constitutional delay should be started 
and gradually increased to the adult range over months to years to 
mimic the normal progression of puberty and to avoid abrupt expo-
sure to high-dose androgen and the possibility of frequent erections 
or priapism. Oral halogenated testosterone and methylated testoster-
one are never recommended because of the risk of hepatocellular 
carcinoma or cholestatic jaundice. Testosterone therapy may not 
cause adequate pubic hair development, but patients with secondary 
or tertiary hypogonadism may benefit from hCG administration 
with increased pubic hair growth resulting from endogenous testicu-
lar androgen secretion in addition to the exogenous testosterone. 
 Testosterone gel or patches, as described earlier, are used for 
permanent replacement but are not FDA-approved for individuals 
less than 16 years. Girls may be treated with oral ethinyl estradiol 
(increasing from 5 µg/d to 10 to 20 µg/d depending on clinical 
results), or conjugated estrogens (0.3 or 0.625 mg/d). One may 
start with daily doses with eventual conversion to treatment on 
days 1 to 21 of the month after several months of daily ingestion. 
Five to ten milligrams of medroxyprogesterone acetate are then 
added on days 12 to 21 after physical signs of estrogen effect are 
noted and breakthrough bleeding occurs (and always within 
6 months after initiating estrogen). Neither hormone is adminis-
tered from day 22 to the end of the month to allow regular with-
drawal bleeding (see Chapter 13). Later, the patient may be 
switched to sequential oral contraceptives to simplify treatment. 
As described earlier, estrogen patch therapy may have benefits (but 
these are not proven) over oral estrogen and may be preferable 
(but these are not FDA-approved for individuals under 16 years of 
age). Gynecologic examinations should be performed yearly for 
those on replacement therapy. 
 Hypothalamic hypogonadism may be treated with GnRH pulses 
by programmable pumps to achieve fertility or to promote pubertal 
development. Likewise, in the absence of a functional pituitary gland, 
hCG and menotropins (human postmenopausal gonadotropin) may 
be administered in pulses. These techniques are cumbersome and best 
reserved for the time when fertility is desired. 
 C. Coexisting GH deficiency  The treatment of patients with 
coexisting GH deficiency requires consideration of their bone age and 
amount of growth left before epiphyseal fusion. If such a patient has 
not yet received adequate treatment with GH, sex steroid therapy may 
be kept at the lower dosage or even delayed to optimize adult height. 
The goal is to allow appropriate pubertal changes to support psycho-
logic development and to allow the synergistic effects of combined sex 
steroids and GH without fusing the epiphyses prematurely. 
 Constitutional delayed puberty may be associated with 
decreased GH secretion in 24-hour profiles of spontaneous secre-
tion or in stimulated testing. GH secretion increases when puber-
tal gonadal steroid secretion rises due to the effects of estrogen, so 
decreased GH secretion in this condition should be considered 
temporary. Nonetheless, true GH-deficient patients may have 
delayed puberty due to the GH deficiency or to coexisting gonad-
otropin deficiency. Therefore, deciding whether a pubertal patient 
has temporary or a permanent GH deficiency can be difficult; 
previous observation may indicate a long history characteristic of 
constitutional delay in adolescence, whereas a recent decrease in 
growth rate may suggest the onset of a brain tumor or other cause 
of hypopituitarism. 
 D. The syndrome of gonadal dysgenesis 
 In the past, 
patients with the syndrome of gonadal dysgenesis were frequently 
not given estrogen replacement until after age 13 years, for fear of 
compromising adult height. However, low-dose estrogen therapy 
(5-10 µg of ethinyl estradiol orally) can be administered to allow 
feminization and improve psychologic status at 12 to 13 years of 
age without decreasing final height, as shown in several studies. 
Low-dose estrogen increases growth velocity, whereas high-dose 
estrogen suppresses it. Even if growth velocity is increased, how-
ever, adult height is not increased with such estrogen treatment. 
CHAPTER 15 Puberty     545
Treatment of Turner syndrome with GH successfully increases 
adult stature (see Chapters 6 and 14). During childhood these 
girls must be regularly screened for strabismus, hearing loss, and 
autoimmune thyroid disease as well as learning difficulties. There 
are several recommendations for the preparation of these girls to 
transition to adult care and necessary follow-up for issues that will 
affect their later life, including monitoring for the development of 
aortic dilation at 5- to 10-year intervals since this defect may 
progress to aortic aneurysms. The induction of fertility was 
described earlier in this chapter. 
 E. Bone mass 
 After infancy, most bone mass accrual takes 
place during the second decade of life, and disorders of puberty 
may affect this process. Delayed puberty in boys causes decreased 
cross-sectional bone density, when the subjects are tested as young 
adults, because they have not yet reached peak bone acquisition. 
Although there is some controversy, it appears likely that normal-
ization of volumetric bone density occurs with maturity and 
exposure to a normal androgen milieu. A range of defects in girls 
such as anorexia nervosa, athletics-induced delayed puberty, and 
Turner syndrome also cause decreased bone density. The use of 
testosterone in boys and estrogen and progesterone in girls with 
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism is helpful in increasing bone 
mass but has not been demonstrated to result in normal adult 
bone mass. Appropriate ingestion of dairy products containing 
calcium or calcium supplementation and vitamin D should be 
encouraged in hypogonadal or constitutionally delayed patients as 
well as in normal children at least as a common sense measure. No 
long-term follow-up is yet available, however, to prove the efficacy 
of this therapy in susceptible subjects. 
 PRECOCIOUS PUBERTY (SEXUAL 
PRECOCITY) 
 All sources agree that the appearance of secondary sexual develop-
ment before the age of 9 years in boys is precocious puberty. 
However, there remains controversy over the lower limits of nor-
mal in girls. There is acceptance by the Pediatric Endocrine 
Society that the appearance of secondary sexual development 
before the age of 7 years in Caucasian girls and 6 years in African-
American girls constitutes precocious sexual development but 
others remain concerned that pubertal development between 7 
and 8 years for Caucasian and 6 and 8 for African American girls 
indicate a pathological state ( Table 15–4 ). However, if a girl has 
the onset of puberty before 8 years, one must have a high index of 
suspicion for pathology. The child must have absolutely no sign of 
central nervous system disorder or other possible cause that might 
trigger pathologic precocious puberty. A careful search for histori-
cal or physical features of organic disease must occur before a girl 
with precocious puberty between 6 or 7 and 8 is considered nor-
mal. When the cause of precocious puberty is premature activa-
tion of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis and the condition is 
gonadotropin dependent, the diagnosis is  central (complete or 
true) precocious puberty ; if ectopic gonadotropin secretion 
occurs in boys or autonomous sex steroid secretion occurs in either 
sex, the condition is not  gonadotropin-dependent, and the diag-
nosis is  incomplete precocious puberty . If feminization occurs in 
girls and virilization occurs in boys, the condition is  isosexual 
precocity , but if the feminization occurs in boys and virilization 
in girls, the condition is  contrasexual precocity . In all forms of 
sexual precocity, there is an increase in growth velocity, 
somatic development, and skeletal maturation. When unchecked, 
this rapid skeletal development may lead to tall stature during the 
early phases of the disorder but to short final stature because of 
early epiphysial fusion. This is the paradox of the tall child grow-
ing up to become a short adult. Plasma IGF-I values may be ele-
vated for age but are appropriate for pubertal stage in untreated 
precocious puberty. 
 Central (Complete or True) Precocious 
Puberty ( Figure 15–8 ) 
 A. Constitutional or familial central (complete or true) 
precocious puberty 
 Otherwise normal children who demon-
strate isosexual precocity at an age slightly more than 2.5 SD below 
the mean may simply represent the lower reaches of the distribution 
TABLE 15–4 Classification of precocious puberty.
Central (complete or true) GnRH-dependent isosexual precocious 
puberty
Constitutional
Idiopathic
Central nervous system disorders (including congenital defects)
 Tumors
 Infection
 Trauma
 Radiation
 Following androgen exposure
Incomplete GnRH-independent isosexual precocious puberty
Males
 Gonadotropin-secreting tumors
 Excessive androgen production
 Testicular or adrenal tumors
 Virilizing congenital adrenal hyperplasia
 Premature Leydig and germinal cell maturation
Females
 Ovarian cysts
 Estrogen-secreting neoplasms
 Severe hypothyroidism
Males and females
 McCune-Albright syndrome
Incomplete contrasexual precocity
Males
 Estrogen-secreting tumor
Females
 Androgen-secreting tumor
 Virilizing congenital adrenal hyperplasia
Iatrogenic sexual precocity due to gonadotropin or sex
Steroid exposure
Variation in pubertal development
 Premature thelarche
 Premature menarche
 Premature pubarche
 Adolescent gynecomastia
546    CHAPTER 15 Puberty
curve describing the age of onset of puberty; often there is a famil-
ial tendency toward early puberty. True precocious puberty is 
reported, rarely, to be due to an autosomal dominant or (in males) 
X-linked dominant trait. 
 B. Idiopathic central (complete or true) isosexual preco-
cious puberty  Affected children, with no familial tendency 
toward early development and no organic disease, may be considered 
to have idiopathic central isosexual precocious puberty. Epilepsy and 
developmental delay are associated with central precocious puberty in 
the absence of a central nervous system anatomic abnormality, indicat-
ing a central nervous system process is responsible for the condition. 
 Pubertal development may follow the normal course or may 
wax and wane. Serum gonadotropin and sex steroid concentrations 
and response to GnRH or GnRH agonists are similar to those 
found in normal pubertal subjects. In idiopathic central precocious 
puberty, as in all forms of true isosexual precocity, testicular 
enlargement in boys should be the first sign; in girls, breast devel-
opment or, rarely, pubic hair appearance may be first. Girls present 
with idiopathic central precocious puberty more commonly than 
boys. Children with precocious puberty have a tendency toward 
obesity based on elevated body mass index in the untreated state. 
While families with inactivating mutations of the  GRP54 gene 
experience absent or delayed puberty, a patient presented with iso-
sexual precocious puberty and demonstrated a mutation of  GRP54 that 
led to prolonged activation of intracellular signaling pathways in 
response to kisspeptin. This further emphasizes the importance of the 
GRP54 Kisspepetin axis in the control of puberty. 
 C. Central nervous system disorders 
 1. Tumors— Central nervous system tumors are more common 
causes of central precocious puberty in boys than in girls but 
may occur in either, so a high index of suspicion is essential. 
Optic gliomas or hypothalamic gliomas, astrocytomas, 
ependymomas, germinomas, and other central nervous system 
tumors may cause precocious puberty by interfering with neu-
ral pathways that inhibit GnRH secretion, thus releasing the 
central nervous system restraint of gonadotropin secretion. 
Patients with optic gliomas and neurofibromatosis type 1 may 
have precocious puberty, but no patients with isolated neurofi-
bromatosis (that did not have optic gliomas) are reported with 
precocious puberty. Remarkably, craniopharyngiomas, which 
are known to cause delayed puberty, can also trigger precocious 
pubertal development. Radiation therapy is often indicated in 
radiosensitive tumors such as germinomas and craniopharyn-
giomas, where complete surgical extirpation is impossible. 
Reportedly, complete removal of craniopharyngiomas is associ-
ated with unexpected recurrence; radiation therapy appears to 
be a key therapy for this tumor in addition to surgery. 
 Hamartomas of the tuber cinereum contain GnRH and 
neurosecretory cells similar to those found in the median emi-
nence; they may cause precocious puberty by secreting GnRH. 
Some hypothalamic hamartomas associated with central preco-
cious puberty do not elaborate GnRH but instead contain 
transforming growth factor (TGF)-α, which stimulates GnRH 
secretion itself. With improved methods of imaging the central 
nervous system, hamartomas, with their characteristic radio-
graphic appearance, are now more frequently diagnosed in 
patients who were previously thought to have idiopathic preco-
cious puberty. These tumors do not enlarge and so pose no 
additional threat to the patients in the absence of intractable 
seizures. These seizures are rare in patients with the peduncu-
lated hamartomas causing central precocious puberty. Because 
of the location of the hamartoma, surgery is a dangerous alter-
native to GnRH analog therapy. 
 Tumors or other abnormalities of the central nervous sys-
tem may cause GH deficiency in association with central pre-
cocious puberty. GH deficiency may also occur after irradiation 
therapy for such tumors, even if precocious puberty was the 
sole endocrine finding before irradiation. Such patients grow 
much faster than isolated GH-deficient patients but slower 
than children with classic precocious puberty and adequate 
GH secretion. Often, the GH deficiency is unmasked after 
successful treatment of precocious puberty. This combination 
FIGURE 15–8 Boy 2-5/12 years of age with idiopathic true pre-
cocious puberty. By 10 months of age, he had pubic hair and phallic 
and testicular enlargement. At 1 year of age, his height was 4 SD 
above the mean; the phallus was 10 cm × 3.5 cm; each testis was
2.5 cm × 1.5 cm. Plasma LH was pubertal and rose in an adult pattern 
after administration of 100 μg of GnRH. Plasma testosterone was 416 
ng/dL. At the time of the photograph, he had been treated with 
medroxyprogesterone acetate (to suppress LH and FSH secretion) for 
1½ years, with reduction of his rapid growth rate and decreased 
gonadotropin and testosterone secretion. At that point his height 
was 95.2 cm (>2 SD above mean height for his age); plasma testoster-
one was 7 ng/dL, and after 100 μg of GnRH, plasma LH rose only 
slightly, demonstrating suppression. (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Styne DM, Grumbach MM. In: Yen SSC, Jaffe RB, eds. 
Reproductive Endocrinology. WB Saunders; 1978.)
CHAPTER 15 Puberty     547
must be considered during the diagnostic process (see also 
Chapter 6). 
 2. Other causes of true precocious puberty —Infectious or 
granulomatous conditions such as encephalitis, brain abscess, 
postinfectious (or postsurgical or congenital) suprasellar cysts, 
sarcoidosis, and tuberculous granulomas of the hypothalamus 
cause central precocious puberty. Suprasellar cysts and hydro-
cephalus cause central precocious puberty that is particularly 
amenable to surgical correction. Brain trauma may be followed 
by either precocious or delayed puberty. Radiation therapy for 
acute lymphoblastic leukemia of the central nervous system, or 
prior to bone marrow transplantation, is characteristically asso-
ciated with hormonal deficiency, but there are increasing 
reports of precocious puberty occurring after such therapy. 
Higher doses of radiation may be more likely to cause GnRH 
deficiency, and lower doses down to 18 Gy may lead to central 
precocious puberty. 
 D. Virilizing syndromes 
 Patients with long-untreated viriliz-
ing adrenal hyperplasia who have advanced bone ages may manifest 
precocious puberty after treatment with glucocorticoid suppres-
sion. Children with virilizing tumors or those given long-term 
androgen therapy may follow the same pattern when the androgen 
source is removed. Advanced maturation of the hypothalamic- 
pituitary-gonadal axis appears to occur with any condition causing 
excessive androgen secretion and advanced skeletal age. 
 Incomplete Isosexual Precocious 
Puberty in Boys 
 Males may manifest premature sexual development in the absence 
of hypothalamic-pituitary maturation from either of two causes: 
(1) ectopic or autonomous endogenous secretion of hCG or LH 
or iatrogenic administration of hCG, which can stimulate Leydig 
cell production of testosterone; or (2) autonomous endogenous 
secretion of androgens from the testes or adrenal glands or from 
iatrogenic exogenous administration of androgens. (In females, 
secretion of hCG does not by itself cause secondary sexual devel-
opment.) 
 A. Gonadotropin-secreting tumors 
 These include hepa-
tomas or hepatoblastomas of the liver as well as teratomas or 
choriocarcinoma of the mediastinum, gonads, retroperitoneum, 
or pineal gland and germinomas of the central nervous system. 
The testes are definitely enlarged but not to the degree found in 
central precocious puberty since only Leydig cells are stimulated 
by hCG. 
 B. Autonomous androgen secretion 
 Secretion of andro-
gens can occur because of inborn errors of adrenal enzyme func-
tion, as in 21-hydroxylase deficiency (P450c21 OMIM#201910 
adrenal hyperplasia, congenital, caused by 21-hydroxylase) or 
11β-hydroxylase deficiency (P450c11β OMIM#202010). Adrenal 
hyperplasia, congenital, caused by steroid 11-beta-hydroxylase 
deficiency), virilizing adrenal carcinomas, interstitial cell tumors of the 
testes, or premature Leydig and germinal cell maturation. Late-
onset congenital adrenal hyperplasia, generally of the 21-hydroxylase 
deficiency form, may occur years after birth with no congenital or 
neonatal manifestations of virilization. Adrenal rest tissue may be 
found in the testes as a vestige of the common embryonic origin 
of the adrenal glands and the testes; in states of ACTH excess—
primarily congenital adrenal hyperplasia—adrenal rests can enlarge 
(sometimes to remarkable size) and secrete adrenal androgens (see 
Chapter 14). 
 In boys with familial gonadotropin-independent premature 
Leydig and germinal cell maturation (#176410. precocious puberty, 
male-limited), plasma testosterone levels are in the pubertal range, 
but plasma gonadotropin levels and the LH response to exogenous 
GnRH are in the prepubertal range or lower because autonomous 
testosterone secretion suppresses endogenous GnRH release. The 
cause of this sex-limited dominant condition lies in a constitutive 
activation of the LH receptor (leaving the LH receptor  on ), causing 
increased cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) production in 
the absence of LH. Several mutations have been reported in the LH 
receptor gene in different families (eg, Asp 578 to Gly or Met 571 to 
Ile). The differential diagnosis rests between testosterone-secreting 
tumor of the adrenal, testosterone-secreting Leydig cell neoplasm, 
and premature Leydig and germinal cell maturation. 
 If hCG secretion causes incomplete male isosexual precocity, 
FSH is not elevated. As only the Leydig cells are stimulated and 
because the seminiferous tubules are not stimulated, the testes do 
not enlarge as much as in complete sexual precocity. If incomplete 
sexual precocity is due to a testicular tumor, the testes may be 
large, asymmetric, and irregular in contour. Symmetric bilateral 
moderate enlargement of the testes suggests familial 
 gonadotropin-independent premature maturation of Leydig and 
germinal cells, which is a sex-limited dominant condition. The 
testes are somewhat smaller in this condition than in true preco-
cious puberty but are still over 2.5 cm in diameter. 
 Incomplete Contrasexual Precocity in Boys 
 Estrogen may be secreted by rare adrenal tumors leading to femi-
nization in boys. Sertoli cell tumors associated with Peutz-Jeghers 
syndrome is another possible etiology. 
 Incomplete Isosexual Precocious 
Puberty in Girls 
 Females with incomplete isosexual precocity have a source of 
excessive estrogens. In all cases of autonomous endogenous estro-
gen secretion or exogenous estrogen administration, serum LH 
and FSH levels are low. 
 A. Follicular cysts 
 If follicular cysts are large enough, they 
can secrete sufficient estrogen to cause breast development and 
even vaginal withdrawal bleeding; some girls have recurrent cysts 
that lead to several episodes of vaginal bleeding. Patients with cysts 
may have levels of serum estrogen high enough to mimic a tumor. 
Larger follicular cysts can twist on their pedicles and become 
infarcted, causing symptoms of acute abdomen in addition to the 
precocious estrogen effects. 
548    CHAPTER 15 Puberty
 B. Other ovarian tumors 
 Granulosa or theca cell tumors of 
the ovaries secrete estrogen and are palpable in 80% of cases. 
Gonadoblastomas are found in streak gonads, lipoid tumors, and 
cystadenomas. Ovarian carcinomas are rare ovarian sources of 
estrogens or androgens. 
 C. Adrenal rest tissue  Adrenal rest tissue has long been known 
to cause testicular enlargement and androgen secretion in boys, par-
ticularly with the increased ACTH secretion of untreated or incom-
pletely congenital adrenal hyperplasia. While the hyperplastic tissue is 
not a neoplasm by itself, neoplastic transformation may follow. 
 D. Exogenous estrogen administration  Ingestion of estro-
gen-containing substances or even cutaneous absorption 
of estrogen can cause feminization in children. Epidemics of 
 gynecomastia and precocious thelarche in Puerto Rico and Italy have 
variously been attributed to ingestion of estrogen-contaminated food, 
estrogens in the environment, soy formula, or undetermined causes. 
One outbreak of gynecomastia in boys and precocious thelarche in 
girls in Bahrain was traced to ingestion of milk from a cow which was 
given continuous estrogen treatment by its owner to ensure uninter-
rupted milk production. Tea tree and lavender oils have estrogenic 
effects in children and exposure can cause thelarche. 
 E. Hypothyroidism 
 Severe untreated hypothyroidism can be 
associated with sexual precocity and galactorrhea (Van Wyk-
Grumbach syndrome); treatment with thyroxine corrects hypo-
thyroidism, halts precocious puberty and galactorrhea, and lowers 
PRL levels. The cause of this syndrome was initially postulated to 
be increased gonadotropin secretion associated with the massive 
increase in TSH secretion. However, it appears that TSH, at high 
concentrations, can activate FSH receptors. 
 F. McCune-Albright syndrome 
 McCune-Albright syn-
drome (#174800. McCune-Albright syndrome; MAS) is classi-
cally manifested as a triad of irregular café au lait spots, fibrous 
dysplasia of long bones with cysts, and precocious puberty. 
However, hyperthyroidism, adrenal nodules with Cushing syn-
drome, acromegaly, hyperprolactinemia, hyperparathyroidism, 
hypophosphatemic hyperphosphaturic rickets, or autonomous 
endogenous-functioning ovarian cysts (in girls) also occur. 
Precocious puberty may be central or incomplete; longitudinal 
studies demonstrate that some patients start with incomplete pre-
cocious puberty and progress to central precocious puberty. Long-
term follow-up of patients with McCune-Albright syndrome 
reveals a high incidence of pathologic fractures and orthopedic 
deformities due to the bone cysts, as well as hearing impairment 
due to the thickening of the temporal area of the skull. Thickening 
of the skull base can impinge on local brain structures with fatal 
consequences. Bone growth may be partly mediated by elevated 
GH secretion and may cease with somatostatin analogue therapy. 
Patients may have a mutation of Arg 201 in exon 8 of the gene 
encoding the Gs alpha subunit that stimulates cAMP formation; 
this mutation impairs GTPase activity of the alpha subunit and 
increases adenylate cyclase activity leading to the endocrine 
abnormalities described earlier. This defect originates in somatic 
rather than germ cells, leading to genetic mosaicism wherever the 
defective gene product is expressed; thus, a wide variety of tissues 
can be affected. 
 Incomplete Contrasexual Precocity in Girls 
 Excess androgen effect can be caused by premature adrenarche or 
more significant pathologic conditions such as congenital or non-
classic adrenal hyperplasia or adrenal or ovarian tumors. P450c21 
adrenal hyperplasia can be diagnosed on the basis of elevated 
serum 17-hydroxyprogesterone concentrations in the basal or 
ACTH-stimulated state (other adrenal metabolites may be elevated 
depending on the defect under investigation) (see Chapter 14). 
Both adrenal and ovarian tumors are associated with elevation of 
serum testosterone; adrenal tumors secrete DHEA. Thus, the 
source of the tumor may be difficult to differentiate if it produces 
only testosterone. MRI or CT scanning may be inadequate to 
diagnose the tumor’s organ of origin, and selective venous sam-
pling may be needed. The rare families reported with aromatase 
deficiency had contrasexual development although not precocious 
puberty per se. One affected 46,XX individual had virilized geni-
talia at birth and further virilization at a pubertal age with the 
additional feature of polycystic ovaries. The patient, in spite of 
high serum testosterone concentrations, had elevated FSH and 
LH in the absence of estrogen production. 
 Variations in Pubertal Development 
 A. Premature thelarche 
 The term  premature thelarche 
denotes unilateral or bilateral breast enlargement without other 
signs of androgen or estrogen secretion. Patients are usually younger 
than 3 years of age; the breast enlargement may regress within 
months or remain until actual pubertal development occurs at a 
normal age. Areolar development and vaginal mucosal signs of 
estrogen effect are usually absent or minimal. Premature thelarche 
may be caused by brief episodes of estrogen secretion from ovarian 
cysts. Plasma estrogen levels are usually low in this disorder, perhaps 
because blood samples are characteristically drawn after the initiat-
ing secretory event. However, ultrasensitive estradiol assays show a 
difference in estrogen production between control girls and those 
with premature thelarche. Classically, premature thelarche is self-
limited and does not lead to central precocious puberty. However, 
there are reports of progression to central precocious puberty in a 
minority of cases, and follow-up for such progression is indicated. 
Other abnormalities in ovulation and menstruation have been 
reported following premature thelarche. Recently, girls with fluctu-
ating thelarche were reported as having mutations in the  GNAS1 
gene, though without other signs of McCune-Albright syndrome. 
 B. Premature menarche 
 In rare cases, girls may begin to 
menstruate at an early age without showing other signs of estrogen 
effect. An unproved theory suggests that they may be manifesting 
increased uterine sensitivity to estrogen. In most subjects, menses 
stop within 1 to 6 years, and normal pubertal progression occurs 
thereafter. 
CHAPTER 15 Puberty     549
 C. Premature Adrenarche  The term premature adrenarche 
denotes the early appearance of pubic or axillary hair without other 
signs of virilization or puberty. This nonprogressive disorder is compat-
ible with then the occurrence of other signs of puberty at the normal 
age for puberty. Prematue adrenarche is more common in girls than in 
boys, and premature adrenarche is usually found in children over 6 
years of age. Sometimes premature adrenarche can overlap with the 
new age limits of puberty in girls. Plasma and urinary DHEAS levels 
are elevated to stage 2 pubertal levels, higher than normally found in 
this age group but well below those seen with. Bone and height ages 
may be slightly advanced for chronologic age. Patients may have 
abnormal electroencephalographic tracings without other signs of 
neurologic dysfunction. 
 The presenting symptoms of late-onset adrenal hyperplasia 
may be similar to those of premature adrenarche, and the differ-
ential diagnosis may require ACTH stimulation testing (see 
Chapter 14). This condition may also present in a manner similar 
to polycystic ovarian syndrome (see Chapter 13). Infants born 
small for gestational age (SGA) have a predilection to develop 
premature adrenarche. These girls may also progress to polycystic 
ovarian syndrome. Daughters of women with PCOS demonstrate 
elevated androgen concentrations before the age of puberty, and 
these daughters may progress themselves to develop PCOS. 
 D. Adolescent gynecomastia 
 Up to 75% of boys have 
transient unilateral or bilateral gynecomastia, usually beginning in 
stage 2 or 3 of puberty and regressing about 2 years later. Serum 
estrogen and testosterone concentrations are normal, but the 
estradiol-testosterone ratio may be elevated and SHBG concentra-
tions may be high. Reassurance is usually all that is required, but 
some severely affected patients with extremely prominent breast 
development require reduction mammoplasty if psychologic dis-
tress is extreme. After 2 years of gynecomastia, the likelihood of 
spontaneous regression decreases due to the formation of scar tis-
sue. Early studies of aromatase inhibitors in the medical treatment 
of gynecomastia were disappointing, but more recent evaluation 
of anastrazole demonstrate promise. 
 Some pathologic conditions such as Klinefelter and the syn-
dromes of incomplete androgen resistance are also associated with 
gynecomastia; these disorders should be clearly differentiated from 
the gynecomastia of normal puberty in males. 
 Differential Diagnosis of 
Precocious Puberty 
 The history and physical examination should be directed toward 
one of the diagnostic possibilities discussed earlier. Serum gonado-
tropin and sex steroid concentrations are determined in order to 
distinguish gonadotropin-mediated secondary sexual development 
(serum gonadotropin and sex steroid levels elevated to pubertal 
levels) from autonomous endogenous secretion or exogenous 
administration of gonadal steroids (serum gonadotropin levels 
suppressed and sex steroid levels elevated). Gonadotropins must 
be measured in a third generation assay with pediatric standards as 
the customary gonadotropin determinations are too insensitive to 
reveal the small changes of puberty.
Measurement of testosterone or estradiol must be done in an 
ultrasensitive assay with pediatric standards or, as with gonadotro-
pin assays, the small changes of pubertal development will be 
missed. Presently highly sensitive high performance liquid chro-
matography  tandem mass spectroscopy (HPLC MS/MS) assays 
are available at national laboratories for this purpose. Third-
generation ultrasensitive immunoassays can identify the onset of 
increased gonadotropin secretion with a single basal unstimulated 
serum sample. In the past, a GnRH test was required to confirm 
an increase in LH secretion at puberty because of the overlap of 
pubertal and prepubertal values of LH in the basal state. These 
third-generation gonadotropin assays can be applied to urine as well as 
serum samples; this may someday eliminate the need for GnRH ago-
nist testing or serial serum sampling. 
 If serum LH concentrations, measured in an assay that cross-
reacts with hCG, are quite high in a boy or if a pregnancy screen-
ing test (β-hCG) is positive, the likely diagnosis is an extra-pituitary, 
hCG-secreting tumor. β-LH values are suppressed, so no confu-
sion with hCG levels is possible. If no abdominal or thoracic 
source of hCG is found, MRI of the brain with particular atten-
tion to the hypothalamic-pituitary area is indicated to evaluate the 
possibility of a germinoma of the pineal gland. 
 If serum sex steroid levels are very high and gonadotropin levels 
are low in third-generation assays, an autonomous source of 
gonadal steroid secretion must be assumed. If plasma gonadotro-
pin and sex steroid levels are in the pubertal range, the most likely 
diagnosis is complete precocious puberty ( Table 15–5 ). 
 Differentiation between premature thelarche and central 
precocious puberty is usually accomplished by physical exami-
nation, but determination of serum estradiol or gonadotropins 
may be required. The evaluation of uterine size by ultrasound 
may also be useful, because premature thelarche causes no 
increase in uterine volume while central precocious puberty 
does and also is associated with an “endometrial stripe.” 
Ovarian size determination is a less useful method of distin-
guishing between the two possibilities but may reveal pubertal 
ovarian cysts. As noted earlier, some girls initially thought to 
have precocious thelarche progress to complete precocious 
puberty, but there is no way presently to distinguish girls who 
will progress from those who will not. 
 The onset of true or complete precocious puberty may indicate 
the presence of a hypothalamic tumor. Boys more often than girls 
have central nervous system tumors associated with complete pre-
cocious puberty. Skull x-rays are not usually helpful, but CT or 
MRI scanning is indicated in children with true precocious 
puberty. The present generation of CT and MRI scanners can 
make thin cuts through the hypothalamic-pituitary area with good 
resolution; small hypothalamic hamartomas are now being diag-
nosed more frequently. Generally, MRI is preferable to CT 
because of better resolution; the use of contrast may help evaluate 
possible central nervous system lesions. 
 Treatment of Precocious Puberty 
 A. Central precocious puberty 
 In the past, medical treat-
ment of true precocious puberty involved medroxyprogesterone 
550    CHAPTER 15 Puberty
acetate or cyproterone acetate—progestational agents that reduce 
gonadotropin secretion by negative feedback. 
 However, current treatment for precocious puberty due to a 
central nervous system lesion involves the use of GnRH agonists 
that suppress sexual maturation and decrease growth rate and 
skeletal maturation. Chronic administration of highly potent and 
long-acting analogs of GnRH has been shown to downregulate 
GnRH receptors and reduce pituitary gland response to GnRH, 
thereby causing decreased secretion of gonadotropin and sex ste-
roids and rapidly stopping the progression of sexual precocity. In 
girls, pubertal enlargement of the ovaries and uterus reverts toward 
the prepubertal state, and the multicystic appearance of the puber-
tal ovary regresses as well. This suppressive effect is reversed after 
therapy is discontinued and puberty progresses. GnRH agonist 
treatment has been successful for idiopathic precocious puberty 
and precocious puberty caused by hamartomas of the tuber 
cinereum, neoplasms of the central nervous system, or long-term 
androgen exposure. The GnRH agonists were originally given by 
daily subcutaneous injection or intranasal insufflation. Injection 
of these agents every 4 weeks in depot preparations has now made 
treatment much easier and has improved compliance. 
 Complete suppression of gonadotropin secretion is necessary 
because an incompletely suppressed patient may appear to have 
arrested pubertal development while actually secreting low but 
significant levels of sex steroids. Under these conditions, bone age 
advances while the growth rate is decreased, leading to even shorter 
TABLE 15–5 Differential diagnosis of precocious puberty.
Serum
Gonadotropin
Concentrations 
LR Response to 
GnRH or GnRH
Agonist
Serum Sex
Steroid 
Concentrations
Gonadal Size
Miscellaneous
Central (complete or true) precocious puberty
Pubertal 
Pubertal pattern 
Pubertal values 
Normal pubertal 
enlargement of 
gonads in males
MRI scan of head to rule out 
a central nervous system 
tumor, hamartoma, or other 
central nervous system 
lesion
Incomplete precocious puberty 
Males 
Chorionic gonadotropin 
secreting tumor 
High hCG (or LH in 
cross-reactive assay), 
positive pregnancy 
test, but β-LH (specific 
assay) is low 
High basal hCG 
or LH that does 
not rise with 
GnRH, but β-LH 
is low and does 
not rise
High or pubertal 
values
Slight to moder-
ate enlargement 
of gonads
Hepatic tumor must be con-
sidered. MRI scan of head if 
hCG-secreting central ner-
vous system tumor sus-
pected. If the LH assay 
measures hCG, both results 
may be high while β-hCG is 
high and β-LH, in an assay 
which does not detect hCG, 
is low
Leydig cell tumor
Prepubertal (low)
Prepubertal or 
suppressed 
pattern 
Extremely high 
testosterone
Irregular asym-
metric enlarge-
ment of testes
Familial gonadotropin-
indepen-dent sexual 
precocity with 
premature Leydig and 
germ cell maturation 
Prepubertal (low) 
Prepubertal or 
suppressed 
pattern
Pubertal or 
higher values 
Testes longer 
than 2.5 cm but 
smaller than 
expected for 
stage of pubertal 
development
Found in sex-limited 
dominant patterns 
Females 
Granulosa cell tumor 
(follicular cysts may 
have similar 
presentation) 
Prepubertal (low) 
Prepubertal or 
suppressed 
pattern 
Extremely high 
estradiol 
Ovarian enlarge-
ment on physical, 
CT, MRI, or  
sonographic 
examination
Granulosa cell 
tumor is usually 
palpable on rectal 
examination 
Follicular cyst
Prepubertal (low) 
Prepubertal or 
suppressed 
pattern  of LH 
secretion. FSH 
secretion may 
rise above 
normal range 
High to 
extremely high 
estradiol
Cysts may be 
visible on 
sonogram
Withdrawal bleeding may 
occur when estrogen levels 
decrease.  Cysts may recur
CHAPTER 15 Puberty     551
adult stature. Side effects of these agonists have generally been 
limited to allergic skin reactions and elevation of immunoglobulins 
directed against GnRH. Significant anaphylactic reactions to an 
injection have rarely been reported. Decrease in bone mineral den-
sity is a potential side effect of GnRH agonists; increased dietary 
calcium and recommended vitamin D intake supplementation is 
wise especially in the era of frequent deficiencies of these in all 
children. The FDA has approved histrelin, a GnRH agonist admin-
istered on a daily basis, and leuprolide acetate, a long-acting GnRH 
agonist, administered every 28 days, for the management of preco-
cious puberty. A daily dose form of leuprolide is also approved for 
precocious puberty but a 3-month preparation is presently only 
approved for adults. Individual monitoring is essential to ascertain 
gonadotropin suppression. A new implantable depot preparation 
of GnRH agonist may be left in for 1 year without the requirement 
for frequent monitoring. 
 Growth velocity decreases within 5 months after the start of 
therapy, and rapid bone age advancement decreases to a rate 
below the increase in chronologic age. Without therapy, height 
in patients with central precocious puberty approaches 152 cm 
in girls and 155 to 164 cm in boys. The first patients treated 
with GnRH agonists have now reached adult height: the girls 
have a mean height of 157 cm and the boys a mean height of 164 
cm—a definite improvement over the untreated state. The worst 
height prognosis is found in children with an early diagnosis of 
precocious puberty who are not treated. The best outcomes of 
therapy are noted when diagnosis and therapy are achieved early, 
and as earlier diagnosis is now made in children with central 
precocious puberty and earlier therapy is offered, better results 
are expected in the future. Menarche and even pregnancy are 
reported after the discontinuation of therapy in girls, indicating 
a reversion to normal pubertal endocrine function following 
GnRH agonist treatment. The new lower age limits of normal 
pubertal development in girls have led clinicians to reassess the 
criteria used to identify appropriate candidates for therapy. 
Patients without significant elevation of serum estrogen, who 
have a predicted height appropriate for family, and who have 
slowly progressing variants without early menarche will likely 
achieve an appropriate adult height without therapy. Psychologic 
support is important for patients with sexual precocity. The 
somatic changes or menses frighten some children and may 
make them the object of ridicule. These patients do not experi-
ence social maturation to match their physical development, 
although their peers, teachers, and relatives tend to treat them as 
if they were older because of their large size. Thus, supportive 
counseling must be offered to both patient and family. Children 
with precocious puberty are more often sexually abused, so 
appropriate precautions are necessary. 
 B. Incomplete precocious puberty 
 Treatment of the dis-
orders discussed earlier under incomplete precocious puberty is 
directed toward the underlying tumor or abnormality rather than 
toward the signs of precocious puberty. If the primary cause is 
controlled, signs of sexual development are halted in progression 
or may even regress. 
 Males with familial Leydig and germ cell maturation do not 
initially respond to GnRH agonist therapy, but some have 
improved with medroxyprogesterone acetate. Affected boys were 
successfully treated with ketoconazole, an antifungal agent that 
can block 17,20-lyase and therefore decrease testosterone produc-
tion. Ketoconazole also suppresses adrenal function as a significant 
side effect. After initial control with ketoconazole, the boys devel-
oped central precocious puberty, because prolonged exposure to 
androgens led to maturation of their hypothalamic-pituitary axis; 
treatment with a GnRH agonist then effectively halted this puber-
tal progression. 
 Newer therapy for McCune-Albright syndrome in girls is a com-
bination of testolactone (an aromatase inhibitor) and spironolac-
tone (which acts as an antiandrogen). Long-term follow-up 
demonstrated some decrease in menses, improvement in growth 
patterns and bone age advancement. Some escaped from control, 
necessitating the addition of a GnRH agonist, which then sup-
pressed pubertal development. Tamoxifen, an estrogen agonist and 
antagonist, combined with aromatase inhibitors (such as anastrazole 
or newer agents such as letrazole) has been successfully used to 
decrease uterine bleeding and advancement in bone age in clinical 
trials. Girls with recurrent estrogen-secreting ovarian cyst formation 
may have a decreased incidence of cysts with medroxyprogesterone 
acetate therapy. A GnRH agonist may also be effective in such cases. 
Surgical removal of ovarian cysts may be unnecessary if such medi-
cal therapy is first utilized. 
 Precocious thelarche or adrenarche requires no treatment, as 
both are self-limited benign conditions. No therapy has been 
reported for premature menarche. Severe, persistent cases of ado-
lescent gynecomastia have been reportedly treated successfully by 
testolactone and dihydrotestosterone heptanoate, although surgi-
cal removal of breast tissue is often necessary, as noted earlier. 
 REFERENCES 
 General 
 Greulich WW, Pyle SI.  Radiographic Atlas of Skeletal Development of the Hand and 
Wrist . 2nd ed. Stanford. CA: Stanford University Press; 1959. 
 Grumbach MM, Auchus RJ. Estrogen: consequences and implications of human 
mutations in synthesis and action.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 1999;84:4677. 
[PMID: 10599737] 
 Herman-Giddens ME, Slora EJ, Wasserman RC, et al. Secondary sexual character-
istics and menses in young girls seen in office practice: a study from the 
Pediatric Research in Office Settings network.  Pediatrics . 1997;99:505. 
[PMID: 9093289] 
 Himes JH, Park K, Styne D. Menarche and assessment of body mass index in 
adolescent girls.  J Pediatr . 2009;155:393. [PMID: 199559445] 
 Kaiser UB, Kuohung W. KiSS-1 and GPR54 as new players in gonadotropin regu-
lation and puberty.  Endocrine . 2005;26:277. [PMID:12944565] 
 Rosenfeld RL, Lipton RB, Drum ML. Thelarche, pubarche, and menarche attain-
ment in children with normal and elevated body mass index.  Pediatrics . 
2009;123;84. [PMID: 19117864] 
 Seminara SB, Messager S, Chatzidaki EE, et al. The GPR54 gene as a regulator of 
puberty.  N Engl J Med . 2003;349:1614. [PMID:14573733] 
 Shahab M, Mastronardi C, Seminara SB, Crowley WF, Ojeda SR, Plant TM. 
Increased hypothalamic GPR54 signaling: a potential mechanism for initia-
tion of puberty in primates.  Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . 2005;102:2129. 
[PMID:15684075] 
552    CHAPTER 15 Puberty
 Smith EP, Boyd J, Frank GR, et al. Estrogen resistance caused by a mutation in the 
estrogen-receptor gene in a man.  N Engl J Med . 1994;331:1056. [PMID: 
8090165] 
 Styne DM, Cuttler L. Normal pubertal development. In: Rudolph C, Rudolph A, 
eds.  Rudolphs Textbook of Pediatrics . 2008. 
Styne DM. Puberty, obesity and ethnicity. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2004;15:472. 
[PMID: 15541646]
 Styne DM, Grumbach MM. Puberty, ontogeny, neuroendocrinology, physiology, 
and disorders. In: Larsen PR, et al, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology. 
11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 2002.
 Physical Changes Associated with Puberty 
 Bayley N, Pinneau SF. Tables for predicting adult height from skeletal age: revised 
for use with the Greulich-Pyle standards.  J Pediatr . 1952;40:423. [PMID: 
14918032] 
 Marshall WA, Tanner JM. Variations in the pattern of pubertal changes in girls. 
 Arch Dis Child . 1969;44:291. [PMID: 5785179] 
 Marshall WA, Tanner JM. Variations in the pattern of pubertal changes in boys. 
 Arch Dis Child . 1970;45:13. [PMID: 5440182] 
 Van Wieringen JC, et al.  Growth Diagrams 1965 Netherlands: Second National 
Survey on 0–24 Year Olds. Groningen, Netherlands: Institute for Preventive 
Medicine NO Leiden, Wolters-Noordhoff Publishing; 1971. 
 Delayed Puberty and Sexual Infantilism 
 Barrio R, de Luis D, Alonso M, Lamas A, Moreno JC. Induction of puberty with 
human chorionic gonadotropin and follicle-stimulating hormone in adoles-
cent males with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.  Fertil Steril . 1999;71:244. 
[PMID: 9988392] 
 Davenport ML. Approach to the patient with Turner syndrome.  J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab . 2010;95:1487. [PMID: 20375216] 
 Grumbach MM, Conte FA. Disorders of sexual differentiation. In: Larsen PR, 
et al, eds.  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology . 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB 
Saunders; 2002. 
 Johansson T, Ritzen EM. Very long-term follow-up of girls with early and late 
menarche.  Endocr Dev . 2005;8:126. [PMID: 15722621] 
 Massa G, Heinrichs C, Verlinde S, et al. Late or delayed induced or spontaneous 
puberty in girls with Turner syndrome treated with growth hormone does 
not affect final height.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2003;88:4168. [PMID: 
12970282] 
 Nabhan ZM, Dimeglio LA, Qi R, Perkins SM, Eugster EA. Conjugated oral versus 
transdermal estrogen replacement in girls with Turner syndrome: a pilot 
comparative study.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2009;94:2009. [PMID: 
19318455] 
 Sedlmeyer IL, Palmert MR. Delayed puberty: analysis of a large case series from an 
academic center.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2002;87:1613. [PMID: 
11932291] 
 Seminara SB, Hayes FJ, Crowley WFJ. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone defi-
ciency in the human (idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and 
Kallmann’s syndrome): pathophysiological and genetic considerations. 
 Endocr Rev . 1999;19:521. [PMID: 9793755] 
 Sexual Precocity 
 Bar A, 7776106. Bayley-Pinneau method of height prediction in girls with central 
precocious puberty: correlation with adult height.  J Pediatr . 1995;126:955. 
[PMID: 7776106] 
 Carel JC, Eugster EA, Rogol A. Consensus statement on the use of gonadotropin-
releasing hormone analogs in children.  Pediatrics . 2009;123:e752. [PMID: 
19332438] 
 Eugster EA, Rubin SD, Reiter EO, et al. Tamoxifen treatment for precocious 
puberty in McCune-Albright syndrome: a multicenter trial.  J Pediatr . 
2003;143:60. [PMID: 12915825] 
 Fahmy JL, Kaminsky CK, Kaufman F, Nelson MD Jr, Parisi MT. The radiological 
approach to precocious puberty.  Br J Radiol . 2000;73:560. [PMID: 
10884758] 
 Ibáñez L, Dimartino-Nardi J, Potau N, Saenger P. Premature adrenarche—normal 
variant or forerunner of adult disease?  Endocr Rev . 2000;21:671. [PMID: 
11133068] 
 Klein KO, Barnes KM, Jones JV, Feuillan PP, Cutler GB Jr. Increased final height 
in precocious puberty after long-term treatment with LHRH agonists: the 
National Institutes of Health experience.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2001;86:4711. [PMID: 11600530] 
 Leschek EW, Jones J, Barnes KM, Hill SC, Cutler GB Jr. Six-year results of 
spironolactone and testolactone treatment of familial male-limited preco-
cious puberty with addition of deslorelin after central puberty onset.  J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab . 1999;84:175. [PMID: 9920079] 
 Mul D, Bertelloni S, Carel JC, Saggese G, Chaussain JL, Oostdijk W. Effect of 
gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist treatment in boys with central 
precocious puberty: final height results.  Horm Res . 2002;58:1. [PMID: 
12169774] 
 Palmert MR, Malin HV, Boepple PA. Unsustained or slowly progressive 
puberty in young girls: initial presentation and long-term follow-up of 
20 untreated patients.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 1999;84:415. [PMID: 
10022394] 
 Reiter EO, Lindberg A, Ranke MB, et al. The KIGS experience with the addition 
of gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists to growth hormone (GH) 
treatment of children with idiopathic GH deficiency.  Horm Res . 
2003;60(suppl 1):68. [PMID: 12955021] 
 Salardi S, Cacciari E, Mainetti B, Mazzanti L, Pirazzoli P. Outcome of premature 
thelarche: relation to puberty and final height.  Arch Dis Child . 1998;79:173. 
[PMID: 9797603] 
 Tanaka T, Niimi H, Matsuo N, et al. Results of long-term follow-up after treat-
ment of central precocious puberty with leuprorelin acetate: evaluation of 
effectiveness of treatment and recovery of gonadal function. The TAP-
144-SR Japanese Study Group on Central Precocious Puberty.  J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab . 2005;90:1371. [PMID: 15598675] 
 Teilmann G, Petersen JH, Gormsen M, Damgaard K, Skakkebaek NE, Jensen TK. 
Early puberty in internationally adopted girls: hormonal and clinical markers 
of puberty in 276 girls examined biannually over two years.  Horm Res . 
2009;72(4):236-246. 
 Volta C, Bernasconi S, Cisternino M, et al. Isolated premature thelarche and 
thelarche variant: clinical and auxological follow-up of 119 girls.  J Endocrinol 
Invest . 1998;21:180. [PMID: 9591214] 
 Weise M, Flor A, Barnes KM, Cutler GB Jr, Baron J. Determinants of growth 
during gonadotropin-releasing hormone analog therapy for precocious 
puberty.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2004;89:103. [PMID: 14715835] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
553
6
1
 The Endocrinology of 
Pregnancy 
 Robert N. Taylor, MD, PhD and  Martina L. Badell, MD 
 ACTH 
Adrenocorticotropin hormone 
 AFP 
Alph-afetoprotein 
 AMH 
Anti-Müllerian hormone 
 BMI 
Body mass index 
 BV 
Bacterial vaginosis 
 CRH 
Corticotropin-releasing hormone 
 DHEA 
Dehydroepiandrosterone 
 EGF 
Epidermal growth factor 
 fFN 
Fetal fibronectin 
 FGF 
Fibroblast growth factor 
 GDM 
Gestational diabetes mellitus 
 GH 
Growth hormone 
 GnRH 
Gonadotropin-releasing 
 
hormone 
 GTN 
Gestational trophoblastic 
 
neoplasia 
 hCG 
 human chorionic gonadotropin 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 HELLP syndrome 
Hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, 
 
and low platelets 
 hPL 
Human placental lactogen 
 IGF 
Insulin-like growth factor 
 LH 
Luteinizing hormone 
 NSAID 
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug 
 PDGF 
Platelet-derived growth factor 
 PlGF 
Placental growth factor 
 PRL 
Prolactin 
 PROM 
Premature rupture of membranes 
 PTB 
Preterm birth 
 sEng 
Soluble endoglin 
 sFlt-1 
Soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1 
 SHBG 
Sex hormone–binding globulin 
 TRH 
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone 
 TSH 
Thyroid-stimulating hormone 
 VEGF 
Vascular endothelial growth factor 
 Throughout pregnancy, the fetal-placental unit secretes protein 
and steroid hormones that alter the function of every endocrine 
gland in the mother’s body. Both clinically and in the laboratory, 
pregnancy can mimic hyperthyroidism, Cushing disease, pitu-
itary adenoma, diabetes mellitus, polycystic ovary syndrome, 
and more. 
 The endocrine changes associated with pregnancy are adaptive, 
allowing the mother to nurture the developing fetus. Although 
maternal reserves are usually adequate, in cases of gestational dia-
betes or hypertensive disease of pregnancy, a woman may develop 
overt signs of disease as a direct result of pregnancy. 
 Aside from creating a satisfactory nutritive environment for 
fetal development, the placenta serves as an endocrine, respira-
tory, alimentary, and excretory organ. Measurements of fetal-
placental products in the maternal serum provide one means of 
assessing fetal well being. This chapter will consider the changes 
in maternal endocrine function in pregnancy and during 
 parturition as well as fetal endocrine development. The chapter con-
cludes with a discussion of some endocrine disorders complicating 
pregnancy. 
 CONCEPTION AND IMPLANTATION 
 Fertilization 
 In fertile women, ovulation occurs approximately 12 to 16 days 
after the onset of the previous menses. The ovum must be fertil-
ized within 24 to 48 hours if conception is to result. For about 
48 hours around ovulation, cervical mucus is copious, nonviscous, 
slightly alkaline, and forms a gel matrix that acts as a filter and 
conduit for sperm. Sperm begin appearing in the outer third of the 
fallopian tube (the ampulla) 5 to 10 minutes after coitus and 
554    CHAPTER 16 The Endocrinology of Pregnancy
 continue to migrate to this location from the cervix for about 24 
to 48 hours. Of the 200 × 10 6 sperm that are deposited in the 
vaginal fornices, only approximately 200 reach the distal tube. 
Fertilization normally occurs in the ampulla. 
 Implantation and hCG Production 
 Embryonic invasion of the uterus occurs during a specific win-
dow of implantation 8 to 10 days after ovulation and fertilization, 
when the conceptus is a blastocyst. Vitronectin, an alpha-v-beta-3 
integrin receptor ligand, serves as one of several links between the 
maternal and embryonic epithelia. The two layers of placental 
epithelial cells, cytotrophoblasts and syncytiotrophoblasts, 
develop after the blastocyst invades the endometrium 
( Figure 16–1 ). Columns of invading cytotrophoblasts anchor the 
placenta to the endometrium. The differentiated syncytiotropho-
blast, derived from fusion of cytotrophoblasts, is in direct contact 
with the maternal circulation. The syncytiotrophoblast is the 
 FIGURE 16–1  Microanatomy of the human placental bed. Oxygen, nutrients, and waste products are exchanged between the fetus and 
the mother across this interface. In normal placental development (upper panel), invasive cytotrophoblasts of fetal origin invade the maternal 
spiral arteries, displacing maternal endothelial cells and transforming the vessels from small-caliber resistance vessels to high-caliber capaci-
tance vessels capable of placental perfusion adequate to sustain fetal growth. In preeclampsia and some cases of fetal growth restriction, 
cytotrophoblasts fail to adopt an invasive endothelial phenotype. Instead, invasion of the spiral arteries is shallow and they remain small-caliber 
resistance vessels (lower panel). This can lead to placental ischemia.  (Adapted, with permission, from Karumanchi SA, et al. Preeclampsia: a renal 
perspective.  Kidney Int . 2005;67:2101.) 
Anchoring villus
cytotrophoblast column
Placenta
Tunica media smooth muscle
Cytotrophoblast
stem cells
Cytotrophoblast
Blood flow
Maternal blood
Floating villus
Floating villus
Cytotrophoblast
Less blood flow
Endovascular
cytotrophoblast
Syncytiotrophoblast
Spiral
artery
Maternal
endothelial cells
Decidua
Myometrium
Anchoring villus
cytotrophoblast column
Placenta
Tunica media vascular
smooth muscle layer
Cytotrophoblast
stem cells
Cytotrophoblast
Maternal blood
Fetal blood vessel
Cytotrophoblast
Syncytiotrophoblast
Spiral artery
Maternal endothelial cells
Decidua
CHAPTER 16 The Endocrinology of Pregnancy     555
major source of hormone production, containing the cellular 
machinery needed for synthesis and secretion of both steroid and 
polypeptide hormones. 
 In most spontaneously conceived pregnancies, the dates of 
ovulation and implantation are not known. Weeks of gestation 
( gestational age ) are by convention calculated from the first day of 
the last menstrual period. Within 24 hours after implantation, or 
at about 3 weeks of gestation, human chorionic gonadotropin 
(hCG), produced by syncytiotrophoblasts ( see Figure 16–1 ), is 
detectable in maternal serum. Under the influence of increasing 
hCG production, the corpus luteum secretes progesterone and 
estradiol in increasing quantities. 
 Ovarian Hormones of Pregnancy 
 The hormones produced by the corpus luteum include progester-
one, 17-hydroxyprogesterone, relaxin, and estradiol. The indis-
pensability of the corpus luteum in early pregnancy has been 
demonstrated by ablation studies, in which luteectomy or 
oophorectomy before 42 days of gestation results in precipitous 
decreases in levels of serum progesterone and estradiol, followed 
by abortion. Exogenous progesterone will prevent abortion, prov-
ing that progesterone alone is required for maintenance of early 
pregnancy. After about the seventh gestational week, the corpus 
luteum can be removed without subsequent abortion owing to 
compensatory progesterone production by the placenta. 
 Because the placenta does not express the 17α-hydroxylase 
enzyme (P450C17), it cannot produce appreciable amounts of 
17-hydroxyprogesterone; thus, this steroid provides a marker of 
corpus luteum function. As shown in  Figure 16–2 , the serum 
concentrations of estrogens and total progesterone exhibit a 
steady increase, but the concentration of 17-hydroxyprogester-
one rises and then declines to low levels that persist for the dura-
tion of the pregnancy. Another marker of corpus luteum 
function is the polypeptide hormone relaxin, a protein with a 
molecular mass of about 6000. Pharmacologically, relaxin ripens 
the cervix, softens the pubic symphysis, promotes decidual 
angiogenesis, and acts synergistically with progesterone to 
inhibit uterine contractions. 
 Symptoms and Signs of Pregnancy 
 Breast tenderness, fatigue, nausea, absence of menstruation, soft-
ening of the uterus, and a sustained elevation of basal body tem-
perature are mostly attributable to hormone production by the 
corpus luteum and developing placenta. 
 FETAL-PLACENTAL-DECIDUAL UNIT 
 The function of the placenta is to establish effective communi-
cation between the mother and the developing fetus while 
maintaining the immune and genetic integrity of both individ-
uals. Initially, the placenta functions autonomously. By the end 
of the first trimester, however, the fetal endocrine system is suf-
ficiently developed to complement placental function and to 
provide some hormone precursors to the placenta. From this 
time, it is useful to consider the endocrine conceptus as the 
fetal-placental unit. 
 The decidua is the endometrium of pregnancy. Decidual cells 
are capable of synthesizing a variety of polypeptide hormones, 
including relaxin, prolactin (PRL), and a variety of paracrine fac-
tors, in particular insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-binding pro-
tein 1. The precise function of the decidua as an endocrine organ 
has not been established, but its role as a source of prostaglandins 
during labor is certain (see “Endocrine Control of Parturition,” 
later). 
 POLYPEPTIDE HORMONES 
 Human Chorionic Gonadotropin 
 The first marker of trophoblast differenation and the first measur-
able product of the placenta is hCG, a glycoprotein consisting of 
237 amino acids. It is similar in structure to the pituitary glyco-
protein hormones in that it consists of two chains: a common 
alpha chain and a specific beta chain, which determines receptor 
interaction and ultimate biologic specificity. The alpha chain is 
identical in sequence to the alpha chains of thyroid-stimulating 
hormone (TSH), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), and 
luteinizing hormone (LH). The beta chain has 67% sequence 
homology with LH and an additional 30 amino acids not found 
in LH beta. 
 In early pregnancy (up to 6 weeks), the concentration of hCG 
doubles every 1.7 to 2 days, and serial measurements provide a 
sensitive index of early trophoblast function and viability. Maternal 
plasma hCG peaks during the 10th gestational week and then 
declines gradually in the third trimester. Peak concentrations cor-
relate temporally with the establishment of maternal blood flow in 
the intervillous space ( see Figure 16–1 , upper panel). 
 The long plasma half-life of hCG (24 hours) allows the tiny 
mass of cells comprising the blastocyst to produce sufficient 
hormone to be detected in the peripheral circulation within 
24 hours of implantation. Thus, pregnancy can be diagnosed 
several days before symptoms occur or a menstrual period has 
been missed. Antibodies to the unique beta-carboxyl terminal 
segment of hCG do not cross-react significantly with any of the 
pituitary glycoproteins. 
 hCG is also produced in gestational trophoblastic neoplasia 
(GTN) by hydatidiform mole and choriocarcinoma, and the con-
centration of hCG-beta is used as a tumor marker for diagnosis 
and for monitoring the success of chemotherapy in these disor-
ders. Women with very high hCG levels due to GTN may become 
clinically hyperthyroid due to the action of hCG on TSH 
 receptors; they can revert to euthyroidism as hCG is reduced dur-
ing chemotherapy. 
 Human Placental Lactogen 
 A second placental polypeptide hormone, this one with homology 
to pituitary growth hormone (GH), is human placental lactogen 
(hPL). hPL is produced by early trophoblasts, but detectable 
serum concentrations are not reached until 4 to 5 gestational 
556    CHAPTER 16 The Endocrinology of Pregnancy
SYSTEM
HORMONE
PATTERN
AVERAGE PEAK
CONCENTRATION
(TIME)
Placenta
   and
   corpus
   luteum
Progesterone
17-Hydroxy-
   progester-
   one
Rises to term
Peaks at 5
   wk, then
   declines
190 ng/mL (552 nmol/L)
   (term)
6 ng/mL (19 nmol/L)
   (5 wk)
Adrenal
Cortisol
Aldosterone
DOC
Increases to 3
   times prepreg-
   nancy values
   at term
Plateaus at 34
   wk with 
   small rise near
   term
Increases to 10
   times prepreg-
   nancy value
   at term
300 ng/mL (0.83
   μmol/L) (term)
100 ng/mL 
   (277 nmol/L)
   (term)
1200 pg/mL (3.48
   nmol/L) (term)
Thyroid
Total T4
Free T4
Total T3
Free T3
Increases 
   during first
   trimester, then
   plateaus
Unchanged
Increases
   during first
   trimester, then
   plateaus
Unchanged
150 ng/mL 
   (193 pmol/L) 
30 pg/mL 
   (38.6 pmol/L)
2 ng/mL 
   (3.1 nmol/L)
4 pg/mL
   (5.1 pmol/L)
200
150
100
50
ng/mL (Progesterone)
ng/mL (17-Hydroxyprogesterone)
10
5
Prepregnancy
1st
2nd
3rd
Trimester
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
100
300
200
Prepregnancy
1st
2nd
3rd
Trimester
pg/mL DOC
Cortisol
Progesterone
DOC
Aldosterone
30
20
10
100
300
200
Prepregnancy
1st
2nd
3rd
Trimester
Trimester
ng/mL (Cortisol, aldosterone)
Free T4
Total T4
pg/mL (Free T4)
ng/mL (Total T4)
5
2.5
2
1
Prepregnancy
1st
2nd
3rd
Free T3
Total T3
pg/mL (Free T3)
ng/mL (Total T3)
17-Hydroxy-
progesterone
 FIGURE 16–2  Maternal serum hormone changes during pregnancy. 
CHAPTER 16 The Endocrinology of Pregnancy     557
SYSTEM
HORMONE
PATTERN
AVERAGE PEAK
CONCENTRATION
(TIME)
Anterior
   pituitary
GH
LH, FSH
ACTH
TSH
PRL
Unchanged
Low, basal levels
Unchanged
Reaches nadir 
   during first trimester, 
   then plateaus
Rise to term
Placental
   proteins
hCG
hPL
CRH
Peaks at 10
   wk, then
   decreases to
   a lower plateau
Rises with
   placental
   weight
Rises acutely
   about 20 d
   before delivery
5 μg/mL (0.2 μmol/L) 
   (end of first
   trimester)
5-25 μg/mL 
   (term)
   (0.2-1.0 μmol/L)
1-3 ng/mL
(2-6 nmol/L)
at term
 
Fetopla-
   cental
   estrogens
Estriol
Estradiol
Estrone
Increases 
   to term
   
Increases
   to term
Increases
   to term
15-17 ng/mL (55-  
   62 nmol/L) 
   (term)
12-15 ng/mL (42-
   52 nmol/L) (term)
5-7 ng/mL (18.5-
   26 nmol/L) (term)
Fetopla-
   cental
   androgens
Testos-
terone
DHEA
Andro-
stenedione
Rises to 10
   times pre-
   pregnancy
   values
   
Falls during
   pregnancy
Small increase
2000 pg/mL (6.9   
    nmol/L) (term) 
   
5 ng/mL (17.3 
   nmol/L) (pre-
   pregnancy)
2.6 ng/mL (9.0
   nmol/L) (term)
200 ng/mL (9 nmol/L)
   (term)
200
100
Prepregnancy
1st
Trimester
2nd
3rd
LH, FSH
GH, TSH
PRL
10
5
ng/mL (PRL)
ng/mL (GH)
Prepregnancy
1st
2nd
3rd
Trimester
hPL
hCG
ng/mL (CRH)
g/mL (hCG, hPL)
μ
15
10
5
2
1
Prepregnancy
1st
2nd
3rd
Trimester
ng/mL 
Estriol
Estradiol
Estrone
15
10
5
Prepregnancy
1st
2nd
3rd
Trimester
pg/mL (Testosterone) 
ng/mL (DHEA, androstenedione) 
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
DHEA
Androstenedione
Testosterone
5
4
3
2
1
CRH
FIGURE 16–2 (continued)
558    CHAPTER 16 The Endocrinology of Pregnancy
weeks ( see Figure 16–2 ). hPL is a protein of 190 amino acids 
whose primary, secondary, and tertiary structures are similar to 
those of GH and PRL. hPL is diabetogenic and lactogenic, but it 
has minimal growth-promoting activity as measured by standard 
GH bioassays. 
 The physiologic role of hPL during pregnancy remains con-
troversial, and normal pregnancy without detectable hPL pro-
duction has been reported. Although not clearly shown to be a 
mammotropic agent, hPL contributes to altered maternal glu-
cose metabolism and mobilization of free fatty acids; causes a 
hyperinsulinemic response to glucose loads; appears to directly 
stimulate pancreatic islet insulin secretion; and contributes to 
the peripheral insulin resistance characteristic of pregnancy. 
Along with prolonged fasting and insulin-induced hypoglyce-
mia, pre-beta-HDL and apoprotein A-I are two factors that 
stimulate release of hPL. hPL production is roughly proportion-
ate to placental mass. Actual production rates may reach as much 
as 1 to 1.5 g/d at term. 
 Serum hPL concentrations were used historically as a clinical 
indicator of the health of the placenta, but the range of normal 
values was wide, and serial determinations were necessary; it is 
therefore no longer used clinically. 
 Other Chorionic Peptide Hormones 
and Growth Factors 
 Other chorionic peptides have been identified, but their functions 
remain poorly defined. Activin, inhibin, corticotropin-releasing 
hormone, and multiple peptide growth factors, including fibro-
blast growth factor (FGF), epidermal growth factor (EGF), 
platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), and the IGFs all have 
been isolated from placental tissue. Placental growth factor (PlGF) 
and the related vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) are 
suggested to play a role in placental angiogenesis, preeclampsia, 
and fetal growth. 
 STEROID HORMONES 
 In contrast to the impressive synthetic capability exhibited in the 
production of placental proteins, the placenta does not have the 
ability to synthesize steroids de novo. However, the trophoblasts 
have remarkable capacity to efficiently interconvert steroids 
derived from maternal or fetal precursors. This activity is demon-
strable even in the early blastocyst, and by the seventh gestational 
week, when the corpus luteum undergoes involution, the placenta 
becomes the dominant source of steroid hormones. 
 Progesterone 
 The placenta relies on maternal cholesterol as its substrate for proges-
terone production. Fetal death has no immediate influence on pro-
gesterone production, suggesting that the fetus is a negligible source 
of substrate. Enzymes in the placenta cleave the cholesterol side 
chain, yielding pregnenolone, which in turn is isomerized to proges-
terone; 250 to 350 mg of progesterone are produced daily by the 
third-trimester placenta, and most enters the maternal circulation 
( see Figure 16–2 ). Whereas exogenous hCG stimulates progesterone 
production in early pregnancy, hypophysectomy, adrenalectomy, or 
oophorectomy have no effect on progesterone levels after the luteo-
placental shift at 7 to 9 weeks’ gestation. Likewise, the administration 
of adrenocorticotropin (ACTH) or cortisol does not influence pla-
cental progesterone secretion. 
 Progesterone is necessary for establishment and maintenance of 
pregnancy. Insufficient production of progesterone may contrib-
ute to failure of implantation, recurrent pregnancy loss, and pre-
term delivery. Progesterone, along with relaxin and nitric oxide, 
maintains uterine quiescence during pregnancy. Clinical trials 
have indicated that the administration of 17α-hydroxyprogesterone 
caproate can reliably prevent preterm delivery in high-risk preg-
nancies. Progesterone also inhibits T cell–mediated allograft rejec-
tion. Thus, high local concentrations of progesterone may 
contribute to immunologic tolerance by the uterus of invading 
trophoblast tissue from the semiallogeneic fetus. 
 Estrogens 
 Estrogen production by the placenta also depends on circulating 
precursors, but in this case both fetal and maternal steroids are 
important sources. Most of the placental estrogens are derived 
from fetal androgens, primarily dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) 
sulfate. Fetal DHEA sulfate, produced mainly by the fetal adrenal, 
is converted by placental sulfatase to free DHEA and then, 
through enzymatic pathways common to steroid-producing 
 tissues, to androstenedione and testosterone. These androgens are 
finally aromatized by the placenta to estrone and estradiol, respec-
tively. 17α-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type II prevents fetal 
exposure to potent estrogens by catalyzing the conversion of estra-
diol to less potent estrone. 
 Most fetal DHEA sulfate is metabolized to produce a third 
estrogen: estriol. Estriol is a weak estrogen with 1/10 the potency 
of estrone and 1/100 the potency of estradiol. Serum estrone and 
estradiol concentrations are increased during pregnancy about 50-fold 
over their maximal prepregnancy values, but estriol increases 
approximately 1000-fold. The substrate for the reaction is 
16α-hydroxy-DHEA sulfate produced in the fetal adrenal and 
liver, not in maternal or placental tissues. The final steps of desul-
fation and aromatization to estriol occur in the placenta. Maternal 
serum or urinary estriol measurements, unlike measurements of 
progesterone or hPL, reflect fetal as well as placental function. 
Rising serum or urinary estriol concentrations were once used as 
biochemical indicators of fetal well-being (see  Figure 16–2 ). 
Decreased estriol production can result from congenital derange-
ments or iatrogenic intervention. Maternal estriol remains low in 
pregnancies with placental sulfatase deficiency and in cases of fetal 
anencephaly. In the first case, DHEA sulfate cannot be hydro-
lyzed; in the second, little fetal DHEA is produced because fetal 
adrenal growth stimulation by ACTH is lacking. Maternal admin-
istration of glucocorticoids also inhibits fetal ACTH and lowers 
maternal estriol. Administration of DHEA to the mother during 
a healthy pregnancy increases estriol production. Placental corti-
cotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) also may be an important 
regulator of fetal adrenal DHEA sulfate secretion. 
CHAPTER 16 The Endocrinology of Pregnancy     559
 Modern methods of screening for fetal chromosomal aneu-
ploidy, particularly trisomy 21 (Down syndrome), utilize circulat-
ing biochemical markers. Screening by maternal age alone (>35 
years) led to the prenatal identification of only about 25% of 
aneuploid fetuses. As an aneuploid chromosome complement 
affects both fetal and placental tissues, their protein and steroid 
products have been evaluated. A combination of alpha-fetoprotein 
(AFP), hCG, inhibin-A and unconjugated estriol concentrations, 
measured in maternal serum between 15 and 18 weeks’ gestation, 
can be used to identify fetal Down syndrome and trisomy 18 with 
a detection rate of 80% over all age groups. 
 MATERNAL ADAPTATION TO 
PREGNANCY 
 As a successful  parasite , the fetal-placental unit manipulates the 
maternal  host for its own gain but normally avoids imposing exces-
sive stress that would jeopardize the pregnancy. The prodigious 
production of polypeptide and steroid hormones by the fetal- 
placental unit directly or indirectly results in physiologic adapta-
tions of virtually every maternal organ system. These alterations 
are summarized in  Figure 16–3 . Most of the commonly measured 
maternal endocrine function tests are radically changed. In some 
cases, true physiologic alteration has occurred; in others, the 
changes are due to increased production of hormone-binding 
proteins by the liver or to decreased serum levels of albumin due 
to the mild dilutional anemia of pregnancy. In addition, some 
endocrine changes are mediated by altered clearance rates due to 
increased glomerular filtration, decreased hepatic excretion, or 
metabolic clearance of steroid and protein hormones by the pla-
centa. The changes in endocrine function tests are summarized in 
 Table 16–1 . Failure to recognize normal pregnancy-induced 
alterations in endocrine function tests can lead to unnecessary 
diagnostic tests and therapy that may be seriously detrimental to 
mother and fetus. 
 Maternal Pituitary Gland 
 The mother’s anterior pituitary gland hormones have little influ-
ence on pregnancy after implantation has occurred. The gland 
itself enlarges by about one-third, with the major component of 
this increase being hyperplasia of the lactotrophs in response to 
the high plasma estrogens. PRL, the product of the lactotrophs, is 
the only anterior pituitary hormone that rises progressively during 
pregnancy and peaks at the time of delivery. In spite of its high 
serum concentrations, pulsatile release of PRL and food-induced 
and nocturnal increases persist. Hence, the normal neuroendo-
crine regulatory mechanisms appear to be intact in the maternal 
adenohypophysis. In nonlactating women, maternal PRL decreases 
to pregestational levels within 3 months of delivery. Pituitary 
ACTH and TSH secretion remain unchanged. Serum FSH and 
LH fall to the lower limits of detectability and are unresponsive to 
GnRH stimulation during pregnancy. GH concentrations are not 
significantly different from nonpregnant levels, but pituitary 
response to provocative testing is markedly altered. GH response 
to hypoglycemia and arginine infusion is enhanced in early preg-
nancy but thereafter becomes depressed. Established pregnancy 
can continue in the face of hypophysectomy, and in women hypo-
physectomized prior to pregnancy, induction of ovulation and 
normal pregnancy can be achieved with appropriate gonadotropin 
replacement therapy. In cases of primary pituitary hyperfunction, 
the fetus is not affected. 
 Maternal Thyroid Gland 
 The thyroid becomes palpably enlarged during the first trimester, 
and a subtle bruit may be present. Thyroid iodide clearance and 
thyroidal  131 I uptake, which are clinically contraindicated in preg-
nancy, have been shown to be increased. These changes are due in 
large part to the increased renal clearance of iodide, which causes a 
relative iodine deficiency. Although total serum thyroxine is ele-
vated as a result of estrogen-stimulated increased thyroid hormone–
binding globulin (TBG), free thyroxine and triiodothyronine are 
normal (see  Figure 16–2 ). High circulating concentrations of hCG, 
particularly asialo-hCG, which has weak TSH-like activity, con-
tribute to the thyrotropic action of the placenta in early pregnancy. 
In fact, there is significant, though transient, biochemical hyper-
thyroidism associated with hCG stimulation in early gestation. 
 Maternal Parathyroid Gland 
 The net calcium requirement imposed by fetal skeletal develop-
ment is estimated to be about 30 g by term. This is met by hyper-
plasia of the maternal parathyroid glands and elevated serum levels 
of parathyroid hormone. The maternal serum calcium concentra-
tion declines to a nadir at 28 to 32 weeks, largely due to the mild 
hypoalbuminemia of pregnancy but also to fetal bone formation. 
Ionized calcium is maintained at normal concentrations through-
out pregnancy. 
 Maternal Pancreas 
 The nutritional demands of the fetus require alteration of mater-
nal metabolic homeostatic control, which results in both struc-
tural and functional changes in the maternal pancreas. The size of 
pancreatic islets increases, and insulin-secreting beta cells undergo 
hyperplasia. Basal levels of insulin are lower or unchanged in early 
pregnancy but increase during the second trimester as a result of 
increased secretion rather than decreased metabolic clearance. 
Thereafter, pregnancy is a hyperinsulinemic state, with resistance 
to its peripheral metabolic effects. Pancreatic production of gluca-
gon remains responsive to the usual endocrine stimuli and is sup-
pressed by glucose loading, although the degree of responsiveness 
has not been well evaluated in pregnancy. 
 The major roles of insulin and glucagon involve the intracel-
lular transport of nutrients, specifically glucose, amino acids, and 
fatty acids. Insulin is not transported across the placenta, but 
rather exerts its effects on transportable metabolites. During 
pregnancy, peak insulin secretion in response to meals is acceler-
ated, and glucose tolerance curves are characteristically altered. 
Fasting glucose levels are maintained at low-normal levels. Excess 
560    CHAPTER 16 The Endocrinology of Pregnancy
SYSTEM
PARAMETER
PATTERN
Cardiovascular
Pulmonary
Blood
Heart rate
Blood pressure
Stroke volume
Cardiac output
Peripheral venous
   distention
Peripheral vascular
   resistance
Gradually increases 20%
Gradually decreases 10% by
   34 wk, then increases
   to prepregnancy values
Increases to maximum at 
   19 wk, then plateaus
Rises rapidly by 20%, then
   gradually increases an addi-
   tional 10% by 28 wk
Progressive increase to term
Progressive decrease to term
Respiratory rate
Tidal volume
Expiratory reserve
Vital capacity
Respiratory minute
   volume
Unchanged
Increases by 30%-40%
Gradual decrease
Unchanged
Increases by 40%
Volume
Hematocrit
Fibrinogen
Electrolytes
Increases by 50% in
   second trimester
Decreases slightly
Increases
Unchanged
Gastrointestinal
Sphincter tone
Gastric emptying
   time
Decreases
Increases
 
+40
+30
+20
+10
0
−10
−20
−30
−40
Tidal volume,
respiratory minute volume
Respiratory rate,
vital capacity
Expiratory reserve
% change
+60
+50
+40
+30
+20
+10
0
−10
−20
% change
+30
+20
+10
0
−10
% change
Ca
rd
i
a
c 
ou
tpu
t 
Rate
Blood pressure
Electrolytes
Hematocrit
Fibrinogen
Blood volume
+60
+50
+40
+30
+20
+10
0
% change
0
12
24
36
Weeks
Gastric emptying time
 FIGURE 16–3  Maternal physiologic changes during pregnancy. 
CHAPTER 16 The Endocrinology of Pregnancy     561
carbohydrate is converted to fat, and fat is readily mobilized dur-
ing decreased caloric intake. 
 Maternal Adrenal Cortex 
 Total plasma cortisol concentrations increase to three times non-
pregnant levels by the third trimester. Most of the changes can be 
explained by increased estrogens causing higher corticosteroid-
binding globulin (CBG) production. The actual production of 
cortisol by the zona fasciculata also is increased in pregnancy. The 
net effect of these changes increases plasma-free cortisol, which is 
approximately doubled by late pregnancy. In spite of cortisol con-
centrations approaching those found in Cushing syndrome, diurnal 
variation in plasma cortisol is maintained. The elevated free cortisol 
concentration probably contributes to the insulin resistance of preg-
nancy and possibly to the appearance of striae, but most signs of 
hypercortisolism do not occur in pregnancy. It is suggested that high 
progesterone levels act to antagonize glucocorticoid effects. 
 Serum aldosterone also is markedly elevated in pregnancy, due 
to an eight fold increased production rate by the zona glomeru-
losa. Renin substrate is increased due to the influence of estrogen 
on hepatic synthesis, and renin also is elevated, leading to 
increased angiotensin. In spite of these dramatic changes, normal 
pregnant women show few signs of hyperaldosteronism. There is 
no tendency toward hypokalemia or hypernatremia, and blood 
pressure at midpregnancy—when changes in the renin- angiotensin-
aldosterone system are maximal—actually tends to be lower than 
in the nonpregnant state. Progesterone is an effective competitive 
inhibitor of mineralocorticoids in the distal renal tubules. Thus, 
increases in renin and aldosterone may simply be an appropriate 
response to the high gestational levels of progesterone. Elevated 
angiotensin II does not normally result in hypertension, because 
of diminished sensitivity of the maternal vascular system to angio-
tensin. Exogenous angiotensin provokes a smaller increase in 
blood pressure than in the nonpregnant state. Finally, in patients 
with preeclampsia, the most common form of pregnancy-related 
hypertension, serum renin, aldosterone, and angiotensin levels 
are unchanged or even lower than in normal pregnancy, thus rul-
ing out a primary role for the renin-angiotensin system in this 
disorder. 
 In normal pregnancy, the maternal production of androgens is 
slightly increased but these are buffered by sex hormone–binding 
globulin (SHBG). Levels of SHBG are increased by estrogens. 
Testosterone, which binds avidly to SHBG, increases to the nor-
mal male range by the end of the first trimester, but free testoster-
one levels are actually lower than in the nonpregnant state. DHEA 
sulfate does not bind significantly to SHBG, and plasma concen-
trations of DHEA sulfate actually decrease during pregnancy. 
SYSTEM
PARAMETER
PATTERN
Renal
Weight
Renal flow
Glomular filtration
   rate
Uterine weight
Body weight
Increases 25%-50%
Increases early, then
   plateaus
Increases from about 60-70 g
   to about 900-1200 g
Average 11-kg (25-lb) increase
+50
+40
+30
+20
+10
0
% change
0
12
24
36
Weeks
Glomerular
filtration rate
Renal flow
FIGURE 16–3 (continued)
TABLE 16–1  Effect of pregnancy on endocrine 
function tests. 
Test 
Result 
Pituitary
 FSH, LH 
GnRH 
stimulation 
Unresponsive from third 
gestational week until 
puerperium 
 GH 
Insulin tolerance 
test 
Response increases during 
the first half of pregnancy 
and then is blunted until 
the puerperium 
Arginine 
stimulation 
Hyperstimulation during 
the first and second 
trimesters, then suppression 
 TSH 
TRH stimulation 
Response unchanged 
Pancreas 
 Insulin 
Glucose 
tolerance 
Peak glucose increases, and 
glucose concentration 
remains elevated longer 
Glucose 
challenge 
Insulin concentration 
increases to higher peak 
levels 
Arginine 
infusion 
Insulin response is blunted 
in mid to late pregnancy 
Adrenal 
 Cortisol 
ACTH infusion 
Exaggerated cortisol and 
aldosterone responses 
Metyrapone 
Diminished response 
Mineralocorti -
coids 
ACTH infusion 
No DOC response 
Dexamethasone 
suppression 
No DOC response 
562    CHAPTER 16 The Endocrinology of Pregnancy
The desulfation of DHEA sulfate by the placenta and the conver-
sion of DHEA to estrogens by the fetal-placental unit are impor-
tant factors in its increased metabolic clearance. 
 FETAL ENDOCRINOLOGY 
 Because of the physical inaccessibility of the human fetus, much of 
our information about fetal endocrinology is derived indirectly. 
Most early studies of fetal endocrinology relied on observations of 
infants with congenital disorders or inferences from ablation studies 
or acute manipulation in experimental animals. The development 
of effective cell culture methods and sensitive immunoassays, as well 
as the ability to achieve stable preparations of chronically catheter-
ized monkey fetuses, have increased our understanding of the 
dynamics of intrauterine endocrine events. The endocrine system is 
among the first to develop in fetal life, but its study is complicated 
by its relative physical isolation as well as the multiplicity of sources 
of the various hormones. Dating of events in fetal development is 
usually given in  fetal weeks , which begin at the time of fertilization. 
Thus, fetal age is always 2 weeks less than gestational age. 
 Fetal Pituitary Hormones 
 The characteristic anterior pituitary cell types are discernible as early 
as 8 to 10 fetal weeks, and all of the hormones of the adult anterior 
pituitary are extractable from the fetal adenohypophysis by 
12 weeks. Similarly, the hypothalamic hormones thyrotropin-releas-
ing hormone (TRH), gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), 
and somatostatin are present by 8 to 10 weeks. The direct circula-
tory connection between hypothalamus and pituitary develops later, 
with capillary invasion initially visible at about 16 fetal weeks. 
 The role of the fetal pituitary in organogenesis during the first 
trimester appears to be negligible. None of the pituitary hormones 
are released into the fetal circulation in large quantities until after 
20 fetal weeks. Even GH appears not to be influential, and in fact 
total absence of GH is consistent with normal development at 
birth. Development of the gonads and adrenals during the first 
trimester appears to be directed by hCG rather than by fetal pitu-
itary hormones, so that these organs initially develop even in the 
face of anencephaly. 
 During the second trimester, there is a marked increase in 
secretion of all of the anterior pituitary hormones, which coin-
cides with maturation of the hypophysial portal system. Female 
fetuses exhibit higher FSH levels in both pituitary and serum than 
do males. Differentiation of the gonads is crucial for normal male 
sexual development and reproductive potential in both sexes. 
ACTH rises significantly during the second trimester and assumes 
an increasing role in directing the maturation of the differentiated 
adrenal, as shown by the anencephalic fetus, in which the fetal 
zone of the adrenal undergoes atrophy after 20 weeks. Fetal PRL 
secretion also increases after the 20th fetal week, but its functional 
significance is unknown. Vasopressin and oxytocin are demon-
strable by 12 to 18 weeks in the fetal posterior pituitary gland and 
correlate with the development of their sites of production, the 
supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei, respectively. 
 Fetal Thyroid Gland 
 The fetal thyroid gland develops initially in the absence of detectable 
TSH. By 12 weeks the thyroid is capable of iodine-concentrating 
activity and thyroid hormone synthesis, but prior to this time the 
maternal thyroid appears to be the primary source for T 4 . This has 
implications in that infants born to even mildly hypothyroid moth-
ers are reported to have lower IQs and other health problems. The 
function of the fetal thyroid hormones appears crucial to somatic 
growth and for successful neonatal adaptation. In particular, auditory 
maturational events are regulated by thyroid hormones. 
 During the second trimester, TRH, TSH, and free T 4 all begin 
to rise. The maturation of feedback mechanisms is suggested by 
the subsequent plateau of TSH at about 20 fetal weeks. Fetal T 3 
and reverse T 3 do not become detectable until the third trimester. 
The hormone produced in largest amount throughout fetal life is 
T 4 , with the metabolically active T 3 and its inactive derivative, 
reverse T 3 , rising in parallel to T 4 during the third trimester. At 
birth, conversion of T 4 to T 3 is demonstrable. Goitrogenic agents 
such as propylthiouracil are transferred across the placenta and 
may induce fetal hypothyroidism and goiter. 
 Fetal Adrenal Cortex 
 The fetal adrenal cortex is identifiable as early as 4 weeks of fetal 
age, and by the seventh week, steroidogenic activity can be 
detected in the inner zone layers. 
 During gestation, the adrenal cortex differs anatomically and 
functionally from the adult gland and occupies as much as 0.5% 
of total body volume. Most of this tissue is composed of a unique 
fetal zone that subsequently is transformed into the definitive 
(adult) zone during the early neonatal period. The inner fetal zone 
is responsible for the majority of steroids produced during fetal life 
and comprises 80% of the mass of the adrenal. During the second 
trimester, the inner fetal zone continues to grow, while the outer 
zone remains relatively undifferentiated. At about 25 weeks, the 
definitive (adult) zone develops, ultimately assuming the principal 
role in steroid synthesis during the early postnatal weeks. 
 Fetal Gonads 
 The testis is histologically identifiable by about 6 fetal weeks. 
Primary testis differentiation begins with development of the 
Sertoli cells at 8 weeks’ gestation. SRY, the sex-determining locus 
on the Y chromosome directs the differentiation of the Sertoli 
cells, the sites of anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) synthesis. 
AMH, a member of the transforming growth factor-beta family of 
growth factors, specifically triggers the ipsilateral resorption of the 
Müllerian tract in males and prevents development of female 
internal structures. Embryonic androgen production begins in the 
developing Leydig cells at about 10 weeks, coincident with the 
peak production of placental hCG. Binding of hCG to fetal testes 
with stimulation of testosterone release has been demonstrated in 
the laboratory. Other fetal testicular products of importance are 
inhibin and the 5α-reduced testosterone metabolite dihydrotes-
tosterone. Dihydrotestosterone is responsible for development of 
the male external genital structures. 
CHAPTER 16 The Endocrinology of Pregnancy     563
 Little is known about early fetal ovarian function, but by 7 to 
8 weeks of intrauterine life the ovaries become morphologically 
recognizable. Oogonia mitosis is active and steroid-producing 
theca cell precursors are identifiable at 20 weeks. This corresponds 
with peak gonadotropin levels from the fetal pituitary. Activin and 
inhibin peptide subunits are expressed in the midtrimester human 
testis but not in the midtrimester human ovary. In contrast to the 
male fetus, ovarian steroid production by the fetus is not essential 
for female phenotypic development (see Chapter 13). 
 ENDOCRINE CONTROL OF PARTURITION 
 During the last few weeks of normal pregnancy, two processes 
herald approaching labor. Sporadic uterine contractions, usually 
painless, become increasingly frequent, and the lower uterine seg-
ment and cervix become softer and thinner, a process known as 
 effacement , or  ripening . Although false alarms are not uncom-
mon, the onset of true labor is usually fairly abrupt, with the 
establishment of regular contractions every 2 to 5 minutes, leading 
to delivery in less than 24 hours. An extensive literature describes 
the physiologic and biochemical events that occur during human 
labor, but the key inciting event has eluded detection. In sheep, 
the fetus controls the onset of labor. The initial measurable event 
is an increase in fetal plasma cortisol, which, in turn, alters placen-
tal steroid production, resulting in a drop in progesterone. 
Cortisol reliably induces labor in sheep, but in humans, glucocor-
ticoids do not induce labor and there is no clear drop in plasma 
progesterone concentrations prior to labor. 
 Sex Steroids 
 Progesterone is essential for maintenance of early pregnancy, and 
withdrawal of progesterone leads to termination of pregnancy. 
Progesterone causes hyperpolarization of myometrial cells decreas-
ing the amplitude of action potentials and preventing effective 
contractions. In various experimental systems, progesterone 
decreases alpha-adrenergic receptors, stimulates cAMP produc-
tion, and inhibits oxytocin receptor synthesis. Progesterone also 
inhibits estrogen receptor synthesis, promotes the storage of pros-
taglandin precursors in the decidua and fetal membranes, and 
stabilizes lysosomes containing prostaglandin-synthesizing 
enzymes. Estrogen opposes progesterone in many of these actions 
and may have an independent role in ripening the uterine cervix 
and promoting uterine contractility. It has been shown that an 
increase in the estrogen-progesterone ratio increases the number of 
oxytocin receptors and myometrial gap junctions; this finding 
may explain the coordinated, effective contractions that character-
ize true labor as opposed to the nonpainful, ineffective contrac-
tions of false labor. 
 Oxytocin 
 Oxytocin infusion is commonly used to induce or augment labor. 
Both maternal and fetal oxytocin levels increase spontaneously 
during labor, but neither has been convincingly shown to increase 
prior to labor. Data in animals suggest that oxytocin’s role in 
 initiation of labor is due to increased sensitivity of the uterus to 
oxytocin rather than increased plasma concentrations of the hor-
mone. Even women with posterior pituitary failure, manifested as 
diabetes insipidus, are able to deliver without oxytocin augmenta-
tion; thus a maternal source of the hormone is not indispensable. 
Clinical studies using the oxytocin receptor inhibitor, atosiban, 
have demonstrated a delay of delivery for 24 to 48 hours but 
meta-analyses do not show an improvement in fetal outcome. 
 Prostaglandins 
 Prostaglandin F 2α administered intra-amniotically, vaginally, or 
intravenously is an effective abortifacient as early as 14 weeks of 
gestation. Prostaglandin E 2 administered vaginally induces labor 
in most women in the third trimester. The amnion and chorion 
contain high concentrations of arachidonic acid, and the decidua 
contains active prostaglandin synthetase. Prostaglandins are almost 
certainly involved in maintenance of labor once it is established. 
They also probably are important in initiating labor in some cir-
cumstances, such as in amnionitis or when the membranes are 
 stripped by the physician. Prostaglandins are believed to be the 
 final common pathway of labor. 
 PRETERM LABOR/BIRTH 
 Preterm birth (PTB) is one of the most important problems in 
obstetrics today as it complicates approximately 12% of all births in 
the United States and accounts for over 70% of perinatal morbidity 
and mortality. Approximately 45% to 50% of PTB is idiopathic or 
spontaneous, defined as regular uterine contractions leading to cer-
vical change prior to 37 weeks of gestation, 30% is related to pre-
term rupture of membranes and the other 15% to 20% is attributed 
to medically indicated or elective preterm delivery, typically due to 
worsening maternal disease or fetal compromise. PTB is a complex 
disorder with heterogeneous risk factors, genetic and environmental 
susceptibilities, and pathophysiologic pathways. Risk factors for 
preterm labor are varied and include history of prior preterm labor, 
uterine anomalies, multiple gestation, maternal medical complica-
tions, low prepregnancy body mass index, gestational bleeding, low 
socioeconomic status, minority race, behavioral habits such as 
smoking, alcohol, drug abuse, stressful events, limited or no prena-
tal care, and infection. The pathophysiology of preterm labor is not 
well understood but may result from mechanical factors, hormonal 
changes, infection, or interruption of normal mechanisms respon-
sible for sustaining uterine quiescence. Unfortunately the rate of 
PTBs continues to increase slightly each year. Despite this, survival 
rates have improved due to the use of antenatal corticosteroids and 
improvements in neonatal resuscitation and care. 
 There is a well-documented racial disparity in rates of PTB 
with African Americans at 17% versus only 11% in Caucasians. 
Further, the infant mortality rate for African American babies is 
2.5 times higher than Caucasians. Population-based studies indi-
cate that this disparity cannot be explained by socioeconomic 
status, maternal behavior, marital status, or education alone and 
likely point to true genetic differences. 
564    CHAPTER 16 The Endocrinology of Pregnancy
 Four major mechanistic pathways leading to PTB have been 
proposed: (1) stress or activation of maternal or fetal hypothalam-
ic-pituitary-adrenal axis, (2) pathologic uterine distention, (3) 
inflammation/infection, and (4) decidual hemorrhage and coagu-
lation. These are summarized in  Figure 16–4 . Each of these path-
ways has different epidemiologic, clinical, and biochemical 
features, but all are likely to initiate labor via prostaglandin pro-
duction, myometrial activation, and degradation of extracellular 
matrix components leading to premature rupture of membranes 
and cervical dilation. The fetoplacental endocrine unit can trigger 
labor prematurely, activating CRH release in cases of a hostile 
intrauterine environment such as stress and chorioamnionitis. 
 Maternal/Fetal Stress 
 Both exogenous and endogenous maternal stress, ranging from 
heavy workload to depression, is associated with PTB. The exact 
mechanism is not well understood, but CRH is thought to play an 
important role. Maternal CRH levels are elevated in both preterm 
and term labor and appear to activate the parturition pathway by 
increasing prostaglandins, inhibiting progesterone, and stimulat-
ing fetal cortisol and DHEA production. 
 Pathologic Uterine Distention 
 Myometrial stretching due to multiple gestations, polyhydram-
nios, and Mullerian anomalies has been associated with an 
increased risk of preterm labor. This is thought to occur as disten-
sion can induce myometrial contractility, prostaglandin release, 
collagenase activity, and increased oxytocin receptor expression. 
 Infection/Inflammation 
 Infection is the only pathologic process for which there is a clear 
causal link to preterm birth exhibited by the fact that: (1) intra-
uterine and extrauterine infections are associated with preterm 
birth; (2) antibiotics for intrauterine infection can prevent pre-
term birth; and (3) treatment of asymptomatic bacteruria prevents 
preterm birth. Microbiology studies suggest that infection may 
account for 25% to 40% of preterm births. Ascending infection is 
believed to be the most common source of microbial invasion of 
the amniotic cavity. Endotoxins from bacteria induce proinflam-
matory mediators such as IL-1 and TNF-alpha from the decidua, 
which stimulates prostaglandin production. Double knockout 
mice for IL-1 and TNF-alpha had decreased rates of PTB after 
administration of microorganisms. Other inflammatory cytokines 
and chemokines also have been implicated in infection-induced 
preterm labor. 
 Decidual Hemorrhage and Coagulation 
 Any vaginal bleeding during pregnancy is a known risk factor for pre-
term birth. Decidual hemorrhage and uteroplacental ischemia are 
thought to contribute to preterm labor via generation of thrombin. 
Thrombin stimulates myometrial contractility in a dose-dependent 
manner and also binds to protease-activated receptor type 1, which 
increases expression of metalloproteniases leading to cervical ripening 
and possible subsequent preterm delivery. 
 A. Predictors/prevention of preterm labor 
 Unfor-
tunately, clinical symptoms to identify women at risk for PTB 
Uterine distention
Multiple gestation
Uterine anomalies
Polyhydramnios
Stress
Behavioral
Socioeconomic
Decidual hemorrhage
Bleeding
Abruption
Stretch: IL-8, MMP-1,
collagenase activity
↑CRH
↑Estrogen
IL-1, TNF-alpha
IL-8 and -11,
MMPs-1
and -8
Thrombin
Fetal cortisol
Contractions/cervical
dilation
Rupture of
membranes
Preterm labor
Amniochorion/decidua
inflammation, cytokines
+
Prostaglandin synthesis
Infection/inflammation
PROM
Chorioamnionitis
Cervicitis
 FIGURE 16–4  Major mechanistic pathways leading to preterm birth. 
CHAPTER 16 The Endocrinology of Pregnancy     565
have been shown to be inaccurate and unreliable. Given the clini-
cal, emotional, and financial gravity of preterm birth, multiple 
tests have been developed over the years to attempt to identify 
women at risk for preterm delivery. Home uterine activity moni-
tors are not currently recommended as they have not been shown 
to improve outcome. The presence of bacterial vaginosis (BV) has 
been associated with preterm delivery independent of other 
known risk factors, however, there is insufficient data to support 
screening and treating women with positive cultures. Maternal 
estradiol and estriol levels have been used to predict activation of 
the fetal hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, but trials have failed 
to establish their clinical usefulness in accurately predicting pre-
term labor. 
 Numerous studies have confirmed the association between 
cervical shortening and subsequent preterm delivery. Transvaginal 
cervical ultrasonography has been shown to be a reliable and 
reproducible way to assess the length of the cervix. Despite the 
usefulness of cervical length determination as a predictor of pre-
term labor, routine use is not recommended because of the lack of 
proven treatments affecting outcome. 
 Fetal fibronectin (fFN) is a basement membrane protein of 
placental membranes and decidua. Numerous trials have shown 
that the risk of PTB is increased in the presence of fFN and 
decreased in its absence. The relationship among fFN, short cer-
vix, BV, and traditional historical risk factors for spontaneous 
preterm birth suggest the highest associations of preterm birth 
with positive fFN, followed by cervical length less than 25 mm 
and a history of preterm birth. A negative fFN test indicates a 
95% likelihood of not delivering within 14 days; therefore it is 
particularly useful in ruling out preterm delivery. 
 Supplemental progesterone therapy has been shown to reduce 
the rate of preterm delivery in high-risk populations. Weekly 
injections of 17α-hydroxyprogesterone caproate from 16 to 20 
weeks until 36 weeks of gestation has been found to significantly 
reduce recurrent preterm birth in women with history of preterm 
delivery. A recent meta-analysis of 10 placebo-controlled trials 
found progesterone therapy to significantly reduce the frequency 
of recurrent preterm birth from 36% to 26%. Given the lack of 
other available treatments, many providers are using progesterone 
as preventative therapy in high-risk patients, but progesterone 
does not reverse established labor. 
 B. Management of preterm labor 
 Once preterm labor has 
been diagnosed, care should be taken to determine if patient war-
rants tocolysis, expectant management, or delivery. It is important 
to confirm an accurate gestational age because if less than 34 weeks, 
glucocorticoids should be administered as they clearly decrease 
neonatal morbidity and mortality in this population. 
 Tocolytic therapy is used to attempt to prolong pregnancy to 
allow time for corticosteroid administration. However, both toco-
lytic and steroid therapy may result in untoward maternal and 
fetal consequences and, therefore, their use should be limited to 
women in true preterm labor at high risk for spontaneous PTB. 
 In general, tocolytic drugs may prolong pregnancy for 2 to 7 days. 
There is no first-line tocolytic drug and the choices include 
 beta-mimetics, magnesium sulfate, calcium channel blockers, and 
NSAIDs (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs). The tocolytic 
chosen should be based on maternal/fetal conditions, side effects, 
and gestational age. Prolonged use of any tocolytic drug is gener-
ally not indicated as it may increase maternal-fetal risk. Serious 
adverse events are rare but potentially life-threatening. Beta-
mimetics, magnesium sulfate, and calcium channel blockers are all 
associated with an increased risk of pulmonary edema. Specifically, 
beta-mimetics are potent cardiovascular stimulants and can cause 
maternal myocardial ischemia, metabolic derangements (eg, 
hyperglycemia and hypokalemia), and fetal cardiac effects. 
Magnesium sulfate may cause maternal lethargy, drowsiness, 
double vision, nausea, and vomiting. NSAIDs can cause fetal oli-
gohydramnios and premature closure of the ductus arteriosus. 
Calcium channel blockers used as a single agent appear to have a 
good maternal and fetal safety profile. Combining tocolytic drugs 
potentially increases maternal morbidity and should be used with 
caution. 
 POSTTERM PREGNANCY 
 Postterm pregnancy refers to gestation that has extended to or 
beyond 42 weeks and is associated with significant risks to the 
fetus. Most importantly, the perinatal mortality rate (stillbirths 
plus early neonatal deaths) beyond 42 weeks is twice that at term 
(4-7 deaths vs 2-3 deaths per 1000 deliveries) and is six fold higher 
after 43 weeks or more. Potential causes include uteroplacental 
insufficiency, meconium aspiration, and intrauterine infection. 
Postterm pregnancy is also a risk factor for low Apgar scores, oli-
gohydramnios, and neonatal complications such as hypoglycemia, 
seizures, respiratory insufficiency, and increased risk of death 
within the first year of life. Postterm pregnancy is associated with 
some complications for the mother including a twofold increased 
risk of severe perineal injury and cesarean delivery. Because preg-
nancy past 41 weeks is associated with high costs of antenatal 
testing and induction of labor, as well as a source of significant 
anxiety for pregnant women, there has been a movement in 
obstetrics to effect delivery before 41 completed weeks. The most 
common cause of a prolonged gestation is incorrect dating; other 
risk factors include primiparity, prior postterm pregnancy, and 
male sex of the fetus. Recently, obesity has been identified as a 
modifiable risk factor. The mechanism for this association is 
unclear but it is likely due to a derangement in endocrine factors 
that initiate labor. In rare cases, postterm pregnancy has been 
associated with placental sulfatase deficiency or fetal anencephaly. 
 Management of Postterm Pregnancy 
 Standard management of postterm pregnancy focuses on antenatal 
fetal surveillance and timely initiation of delivery if spontaneous 
labor does not occur. Although antepartum testing for postterm 
pregnancies is universally accepted, it has not been validated in 
prospective trials to decrease perinatal mortality. Given the ethical 
and medicolegal concerns for a control group, randomized studies 
to prove benefit will likely never be done. Timing of delivery is 
566    CHAPTER 16 The Endocrinology of Pregnancy
generally recommended when risks to continuing the pregnancy 
are greater than the benefit to mother or fetus after or during 
birth. In high-risk cases such as diabetics and, hypertensives, preg-
nancy should not be allowed to progress beyond 41 weeks. 
However, management of low-risk postterm pregnancy is more 
controversial. Because delivery cannot always be induced readily, 
maternal risks and considerations complicate this decision. Factors 
to consider include gestational age, results of antepartum fetal 
testing, cervical exam, and maternal preference after counseling 
regarding the risks, benefits, and alternatives to expectant manage-
ment with antepartum monitoring versus labor induction. 
 ENDOCRINOLOGY OF THE PUERPERIUM 
 Extirpation of any active endocrine organ leads to compensatory 
changes in other organs and systems. Delivery of the infant and 
placenta causes both immediate and long-term adjustment to loss of 
the pregnancy hormones. The sudden withdrawal of fetal-placental 
hormones at delivery permits determination of their serum half-
lives and some evaluation of their effects on maternal systems. 
 Physiologic and Anatomic Changes 
 Some physiologic and anatomic adjustments that take place after 
delivery are both hormone dependent and independent. For 
example, major readjustments of the cardiovascular system occur 
in response to the normal blood losses associated with delivery and 
to loss of the low-resistance placental shunt. By the third postpar-
tum day, blood volume is estimated to decline to about 80% of 
predelivery values. These cardiovascular changes influence renal 
and liver function, including clearance of pregnancy hormones. 
 Uterine Changes 
 The uterus involutes progressively at the rate of about 500 g/wk 
and continues to be palpable abdominally until about 2 weeks 
postpartum, after which it reoccupies its position entirely within 
the pelvis. Nonpregnant size and weight (60-70 g) are reached by 
6 weeks postpartum. The reversal of myometrial hypertrophy 
occurs with a decrease in size of individual myometrial cells rather 
than by reduction in number. The endometrium, which is sloughed 
at the time of delivery, regenerates rapidly; by the seventh postpar-
tum day there is restoration of surface epithelium. These rapid 
regenerative changes do not apply to the area of placental implanta-
tion, which requires much longer for restoration and retains 
pathognomonic histologic evidence of placentation indefinitely. 
 Endocrine Changes 
 A. Steroids 
 With expulsion of the placenta, many steroid 
levels decline precipitously, with half-lives of minutes. Plasma 
progesterone falls to luteal-phase levels within 24 hours after deliv-
ery and to follicular-phase levels within several days. Removal of 
the corpus luteum results in a fall to follicular levels within 
24 hours. Estradiol reaches follicular phase levels within 1 to 3 days 
after delivery. 
 B. Pituitary hormones 
 The pituitary gland, which enlarges 
during pregnancy owing primarily to an increase in lactotrophs, 
does not diminish in size until after lactation ceases. Secretion of 
FSH and LH continues to be suppressed during the early weeks 
of the puerperium, and stimulus with bolus doses of GnRH 
results in subnormal release of LH and FSH. Over the ensuing 
weeks, responsiveness to GnRH gradually returns to normal and 
most women exhibit follicular-phase serum levels of LH and 
FSH by the third or fourth postpartum week. 
 C. Prolactin 
 Serum PRL, which rises throughout pregnancy, 
falls with the onset of labor and then exhibits variable patterns of 
secretion depending on whether breast-feeding occurs. Delivery is 
associated with a surge in PRL, which is followed by a rapid fall in 
serum concentrations over 7 to 14 days in the nonlactating 
mother. In nonlactating women, the return of normal cyclic func-
tion and ovulation may be expected within 3 months, with the 
initial ovulation occurring at an average of 9 to 10 weeks postpar-
tum. In actively lactating women, PRL can cause a persistence of 
anovulation. Surges of PRL are believed to act on the hypothala-
mus to inhibit GnRH secretion. Administration of exogenous 
GnRH during this time induces normal pituitary responsiveness, 
and occasional ovulation may occur spontaneously even during 
lactation. 
 LACTATION 
 Development of the breast alveolar lobules occurs throughout 
pregnancy. This period of mammogenesis requires the concerted 
participation of estrogen, progesterone, PRL, GH, and glucocor-
ticoids. hPL may also play a role but is not indispensable. 
Lactation requires PRL, insulin, and adrenal steroids and is associ-
ated with further enlargement of the lobules, followed by synthesis 
of milk constituents such as lactose and casein. Lactopoiesis does 
not occur until unconjugated estrogens fall to nonpregnant levels 
at about 36 to 48 hours postpartum. Evidence from GH-deficient 
and hypothyroid patients suggests that GH and thyroid hormone 
are not required. 
 PRL is essential to milk production. Its action involves induced 
synthesis of large numbers of PRL receptors. These receptors 
appear to be autoregulated because PRL increases receptor levels 
in cell culture and bromocriptine, an inhibitor of PRL release, 
causes a decrease in both PRL and its receptors. In the absence of 
PRL, milk secretion does not take place. However, even in the 
presence of high levels of PRL during the third trimester, milk 
secretion does not take place until after delivery, due to the block-
ing effect of high levels of estrogen. 
 Milk secretion requires the additional stimulus of suckling, 
which activates a neural arc. Milk ejection occurs in response to a 
surge of oxytocin, which induces a contractile response in the 
smooth muscle surrounding the gland ductules. Oxytocin release 
is occasioned by stimuli of a visual, psychologic, or physical nature 
that prepare the mother for breast-feeding; whereas PRL release is 
limited to the suckling reflex arc. 
CHAPTER 16 The Endocrinology of Pregnancy     567
 ENDOCRINE DISORDERS 
AND PREGNANCY 
 Hyperthyroidism in Pregnancy 
 Pregnancy mimics hyperthyroidism because it causes thyroid 
enlargement, increased cardiac output, and peripheral vasodila-
tion. Owing to the increase in TBG in pregnancy, total serum 
thyroxine is in the range expected for hyperthyroidism. Free thy-
roxine, the free thyroxine index, and TSH levels, however, remain 
in the normal range (see Chapter 7). 
 True hyperthyroidism complicates 1 to 2 per 1000 pregnan-
cies. The most common form of hyperthyroidism during preg-
nancy is Graves disease. Hyperthyroidism is associated with an 
increased risk of preterm delivery (11%-25%) and may modestly 
increase the risk of early abortion. In Graves disease, thyroid-
stimulating immunoglobulin, a 7S immune gamma globulin, 
crosses the placenta and may cause fetal goiter and transient neo-
natal hyperthyroidism. 
 A. Management of the mother 
 The treatment of mater-
nal hyperthyroidism is complicated in pregnancy. Radioiodine is 
strictly contraindicated. Iodide therapy can lead to huge fetal 
goiter and is contraindicated except as acute therapy to prevent 
thyroid storm before thyroid surgery. All antithyroid drugs cross 
the placenta and may cause fetal hypothyroidism and goiter or 
cretinism in the newborn. However, propylthiouracil in doses of 
300 mg/d or less has been shown to be reasonably safe, although 
even at low doses about 10% of newborns will have a detectable 
goiter. A reasonable plan of management is to begin therapy 
with propylthiouracil in doses high enough to bring the free T 4 
index into the mildly hyperthyroid range and then to taper the 
dose gradually. Propranolol has been used to control maternal 
cardiovascular symptoms but may result in fetal bradycardia, 
growth restriction, preterm labor, and neonatal respiratory 
depression. Partial or total thyroidectomy, especially in the sec-
ond trimester, is a reasonably safe procedure except for the risk 
of preterm labor. 
 B. Management of the newborn 
 Newborns should be 
observed carefully. In infants of mothers given propylthiouracil, 
even equivocal evidence of hypothyroidism is an indication for 
thyroxine replacement therapy. Neonatal Graves disease, which 
may present as late as 2 weeks after delivery, requires intensive 
therapy (see Chapter 7). 
 Hypothyroidism in Pregnancy 
 Hypothyroidism is uncommon in pregnancy because most women 
with the untreated disorder are anovulatory. As a practical matter, 
women taking thyroid medication at the time of conception 
should be maintained on the same or a slightly higher dose 
throughout pregnancy, whether or not the obstetrician believes 
thyroid replacement was originally indicated. Physiologic doses of 
thyroid hormone replacement are innocuous, but maternal 
 hypothyroidism is hazardous to the developing fetus. Women 
with a personal or family history of thyroid disease or with symp-
toms suggestive of hypothyroidism should have TSH tested prior 
to conception. The correlation between maternal and fetal thyroid 
status is poor, and hypothyroid mothers frequently deliver euthy-
roid infants. The strongest correlation between maternal and 
newborn hypothyroidism occurs in areas where endemic goiter 
due to iodide deficiency is common. In an iodine-deficient popu-
lation, treatment with iodine in the first and second trimesters of 
pregnancy significantly reduces the incidence of cretinism (growth 
failure, mental retardation, and other neuropsychologic deficits). 
Overt maternal hypothyroidism has been associated with fetal 
neurodevelopmental damage and low IQs in the offspring. This is 
thought to be due to inadequate transplacental supply of thyrox-
ine T 4 in early pregnancy as the mother is the only source of T 4 for 
the early developing fetal brain. 
 Pituitary Disorders in Pregnancy 
 In women of reproductive age, small tumors of the anterior pitu-
itary are not uncommon (see also Chapter 4). Although many are 
nonfunctional and asymptomatic, the most common symptom of 
pituitary microadenomas is amenorrhea, frequently accompanied 
by galactorrhea. In the past, few affected women became preg-
nant, but now most can be made to ovulate and to conceive with 
the aid of clomiphene citrate, recombinant gonadotropins and 
hCG, or bromocriptine. Before ovulation is induced in any 
patient, serum PRL should be determined. Modest elevations of 
PRL warrant checking IGF-I levels, because hyperprolactinemia 
occurs in 25% of patients with GH-producing adenomas. If PRL 
or IGF-1 is elevated, the sella turcica should be evaluated by mag-
netic resonance imaging. About 10% of women with secondary 
amenorrhea are found to have adenomas, and 20% to 50% of 
women with amenorrhea and galactorrhea have detectable 
tumors. 
 The effect of pregnancy on pituitary adenomas depends on 
their size. Microadenomas rarely (1%) lead to visual field defects. 
However, approximately 20% of macroadenomas may lead to 
abnormalities in visual fields or other neurologic signs, usually in 
the first half of pregnancy. These changes almost always revert to 
normal after delivery, so aggressive therapy for known pituitary 
adenomas is not indicated except in cases of rapidly progressive 
visual loss. Monitoring of patients with known PRL-secreting 
adenomas during pregnancy is primarily based on clinical exami-
nation. The normal gestational increase in PRL may obscure an 
increase attributable to the adenoma, and radiographic procedures 
are undesirable in pregnancy. 
 A. Management 
 Management of the pregnant woman with 
a pituitary adenoma includes early ophthalmologic consultation 
for formal visual field mapping and repeat examinations every 
other month throughout pregnancy. If visual field disturbances are 
minimal, pregnancy may be allowed to proceed to term. If symp-
toms become progressively more severe and the fetus is mature, 
labor should be induced. If symptoms are severe and the fetus is 
immature, management may consist of transsphenoidal resection 
568    CHAPTER 16 The Endocrinology of Pregnancy
of the adenoma or medical treatment with bromocriptine. 
Although bromocriptine inhibits both fetal and maternal pituitary 
PRL secretion, it does not affect decidual PRL secretion. 
Bromocriptine appears not to be teratogenic, and no adverse fetal 
effects have been reported. In most cases, it is probably preferable 
to surgery. The newer, selective dopamine D 2 receptor agonist 
cabergoline has shown excellent results in normalizing PRL levels, 
inducing tumor shrinkage, and minimizing side effects. The data 
available on pregnancies in which cabergoline was used do not 
show adverse effects; however, because the data are limited com-
pared with the large numbers for bromocriptine safety, the latter 
is recommended. Both have category B classification for preg-
nancy. Radiation therapy should not be used in pregnancy, how-
ever, focused gamma knife pituitary radiation, with abdominal 
shielding, is gaining popularity in this setting with less than 
0.01% of the radiation dose reaching the uterus. 
 Lymphocytic hypophysitis is an autoimmune inflammation of 
the pituitary that classically occurs in women in late pregnancy or 
during the puerperium. The clinical presentation is difficult to 
distinguish from that of a large PRL-secreting adenoma. Expectant 
conservative medical management with corticosteroids is some-
times possible, with vigilant postpartum observation to prevent 
consequences of pituitary insufficiency. 
 A. Prognosis and follow-up 
 There appears to be no 
increase in obstetric complications associated with pituitary 
adenomas, and no fetal jeopardy. The rate of prematurity 
increases in women with tumors requiring therapy, but this is 
probably due to aggressive intervention rather than to direct 
effects on spontaneous preterm labor. The postpartum period 
is characterized by rapid relief of even severe symptoms, with 
less than 4% of untreated tumors developing permanent 
sequelae. In some cases, tumors improve following pregnancy, 
with normalization or lowering of PRL relative to prepreg-
nancy values. Management should include imaging and assess-
ment of PRL levels 4 to 6 weeks after delivery. There are no 
contraindications to breast-feeding. 
 Obesity and Pregnancy 
 Obesity is a complicated metabolic and endocrine condition that 
has been implicated in a number of pregnancy-related complica-
tions. Its prevalence has dramatically increased in the United States 
over the last 20 years. Currently approximately one-third of adult 
women are obese (body mass index [BMI] >30). This is a particular 
problem for non-Hispanic black women (49%) and Mexican 
American women (38%). Obese women are at increased risk for a 
number of adverse outcomes during pregnancy, including sponta-
neous abortion, stillbirth, preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, con-
genital anomalies, cesarean section, venous thromboembolism, and 
increased surgical morbidity. Complications in pregnancy are gen-
erally related to maternal pregravid obesity rather than excessive 
weight gain during pregnancy. In 1990, the Institute of Medicine 
published guidelines recommending weight gain of 25 to 35 lb for 
pregnant women with a normal BMI, 15 to 25 lb for overweight 
women, and no more than 15 lb for obese women. These were 
initially designed to help prevent fetal growth restriction. However, 
most overweight/obese women have mean weight gain exceeding 
these guidelines. Because of the risks to the fetus, it is recom-
mended that women attempt to lose weight prior to conception. 
 A. Early pregnancy risks associated with obesity 
 There 
is a well-documented increased risk of early miscarriage in obese 
women in both spontaneous pregnancies and after infertility treat-
ments. Maternal obesity is also associated with an increased risk of 
a range of structural anomalies particularly neural tube defects, 
heart defects, and omphalocele. As these types of anomalies are 
also associated with diabetes, it has been suggested that some of 
these women may be undiagnosed diabetics. To complicate this 
further, obesity can affect accuracy of diagnostic testing for con-
genital anomalies. Heavier women have lower AFP levels likely 
from greater plasma volume and therefore adjustments have to be 
made for serum screening based on maternal weight. Ultrasound 
is the primary diagnostic tool for identifying structural abnor-
malities. Increasing maternal weight is associated with increasing 
impairment of adequate ultrasound visualization particularly of 
cardiac and craniospinal abnormalities. For these reasons, it is 
important to encourage preconception weight loss and perform 
early screening for diabetes. 
 B. Late pregnancy risks associated with obesity 
 Maternal obesity in pregnancy is associated with a significantly 
increased rate of gestational diabetes (GDM), preeclampsia, and 
stillbirths. In a large prospective study of 16,102 women, obese 
women and morbidly obese women were 2.5 and 3.2 more likely, 
respectively, to develop gestational hypertension, and 1.6 and 3.3 
times more likely to develop preeclampsia. Given the potential 
increase in oxidative stress from maternal adipose tissue, antioxi-
dants such as vitamin C and E have been studied in the prevention 
of preeclampsia in obese women; however, they have yet to show 
any benefit. Gestational diabetes occurs due to decreased insulin 
sensitivity and inadequate insulin secretory response. Obese 
women, in general, are more insulin resistant at baseline; there-
fore, it is not surprising that they are at higher risk of developing 
GDM. Overweight and obese women have a 2.0- to 2.4-fold 
increased risk of unexplained fetal death, respectively. The exact 
pathophysiology of unexplained intrauterine fetal death in obese 
women is currently unknown. 
 C. Peripartum risks associated with obesity 
 Overweight 
and obese women also have an increased rate of cesarean section 
and surgical complications, including risks of anesthesia, wound 
infection, excessive blood loss, endometritis, and deep venous 
thrombosis. In a recent report, the rate of cesarean section in over-
weight women was 33.8% and 47% in obese women, compared 
to only 20.7% in normal weight controls. 
 D. Long-term risks associated with obesity 
 Maternal 
obesity is a risk factor for fetal macrosomia. Accumulating 
 evidence indicates fetal macrosomia is associated with adolescent 
CHAPTER 16 The Endocrinology of Pregnancy     569
and adult obesity and metabolic syndrome. A large retrospective 
study recently found that children born to obese mothers were 
twice as likely to be obese at 2 years of age. Both maternal obesity 
and maternal diabetes may independently affect the risk of adoles-
cent obesity in children. Macrosomic infants are also at increased 
risk of subsequent development of diabetes. Thus, the epidemics 
of obesity and diabetes may continue to increase further as a result 
of fetal overgrowth and adiposity in utero. 
 Parathyroid Disease and Pregnancy 
 Pregnancy is associated with an approximately 25 to 30 g accumu-
lation of calcium in the mother by term. Most of this calcium is 
used for fetal skeletal development. Elevated levels of 1,25- 
hydroxyvitamin D from the decidua leads to increased calcium 
absorption by the maternal gastrointestinal tract. The kidneys also 
work to conserve calcium during pregnancy by increasing reab-
sorption. Overall PTH levels are slightly lower throughout preg-
nancy and calcium is actively transported across the placenta to 
the fetus against a concentration gradient. The fetus is relatively 
hypercalcemic, hypercalcitonemic, and hypoparathyroid in com-
parison to the mother, but this resolves shortly after birth. 
 A. Hyperparathyroidism 
 Hyperparathyroidism can be 
either primary, from an overactive parathyroid gland(s), or a sec-
ondary physiologic response to low calcium or vitamin D defi-
ciency. Primary hyperparathyroidism in pregnancy is rare and is 
due to a solitary or multiple parathyroid adenomas, hyperplasia, or 
carcinoma. Symptoms of hyperparathyroidism are nonspecific 
including fatigue, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, constipation, mental 
status changes, and depression and are generally present when 
serum calcium levels are over 12 mg/dL. Complications during 
pregnancy from uncontrolled hyperparathyroidism include neph-
rolithiasis, pancreatitis, hyperemesis gravidarum, and hypercalce-
mic crisis. There is an increased incidence of these complications 
during the postpartum period when the fetal/placental drain of 
calcium has been removed if the hyperparathyroidism persists after 
birth of the infant. Fetal complications have been reported to be as 
high as 80% and include increased risk of spontaneous abortions, 
intrauterine growth restriction, low birth weight, intrauterine 
demise, and postpartum neonatal hypocalcemia/tetany due to sup-
pression of the fetal parathyroid glands. In general, neonates do 
well if supplemental calcium and vitamin D are started promptly 
and serum biochemistries are closely monitored. If possible, deliv-
ery should be delayed until eucalcemia is achieved in order to allow 
for normal development of the fetal parathyroid glands. Surgical 
excision of a symptomatic adenoma is generally recommended in 
pregnancy during the second trimester. Conservative management 
throughout pregnancy is, however, possible with close maternal 
and fetal surveillance, if the patient is asymptomatic and only mild 
elevations in serum calcium are present. 
 B. Hypoparathyroidism  Hypoparathyroidism in pregnancy is 
even rarer than hyperparathyroidism and is most commonly due to 
incidental resection of or damage to the parathyroid glands  during 
thyroidectomy. Symptoms from hypocalcemia include numbness 
and tingling of fingers and perioral area. If serum calcium levels are 
maintained within normal limits, pregnancy outcome should not be 
negatively affected. If not treated, maternal hypocalcemia can lead to 
hyperparathyroidism in the fetus causing bone demineralization, and 
labor may be complicated by tetany. Treatment of hypoparathyroid-
ism involves administration of supplemental calcium and vitamin D 
or its metabolite 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D. 
 PREECLAMPSIA/ECLAMPSIA 
 Preeclampsia is an idiopathic multisystem disease seen only in 
pregnancy and during the peripartum period. The incidence of 
preeclampsia is approximately 7%. Risk factors include nulliparity, 
African American race, extremes of age, chronic hypertension, 
multiple gestation, prior history of preeclampsia, family history of 
preeclampsia, chronic renal disease, antiphospholipid antibody 
syndrome, hydramnios, diabetes, and obesity. Preeclampsia is char-
acterized by onset of hypertension and proteinuria after 20 weeks’ 
gestation. Other signs and symptoms include headache, visual 
disturbances, epigastric pain, nausea/vomiting, thrombocytopenia, 
abnormal liver and kidney function tests. Eclampsia is the occur-
rence of seizures that cannot be attributed to other causes in 
women with preeclampsia and is associated with a maternal mor-
tality rate as high as 10%. Preeclampsia accounts for approximately 
15% of maternal deaths in the United States. Deaths occur most 
frequently from cerebral hemorrhage, renal failure, disseminated 
intravascular coagulopathy, acute pulmonary edema, or hepatic 
failure. Preeclampsia is also associated with perinatal fetal death 
and morbidity, due most commonly to iatrogenic prematurity. 
 Pathophysiology 
 The exact pathogenesis of preeclampsia remains poorly under-
stood despite a significant amount of research in the field. It likely 
involves both maternal and placental factors as it is also seen in 
molar pregnancies with only trophoblastic and no fetal tissue. 
Abnormalities in placental vasculature development are postulated 
to result in placental hypoxia, which leads to factors being released 
that cause hypertension and microangiopathy of target organs. 
Both epidemiologic and experimental data support the role of the 
placenta in the etiology of preeclampsia as placental tissue is neces-
sary for the development of the disease and once the placenta is 
removed its signs and symptoms begin to abate. 
 In preeclampsia, cytotrophoblast invasion is shallow and only 
the decidual portion of the spiral arteries is remodeled. In con-
trast, in normal pregnancies the cytotrophoblasts infiltrate deeper 
into the muscular tunica media of the spiral arteries, transforming 
these small muscular arterioles into large vessels with low resis-
tance that facilitate placental blow flow (see Figure 16–1). It is 
likely that environmental, immunologic, and genetic factors all 
play a role in this important process. 
 Hypoperfusion and hypoxia are likely both a cause and effect 
of abnormal placental vascularization and subsequent preeclamp-
sia. Animal models support this theory as induced preeclampsia 
generally requires mechanically reduced uteroplacental perfusion. 
570    CHAPTER 16 The Endocrinology of Pregnancy
In addition, maternal medical conditions associated with vascular 
dysfunction such as hypertension, lupus, and renal disease increase 
the risk of preeclampsia, as do obstetric conditions that increase 
placental volume without increasing placental blood flow, such as 
twins and hydatidiform moles. 
 Generalized endothelial dysfunction may explain many of the 
multiple clinical features of preeclampsia. Evidence to support this 
includes enhanced vascular reactivity to angiotensin II, impaired 
flow-mediated vasodilation, decreased production of endothelial-
derived vasodilators such as nitric oxide and prostacyclin, and 
increased production of vasoconstrictors like endothelins and 
thromboxanes. 
 Extensive placental angiogenesis is required to supply the nec-
essary nutrients and oxygen to the fetus. Normal placental vessel 
development relies on a balance between proangiogenic factors 
such as VEGF and placental growth factor (PlGF) and antiangio-
genic factors such as soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1 (sFlt-1) and 
soluble endoglin (sEng). It is proposed that free sFlt-1 in the 
maternal circulation antagonizes the angiogenic activities of 
VEGF and PlGF, leading to ischemia and vasospasm. sEng from 
the placenta is elevated in preeclamptic women, and appears to 
inhibit TGF-beta-1-mediated vasodilation. 
 Despite extensive research and multiple hypotheses regarding 
its etiology and pathophysiology, there is still no unifying theory 
that explains all the features of preeclampsia. It is generally 
accepted that the basis for the development of preeclampsia occurs 
early in pregnancy. While the roles of antiangiogenic factors such 
as sFlt-1 and sEng are convincing with regard to the pathogenesis 
of preeclampsia, the clinical utility of these biomarkers to predict, 
diagnose, prevent, or treat this disease remains unknown. 
 Clinical Features 
 Preeclampsia is classified as mild or severe, the latter designation 
being applied if any of the following signs or symptoms are pres-
ent: headache, blurred vision, scotomata, altered mental status, 
right upper quadrant or epigastric pain, severe hypertension 
(160/110 mm Hg), pulmonary edema, oliguria (<500 cc/24 h), 
massive proteinuria (>5 g/24 h), renal failure (creatinine >1 mg/
dL over baseline), elevated liver function tests (>2× normal), 
thrombocytopenia (platelets <100,000), coagulopathy or HELLP 
syndrome (hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, low platelets). 
Despite knowledge of the many risk factors described above, it is 
still not possible to determine which mothers will ultimately 
develop preeclampsia and there are no effective preventative treat-
ments. Large clinical trials using low-dose aspirin, calcium, and 
antioxidant vitamin supplementation revealed minimal to no 
benefit in preventing the development of preeclampsia. Instead, 
the current focus of management is for regular prenatal care with 
screening of blood pressure and proteinuria in hopes of early iden-
tification and aggressive monitoring. 
 Treatment/Management of Preeclampsia 
 The only definitive therapy for preeclampsia is delivery of fetus 
and placenta. This is straightforward for pregnancies near term. 
However, pregnancies between 24 to 34 weeks are more compli-
cated as the obstetrician must balance the significant perinatal 
morbidity and mortality associated with preterm delivery versus 
the maternal and fetal risk of prolonging these high-risk pregnan-
cies. Antihypertensive medications should be used in setting of 
severe hypertension to prevent a maternal stroke; however, their 
use in mild to moderate hypertension has not been shown to 
improve maternal or fetal outcome. Magnesium sulfate therapy is 
initiated as the anticonvulsant of choice for preeclamptics during 
labor, while administering corticosteroids prior to a planned pre-
term delivery, and for 24 hours postpartum. 
 REFERENCES 
 General 
 Haig D. Evolutionary conflicts in pregnancy and calcium metabolism—a review. 
Placenta. 2004;25(suppl A):S10. [PMID: 15033301]
Thung SF, Norwitz ER. Endocrine diseases of pregnancy. In: Strauss JF, Barbieri 
RL, eds.  Yen and Jaffe’s Reproductive Endocrinology :  Physiology, Pathophysiology 
and Clinical Management . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 
2009. 
 Chorionic Proteins and Pregnancy Tests 
 Cole LA. New discoveries on the biology and detection of human chorionic 
gonadotropin.  Reprod Biol Endocrinol . 2009;7:8. [PMID: 19171054] 
 Driscoll DA, Gross S. Clinical practice. Prenatal screening for aneuploidy.  N Engl 
J Med . 2009;360:2556. [PMID: 19516035] 
 Ovarian Proteins 
 Goldsmith LT, Weiss G. Relaxin in human pregnancy.  Ann N Y Acad Sci . 
2009;1160:130. [PMID: 19416173] 
 Tsigkou A, Luisi S, Reis FM, Petraglia F. Inhibins as diagnostic markers in human 
reproduction.  Adv Clin Chem . 2008;45:1. [PMID: 18429491] 
 Steroid Hormones 
 Chang K, Zhang L. Review article: steroid hormones and uterine vascular adapta-
tion to pregnancy.  Reprod Sci . 2008;15:336. [PMID: 18497342] 
 Kallen CB. Steroid hormone synthesis in pregnancy.  Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am . 
2004;31:795. [PMID: 15550336] 
 Miller WL. Steroidogenic enzymes.  Endocr Dev . 2008;13:1. [PMID: 18493130] 
 Fetal Endocrinology 
 de Escobar GM, Ares S, Berbel P, Obregön MJ, del Rey FE. The changing role of 
maternal thyroid hormone in fetal brain development.  Semin Perinatol . 
2008;32:380. [PMID: 19007674] 
 Grattan DR. Fetal programming from maternal obesity: eating too much for two? 
 Endocrinology . 2008;149:5345. [PMID: 18936494] 
 MacLaughlin DT, Donahoe PK. Sex determination and differentiation.  N Engl J 
Med . 2004;350:367. [PMID: 14736929] 
 Parturition 
 Florio P, Romero R, Chaiworapongsa T, et al. Amniotic fluid and umbilical cord 
plasma corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF), CRF-binding protein, adreno-
corticotropin, and cortisol concentrations in intraamniotic infection and 
inflammation at term.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2008;93:3604. [PMID: 
18559919] 
Meis PJ, Aleman A. Progesterone treatment to prevent preterm birth. Drugs. 
2004;64:2463. [PMID: 15482003]
 Mesiano S, Welsh TN. Steroid hormone control of myometrial contractility 
and parturition.  Semin Cell Dev Biol . 2007;18:321. [PMID: 
17613262] 
CHAPTER 16 The Endocrinology of Pregnancy     571
 Smith R, Smith JI, Shen X, et al. Patterns of plasma corticotropin-releasing hor-
mone, progesterone, estradiol, and estriol change and the onset of human 
labor. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009;94:2066. [PMID: 19258402]
 Preterm Labor 
 de Heus R, Mol BW, Erwich JJ, et al. Adverse drug reactions to tocolytic treatment 
for preterm labour: prospective cohort study.  BMJ . 2009;5:338. [PMID: 
19264820] 
Iams JD, Creasy RK. Preterm labor and delivery. In: Creasy RK, Resnick R, eds. 
Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Principles and Practice. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: 
WB Saunders; 2008.
 Menon R, Pearce B, Velez DR, et al. Racial disparity in pathophysiologic pathways 
of preterm birth based on genetic variants.  Reprod Biol Endocrinol . 2009;7:62. 
[PMID: 19527514] 
 Postterm Pregnancy 
 Caughey AB, Stotland NE, Washington AE, Escobar GJ. Who is at risk for pro-
longed and postterm pregnancy?  Am J Obstet Gynecol . 2009;200:683. 
[PMID: 19380120] 
 Puerperium and Lactation 
 Buhimschi CS. Endocrinology of lactation. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am. 
2004;31:963. [PMID: 15550345]
Henderson JJ, Hartmann PE, Newnham JP, Simmer K. Effect of preterm birth and 
antenatal corticosteroid treatment on lactogenesis II in women.  Pediatrics . 
2008;121:e92. [PMID: 18166549] 
 Thyroid Disease in Pregnancy 
 Gyamfi C, Wapner RJ, D’Alton ME. Thyroid dysfunction in pregnancy: the basic 
science and clinical evidence surrounding the controversy in management. 
 Obstet Gynecol . 2009;113:702. [PMID: 19300337] 
 Patil-Sisodia K, Mestman JH. Graves’ hyperthyroidism and pregnancy: a clinical 
update. Endocr Pract. 2009;15:1. [PMID: 19833580]
Toft A. Increased levothyroxine requirements in pregnancy—why, when, and how 
much?  New Engl J Med . 2004;351:292. [PMID: 15254288] 
 Pituitary Adenomas 
 Christin-Maître S, Delemer B, Touraine P, Young J. Prolactinoma and estrogens: 
pregnancy, contraception and hormonal replacement therapy.  Ann Endocrinol 
(Paris) . 2007;68:106. [PMID: 17540335] 
 Obesity 
 Catalano PM. Management of obesity in pregnancy.  Obstet Gynecol . 2007;109:419. 
[PMID:17267845] 
 Parathyroid Disease 
 Sato K. Hypercalcemia during pregnancy, puerperium, and lactation: review and a 
case report of hypercalcemic crisis after delivery due to excessive production 
of PTH-related protein (PTHrP) without malignancy (humoral hypercalce-
mia of pregnancy).  Endocr J. 2008;55:959. [PMID: 18614854] 
 Hypertensive Disorders 
 Karumanchi SA, Maynard SE, Stillman IE, Epstein FH, Sukhatme VP. Preeclampsia: 
a renal perspective.  Kidney Int . 2005;67:2101. [PMID: 15882253] 
Redman CW, Sargent IL. Placental stress and pre-eclampsia: a revised view. 
Placenta. 2009;30 (suppl A):S38. [PMID: 19138798]
 Roberts JM. Pregnancy-related hypertension. In: Creasy RK, Resnick R, eds. 
 Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Principles and Practice . 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: 
WB Saunders; 2008. 
Sibai BM. Maternal and uteroplacental hemodynamics for the classification and 
prediction of preeclampsia. Hypertension. 2008;52:805. [PMID: 18824659]
 
This page intentionally left blank
573
7
1
 Pancreatic Hormones and 
Diabetes Mellitus 
 Umesh Masharani, MB, BS, MRCP (UK)
and  Michael S. German, MD 
 ABCC8 
ATP-binding cassette transporter sub-family C
 
member 8 
 ACE 
Angiotensin-converting enzyme 
 ADA 
American Diabetes Association 
 ADH 
Antidiuretic hormone (vasopressin) 
 AGE 
Advanced glycation end product 
 AGPAT 
1-acylglycerol-3-phosphate-O-acyltransferase 2 
 AKT/PKB 
AKR mouse tumor 8 kinase/protein 
 
kinase B 
 AIRE 
Autoimmune regulator 
 ALT 
Alanine aminotransferase 
 AMPK 
Adenosine monophosphate-activated 
 
protein kinase 
 APS1 
Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome 
 
type 1 
 ATF6 
Activating transcription factor 6 
 BMI 
Body mass index 
 cAMP 
Cyclic adenosine monophosphate 
 CCK 
Cholecystokinin 
 CEL 
Carboxyl-ester lipase 
 cGMP 
Cyclic 3′,5′-guanosine monophosphate 
 CIDEC 
Cell death-inducing DFFA-like effector C 
 CSII 
Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion 
 CST 
Contraction stress test 
 DCCT 
Diabetes Control and Complications Trial 
 DIDMOAD 
Diabetes insipidus, diabetes mellitus, optic 
 
atrophy, deafness (Wolfram syndrome) 
 DPP 
Diabetes Prevention Program 
 DPP-4 
Dipeptidyl peptidase 4 
 DPT-1 
Diabetes Prevention Trial-1 
 EIF2AK3 
Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 
 
2-α kinase 3 
 ER 
Endoplasmic reticulum 
 FDA 
Food and Drug Administration 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 FFA 
Free fatty acid 
 FHR 
Fetal heart rate 
 Foxo1 
Forkhead box, subfamily O, member 1 
 FOXP3 
Forkhead box, subfamily P, member 3 
 GABA 
Gamma-aminobutyric acid 
 GAD 
Glutamic acid decarboxylase 
 GCK 
Glucokinase 
 GH 
Growth hormone 
 GHb 
Glycohemoglobin 
 GHSR 
Growth hormone-secretagogue receptor 
 GI 
Glycemic index 
 GIP 
Gastric inhibitory polypeptide 
 GLIS3 
Glioma-associated oncogene homolog— 
 
similar 3 
 GLP-1 
Glucagon-like peptide-1 
 GLP-2 
Glucagon-like peptide-2 
 GLUT 
Glucose transporter 
 GPCR 
G protein–coupled receptor 
 GRPP 
Glicentin-related polypeptide 
 GWAS 
Genome-wide association study 
 HDL 
High-density lipoprotein 
 HLA 
Human leukocyte antigen 
 HNF 
Hepatocyte nuclear factor 
 hPL 
Human placental lactogen 
 IA2 
Insulinoma antigen 2 
 IAA 
Insulin autoantibody 
 IAPP 
Islet amyloid polypeptide 
 ICA 
Islet cell antibody 
 IFG 
Impaired fasting glucose 
 IGF-1 
Insulin-like growth factor 1 
 IGT 
Impaired glucose tolerance 
 IL-6 
Interleukin-6 
 INS 
Insulin 
574    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
 IP3 
Inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate 
 IPEX 
Immunodysregulation polyendocrinopathy 
 
enteropathy, X-linked 
 IPF-1 
Insulin promoter factor-1 
 IRE1 
Inositol-requiring enzyme 1 
 IRS 
Insulin receptor substrate 
 ISL1 
Islet transcription factor 1 
 IUGR 
Intrauterine growth restriction 
 KPD 
Ketosis-prone diabetes 
 KCNJ11 
Potassium inwardly-rectifying channel, 
 
subfamily J, member 11 
 Kir6.2 
Potassium channel, inwardly-
 
rectifying 6.2 
 LADA 
Latent autoimmune diabetes of 
 
adulthood 
 LBK1 
Liver kinase B1 
 LDL 
Low-density lipoprotein 
 MAPK 
Mitogen-activated protein kinase 
 MODY 
Maturity-onset diabetes of the young 
 MHC 
Major histocompatibility complex 
 mTOR 
Mammalian target of rapamycin 
 NeuroD1 
Neural differentiation factor 1 
 Neurog3 
Neural genesis factor 3 
 NIH 
National Institutes of Health 
 NPH 
Neutral protamine hagedorn 
 NST 
Nonstress test 
 PAI-1 
Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 
 PAX4 
Paired homeobox 4 
 PCSK 
Proprotein convertase, subtilisin/kexin 
 PDE5 
Phosphodiesterase type 5 
 PDX1 
Pancreatic duodenal homeobox-1 
 PERK 
Protein kinase R-like endoplasmic 
 
reticulum kinase 
 PGC1α 
PPAR gamma coactivator-1α 
 PNDM 
Permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus 
 POEMS 
Polyneuropathy, organomegaly, 
 
endocrinopathy, monoclonal gammopathy, 
 
and skin changes 
 PP 
Pancreatic polypeptide 
 PPAR 
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor 
 PTF1A  
Pancreatic transcription factor 1α 
 PTP1b 
Protein tyrosine phosphatase 1b 
 RFX6 
Regulatory factor X-6 
 RXR  
9- cis -retinoic acid receptor 
 SCL19A2 
Solute carrier family 19 (thiamine 
 
transporter), member 2 
 SOCS 
Suppressor of cytokine signaling 
 SREBP1c 
Sterol regulatory element-binding protein 1c 
 SSTR 
Somatostatin receptor 
 SUR1 
Sulfonylurea receptor 1 
 TCF7L2 
Transcription factor 7-like 2 
 TGF-a 
Transforming growth factor-β 
 TNDM 
Transient neonatal diabetes mellitus 
 TNF-α 
Tumor necrosis factor-α 
 UGDP 
University Group Diabetes Program 
 UKPDS 
United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study 
 VEGF 
Vascular endothelial growth factor 
 VLDL 
Very low density lipoprotein 
 VNTR 
Variable number of tandem repeats 
 WFS1 
Wolfram syndrome protein 1 
 ZAC 
Zinc finger protein-inducing apoptosis and 
 
cell cycle arrest 
 ZnT8 
Zinc transporter 8 
 ZFP57 
Zinc finger protein 57 
 THE ENDOCRINE PANCREAS 
 The pancreas comprises two functionally distinct organs: the 
 exocrine pancreas , the major digestive gland of the body; and 
the  endocrine pancreas , the source of insulin, glucagon, soma-
tostatin, pancreatic polypeptide (PP), and ghrelin. Whereas the 
major role of the products of the exocrine pancreas (the digestive 
enzymes) is the processing of ingested foodstuffs so that they 
become available for absorption, the hormones of the endocrine 
pancreas modulate every other aspect of cellular nutrition from 
rate of adsorption of foodstuffs to cellular storage or metabolism 
of nutrients. Dysfunction of the endocrine pancreas or abnormal 
responses to its hormones by target tissues cause serious distur-
bances in nutrient homeostasis, including the important clinical 
syndromes grouped under the name  diabetes mellitus . 
 ANATOMY AND HISTOLOGY 
 The endocrine pancreas consists of approximately 1 million small 
endocrine glands—the islets of Langerhans—scattered through-
out the glandular substance of the exocrine pancreas. The exocrine 
pancreas consists of the enzyme-producing cells organized into 
acini, and the duct system that delivers those enzymes to the 
lumen of the duodenum. The islet volume comprises 1% to 1.5% 
of the total mass of the pancreas and weighs about 1 to 2 g in adult 
humans. At least five cell types—α, β, δ, ε, and PP—have been 
identified in the islets ( Table 17–1 ). Each of these islet cell types 
produces a distinguishing peptide hormone: glucagon, insulin, 
somatostatin, ghrelin, and PP, respectively. Within individual 
islets, the different cell types are scattered throughout. A typical 
human islet is depicted in  Figure 17–1 . 
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     575
 These cell types are not distributed uniformly throughout 
the pancreas. The PP cells reside primarily in islets in the pos-
terior portion (posterior lobe) of the head, a discrete lobe of the 
pancreas separated from the anterior portion by a fascial parti-
tion. This lobe originates in the primordial ventral bud as 
opposed to the dorsal bud. The posterior lobe receives its blood 
supply from the superior mesenteric artery; the remainder of 
the pancreas derives most of its blood flow from the celiac 
artery. The islets themselves are richly vascularized, receiving 
five to ten times the blood flow of the surrounding exocrine 
pancreatic tissue. Each islet is surrounded by a lattice of astro-
glial cells and innervated by sympathetic, parasympathetic, and 
sensory neurons. 
 HORMONES OF THE ENDOCRINE 
PANCREAS 
 1. INSULIN 
 Biosynthesis 
 The human insulin gene resides on the short arm of chromosome 
11. A unique set of transcription factors found in the β cell 
nucleus activates the transcription of the preproinsulin mRNA 
from the  insulin gene ( Figure 17–2 ). A precursor molecule, 
 preproinsulin , a peptide of MW 11,500, is translated from the 
preproinsulin messenger RNA in the rough endoplasmic reticu-
lum of pancreatic β cells (see  Figure 17–2 ). Microsomal enzymes 
cleave preproinsulin to proinsulin (MW ∼9000) almost immedi-
ately after synthesis. Proinsulin is transported to the Golgi appara-
tus, where packaging into clathrin-coated secretory granules takes 
place. Maturation of the secretory granule is associated with loss 
of the clathrin coating and conversion of proinsulin into insulin 
and a smaller connecting peptide, or C peptide, by proteolytic 
cleavage at two sites along the peptide chain. Mature secretory 
granules contain insulin and C peptide in equimolar amounts and 
only small quantities of proinsulin, a small portion of which con-
sists of partially cleaved intermediates. 
 Biochemistry 
 Proinsulin ( Figure 17–3 ) consists of a single chain of 86 amino 
acids, which includes the A and B chains of the insulin molecule 
plus a connecting segment of 35 amino acids. Two proteins—the 
prohormone-converting enzymes type 1 and 2 (PCSK1 and 
PCSK2)—are packaged with proinsulin in the immature secretory 
granules. These enzymes recognize and cut at pairs of basic amino 
acids, thereby removing the intervening sequence. After the two 
pairs of basic amino acids are removed by carboxypeptidase E, the 
result is a 51 amino acid insulin molecule and a 31 amino acid 
residue, the C peptide, as shown in  Figure 17–3 . 
 A small amount of proinsulin produced by the pancreas escapes 
cleavage and is secreted intact into the bloodstream, along with 
insulin and C peptide. Most anti-insulin sera used in the standard 
immunoassay for insulin cross-react with proinsulin; about 3% to 
5% of immunoreactive insulin extracted from human pancreas is 
actually proinsulin. Because proinsulin is not removed by the liver, 
it has a half-life three to four times that of insulin. Its long half-life 
allows proinsulin to accumulate in the blood, where it accounts 
for 12% to 20% of the circulating immunoreactive insulin in the 
basal state in humans. Human proinsulin has about 7% to 8% of 
the biologic activity of insulin. The kidney is the principal site of 
proinsulin degradation. 
TABLE 17–1  Cell types in adult human pancreatic 
islets of Langerhans.
Cell Types
Approximate 
Percentage of 
Islet Volume
Secretory Products
α Cell
25%
Glucagon, proglucagon
β Cell
55%
Insulin, C peptide, proinsulin, IAPP, 
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)
δ Cell
10%
Somatostatin-14
ε Cell
3%
Ghrelin
PP cell 
5%
Pancreatic polypeptide
 FIGURE 17–1  Human islet of Langerhans. Staining for insulin 
(red), glucagon (green), and somatostatin (blue) was performed by 
immunofluorescence and imaged by confocal microscopy. 
 (Reproduced, with permission, from Cabrera O, Berman DM, Kenyon NS, 
Ricordi C, Berggren PO, Caicedo A. The unique cytoarchitecture of 
human pancreatic islets has implications for islet cell function.  Proc 
Natl Acad Sci . 2006;103(7):2334.) 
576    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
 FIGURE 17–2  Structural components of the pancreatic β cell involved in glucose-induced biosynthesis and release of insulin.  (Modified 
and reproduced, with permission, from Junqueira LC, Carneiro J, Long JA.  Basic Histology . 5th ed. McGraw-Hill; 1986.) 
Ca2+
Glucose
Secretory granules (condensation and 
storage of insulin)
Small transfer vesicles (transport of proinsulin
to Golgi)
Nucleus (production of mRNA for preproinsulin
production)
Golgi (packaging of proinsulin into coated
secretory granules, conversion of proinsulin
to insulin)
Mitochondrion
Granular endoplasmic reticulum (synthesis of
preproinsulin; this is cleaved by microsomal
enzymes)
PHE
ASN
ALA
GLN
HIS
LEU
LEU
LEU
LEU
TYR
TYR
THR
CYS
GLY
GLU
GLU
PHE
PRO
GLU
GLU
GLU
LEU
LEU
SER
SER
LEU
LEU
LEU
LEU
GLN
GLN
GLY
GLY
GLY
GLY
PRO
PRO
GLY
ALA
ALA
GLY
GLY
GLN
GLY
GLU
GLN
GLN
GLU
ASN
CYS
CYS
CYS
THR
TYR
TYR
CYS
ASN
SER
SER LEU
LEU
VAL
ILE
ILE
GLN
GLU
VAL
VAL
ASP
ALA
PHE
CYS GLY
ARG
ARG
ARG
ARG
LYS
GLY
LYS
SER
HIS
VAL
VAL
VAL
THR
S
31
30
20
21
10
10
10
1
1
1
S
S
S
S
S
C chain
C chain
A chain
A chain
−COOH
Connecting peptide
B chain
B chain
B chain
Insulin
NH2
−
Dipeptide
linkage
Dipep-
tide 
linkage
 FIGURE 17–3  Structure of human proinsulin C peptides and insulin molecules connected at two sites by dipeptide links. 
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     577
 Of the two major proinsulin split products present in plasma, 
the one split at arginine 32-33 far exceeds in amount the barely 
detectable 65-66 split product. In control subjects, concentrations 
of proinsulin and 32-33 split proinsulin after an overnight fast 
averaged 2.3 and 2.2 pmol/L, respectively, with corresponding 
postprandial rises to 10 and 20 pmol/L. 
 C peptide , the 31 amino acid peptide (MW 3000) released 
during cleavage of insulin from proinsulin, has no known biologic 
activity. β Cells release C peptide in equimolar amounts with 
insulin. It is not removed by the liver but is degraded or excreted 
chiefly by the kidney. It has a half-life three to four times that of 
insulin. In the basal state after an overnight fast, the average con-
centration of C peptide may remain as high as 1000 pmol/L. 
 Insulin is a protein consisting of 51 amino acids contained 
within two peptide chains: an A chain, with 21 amino acids; and 
a B chain, with 30 amino acids. The chains are connected by two 
disulfide bridges as shown in  Figure 17–3 . In addition, an intra- 
chain disulfide bridge links positions 6 and 11 in the A chain. 
Human insulin has a molecular weight of 5808. 
 Endogenous insulin has a circulatory half-life of 3 to 5 minutes. 
It is degraded chiefly by insulinases in liver, kidney, and placenta. 
A single pass through the liver removes approximately 50% of the 
plasma insulin. 
 Secretion 
 The human pancreas secretes about 30 units of insulin per day 
into the portal circulation of normal adults in distinct pulses with 
a period of approximately 5 minutes. The basal concentration 
of insulin in the peripheral blood of fasting humans averages 
10 μU/mL (0.4 ng/mL, or 61 pmol/L). In normal control sub-
jects, insulin seldom rises above 100 μU/mL (610 pmol/L) after 
standard meals. After ingestion of food, peripheral insulin concen-
tration increases within 8 to 10 minutes, reaches peak concentra-
tions by 30 to 45 minutes, and then rapidly declines to baseline 
values by 90 to 120 minutes postprandially. 
 Basal insulin secretion occurs in the absence of exogenous 
stimuli, in the fasting state. Plasma glucose levels below 80 to 
100 mg/dL (4.4-5.6 mmol/L) do not stimulate insulin release, and 
most other physiologic regulators of insulin secretion only func-
tion in the presence of stimulatory levels of glucose. Stimulated 
insulin secretion occurs in response to exogenous stimuli. In vivo, 
ingested meals provide the major stimuli for insulin secretion. 
Glucose is the most potent stimulant of insulin release. The per-
fused pancreas releases insulin in two phases in response to glucose 
stimulation ( Figure 17–4 ). When the glucose concentration 
increases suddenly, an initial short-lived burst of insulin release 
occurs (the  first phase ); if the glucose elevation persists, the insu-
lin release gradually falls off and then begins to rise again to a 
steady level (the  second phase ). However, sustained levels of high 
glucose stimulation (∼4 hours in vitro or >24 hours in vivo) result 
in a reversible desensitization of the β cell response to glucose but 
not to other stimuli. 
 The β cell senses glucose through its metabolism ( Figure 17–5 ). 
Indeed, agents such as 2-deoxyglucose that inhibit the metabolism 
of glucose block the release of insulin. Glucose enters the pancre-
atic β cell by passive diffusion, facilitated by membrane proteins 
termed glucose transporters (see later). Because the transporters 
function in both directions, and the β cell has an excess of 
glucose transporters, the glucose concentration inside the β cell is 
300
150
0
0
60
50
40
30
20
10
80
60
40
20
Glucose
Insulin
Period of glucose infusion
Insulin (ng/mL)
Glucose (mg/dL)
Minutes
 FIGURE 17–4  Multiphasic response of the in vitro perfused rat pancreas during constant stimulation with glucose.  (Modified from Grodsky 
GM, et al. Further studies on the dynamic aspects of insulin release  in vitro with evidence for a two-compartmental storage system.  Acta 
Diabetol Lat . 1969;6[suppl 1]:554.) 
578    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
in equilibrium with the extracellular glucose concentration. The 
low-affinity enzyme glucokinase catalizes the subsequent, and 
rate-limiting, step in glucose metabolism by the pancreatic β cell, 
the phosphorylation of glucose to glucose-6-phosphate. Glucose 
catabolism in the β cell causes a rise in the intracellular ATP-ADP 
ratio. Acting through the sulfonylurea receptor (SUR1), the 
nucleotide-sensing subunit of the ATP-sensitive potassium chan-
nels on the surface of the β cell, the rise in ATP-ADP ratio closes 
the potassium channels and depolarizes the cell, thereby activating 
the voltage-sensitive calcium channels and allowing the entry of 
calcium ions into the cell. 
 Insulin release requires calcium ion signaling. In addition to 
the voltage-dependent entry of extracellular Ca 2+ into the β cell as 
described earlier, glucose also retards Ca 2+ efflux from the β cell 
and releases Ca 2+ from intracellular compartments (predomi-
nantly the endoplasmic reticulum) into the cytosol. Some nonglu-
cose stimuli of insulin release also function through increases in 
cytoplasmic Ca 2+ . The sulfonylurea and meglitinide (such as repa-
glinide) medications act by closing the ATP-sensitive potassium 
channels. Secretagogues such as acetylcholine that act through G 
protein–coupled receptors of the Gα q class stimulate the release of 
intracellular Ca 2+ stored in the endoplasmic reticulum by activat-
ing phospholipase C and releasing the intracellular signaling 
 molecule inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP3). 
 Glucose metabolism in the β cell also generates additional 
signals that amplify the secretory response to elevations in 
 cytoplasmic Ca 2+ concentration. The exact mechanisms of these 
amplifying signals remains unknown but involve multiple  pathways 
and include increases in the intracellular signaling molecules dia-
cylglycerol and cAMP. Secretagogues such as the gut hormones 
glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) and gastric inhibitory polypep-
tide (also known as glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide, 
GIP) that act via G protein–coupled receptors of the Gα s class also 
stimulate insulin secretion through elevations in cAMP. 
 Other factors involved in the regulation of insulin secretion are 
summarized in  Table 17–2 . These factors can be divided into three 
categories:  direct stimulants , which directly raise cytoplasmic 
calcium ion concentrations and thus can act in the absence of 
stimulatory glucose concentrations;  amplifiers , which potentiate 
the response of the β cell to glucose; and inhibitors. Many of the 
amplifiers are  incretins : gastrointestinal hormones that are released 
in response to the ingestion of meals and stimulate insulin secretion. 
Glucose
Glucose
cAMP
Insulin
synthesis
DAG and
other signals?
ATP/ADP↑
Secretion
Acetylcholine
Voltage-gated
calcium channel
ATP-sensitive
potassium
channel
Sulfonylureas
Fatty acids
amino acids
Ca2+
K+
Ca2+
Fructose 1,6-P2
Phosphoenolpyruvate
Pyruvate
Acetyl CoA
Mitochondria
Glucokinase
Glucose
transporter
Catecholamines
αA2
receptor
GLP-1
receptor
M3
receptor
Gαi
Gαs
–
Gαq
GLP-1
Kir 6.2
SUR 1
TCA
cycle
–
 FIGURE 17–5  A simplified outline of glucose-sensing and regulated insulin secretion from the β cell. The blue arrows indicate stimulation, 
and the red lines indicate inhibition. Glucose enters the β cell through facultative glucose transporters, is phosphorylated to glucose-6- 
phosphate by glucokinse, and enters glycolysis. This results in the production of pyruvate, which enters the mitochondria, is converted to 
acetyl-CoA, and feeds the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle and oxidative phosphorylation to produce ATP. When ATP levels rise or sulfonylureas 
bind to the regulatory subunit (SUR1/ABCC8) of the ATP-sensitive K + channels, the channel subunit (Kir6.2/KCNJ11) closes. This block of the K + 
current depolarizes the cell, allowing the voltage-gated calcium channels to open. The entry of calcium drives the fusion of insulin granules 
with the cell surface membrane and exocytosis of insulin. Glucose metabolism and extracellular signals modulate this pathway through release 
of Ca 2+ from intracellular stores and changes in diacylglycerol (DAG), cAMP, and other intracellular signaling pathways. 
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     579
threonine kinase AKT/PKB. AKT activation drives the movement 
of glucose transporter (GLUT) 4–containing vesicles to the cell 
membrane, increases glycogen and lipid synthesis, and stimulates 
protein synthesis through the activation of mTOR. In the mito-
genic signaling pathway, activation of Ras initiates a cascade of 
activating phosphorylations via the MAP kinase pathway, leading 
to cell growth and proliferation. 
 Transcriptional regulation.  
In addition, the insulin- 
signaling pathway regulates the activity of several nuclear tran-
scription factors that in turn control the expression of genes 
involved in metabolism and growth. These include members of 
the forkedhead family of transcription factors, including Foxo1, 
which is inactivated by phosphorylation by AKT downstream of 
insulin signaling. Foxo1 coordinates the expression of gene net-
works involved in nutrient metabolism in multiple tissues, gener-
ally activating genes involved in the response to fasting. In this 
process, Foxo1 works with several other transcriptional regulators 
including the lipogenic transcription factor SREBP1c, members 
of the PPAR family of nuclear receptors and the PPAR coactivator 
PGC1α ( Figure 17–7 ). Foxo1 also inhibits β cell proliferation and 
survival. 
 The three members of the PPAR family of nuclear hormone 
receptors play pleiotropic roles in regulating genes involved in 
metabolism in many tissues. They may function as targets of 
 insulin signaling, modulators of insulin signaling, or both. Despite 
overlap in the tissue expression and gene targets of the three 
PPARs, some general conclusions can be drawn about the func-
tion of each. PPARα regulates genes involved in fatty acid catabo-
lism and gluconeogenesis and is most highly expressed in brown 
fat, heart, liver, kidney, and intestine. PPARβ/δ is broadly 
expressed and activates gene programs involved in fatty acid oxida-
tion. PPARγ is most highly expressed in adipose tissue, intestine, 
and immune cells, but also at lower levels in many other tissues. 
PPARγ drives white adipocyte differentiation and lipid storage 
and inhibits production of many of the pro-resistance adipokines 
and pro-inflammatory cytokines in adipose tissue (see section on 
insulin resistance later). In macrophages, PPARγ acts to promote 
their alternative activation to the anti-inflammatory M2 state, 
rather than the pro-inflammatory M1 state. 
 The PPARs bind to DNA as heterodimers with the 9- cis -
retinoic acid receptor (RXR), and recruit a variety of coactivators 
and corepressors. PGC1α was originally identified as a coactivator 
interacting with PPARγ, but the interaction is not exclusive. On dif-
ferent genes PPARγ works with different coactivators, and PGC1α 
interacts with the other PPARs and many other transcription factors. 
In collaboration with a variety of different transcription factors in 
various tissues, PGC1α orchestrates the expression of a set of 
genes involved in metabolism. PGC1α itself is highly regulated by 
several signaling pathways including insulin signaling, which 
inhibits PGC1α activity via phosphorylation by AKT. 
 A number of natural and synthetic lipids and related com-
pounds can act as PPAR ligands, but the endogenous ligands act-
ing in vivo remain a mystery. The fibrate class of lipid-lowering 
drugs, used clinically to lower circulating triglyceride levels, act as 
PPARα ligands. The thiazolidinedione class of insulin-sensitizing 
The action of the incretins explains the observation that orally 
ingested glucose provokes a greater insulin secretory response than 
does the same amount of intravenously administered glucose. 
 Insulin Receptors and Insulin Action 
 Insulin action begins with the binding of insulin to a receptor on 
the surface of the target cell membrane. Most cells of the body 
have specific cell surface insulin receptors. In fat, liver, and muscle 
cells, binding of insulin to these receptors is associated with the 
biologic response of these tissues to the hormone. These receptors 
bind insulin rapidly, with high specificity and with an affinity high 
enough to bind picomolar amounts. 
 Insulin receptors, members of the growth factor receptor family 
(see Chapter 1), are membrane glycoproteins composed of two 
protein subunits encoded by a single gene. The larger alpha 
 subunit (MW 135,000) resides entirely extracellularly, where it 
binds the insulin molecule. The alpha subunit is tethered by dis-
ulfide linkage to the smaller beta subunit (MW 95,000). The beta 
subunit crosses the membrane, and its cytoplasmic domain con-
tains a tyrosine kinase activity that initiates specific intracellular 
signaling pathways. 
 Downstream signaling. 
On binding of insulin to the alpha 
subunit, the beta subunit activates itself by autophosphorylation. 
The activated beta subunit then recruits additional proteins to the 
complex and phosphorylates a network of intracellular substrates, 
including insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1), insulin receptor 
substrate-2 (IRS-2), and others ( Figure 17–6 ). These activated 
substrates each lead to subsequent recruitment and activation of 
additional kinases, phosphatases, and other signaling molecules in 
a complex pathway that generally contains two arms: the mito-
genic pathway, which mediates the growth effects of insulin and 
the metabolic pathway, which regulates nutrient metabolism. 
 In the metabolic signaling pathway, activation of 
 phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase leads to the activation of serine/
TABLE 17–2 Regulation of insulin release.
Stimulants of insulin 
 release
Glucose
Amino acids: Leucine
Neural: Vagal stimulation, acetylcholine
Drugs: Sulfonylureas, meglitinides
Amplifiers of glucose-
 induced insulin 
 release
Enteric hormones:
 Glucagon-like peptide 1 (7–37) (GLP1)
 Gastric inhibitory peptide (GIP)
 Cholecystokinin, gastrin
 Secretin
Neural: β-adrenergic effect of 
 catecholamines
Amino acids: arginine
Drugs: GLP1 agonists
Inhibitors of insulin 
release
Neural: α-adrenergic effect of 
 catecholamines
Humoral: somatostatin
Drugs: diazoxide, thiazides, β-blockers,
 clonidine, phenytoin, vinblastine, 
 colchicine
580    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
drugs, used for the treatment of type 2 diabetes (see later), act as 
PPARγ ligands. 
 Deactivation of insulin signaling.  
Once activated by bind-
ing to insulin, the insulin receptor and downstream signaling cas-
cades rapidly deactivate again by several mechanisms. Insulin can 
simply disengage from the receptor, or the receptor can 
be internalized and degraded. The receptor and its tyrosine- 
phosphorylated substrates can be deactivated by specific protein 
tyrosine phosphatases such as PTP1b. In addition, inhibitory SOCS 
(suppressor of cytokine signaling) proteins block interactions 
between the phosphorylated receptor and interacting IRS proteins, 
direct the ubiquitination and degradation of the IRS proteins, and 
terminate the activation of downstream components of the signal-
ing pathway. Finally, serine phosphorylation of the insulin receptor 
and its active substrates by several different serine/threonine kinases, 
including components of the insulin-signaling pathway such as 
AKT, blocks insulin signaling. Many of these mechanisms may play 
a role in the development of insulin resistance (see later). 
 Metabolic Effects of Insulin 
 The major function of insulin is to promote storage of ingested 
nutrients. Although insulin directly or indirectly affects the func-
tion of almost every tissue in the body, the discussion here will be 
limited to a brief overview of the effects of insulin on the major 
tissues specialized for energy metabolism: liver, muscle, adipose 
tissue, and brain. In addition, the paracrine effects of insulin will 
be discussed briefly. 
 A. Paracrine effects 
 The effects of the products of endocrine 
cells on surrounding cells are termed  paracrine effects , in contrast 
to actions that take place at sites distant from the secreting cells, 
which are termed  endocrine effects (see Chapter 1). Paracrine 
effects of the β and δ cells on the nearby α cells (see  Figure 17–1 ) 
are of considerable importance in the endocrine pancreas. Insulin 
directly inhibits α cell secretion of glucagon. In addition, somatosta-
tin, which δ cells release in response to most of the same stimuli that 
provoke insulin release, also inhibits glucagon secretion. 
 Because glucose stimulates only β and δ cells (whose products 
then inhibit α cells) whereas amino acids stimulate glucagon as 
well as insulin, the type and amounts of islet hormones released 
during a meal depend on the ratio of ingested carbohydrate to 
protein. The higher the carbohydrate content of a meal, the lower 
the amount of glucagon released by any amino acids absorbed. In 
contrast, a predominantly protein meal results in relatively greater 
glucagon secretion, because amino acids are less effective at stimu-
lating insulin release in the absence of concurrent hyperglycemia 
but are potent stimulators of α cells. 
Pl3
kinase
PDK
IRS 1,2,3,4
Others?
MAP
kinase
pathways
TK
domain
PI4,5-P2
Protein
synthesis
Cross-talk
PI3,4,5-P3
PP-1
SOS
Insulin
α-Subunit
β-Subunit
Insulin
receptor
GRB2
SHC
Ras
GSK3
mTOR
GS
Glycogen
UDPG
G-6-P
Glucose
Glucose
GLUT 4-
containing
vesicles
GS
P90RSK
Nucleus
Growth/mitogenic
effects
Metabolic effects
P
–
PKB/AKT
 FIGURE 17–6  A simplified outline of insulin signaling. A minimal diagram of the mitogenic and metabolic arms of the insulin-signaling 
pathway is shown. GLUT 4, glucose transporter 4; Grb-2, growth factor receptor–binding protein 2; GS, glycogen synthase (P indicates the 
 inactive phosphorylated form); GSK-3, glycogen synthase kinase 3; IRS, insulin receptor substrate (four different proteins); MAP kinase, mitogen-
activated protein kinase; mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin; PDK, phospholipid-dependent kinase; PI3 kinase, phosphatidylinositol 
3 kinase; PKB/AKT, protein kinase B/AKR mouse tumor 8 kinase; PP-1, glycogen-associated protein phosphatase-1; Ras, rat sarcoma protein; SHC, 
Src and collagen homology protein; SOS, son-of-sevenless related protein; TK, tyrosine kinase). 
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     581
 B. Endocrine effects ( Table 17–3 ) 
 1. Liver—The first major organ reached by insulin via the blood-
stream is the liver. Insulin exerts its action on the liver in two 
major ways: 
 a.  Insulin promotes anabolism —Insulin promotes glycogen 
synthesis and storage while inhibiting glycogen breakdown. 
These effects are mediated by changes in the activity of 
enzymes in the glycogen synthesis pathway (see below). The 
liver has a maximum storage capacity of 100 to 110 g of 
glycogen, or approximately 440 kcal of energy. 
 Insulin increases both protein and triglyceride synthesis 
and very low density lipoprotein (VLDL) formation by the 
liver. It also inhibits gluconeogenesis and promotes glycolysis 
through its effects on the function and expression of key 
enzymes of both pathways. 
 b. Insulin inhibits catabolism— Insulin acts to reverse the 
catabolic events of the postabsorptive state by inhibiting 
hepatic glycogenolysis, ketogenesis, and gluconeogenesis. 
 2. Muscle— Insulin promotes protein synthesis in muscle by increas-
ing amino acid transport, as well as by stimulating ribosomal 
protein synthesis. In addition, insulin promotes glycogen synthesis 
to replace glycogen stores expended by muscle activity. This is accom-
plished by increasing glucose transport into the muscle cell, enhanc-
ing the activity of glycogen synthase, and inhibiting the activity of 
glycogen phosphorylase. Approximately 500 to 600 g of glycogen 
are stored in the muscle tissue of a 70-kg man, but because of the 
lack of glucose 6-phosphatase in this tissue, it cannot be used as a 
source of blood glucose, except for a small amount produced 
when the debranching enzyme releases unphosphorylated glucose 
from branch points in the glycogen polymer, and the glucose 
indirectly produced via the liver from lactate generated by muscle. 
 3. Adipose tissue— Fat, in the form of triglyceride, is the most 
efficient means of storing energy. It provides 9 kcal/g of stored 
substrate, as opposed to the 4 kcal/g generally provided by 
protein or carbohydrate. In the typical 70-kg man, the energy 
content of adipose tissue is about 100,000 kcal. 
 Insulin acts to promote triglyceride storage in adipocytes by 
a number of mechanisms. (1) It induces the production of 
lipoprotein lipase in adipose tissue (this is the lipoprotein lipase 
that is bound to endothelial cells in adipose tissue and other 
vascular beds), which leads to hydrolysis of triglycerides from 
circulating lipoproteins, thereby yielding fatty acids for uptake 
by adipocytes. (2) By increasing glucose transport into fat cells, 
insulin increases the availability of α-glycerol phosphate, a 
substance used in the esterification of free fatty acids into trig-
lycerides. (3) Insulin inhibits intracellular lipolysis of stored 
triglyceride by inhibiting intracellular lipase (also called 
 hormone-sensitive lipase ). This reduction of fatty acid flux to 
the liver is a key regulatory factor in the action of insulin to 
lower hepatic gluconeogenesis and ketogenesis. 
 4. Central nervous system— Although the brain is traditionally 
not considered an insulin-sensitive tissue, and overall glucose 
utilization by the brain is not acutely regulated by insulin, key 
regions of the brain can respond to insulin. Insulin signaling 
via PI3 kinase in key cells in the hypothalamus functions with 
leptin signaling to decrease appetite and increase energy expen-
diture (see Chapter 20). 
 C. AMPK and insulin-independent regulation of nutri-
ent metabolism 
 Insulin, along with the counter-regulatory 
hormones and other circulating enhancers and inhibitors of their 
actions, coordinates nutrient metabolism in response to the overall 
Insulin
β Cell
survival and
proliferation
AKT
Foxo1
PGC1α
SREBP1c
ACC
FAS
ACLY
Lipogenesis
Glycolysis
Gluconeogenesi
VLDL
GK
LPK
PDH
MTTP
PEPCK
G6P
 FIGURE 17–7  Regulation and function of Foxo1. The blue arrows 
indicate stimulation, and the red lines indicate inhibition. Processes acti-
vated by Foxo1 are labeled in blue, while the processes inhibited by 
Foxo1 are shown in red. (ACC, acetyl-CoA carboxylase; ACLY, ATP-citrate 
lyase; AKT, AKR mouse tumor 8 kinase; FAS, fatty acid synthase; G6P, glu-
cose-6-phosphatase; GK, glucokinase; LPK, liver pyruvate kinase; MTTP, 
microsomal triglyceride transfer protein; PDH, pyruvate dehydrogenase; 
PEPCK, phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase; PGC1α, peroxisome prolif-
erator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1; SREBP1c, sterol regula-
tory element-binding protein 1c). 
TABLE 17–3 Endocrine effects of insulin.
Tissue
Effect of Insulin
Liver
 
Catabolic Pathways
 Inhibits glycogenolysis
 Inhibits conversion of fatty acids and amino 
  acids to keto acids
 Inhibits conversion of amino acids to glucose
Anabolic Pathways
 Promotes glucose storage as glycogen (induces 
  glucokinase and glycogen synthase, inhibits 
  phosphorylase)
 Increases triglyceride synthesis and VLDL formation
Muscle
Protein Synthesis
 Increases amino acid transport
 Increases ribosomal protein synthesis
Glycogen Synthesis
 Increases glucose transport
 Induces glycogen synthethase
 Inhibits phosphorylase
Adipose 
Tissue
Triglyceride Storage
 Lipoprotein lipase is induced by insulin to hydro-
  lyze triglycerides in circulating lipoproteins for 
  delivery of fatty acids to the adipocytes
 Glucose transport into cell provides glycerol 
  phosphate to permit esterification of fatty 
  acids supplied by lipoprotein transport
 Intracellular lipase is inhibited by insulin
Brain
Decreased appetite
Increased energy expenditure
582    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
needs of the organism. At the level of the individual cell, however, 
additional mechanisms sense and respond to the local energy state. 
Among these mechanisms, adenosine monophosphate protein 
kinase (AMPK) plays a central role. When energy availability falls, 
the drop in cellular ATP concentration and rise in AMP trigger a 
conformational change in the trimeric AMPK complex and the 
subsequent activation of the catalytic domain by the serine/threo-
nine kinase LBK1/STK11. AMPK then drives the production of 
ATP by activating catabolic pathways and inhibiting synthetic path-
ways in the cell ( Figure 17–8 ). In muscle, in response to the rise in 
AMP during exercise, AMPK increases fatty acid oxidation and 
insulin-independent glucose uptake while inhibiting mTOR and 
protein synthesis. In the long term, AMPK also drives mitochon-
drial biogenesis. In liver cells, AMPK blocks fatty acid and triglyc-
eride synthesis while activating fatty acid oxidation, and also 
inhibits the gluconeogenic program by blocking cAMP activation of 
gene expression and inhibiting Foxo1/PGC1α-driven expression of 
the gluconeogenic genes. In brain, AMPK also functions as an 
energy sensor and plays a role in the regulation of appetite and 
energy expenditure by the hypothalamus. AMPK has also been 
implicated in the regulation of insulin secretion by β cells. 
 While predominantly an intracellular energy sensor, AMPK 
increases the sensitivity of cells to insulin, although the mechanisms 
remain uncertain. AMPK also responds to extracellular  signals, and 
contributes to the regulation of metabolism by many of the adipo-
kines and cytokines (see later) as well as cannabinoids. The bigu-
anide drugs, including metformin, which is used in the treatment of 
type 2 diabetes, activate AMPK by reducing mitochondrial produc-
tion of ATP and raising intracellular levels of AMP, and thereby 
lower blood glucose levels by inhibiting gluconeogenesis. 
 Glucose Transporter Proteins 
 Glucose oxidation provides energy for most cells and is critical for 
brain function. Because cell membranes are impermeable to hydro-
philic molecules such as glucose, all cells require carrier proteins to 
transport glucose across the lipid bilayers into the cytosol. Whereas 
the intestine and kidney have an energy-dependent Na + -glucose 
cotransporter, all other cells utilize non-energy-dependent transport-
ers that facilitate diffusion of glucose from a higher concentration to 
a lower concentration across cell membranes. Facilitative glucose 
transporters (GLUTs) comprise a large family including at least 
13 members, although some of the recently identified members of 
the family have not yet been shown to transport glucose. The first 
four members of the family are the best characterized, and they have 
distinct affinities for glucose and distinct patterns of expression. 
 GLUT 1 is present in all human tissues. It mediates basal 
 glucose uptake, because it has a very high affinity for glucose and, 
Tak1
CamKK
LKB1
Metformin
AMP
Adiponectin
Fatty acids
Mitochondrial
biosynthesis
Protein
synthesis
↓Growth
↓Glucose production
↑Glucose utilization
↓Lipid synthesis
↑Lipid oxidation
Cholesterol
synthesis
Triglyceride
synthesis
Fatty acid
synthesis
Fatty acid
oxidation
Glycolysis
PKA
PP2C
Resistin
Insulin
AKT
TSC1/2
TORC2
Proliferation
mTOR
eEF2
Glut4
HK
PFK2
PGC1α
HMGR
GPAT
ACC
FAS
SREBP1c
MCD
AMPK
Malonyl CoA
Gluconeogenesis
G6P
PEPCK
 FIGURE 17–8  Regulation and function of AMPK. Proteins that are directly phosphorylated by AMPK are shown in bold font. The blue 
arrows indicate stimulation, and the red lines indicate inhibition. Processes activated by AMPK are labeled in blue, while the processes inhibited 
by AMPK are shown in red. (ACC, acetyl-CoA carboxylase; AKT, AKR mouse tumor 8 kinase; CamKK, calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein 
kinase kinase; eEF2, eukaryotic translation elongation factor 2; FAS, fatty acid synthase; G6P, glucose-6-phosphatase; GPAT, glycerol-3-phosphate 
acyltransferase, mitochondrial; HK, hexokinase; HMGR, HMG-CoA reductase; LKB1, liver kinase B1; MCD, malonyl-CoA decarboxylase; 
mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin; PEPCK, phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase; PFK2, 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6- 
bisphosphatase; PGC1α, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1; PKA, protein kinase A; PP2C, protein phosphatase 
2C; SREBP1c, sterol regulatory element–binding protein 1c; Tak1, TGF-beta-activated kinase 1; transducer of regulated cAMP response 
 element-binding protein 2; TSC1/2, tuberous sclerosis 1). 
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     583
therefore, can transport glucose at the relatively low  concentrations 
found in the fasted state. For this reason, its presence on the 
surface of the endothelial cells of the brain vascular system 
(blood–brain barrier) ensures adequate transport of plasma glu-
cose into the central nervous system. 
 GLUT 3, which is also found in all tissues, is the major glucose 
transporter on neurons. It also has a very high affinity for glucose 
and is responsible for transferring glucose into neuronal cells at the 
lower concentrations found in the central nervous system. 
 In contrast, GLUT 2 has a lower affinity for glucose and thus 
increases glucose transport when plasma glucose levels rise, such as 
postprandially. It is a major transporter of glucose in hepatic, 
intestinal, and renal tubular cells. The low affinity of GLUT 2 for 
glucose reduces hepatic uptake of glucose during fasting, while its 
ability to transport glucose equally efficiently in both directions 
assists in the export of glucose from hepatocytes. GLUT 2 is also 
expressed on the surface of the β cells in rodents, but it is not 
detected at significant levels on human β cells. 
 GLUT 4 is found in two major insulin target tissues: skeletal muscle 
and adipose tissue. It is sequestered mainly within an intracellular com-
partment of these cells and thus does not function as a glucose transporter 
until insulin signaling causes translocation of GLUT 4 to the cell mem-
brane, where it facilitates glucose entry into these tissues after a meal (see 
 Figure 17–6 ). In muscle, exercise also drives GLUT 4 translocation to the 
cell surface by activating AMPK. 
 Islet Amyloid Polypeptide 
 Islet amyolid polypeptide (IAPP), or amylin, is a 37 amino acid 
peptide produced and stored with insulin in pancreatic β cells but 
only at a low ratio of approximately one molecule of IAPP to 100 
of insulin. β Cells cosecrete IAPP with insulin in response to glu-
cose and other β cell secretagogues. Although it plays a role in 
regulating gut physiology by decreasing gastric emptying and gut 
motility after meals, the full physiologic functions of IAPP remain 
uncertain. A soluble analog of IAPP called pramlintide has been 
approved for use in patients with type 1 diabetes and insulin-
treated type 2 diabetes (see later). 
 IAPP produces amyloid deposits in pancreatic islets of most 
patients with type 2 diabetes of long duration. These amyloid 
deposits are insoluble fibrillar proteins generated from IAPP 
 oligomers that encroach on and may even occur within pancreatic 
β cells. Islets of nondiabetic elderly persons may contain less 
extensive amyloid deposits. Whether amyloid fibrils and deposi-
tion contributes to the islet dysfunction and β cell loss seen in type 
2 diabetes or is simply a consequence of disordered and hyper-
stimulated islet function remains an unresolved question. 
 2. GLUCAGON 
 Biochemistry 
 Pancreatic glucagon, along with several other biologically active 
peptides, derives from the large proglucagon peptide encoded by 
the preproglucagon gene located on human chromosome 2. 
Tissue-specific proteases (the prohormone convertases) cleave 
different sets of peptide products from the proglucagon molecule 
in the endocrine L-cells of the gut and the α cells in the islet 
( Figure 17–9 ). The activity of prohormone convertase 2 in 
α cells generates the glucagon peptide, along with the amino- 
terminal glicentin-related peptide, a small central hexapeptide, 
and a large carboxyl-terminal fragment. 
Human
proglucagon
Glicentin-
related 
polypeptide
Glucagon
Glucagon
GLP-1
GLP-2
GLP-2
Pancreas
α cell
GRPP
GRPP
Hexa-
pep-
tide
Major proglucagon fragment
Small
intestine
Glicentin
Truncated
GLP-1 (7-37)
Oxyntomodulin
1
33
1
33
30
61 69
69
69
72
108
126
160
 FIGURE 17–9  Tissue-specific secretory products of human proglucagon (GLP-1, glucagon-like peptide-1; GLP-2, glucagon-like peptide-2; 
GRPP, glicentin-related polypeptide). 
584    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
 Glucagon consists of 29 amino acids in a single-chain 
 polypeptide with a molecular weight of 3485. In healthy humans, 
the average fasting plasma immunoreactive glucagon level is 
75 pg/mL (25 pmol/L). Only 30% to 40% of this is actually pan-
creatic glucagon, the remainder being a heterogeneous composite 
of higher-molecular-weight molecules with glucagon immunore-
activity such as proglucagon, glicentin, and oxyntomodulin. 
Circulating glucagon has a half-life of 3 to 6 minutes due to 
removal by the liver and kidney. 
 Secretion 
 In contrast to its stimulation of insulin secretion, glucose inhibits 
glucagon secretion. Conflicting data surround the question of 
whether glucose directly inhibits secretion from the α cell or 
whether it only acts via release of insulin and somatostatin from 
the β and δ cells, both of which inhibit the α cell directly. In addi-
tion, because β cells release gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) 
and α cells express inhibitory GABA receptors, GABA also may 
participate in the inhibition of α cells during β cell stimulation. 
 Many amino acids stimulate glucagon release, although they 
differ in their ability to do so. Some, such as arginine, release both 
glucagon and insulin; others (eg, alanine) stimulate primarily 
 glucagon release. Leucine, an effective stimulant of insulin release, 
does not stimulate glucagon. Other substances that promote 
 glucagon release include catecholamines, gastrointestinal hor-
mones (cholecystokinin [CCK], gastrin, and gastric inhibitory 
polypeptide [GIP]), and glucocorticoids. Both sympathetic and 
parasympathetic (vagal) stimulation promote glucagon release, 
especially in response to hypoglycemia. High levels of circulating 
fatty acids suppress glucagon secretion. 
 Action of Glucagon 
 In contrast to insulin, which promotes energy storage in a variety 
of tissues in response to feeding, glucagon provides a humoral 
mechanism for delivering energy from the liver to the other tissues 
between meals. The ratio of insulin to glucagon affects key target 
tissues by regulating the expression and activity of key enzymes 
controlling nutrient metabolism and, thereby, controlling the flux 
of these nutrients into or out of storage. 
 The liver, because of its connection to the pancreas via the 
portal vein, represents the major target organ for glucagon, with 
portal vein glucagon concentrations reaching as high as 300 to 
500 pg/mL (100-166 pmol/L) during fasting. It is unclear 
whether physiologic levels of glucagon affect tissues other than 
the liver. Glucagon signals through the glucagon receptor, a 
G protein–coupled receptor (GPCR) of the Gα s class found 
predominantly on the surface of hepatocytes. Binding of gluca-
gon to its receptor in the liver activates adenylyl cyclase and the 
generation of cAMP, which in turn mediates the phosphoryla-
tion or dephosphorylation of key enzymes regulating nutrient 
metabolism. In addition, like insulin, glucagon receptor signal-
ing modifies the activity of a set of cAMP responsive transcrip-
tional regulators that in turn control the expression of the genes 
encoding these same enzymes. 
 Glucagon signaling in the liver stimulates the breakdown of 
stored glycogen, maintains hepatic output of glucose from amino 
acid precursors (gluconeogenesis), and promotes hepatic output of 
ketone bodies from fatty acid precursors (ketogenesis). Glucagon 
facilitates the uptake of the gluconeogenic substrate alanine by 
liver, and directs fatty acids away from reesterification to triglycer-
ides and toward ketogenic pathways. In sum, glucagon signaling 
results in the net release of readily available energy stores from the 
liver in the form of glucose and ketones. 
 Glucagon-Related Peptides 
 In the intestinal L-cells, found predominantly in the distal ileum 
and colon, prohormone convertase 1 generates a different set of 
peptides from the proglucagon molecule, including glicentin, 
 glicentin-related polypeptide (GRPP), oxyntomodulin, and the 
two glucagon-like peptides  GLP-1 and  GLP-2 (see  Figure 17–9 ). 
Several biological activities have been attributed to glicentin and 
oxyntomodulin based on studies using high concentrations of the 
peptides, but all these actions can be explained by low-affinity 
interactions with the receptors for glucagon, GLP-1 and GLP-2. 
Specific receptors for glicentin and oxyntomodulin have not been 
identified, and it remains uncertain whether these peptides play 
any biological role at physiologic concentrations. GRPP also has 
no clearly established biological activity. The other two gut- 
derived glucagon-related peptides, GLP-1 and GLP-2, however, 
play important roles in nutrient metabolism and gastrointestinal 
physiology ( Table 17–4 ). 
 There are two active forms of GLP-1: GLP-1(7-36) amide, and 
GLP-1(7-37). The intestinal L-cells secrete GLP-1 in response to 
meals, through dietary glucose and lipids and parasympathetic 
stimulation. The L-cells sense dietary fat in the gut lumen in part 
through the GPR119 receptor, which binds the long chain fatty 
acid derivative oleoylethanolamide. GPR119 is also expressed on 
the surface of the β cells. GLP-1 binds to the GLP-1 receptor, a 
GPCR similar to the glucagon receptor. The ubiquitous protease 
dipeptidyl peptidase 4 ( DPP-4 ) rapidly inactivates circulating 
GLP-1 (half-life <2 min) by removing the two amino-terminal 
amino acids. Pancreatic islets are major targets of GLP-1 action. 
GLP-1 directly stimulates the production and secretion of insulin 
and somatostatin, and thereby indirectly inhibits the secretion of 
glucagon. In addition, GLP-1 protects the β cells from destruction 
and stimulates β cell growth. Other targets of GLP-1 include the 
stomach, where the peptide inhibits gastric emptying and gastric 
acid secretion; the brain, where it inhibits appetite and induces 
weight loss; and the heart, where it has some protective effects. 
 Along with GLP-1, intestinal L-cells cosecrete GLP-2 in 
response to eating; and like GLP-1, GLP-2 binds to a specific 
GPCR closely related to the glucagon and GLP-1 receptors. 
DPP-4 also inactivates GLP-2. GLP-2 signaling predominantly 
targets the intestine, where it stimulates mucosal growth and 
nutrient absorption and inhibits motility. 
 The K cells in the duodenum and jejunum produce a related 
42 amino acid incretin peptide,  GIP , that has both functional and 
sequential similarity to GLP-1, but is the product of a distinct 
gene and binds to a distinct receptor, GIPR, which also belongs to 
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     585
the family of glucagon-related Gα s -linked receptors. The K cells 
secrete GIP in response to glucose—via the same pathway used by 
the β cell (see  Figure 17–5 )—and lipids. Interestingly, the GIP prepro-
peptide is also expressed in α cells, but prohormone convertase 2 
in α cells produces a shorter peptide, GIP 1-30 , which lacks the 
12 carboxyl amino acids present in intestinal GIP 1-42 . The two 
forms of GIP appear to function identically. GIP signaling 
through its receptor has similar effects to those of GLP-1 on the 
stomach and β cells. α Cells also express the GIP receptor, through 
which GIP directly stimulates glucagon secretion; but GIP con-
comitantly suppresses glucagon secretion indirectly through its 
stimulation of insulin secretion. The GIP receptor is also expressed 
in adipose tissue and bone. In adipose tissue, GIP plays an impor-
tant role in the differentiation of new adipocytes, and also drives 
lipogenesis and adipokine production in mature adipocytes. In 
bone, GIP stimulates the osteoblasts and increases bone density. 
 3. SOMATOSTATIN 
 The pancreatic δ cells transcribe the gene for somatostatin on the 
long arm of chromosome 3. It codes for a 116 amino acid peptide, 
preprosomatostatin, from whose carboxyl end is cleaved the hor-
mone somatostatin, a 14 amino acid cyclic polypeptide with a 
molecular weight of 1640 ( Figure 17–10 ). First identified in the 
hypothalamus, it owes its name to its ability to inhibit the release 
of growth hormone (GH; pituitary somatotropin). Since that 
time, somatostatin has been found in a number of tissues, includ-
ing many areas of the brain and peripheral nervous system, 
the endocrine D cells in the epithelial lining of the stomach and 
intestine, and the δ cells in the pancreatic islets. In neurons, gastric 
D cells and the islet, somatostatin-14 predominates, but approxi-
mately 5% to 10% of the somatostatin-like immunoreactivity in 
the brain consists of a 28 amino acid peptide, somatostatin-28. 
Somatostatin-28 consists of an amino terminal region of 14 amino 
acids and a carboxyl terminal segment containing somatostatin-14. 
In small intestine, the larger molecule predominates, with 70% to 
75% of the hormone in the 28 amino acid form and only 25% to 
30% as somatostatin-14. Somatostatin-28 is 10 times more potent 
than somatostatin-14 in inhibiting growth hormone and insulin 
secretion, whereas somatostatin-14 is more effective in inhibiting 
glucagon release. 
 Most known stimulators of insulin release also promote soma-
tostatin release from δ cells. This includes glucose, arginine, gas-
trointestinal hormones, and sulfonylureas. The importance of 
circulating somatostatin is unclear; the major action of this 
peptide appears to be paracrine regulation of the pancreatic 
islet and the gastrointestinal tract. Physiologic levels of somatosta-
tin in humans seldom exceed 80 pg/mL (49 pmol/L). The 
metabolic clearance of exogenously infused somatostatin in 
humans is extremely rapid; the half-life of the hormone is less than 
3 minutes. 
 Molecular cloning has identified five somatostatin receptors 
(SSTR1-5), all of which are GPCRs. They vary in size from 364 
to 418 amino acids (with 105 amino acids invariant) and function 
in the central nervous system and a wide variety of peripheral tis-
sues, including the pituitary gland, the small intestine, and the 
pancreas. All five receptors belong to the Gα i class and inhibit the 
activity of adenylate cyclase, thereby lowering intracellular levels 
TABLE 17–4 Biologic roles of glucagon-related peptides.
Target Tissue
Glucagon
GLP-1
GLP-2
GIP
Islet
Stimulates insulin secretion
Stimulates insulin and 
 somatostatin secretion
Inhibits glucagon secretion 
 (indirectly)
Increases β cell mass by 
 inhibiting β cell death and 
 inducing β cell proliferation
Stimulates insulin, somatostatin, 
 and glucagon secretion
Inhibits glucagon secretion 
 (indirectly)
Increases β cell mass by 
 inhibiting β cell death and 
 inducing β cell proliferation
Liver
Stimulates glycogenolysis, 
 glucogenesis, fatty acid 
 oxidation, and ketogenesis
Inhibits glycogen synthesis 
 and fatty acid synthesis
Stomach
Inhibits gastric acid secretion
Inhibits gastric emptying
Inhibits gastric acid secretion
 and gastric emptying
Intestine
Stimulates mucosal
 growth and nutrient 
 absorption
Inhibits motility
Adipose tissue
Stimulates adipogenesis, 
 lipogenesis, and adipokine 
 production
Brain
 (hypothalamus)
Inhibits appetite
586    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
of cAMP and inhibiting cAMP-activated secretion. In addition, 
however, each of the different somatostatin receptors interacts 
with additional distinct downstream effectors that modify the 
 cellular consequences of receptor activation. Binding of ligand to 
SSTR5 on β cells mediates the inhibition of insulin secretion, 
whereas inhibition of GH release from pituitary somatotrophs as 
well as glucagon release from α cells of the pancreas works through 
SSTR2. This explains why an analog of somatostatin, octreotide, 
which has a much greater affinity for SSTR2 than for SSTR5, is 
effective in correcting GH excess without having much effect on 
carbohydrate tolerance when used to treat acromegaly. 
 Somatostatin acts in several ways to restrain the movement of 
nutrients from the intestinal tract into the circulation. It prolongs 
gastric emptying time, decreases gastric acid and gastrin produc-
tion, diminishes pancreatic exocrine secretion, decreases splanch-
nic blood flow, and retards xylose absorption. 
 4. PANCREATIC POLYPEPTIDE 
 PP is found in PP cells located chiefly in islets in the posterior 
portion of the head of the pancreas. Similar to the other islet 
 hormones, PP derives from a larger prepropeptide of 85 amino acids 
that is cleaved to a single 36 amino acid peptide with a molecular 
weight of 4200. Circulating levels of the peptide increase in response 
to a mixed meal; however, intravenous infusion of glucose or lipid 
does not produce such a rise, and intravenous amino acids induce 
only a small increase. In contrast, vagotomy abolishes the response 
to an ingested meal, demonstrating that PP secretion responds pre-
dominantly to neural, rather than nutrient signals. 
 In healthy subjects, basal levels of PP average 24 ± 4 pmol/L 
and may become elevated owing to a variety of factors including 
old age, alcohol abuse, diarrhea, chronic renal failure,  hypoglycemia, 
or inflammatory disorders. Values above 300 pmol/L are found in 
most patients with pancreatic endocrine tumors such as gluca-
gonoma or vasoactive intestinal polypeptide-secreting tumor and 
in all patients with tumors of the pancreatic PP cell. As many as 
20% of patients with insulinoma and one-third of those with 
gastrinomas also have plasma concentrations of PP that are greater 
than 300 pmol/L. 
 Although it has been implicated in the regulation of exocrine 
pancreatic secretion and gall bladder contraction, the physiologic 
actions of PP remain uncertain. 
 5. GHRELIN 
 The peptide hormone ghrelin was originally identified in 
extracts from the stomach based on its ability to bind to and 
activate the growth hormone secretagogue receptor (GHSR) 
and stimulate growth hormone release from the pituitary. The 
P/D1 endocrine cells in the gastric mucosa and the ε cells in the 
islet make ghrelin, as do a few cells in the heart, lung, kidney, 
immune system, hypothalamus, and pituitary. The human 
 GHRELIN gene comprises four exons, and the major splice 
product encodes the 117 amino acid preproghrelin peptide. 
Processing in the ε cells yields the active form of ghrelin: a 
28 amino acid peptide (amino acids 24-51 of preproghrelin) 
with the serine in position 3 modified by the attachment of 
an octanoyl side chain. Full biological activity requires the 
 n -octanoyl modification. In addition, protease cleavage gener-
ates a second peptide, obestatin (amino acids 76-98 of 
 preproghrelin) of less certain biological function. 
 Initially identified as a stimulator of growth hormone secre-
tion, ghrelin signals through its receptor, the previously identi-
fied GHSR, which is a GPCR found in a variety of tissues, 
including the hypothalamus, pituitary, intestine, and islet. 
Ghrelin signaling stimulates growth hormone secretion directly 
through its receptor on pituitary somatotrophs, and also 
through its stimulation of hypothalamic GHRH secretion. In 
addition, Ghrelin induces gastric emptying and acid secretion 
and regulates appetite and energy balance via neurons in the 
arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus (see Chapter 20). The role 
of ghrelin signaling in the pancreas, and the relative contribu-
tion of islet-derived ghrelin to the overall actions of ghrelin 
remains unresolved. 
Phe
Asn
Gly
Thr
Thr Ser
Cys
Cys
Lys
Trp
Ala
Phe
Phe
Lys
SOMATOSTATIN-14
ARG-LYS
ARG
Prosomatostatin (28 AA)
Preprosomatostatin (116 AA)
(Somatostatin-28)
Somatostatin (14 AA)
1
12
13
14
15
28
-COOH
NH2
–
1
14
 FIGURE 17–10  Amino acid sequence of somatostatin and its cleavage from dibasic amino acid residue in prosomatostatin and 
preprosomatostatin. 
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     587
 DIABETES MELLITUS 
 Clinical diabetes mellitus is a syndrome of disordered metabolism 
with inappropriate hyperglycemia due to an absolute or relative 
deficiency of insulin. There may also be a defect in insulin action 
(insulin resistance). 
 CLASSIFICATION 
 Diabetes is classified into four main groups based on known 
pathological and etiologic mechanisms—type 1, type 2, other 
specific types, and gestational diabetes ( Table 17–5 ). Type 1 
 diabetes (previously referred to as juvenile-onset or insulin depen-
dent diabetes mellitus [IDDM]) results from pancreatic islet β cell 
destruction most commonly by an autoimmune process. These 
patients are prone to developing ketoacidosis and require insulin 
replacement. Type 2 diabetes (previously referred to as adult-onset 
or non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus [NIDDM]), the most 
prevalent form of diabetes, is a heterogeneous disorder most com-
monly associated with insulin resistance in the presence of an 
associated impairment in compensatory insulin secretion. 
 TYPE 1 DIABETES MELLITUS 
 Type 1 diabetes is immune-mediated in more than 95% of cases 
(type 1a) and idiopathic in less than 5% (type 1b). The rate of 
pancreatic β cell destruction may vary, but in most cases the pro-
cess is prolonged, extending over months or years, since evidence 
for an immune response can be detected long in advance of hyper-
glycemia in patients that eventually develop type 1 diabetes. It is a 
catabolic disorder in which circulating insulin is virtually absent, 
plasma glucagon is elevated, and the pancreatic β cells fail to 
respond to all known insulinogenic stimuli. In the absence of 
insulin, the three main target tissues of insulin (liver, muscle, and 
TABLE 17–5  Etiologic classification of diabetes mellitus.
  I. Type 1 diabetesa (β cell destruction, usually leading to absolute 
 
insulin deficiency)
  A. Immune-mediated, type 1a
  B. Idiopathic, type 1b
 II. Type 2 diabetesa (may range from predominantly insulin 
 
resistance with relative insulin deficiency to a predominantly 
 
secretory defect with minimal insulin resistance)
III. Other specific types
  A. Autosomal dominant genetic defects of pancreatic β cells
   1. Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY)
   2. Insulin gene (INS)
   3. ATP-sensitive potassium channel (KCNJ11 and ABBC8)
  B. Other genetic defects of pancreatic β cells
   1. Autosomal recessive genetic defects 
   2. Mitochrondrial DNA
   3. Ketosis-prone diabetes (KPD)
  C. Genetic defects in insulin action
   1. Insulin receptor mutations
   2. Lipoatrophic diabetes
  D. Neonatal diabetes
   1. Transient
   2. Permanent
  E. Diseases of the exocrine pancreas
   1. Pancreatitis
   2. Trauma, pancreatectomy
   3. Neoplasia
   4. Cystic fibrosis
   5. Hemochromatosis
   6. Fibrocalculous pancreatopathy
  F. Endocrinopathies
   1. Acromegaly
   2. Cushing syndrome
   3. Glucagonoma
   4. Pheochromocytoma
   5. Hyperthyroidism
   6. Somatostatinoma
   7. Aldosteronoma
  G. Drug- or chemical-induced
   1. β cell toxicity: vacor, pentamidine, cyclosporine
   2. β cell autoimmunity: α-interferon
   3. β cell dysfunction: thiazide and loop diuretics, diazoxide, 
  
 α agonists, β blockers, phenytoin, opiates
   4. Insulin resistance: glucocorticoids, progesterone, nicotinic 
  
 acid, thyroid hormone, β blockers, atypical antipsychotic 
  
 drugs, antiretroviral protease inhibitors
  H. Infections
   1. Congenital rubella
   2. Other viruses: cytomegalovirus, coxsackievirus B, adenovirus, 
  
 mumps
  I. Uncommon forms of immune-mediated diabetes
   1. Stiff-person syndrome
   2. Immunodysregulation polyendocrinopathy enteropathy,
  
 X-linked (IPEX)
   3. Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome type 1
   4. Anti-insulin receptor antibodies
   5. Ataxia telangiectasia syndrome (antireceptor antibodies)
   6. POEMS syndrome
  J. Other genetic syndromes sometimes associated with diabetes
   1. Chromosomal defects: Down, Klinefelter, and Turner 
  
 syndromes
   2. Neuromuscular syndromes: Friedreich ataxia, 
  
 Huntington chorea, myotonic dystrophy, porphyria, and others
   3. Obesity syndromes: Laurence-Moon-Biedl, Bardet-Biedl, 
  
 Prader-Willi syndromes, and others
   4. Wolfram syndrome
IV. Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM)
aPatients with any form of diabetes may require insulin treatment at some stage of their disease. Such use of insulin does not, of itself, classify the patient.
Modified from American Diabetes Association: Diabetes Care. 2010;33(suppl 1):S65.
588    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
fat) not only fail to appropriately take up absorbed nutrients but 
continue to deliver glucose, amino acids, and fatty acids into the 
bloodstream from their respective storage depots. Furthermore, 
alterations in fat metabolism lead to the production and accumu-
lation of ketones. This inappropriate persistence of the fasted state 
postprandially can be reversed by the administration of insulin. 
 The incidence of type 1 diabetes varies widely in different 
populations. Scandinavia and northern Europe have the highest 
incidence of type 1 diabetes: the yearly incidence per 100,000 
youngsters 14 years of age or less is as high as 40 in Finland, 31 in 
Sweden, 22 in Norway, 27 in Scotland, and 20 in England. The 
incidence of type 1 diabetes generally decreases across the rest of 
Europe to 11 in Greece and 9 in France. Surprisingly, the island 
of Sardinia has as high an incidence as Finland, even though in the 
rest of Italy, including the island of Sicily, the incidence is only 11 
per 100,000 per year. The United States averages 16 per 100,000. 
The lowest incidence of type 1 diabetes worldwide is less than 1 
per 100,000 per year in China and parts of South America. 
 Worldwide incidence of type 1 diabetes continues to increase 
steadily. In Finland, the incidence has more than tripled since 
1953, when it was 12/100,000/year, with an average increase of 
2.4% per year. The EURODIAB study group reported recently 
0.6 % to 9.3 % annual increases in incidence of type 1 diabetes in 
children younger than 15 years in various European countries. 
The most rapid increases have occurred in low-prevalence coun-
tries and in younger patients. Changes in environmental factors 
most likely explain this increased incidence. 
 Latent autoimmune diabetes of adulthood (LADA): Type 1 
diabetes can present at any age, although peaks in incidence occur 
before school age and again at around puberty. Older adults often 
present with a more indolent onset that sometimes leads to misdi-
agnosis and has led to the use of the term  latent autoimmune 
diabetes of adulthood (LADA) to distinguish these patients. 
These initially unrecognized patients may retain enough β cell 
function at the outset to avoid ketosis, but develop increasing 
dependence on insulin therapy over time as their β cell mass 
diminishes. Islet cell antibody surveys among northern Europeans 
indicate that up to 15% of patients previously diagnosed with type 
2 diabetes may actually have LADA. 
 Autoimmunity and Type 1 Diabetes 
 Most patients with type 1 diabetes at diagnosis have circulating 
antibodies against β cell proteins: islet cell antibodies (ICA), insulin 
autoantibodies (IAA), and antibodies to glutamic acid decarboxy-
lase 65 (GAD), tyrosine phosphatase IA2 (ICA512), and zinc 
transporter 8 (ZnT8) ( Table 17–6 ). These autoreative antibodies 
can often be detected well before the onset of frank hyperglycemia, 
even decades earlier, providing evidence that the autoimmune pro-
cess may be prolonged. After diagnosis, autoantibody levels often 
decline with increasing duration of the disease. Also, once patients 
are treated with insulin, low levels of IAA develop, even in patients 
that do not have an autoimmune etiology for their diabetes. 
 Although useful for diagnosing and predicting type 1 diabetes, 
antibodies against β cell proteins do not directly cause the destruc-
tion of β cells in type 1 diabetes. Instead, it is the cellular immune 
system, the T lymphocytes, that infiltrate the islets (a process 
called insulitis) and destroy the β cells. At the time of diagnosis, 
the islets of patients with type 1 diabetes are extensively infiltrated 
with both helper and cytotoxic T lymphocytes. 
 Normally, the thymus deletes autoreactive T cells during devel-
opment so that the immune system becomes tolerant of self- 
antigens. In addition, certain specialized T cells, the regulatory T 
cells, further prevent attacks against healthy tissues by retraining 
the activity of any autoreactive cytotoxic and helper T cells that 
escape the thymus. Type 1 diabetes results from a breakdown in 
these processes of self-tolerance in the immune system. 
 Type 1b diabetes: Approximately 5% of patients with the 
clinical features of type 1 diabetes lack serum evidence of auto-
immunity. Some of these individuals have high risk HLA haplo-
types (see later) and may have T-cell–mediated β cell destruction 
in the absence of measurable levels of the known autoantibodies. 
Others in this group have low-risk HLA haplotypes, and appear to 
have a nonautoimmune cause for loss of β cell function. Such 
nonautoimmune type 1 diabetes has been referred to as type 1b 
diabetes, but a variety of terms has been used. This probably rep-
resents a heterogeneous group of disorders that lead to profound 
β cell dysfunction or loss, absolute insulin deficiency and a syn-
drome clinically similar to autoimmune type 1a diabetes. Under 
the accepted classification system, as specific disorders within this 
subgroup become defined and the genetic or environmental causes 
are identified, these disorders become reclassified within the group 
of “Other Specific Types of Diabetes.” 
 Included within this group are patients that present with a 
course of relapsing diabetic ketoacidosis with intervening normo-
glycemia that eventually progresses to permanent insulin-deficient 
diabetes. This disorder, ketosis prone diabetes (KPD, see later), 
has also been referred to as type 1b diabetes, and may result from 
unknown environmental insults combined with genetic defects in 
the β cell. 
 Autoimmune diabetes and stiff person syndrome: GAD 
antibodies, the first identified in type 1 diabetes, remain among 
the most clinically useful. Human pancreatic β cells produce 
GAD65, which functions as an enzyme that catalyzes the synthesis 
of GABA from glutamate. GAD65 and the closely related isoform 
GAD67 are also found in central nervous system inhibitory neu-
rons that secrete GABA. Some patients with GAD antibodies 
TABLE 17–6  Diagnostic sensitivity and specificity 
of autoimmune markers in newly 
diagnosed patients with type 1 
diabetes mellitus.
Sensitivity
Specificity
Glutamic acid decarboxylase 
 (GAD65)
70%-90%
99%
Insulin (IAA)
40%-70%
99%
Tyrosine phosphatase IA2 (ICA512)
50%-70%
99%
Zinc transporter 8 (ZnT8)
50%-70%
99%
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     589
develop a rare neurologic condition,  stiff person syndrome , 
caused by the depletion of GABA in the central nervous system 
and characterized by progressive rigidity and fluctuating muscle 
spasms. Approximately half of the patients with stiff person syn-
drome develop type 1 diabetes. 
 The vast majority of patients with type 1 diabetes do not 
develop symptoms of stiff person syndrome, despite the presence 
of GAD antibodies. The rare patients that develop the syndrome 
usually have much higher titers of GAD antibodies than typical 
patients with type 1 diabetes alone. 
 Genetics of Type 1 Diabetes 
 Family members of patients with type1 diabetes have an increased 
lifetime risk of developing type 1 diabetes. The offspring of a 
mother with type 1 diabetes have a risk of 3%, whereas the risk is 
6% for children of affected fathers. The risk in siblings of affected 
individuals is related to the number of human leukocyte antigen 
(HLA) haplotypes (see later) that the sibling shares. If one 
 haplotype is shared, the risk is 6% and if two haplotypes are shared, 
the risk increases to 12% to 25%. For monozygotic twins, the con-
cordance rate reaches 25% to 50%. Although these data demonstrate 
a strong genetic contribution to the risk of type 1 diabetes, genetics 
plays an even larger role in type 2 diabetes, and environment also 
clearly contributes substantially to the risk of type 1 diabetes. 
 Genes in the major histocompatibility (MHC) locus on the 
short arm of chromosome 6 explain at least half of the familial 
aggregation of type 1 diabetes. Within the MHC locus lie a num-
ber of closely packed genes involved in the function and regula-
tion of the immune response. Although a number of genes within 
the MHC locus have been linked to the risk of developing type 1 
diabetes, the most important of these are the genes encoding the 
HLA class II molecules DQ and DR. The professional antigen-
presenting 
cells—dendritic 
cells, 
macrophages 
and 
B 
 lymphocytes—use the class II molecules on their cell surface to 
present peptide antigens to T lymphocytes through the T-cell 
receptor. T cells activated by antigen-presenting cells carry out the 
β cell destruction that leads to type 1 diabetes. Although exact 
mechanisms remain uncertain, the variations in the amino acid 
sequence of individual HLA class II molecules may impact their 
ability to present specific self-peptides to T cells either in the pro-
cess of central or peripheral tolerization or later during the devel-
opment of the autoimmune response, thereby contributing to the 
risk of developing type 1 diabetes. 
 The DR haplotypes DR3 and DR4 are major susceptibility 
risk factors for type 1 diabetes. As many as 95% of type 1 diabetic 
patients have a DR3 or a DR4 haplotype—or both—compared 
with 45% to 50% of Caucasian nondiabetic controls. Individuals 
who express both a DR3 and a DR4 allele carry the highest risk 
for type 1 diabetes in the United States. 
 The high-risk  DR genes are generally in linkage disequilibrium 
with  DQ genes that themselves confer high risk, particularly 
DQA1 ∗ 0501, DQB1 ∗ 0201 (coupled with DR3), and DQA1 ∗ 0301, 
DQB1 ∗ 0302 (coupled with DR4). DQ alleles are associated not 
only with risk for type 1 diabetes but also with dominant protec-
tion, often in linkage with HLA-DR2. The most protective of 
these—and a quite common allele—is DQA1 ∗ 0102, DQB1 ∗ 0602. 
It occurs in over 20% of individuals in the United States but in 
less than 1% of  children who develop type 1 diabetes. 
 An independent genetic link to chromosome 11 has also been 
identified in type 1 diabetes. Studies of a polymorphic DNA locus 
flanking the 5′ region of the  insulin gene on chromosome 11 
revealed a small but statistically significant linkage between type 1 
diabetes and this genetic locus in a Caucasian population with 
type 1 diabetes. This polymorphic locus, which consists of a vari-
able number of tandem repeats (VNTRs) with two common sizes 
in Caucasians, small (26-63 repeats) or large (140-243 repeats), 
does not encode a protein. An intriguing proposal to explain how 
the VNTR might influence susceptibility to type 1 diabetes was 
based on findings that  insulin gene transcription is facilitated in 
the fetal thymus gland by the presence of the large allele of the 
VNTR locus flanking the  insulin gene. The large VNTR allele 
might produce a dominant protective effect by promoting nega-
tive selection (deletion) by the thymus of insulin-specific T lym-
phocytes that play a critical role in the immune destruction of 
pancreatic β cells. 
 The established genetic association with the MHC region of 
chromosome 6 contributes much more (about 50%) to the 
genetic susceptibility to type 1 diabetes than does this locus flank-
ing the  insulin gene on chromosome 11, which contributes about 
10%. Both candidate gene studies and genome-wide association 
studies (GWAS) have identified a number of additional risk loci 
that make smaller contributions to the genetic risk of type 1 
 diabetes. Many of the genes linked to these additional loci also 
play important roles in the function and regulation of the immune 
response. 
 Mutations in two genes involved in T-cell tolerance cause rare 
syndromes of type 1 diabetes together with other autoimmune 
diseases. In the autosomal recessive disease autoimmune 
 polyglandular syndrome type 1 (APS1; see Chapter 2), homozy-
gous mutations in the gene encoding the autoimmune regulator 
( AIRE ) prevent the expression of certain self-proteins in the thy-
mus, thus allowing mature autoreactive T cells to leave the thymus. 
In addition to other autoimmune diseases and mucocutaneous 
candidiasis, approximately 20% of patients with APS1 develop 
type 1 diabetes. The second gene,  FOXP3 , found on the X chromo-
some, encodes a transcription factor required for the formation of 
regulatory T cells. Mutations in  FOXP3 cause immunodysregula-
tion polyendocrinopathy enteropathy X-linked (IPEX) syndrome. 
IPEX presents in male patients with very early onset type 1 diabe-
tes, often neonatal, combined with other autoimmune endocrinop-
athies, autoimmune skin disorders, diarrhea secondary to 
autoimmune enteropathy, and frequent severe infections. 
 Environmental Factors in Type 1 Diabetes 
 While genetic inheritance may play an important role in causing 
type 1 diabetes, the monozygotic twin studies demonstrate that 
other causes, stochastic or environmental, are at least as impor-
tant. Most individuals with type 1 diabetes do not have other 
family members with the disease. Environmental factors associ-
ated with increased risk of type 1 diabetes include viruses (mumps, 
590    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
congenital rubella, Coxsackie virus B4), toxic chemical agents 
such as vacor (a nitrophenylurea rat poison), and other destructive 
cytotoxins such as hydrogen cyanide from spoiled tapioca or cas-
sava root. How these environmental insults lead to type 1 diabetes 
is unknown; they may directly damage β cells in some cases, or 
may act as initiators or accelerators of the autoimmune attack on 
the β cells. In some cases, molecular mimicry, wherein the 
immune system mistakenly targets β cell proteins that share 
homologies with certain viral or other foreign peptides may play a 
role. 
 Epidemiological studies have demonstrated an association 
between breast-feeding in the first 6 months of life and protection 
from type 1 diabetes. While it has been suggested that proteins in 
cow’s milk may be the culprits, the strongest evidence supports the 
idea that human breast milk may reduce the risk of autoimmune 
disease. 
 Accumulating evidence shows that in the process of modern-
izing and improving public health, the risk of type 1 diabetes has 
increased, possibly due to the removal of some protective factors. 
Type 1 diabetes is almost unheard of in many third-world coun-
tries, and has its highest incidence in countries with the best 
public health systems, such as the Scandinavian countries. In addi-
tion, the incidence of the disease has been steadily increasing over 
the past century in western and westernizing countries and is 
especially high among the more affluent. This has led to the 
 suggestion that a dirty environment, one with more infections 
(especially more parasitic diseases) and more antigen exposure, 
may reduce the risk of type 1 disease. 
 TYPE 2 DIABETES 
 Type 2 diabetes mellitus—previously called non-insulin- dependent 
diabetes or adult-onset diabetes mellitus—results from relative 
insulin deficiency, in contrast to the absolute insulin deficiency of 
patients with type 1 diabetes. Type 2 diabetes is a heterogeneous 
disorder and probably represents a large number of different pri-
mary genetic and environmental insults leading to relative insulin 
deficiency—a mismatch between insulin production and insulin 
requirements. Clinically, patients with type 2 diabetes can range 
from those with severe insulin resistance and minimal insulin 
secretory defects to those with a primary defect in insulin 
 secretion. 
 Type 2 diabetes accounts for 80% to 90% of cases of diabetes 
in the United States. These patients commonly present as adults 
with some degree of obesity, although increasing rates of obesity 
are leading to earlier onset of the disease in adolescents and 
 children. At onset, most patients with type 2 diabetes do not 
require insulin to survive, but over time their insulin secretory 
capacity tends to deteriorate, and many eventually need insulin 
treatment to achieve optimal glucose control. Ketosis seldom 
occurs spontaneously, and if present, it is a consequence of severe 
stress from trauma or infection. 
 Most patients with type 2 diabetes, irrespective of weight, have 
some degree of tissue insensitivity to insulin attributable to several 
interrelated factors ( Table 17–7 ). These include putative (mostly 
as yet undefined) genetic factors, which are aggravated in time by 
further enhancers of insulin resistance such as aging, a sedentary 
lifestyle, and abdominal visceral obesity. Not all patients with 
obesity and insulin resistance develop hyperglycemia, however. An 
underlying defect in the ability of the β cells to compensate for the 
increased demand determines which patients will develop diabetes 
in the setting of insulin resistance. Furthermore, both the tissue 
resistance to insulin and the impaired β cell response to glucose 
appear to be further aggravated by sustained hyperglycemia, which 
may impede both insulin signaling and β cell function. Treatment 
that reduces the blood glucose levels toward normal reduces this 
acquired defect in insulin resistance and may also improve 
 glucose-induced insulin release to some degree, although the 
 long-term decline in β cell function continues. 
 Type 2 diabetes frequently goes undiagnosed for many years 
because the hyperglycemia may develop quite gradually and with-
out initial symptoms. Despite this mild presentation, these 
patients develop microvascular, and, especially, macrovascular 
TABLE 17–7  Factors reducing response to insulin.
Pre-receptor
Insulin autoantibodies
Reduced transendothelial transit
Primary defect in insulin 
 signaling
Insulin receptor mutations
 Leprechaunism (complete)
 Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome (partial)
 Type A (mild)
Defects in other genes involved in insulin 
 signaling
Insulin receptor autoantibodies (Type B)
Ataxia telangectasia syndrome
Secondary to other 
 endocrine disorders
Cushing syndrome
Acromegaly
Pheochromocytoma
Glucagonoma
Hyperthyroidism
Insulinoma
Secondary to other 
 disorders
Visceral obesity
Stress (infection, surgery, etc)
Uremia
Hyperglycemia (mild resistance seen in
 type 1 diabetes)
Liver disease
Cytogenetic disorders (Down, Turner,
 Klinefelter)
Neuromuscular disorders (muscular 
 dystrophies, ataxias, muscle inactivity)
Congenital lipodystrophies/lipoatrophy
Acquired lipodystrophy
Secondary to normal 
 physiologic states
Puberty
Pregnancy
Starvation
Secondary to 
 medications
Glucocorticoids
Atypical antipsychotic drugs
Antiretroviral protease inhibitors
Nicotinic acid
Thiazide diuretics
Oral contraceptive
Progesterone
β blockers
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     591
complications. Furthermore, as noted above, patients with type 2 
diabetes suffer from a progressive decline in β cell capacity, leading 
to worsening hyperglycemia over time. 
 A. Obesity in type 2 diabetes 
 The majority of people with 
type 2 diabetes have excess adiposity, although the prevalence of 
obesity in association with type 2 diabetes varies among different 
racial groups. Sixty to eighty percent of North Americans, 
Europeans, or Africans with type 2 diabetes and close to 100% of 
individuals with type 2 disease among Pima Indians or Pacific 
Islanders from Nauru or Samoa have obesity as defined by body 
mass index (BMI, see Chapter 20), while as few as 30% of 
Chinese and Japanese patients with type 2 diabetes are obese. 
However, many of those individuals with type 2 diabetes who do 
not meet BMI criteria for obesity have a predominantly abdomi-
nal distribution of fat, producing an abnormally high waist to hip 
ratio. Increases in visceral adiposity correlate with increased insu-
lin resistance. 
 B. Insulin resistance in type 2 diabetes 
 Insulin resistance 
can be broadly defined as a decrease in tissue responsiveness to 
insulin. Clinically it can be assessed directly by measuring the 
 ability of a fixed dose of insulin to promote total body glucose 
disposal. It can be assessed indirectly by measuring fasting insulin 
levels. An increase in insulin levels with normal plasma glucose 
indicates insulin resistance. 
 As adiposity increases, especially abdominal visceral fat depos-
its, total body insulin sensitivity decreases. Since adipose tissue 
only removes a small fraction of plasma glucose, clearly the 
increased adipose fat stores impact total body insulin sensitivity 
through effects on other tissues, especially muscle and liver, caus-
ing them to decrease insulin-stimulated glucose disposal. The 
exact means by which fat storage in adipocytes affects the insulin 
sensitivity of other cells remains uncertain, but experimental evi-
dence suggests several possible mechanisms. 
 Abnormalities of insulin receptors—in concentration, affinity, 
or both—affect insulin action. Target tissues downregulate the 
number of insulin receptors on the cell surface in response to 
chronically elevated circulating insulin levels, probably by increased 
intracellular degradation. When insulin levels are low, on the other 
hand, receptor binding is upregulated. Conditions associated with 
high insulin levels and lowered insulin binding to the receptor 
include obesity, high intake of carbohydrates, and chronic exoge-
nous overinsulinization. Conditions associated with low insulin 
levels and increased insulin binding include exercise and fasting. 
The insulin receptor itself is probably not the major determinant 
of insulin sensitivity under most circumstances, however. Clinically 
relevant insulin resistance most commonly results from defects in 
postreceptor intracellular signaling pathways. 
 Adipokines.  
Adipose tissue can affect the insulin sensitivity 
of other tissues through the secretion of signaling molecules, 
 adipokines , that inhibit (TNF-α, IL-6, leptin, resistin, and oth-
ers) or enhance (adiponectin) insulin signaling locally or in distal 
target tissues (see Chapter 20). Levels of fat storage in adipocytes, 
along with insulin signaling itself, regulate the production and 
secretion of many of the adipokines. Some of these mediators of 
insulin resistance may reduce insulin signaling by blocking access 
of insulin to target tissues through reduced transendothelial tran-
sit. However, most evidence suggests that the secreted adipokines 
influence insulin signaling in distant tissues through effects on 
postreceptor intracellular signaling pathways. Potential intracel-
lular effectors include protein tyrosine phosphatases that dephos-
phorylate the receptor and pathway components, inhibitors such 
as the SOCS proteins that block receptor–IRS interactions, and 
serine/threonine kinases that inhibit the receptor and substrates 
through serine phosphorylation. 
 Free fatty acids and ectopic lipid storage.  
The release of 
fatty acids by the engorged adipocytes (especially visceral 
 adipocytes, from which fatty acids are more readily mobilized) 
may play a role in the development of insulin resistance as well. 
Oxidation of fatty acids by muscle and other tissues could inhibit 
glycolysis and reduce insulin-stimulated glucose removal (the 
Randle hypothesis, named after its original proponent). Increased 
fat storage in adipocytes and release of fatty acids may also even-
tually cause a shift in lipid storage, increasing lipid uptake and 
storage in nonadipose tissues such as muscle, liver, and β cells. 
Ectopic lipid storage in these tissues may lead to a decrease in 
their insulin sensitivity. In addition, free fatty acids may function 
directly in a signaling role both locally within the adipose tissue 
and systemically. 
 Inflammation.  
In addition to adipocytes, adipose tissue con-
tains a variety of other cell types including inflammatory/immune 
cells, such as macrophages and lymphocytes. Recent evidence 
implicates these cells in obesity-induced insulin resistance. As 
adipocyte lipid stores rise, the increased release of free fatty acids 
and proinflammatory adipokines recruits macrophages to the 
adipose tissue and activates them. The activated macrophages then 
release a variety of molecules (TNF-α, IL-6, nitric oxide, and 
 others) that decrease the insulin sensitivity of the adipocytes and 
further increase their release of proinflammatory fatty acids and 
peptides, creating a positive feedback loop that maintains a 
chronic state of local inflammation and insulin resistance. Release 
of these adipokines and proinflammatory cytokines, along with 
the increased release of free fatty acids and the development of 
ectopic lipid accumulation, promotes the development of inflam-
mation and insulin resistance in the other key insulin-target tis-
sues, such as muscle and liver. Similar mechanisms could also lead 
to inflammation in the islets and contribute to β cell failure. 
 PPARγ activity in the adipose tissue generally has beneficial 
effects on systemic insulin signaling through several mechanisms: 
(1) Promotion of adipose lipid storage, which thereby decreases 
ectopic lipid storage in nonadipose tissues; (2) Inhibition of the 
production of adipokines and proinflammatory cytokines, which 
promote insulin resistance, by adipocytes; (3) Promotion of the 
alternative activation of macrophages to the anti-inflammatory 
M2 state, rather than the proinflammatory M1 state; (4) Inhibition 
of the release of proinflammatory and proresistance cytokines by 
macrophages. Although it is expressed at much lower levels in 
muscle than in adipose tissue, PPARγ in myocytes might also have 
592    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
a direct role in controlling muscle insulin sensitivity; however, 
these findings remain controversial. 
 Tissue heterogeneity in insulin resistance.  
Finally, it must 
be kept in mind that not all tissues necessarily develop insulin 
resistance in parallel. The combination of local and systemic con-
tributors to obesity-induced insulin resistance may explain the 
different levels of insulin resistance in different tissues of the same 
patient. Even in the same cell, insulin resistance may impact dif-
ferent arms of the insulin-signaling pathway discordantly. This 
heterogeneity leads to changes in tissue energy storage and insulin 
sensitivity that could explain unique syndromes associated with 
insulin resistance like hepatic steatosis and polycystic ovary 
 syndrome. 
 Other causes of insulin resistance.  
Visceral obesity is not the 
only cause of insulin resistance, although it is by far the most common 
cause in most populations. Other causes of insulin resistance include 
a variety of genetic and acquired defects that impact the insulin recep-
tors or postreceptor signaling pathways (see  Table 17–7 ). 
 Clinical consequences of insulin resistance.  
In addition to 
the impact on glucose metabolism, severe insulin resistance and 
the resulting elevation in circulating insulin levels can cause other 
clinical consequences including acanthosis nigricans, pseudoacro-
megaly, and hyperandrogenism. Acanthosis nigricans appears to 
be a consequence of very high circulating insulin levels that cross 
over to bind to IGF receptors on epidermal and melanin- 
containing cutaneous cells. This leads to local skin hyperplasia 
with papillomatosis, hyperkeratosis, and hyperpigmentation. The 
dark, velvety patches of skin most commonly appear on the back 
of the neck, axillae, and anticubital fossae. In extreme and pro-
longed cases of insulin resistance, the secondary increase in signal-
ing through the IGF-1 receptor, or possibly residual signaling 
through the mitogenic arm of the insulin signaling pathway, can 
cause pseudoacromegaly, a syndrome with all of the bone and soft 
tissue changes of acromegaly (see Chapter 4), but no elevation in 
growth hormone or IGF-1. A similar action of extremely high 
insulin levels on ovarian hilar cells has been implicated in women 
with insulin resistance who develop hyperandrogenism and hirsut-
ism associated with menstrual irregularities, enlarged cystic ovaries 
and infertility (polycystic ovary syndrome). 
 C.  a Cell defects in type 2 diabetes 
 Although the major-
ity of people with type 2 diabetes have insulin resistance, most 
people with insulin resistance do not have diabetes because their β 
cells compensate for the insulin resistance by producing and 
secreting more insulin. Those individuals with insulin resistance 
who develop type 2 diabetes have a defect in the compensatory 
response of their β cells to insulin resistance. Functionally, this 
defect is revealed by a reduction in first phase insulin secretion and 
the maximal insulin secretion stimulated by glucose. 
 While increased insulin secretion per β cell may contribute to 
the compensatory response to insulin resistance, increases in the 
number of β cells play a role as well. In the setting of obesity, 
hyperplasia of pancreatic β cells is often present and probably 
accounts for the normal or exaggerated insulin responses to glu-
cose and other stimuli seen in obese individuals without type 2 
diabetes. Assessment of total β cell mass at autopsy has revealed 
that β cell mass increases in obesity, but the individuals with type 
2 diabetes have decreased β cell mass when compared to nondia-
betic individuals with the same BMI. 
 Several possible defects could contribute to the failure of β cell 
mass compensation in people with type 2 diabetes. Underlying 
genetic differences in the pathways that drive β cell expansion 
appear to limit compensation in individuals with high genetic risk 
of diabetes. In susceptible individuals with obesity, ectopic fat 
deposition in the islets, local obesity-induced inflammation in the 
islets, and local and circulating adipokines and inflammatory 
cytokines may accelerate β cell loss. As β cell failure progresses, 
levels of glucose and free fatty acids start to rise, which in turn can 
cause further β cell toxicity. Increased demand on a decreased 
β cell mass may cause further damage through ER stress and the 
increased formation of toxic IAPP oligomers. Then, once diabetes 
is established, all of these mechanisms may further contribute to 
the progressive decline in β cell function that characterizes type 2 
diabetes. 
 D. Metabolic syndrome 
 Patients with visceral obesity and 
insulin resistance often present with a cluster of abnormalities com-
monly termed the metabolic syndrome. Hyperglycemia in these 
patients is frequently associated with hyperinsulinemia, dyslipi-
demia, and hypertension, which together lead to coronary artery 
disease and stroke. It has been suggested that this aggregation 
results from a genetic defect producing insulin resistance, particu-
larly when obesity aggravates the degree of insulin resistance. In 
this model, impaired action of insulin predisposes to hyperglyce-
mia, which in turn induces hyperinsulinemia. If this hyperinsuline-
mia is of insufficient magnitude to correct the hyperglycemia, type 
2 diabetes is manifested. The excessive insulin level could also 
increase sodium retention by renal tubules, thereby contributing to 
or causing hypertension. Increased VLDL production in the liver, 
leading to hypertriglyceridemia (and consequently a decreased 
high-density lipoprotein [HDL] cholesterol level), has also been 
attributed to hyperinsulinism. Moreover, it has been proposed that 
high insulin levels can stimulate endothelial and vascular smooth 
muscle cell proliferation—by virtue of the hormone’s action on 
growth factor receptors—to promote atherosclerosis. 
 Although there is full agreement on an association of these 
disorders, the mechanism of their interrelationship remains specu-
lative and open to experimental investigation. Controversy persists 
about whether or not hypertension is caused by the hyperinsulinism 
that results from insulin resistance. Moreover, patients with hyper-
insulinism due to an insulinoma are generally normotensive, and 
there is no reduction of blood pressure after surgical removal of 
the insulinoma restores normal insulin levels. 
 An alternative unifying hypothesis could be that visceral 
 obesity directly induces the other components of this syndrome. 
Visceral obesity is an independent risk factor for all of the other 
components of the metabolic syndrome. In addition to the 
metabolic effects of visceral obesity, the adipokines and inflam-
matory cytokines generated from overloaded and inflamed 
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     593
 adipose tissue may contribute to the pathophysiology of the 
syndrome. Although the full details of the role of these molecules 
in causation of the metabolic syndrome remain under investiga-
tion, the adipocytes and associated macrophages clearly are not 
just innocent bystanders but play active roles in the development 
of systemic insulin resistance, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia. 
Furthermore, thrombi in atheromatous vessels may be more 
hazardous in patients with visceral obesity because of an associ-
ated increase in plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), a 
circulating factor produced by omental and visceral adipocytes 
that inhibits clot lysis. This model emphasizes the importance of 
measures such as diet and exercise that reduce visceral adiposity 
in the management of patients with metabolic syndrome and 
obese type 2 diabetes. 
 The main value of grouping these disorders as a syndrome, 
regardless of its nomenclature, is to remind physicians that the 
therapeutic goals in these patients must not only correct hypergly-
cemia but also manage the elevated blood pressure and hyperlipi-
demia that result in considerable cardiovascular morbidity as well 
as cardiovascular deaths. In addition, it reminds physicians that 
when choosing antihypertensive agents or lipid-lowering drugs to 
manage one of the components of this syndrome, their possible 
untoward effects on other components of the syndrome should be 
carefully considered. For example, physicians aware of this syndrome 
are less likely to prescribe antihypertensive drugs that raise lipids 
(diuretics, beta blockers) or that raise blood glucose (diuretics). 
Likewise, they may refrain from prescribing drugs that correct 
hyperlipidemia, but increase insulin resistance with aggravation of 
hyperglycemia (nicotinic acid). 
 E. Genetics of type 2 diabetes 
 Type 2 diabetes has a strong 
genetic link. Depending on the population studied, monozygotic 
twins have lifetime concordance rates for type 2 diabetes exceed-
ing 90%. In contrast, concordance rates for type 1 diabetes in 
monzygotic twins are 25% to 50%. Most individuals with type 2 
diabetes have other family members with the disease, but the 
inheritance rarely fits Mendelian patterns, supporting the conclu-
sion that multiple genes with varying degrees of penetrance con-
tribute. Because of the heterogeneous nature of type 2 diabetes, 
and its complex inheritance, efforts to identify the genes that con-
tribute to the disease have had very limited success in the vast 
majority of affected patients. There has been considerable success, 
however, in identifying small subsets of patients with unique 
monogenic forms of the disease. When the etiologic defect has 
been defined, these patients have been reclassified within a group 
designated “Other Specific Types of Diabetes” (see  Table 17–5 ). 
 Efforts to identify the genes involved in polygenic type 2 dia-
betes have focused on two approaches: candidate gene testing and 
genome-wide association studies (GWAS). To date candidate gene 
and GWAS approaches have identified 19 loci with common vari-
ants linked to type 2 diabetes. Although statistically significant 
and validated in additional populations, these loci independently 
make very small contributions to type 2 diabetes risk. The highest 
risk of these common variants is found at a locus adjacent to the 
gene encoding TCF7L2, a transcription factor involved in Wnt 
signaling and implicated in β cell turnover. Inheritance of the 
high-risk TCF7L2 allele increases the probability of developing 
diabetes by 1.5-fold. 
 Among the genes identified so far, most are involved in β cell 
function and turnover. When combined with the predominance 
of β cell genes implicated in mongenic forms of diabetes (see 
Other Specific Types of Diabetes), these results reinforce the criti-
cal role of the β cell in controlling blood glucose and its involve-
ment in the pathophysiology of type 2 diabetes. Hopefully, with 
the advent of high-throughput whole genome sequencing tech-
nologies, the identification of rarer, but higher risk, variants will 
further expand our understanding of the genetics of type 2 diabe-
tes in the near future. 
 F. Environmental factors in type 2 diabetes 
 Despite the 
critical role of genetics in type 2 diabetes, environment contrib-
utes as well, especially in determining the age of onset and severity 
of the disease. There is generally a low incidence of type 2 diabetes 
in underdeveloped countries, especially in rural areas. Western 
countries and westernizing countries suffer from a much higher 
incidence. Over the past half-century, the incidence of type 2 
diabetes has increased rapidly in almost all world populations but 
especially in emerging third-world countries. This increase corre-
lates with increasing rates of obesity in the same populations and 
reflects increased access to food with high caloric content and 
decreased physical activity. This combination inevitably leads to 
increased adiposity, especially in the more readily mobilized fat 
stores surrounding the viscera in the abdomen. 
 One of the most dramatic recent changes in the epidemiology 
of diabetes has been the growing incidence of type 2 diabetes in 
children. While rarely seen in children a generation ago, type 2 
diabetes is now as common as type 1 diabetes in teenagers in the 
United States and is seen with increasing frequency, even in 
younger children. Again, this increase is directly related to increas-
ing visceral adiposity. 
 OTHER SPECIFIC TYPES OF DIABETES 
 Autosomal Dominant Genetic Defects of 
Pancreatic a Cells 
 MODY: This subgroup of monogenic disorders is characterized 
by the onset of diabetes in late childhood or before the age of 
25 years as a result of a partial defect in glucose-induced insulin 
release and accounts for up to 5% of diabetes in North American 
and European populations. A strong family history of early-onset 
diabetes occurring in one parent and in one-half of the parent’s 
offspring suggests autosomal dominant transmission. In contrast 
to most patients with type 2 diabetes, these patients are generally 
nonobese and lack associated insulin resistance. Instead they 
exhibit predominantly a defect in glucose-stimulated insulin secre-
tion. However, because they are not ketosis-prone and may ini-
tially achieve good glycemic control without insulin therapy, their 
disease has been called  maturity-onset diabetes of the young 
( MODY ). Several distinct types have been described with single-
gene defects, and all have been shown to produce a defect in 
594    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
glucose-induced insulin release. MODY 2 results from an abnor-
mal glucokinase enzyme. Most of the other forms of MODY are 
due to mutations of nuclear transcription factors that regulate the 
expression of genes in β cells or β cell precursors ( Table 17–8 ). 
 MODY 1 includes multiple members of a large pedigree 
known as the R-W family, descendants of a German couple who 
immigrated to Michigan in 1861. They were studied prospectively 
since 1958, and in 1996 the genetic defect was shown to be a non-
sense mutation of a nuclear transcription factor found in liver as 
well as in pancreatic β cells. This gene has been termed  hepatocyte 
nuclear factor 4α ( HNF4α ) and is found on chromosome 20. 
Mutations of this gene are among the rarest of the MODY groups, 
with very few reported in families outside the Michigan pedigree. 
These patients display a progressive decline in β cell function and 
eventually develop chronic complications of diabetes including 
microangiopathy at a rate approaching that of people with type 1 
diabetes. They often fare better with insulin therapy. 
 MODY 2 was first described in French families but has now 
been found in racial groups from most parts of the world. Multiple 
different mutations of the  glucokinase gene ( GCK  ) on chromo-
some 7 have been identified and characterized. In pancreatic 
β cells, glucokinase controls the rate-limiting step in glycolysis and 
thereby determines the rate of ATP production from glucose and 
the insulin secretory response to glucose (see  Figure 17–5 ). 
Reduced glucokinase activity resets the sensitivity of the β cell to 
glucose so that it requires higher plasma glucose levels to stimulate 
insulin secretion, resulting in fasting hyperglycemia and mild dia-
betes. Although some of these mutations can completely block the 
enzyme’s function, others interfere only slightly with its action. In 
contrast to all the other forms of MODY, most patients with one 
mutated  GCK allele (heterozygotes) have a benign course with few 
or no chronic complications and respond well to diet therapy or 
oral antidiabetic drugs without the need for insulin treatment. On 
the other hand, rare individuals who inherit two mutated  GCK 
alleles have permanent neonatal diabetes (see later), a nonimmune 
form of absolute insulin deficiency that presents at birth. 
 In contrast to the mutations that reduce glucokinase enzyme 
activity and cause MODY 2, rare mutations in  GCK that increase 
the enzymatic activity of glucokinase can cause increased insulin 
secretion and hypoglycemia (see Chapter 18), demonstrating the 
key role of this enzyme in determining the sensitivity of the β cell 
to glucose. 
 MODY 3 is caused by mutations of  hepatocyte nuclear factor 1α 
( HNF1α ), whose gene is located on chromosome 12. This is the 
most common form of MODY in European populations, with many 
different mutations having been reported. Like  HNF4α , the  HNF1α 
transcription factor is expressed in pancreatic β cells as well as in liver. 
Also similar to  HNF4α , mutations in  HNF1α cause a progressive 
form of diabetes with declining β cell function that often leads to 
dependence on insulin therapy and high rates of microvascular com-
plications. Noteworthy, early in the course of the disease, these 
patients may display an exaggerated response to sulfonylureas. 
 Together,  HNF1α and  HNF4α , along with several other β cell 
transcription factors including  PDX1 (discussed later), form an 
interacting network of transcription factors. This transcriptional 
network regulates genes involved in multiple β cell functions, 
including glucose-sensing and insulin secretion. Target genes 
include  GCK , as well as genes implicated in the formation, matu-
ration and expansion of β cells. Impairment in β cell formation 
and regeneration may explain the progressive nature of the 
MODY transcription factor syndromes and reinforces the impor-
tance of β cell mass in preventing hyperglycemia. 
 MODY 4 results from mutation of a pancreatic nuclear tran-
scription factor known as  pancreatic and duodenal homeobox-1 
( PDX1 ), whose gene is on chromosome 13. It mediates  insulin 
gene transcription and regulates expression of other β cell-specific 
genes including  GCK . When both alleles of this gene are nonfunc-
tioning, agenesis of the entire pancreas results; but in the presence 
of a heterozygous mutation of  PDX1 , a mild form of MODY has 
been described in which affected individuals developed diabetes at 
a later age (mean onset at 35 years) than occurs with the other 
forms of MODY, in whom onset generally occurs before the age 
of 25 years. 
 MODY 5 was initially reported in a Japanese family with a 
mutation of  HNF1β , a hepatic nuclear transcription factor closely 
related in structure and molecular function to  HNF1α . The two 
 HNF1 factors, however, are expressed by different cells.  HNF1β is 
expressed early in the development of the liver, pancreas, kidneys, 
and genitourinary system, and is not found in mature β cells. 
TABLE 17–8  Autosomal dominant genetic defects of 
pancreatic β cell function.
Syndrome
Mutated Protein
Gene
Function
MODY 1
Hepatocyte nuclear
 factor-4α
HNF4A
Transcription
 factor
MODY 2
Glucokinase
GCK
Glucose 
 sensor
MODY 3
Hepatocyte nuclear
 factor-1α
HNF1A
Transcription
 factor
MODY 4
Pancreatic duodenal
 homeobox-1
PDX1
Transcription 
 factor
MODY 5
Hepatocyte nuclear
 factor-1β
HPF1A
Transcription 
 factor
MODY 6
NeuroD1
NEUOROD1
Transcription 
 factor
MODY 7
Kruppel-like 
 factor 11
KLF11
Transcription
 factor
MODY 8
Carboxyl-ester
 lipase
CEL
Exocrine
 enzyme
MODY 9
Paired homeobox 4
PAX4
Transcription
 factor
Mutant 
 insulin or 
 proinsulin
Preproinsulin 
INS
Hormone
KATP 
 mutations
Inward-rectifying K+
 channel 6.2
Sulfonylurea 
 receptor 1
KCNJ11 
ABBC8
Ion channel
Ion channel
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     595
 Mutations in this gene cause a moderately severe form of 
MODY with progression to insulin treatment and severe diabetic 
complications in those affected. Consistent with its expression 
pattern early in development,  HNF1β mutations also frequently 
cause reduction in the overall size of the pancreas, decreased insu-
lin production, and congenital defects in the kidney and urogeni-
tal tract. Patients may also suffer from varying degrees of 
cholestatic jaundice, hyperuricemia, nephropathy, and hypomag-
nesemia secondary to renal magnesium wasting. 
 MODY 6 , a milder form of MODY similar to MODY 4, 
results from mutations in the gene encoding the islet transcription 
factor NeuroD1. Like PDX1, NeuroD1 plays an important role in 
the expression of insulin and other  β cell genes, and in the forma-
tion and maintenance of β cells. 
 Other  MODY genes: The six  MODY genes listed above explain 
the majority of cases of MODY in patients of European ancestry, but 
less than half of those in non-European populations. Several rare 
variants in other genes have been implicated in autosomal dominant 
diabetes in a few families (see  Table 17–8 ); however, a consensus has 
not yet been reached that these families fit the criteria for MODY 
and that the reported variants cause the disorder. The causative genes 
in most non-Europeans with MODY remain unknown. 
 The identification of mutations in multiple genes encoding 
pancreatic transcription factors in patients with MODY has led to 
the screening of other genes encoding pancreatic transcription fac-
tors in patients with diabetes. Heterozygous mutations in genes 
encoding several transcription factors, including  Isl1 ,  Pax6 , and 
 Pax4 , have been identified in patients with later onset diabetes. 
The association of diabetes with heterozygous mutations in so 
many  β cell genes highlights the critical importance of optimal β 
cell function in metabolic regulation. Even modest defects in 
glucose-induced insulin secretion can result in hyperglycemia. 
 Insulin mutations: Sequencing of the  insulin gene more than 
30 years ago led to the first descriptions of heterozygous mutations 
in the coding sequence of the  insulin gene that produce abnormal 
circulating forms of insulin. Most of these initial cases presented 
with high circulating levels of insulin, but normal insulin sensitiv-
ity and normal glucose levels. Because the abnormal insulins in 
these cases bind to receptors poorly, they have very low biologic 
activity and are cleared at a slower rate, leading to accumulation 
in the blood at higher levels than normal insulin and a subnormal 
molar ratio of C peptide to immunoreactive insulin. They typi-
cally are not associated with hyperglycemia. 
 However, a mutation in the insulin B chain in one family was 
associated with decreased circulating levels of both the mutant and 
normal insulins, and diabetes. Subsequent extensive sequencing of 
the  INS gene has identified several other mutant insulins that 
produce a similar heterozygous form of diabetes. Modeling of 
these dominant insulin mutations in mice demonstrates that they 
lead to the accumulation of aberrantly folded proteins in the 
endoplasmic reticulum, activation of the unfolded protein response 
in the ER, and β cell apoptosis. Patients with diabetes secondary 
to  INS gene mutations usually present at a younger age than most 
patients with MODY, often developing the disease as neonates 
(see later). Because of the profound β cell loss, these patients 
 follow a disease course similar to type 1 diabetes with absolute 
insulin deficiency and ketosis, and they require insulin therapy. 
 This syndrome highlights the sensitivity of the β cells to ER 
stress, which may explain why β cells often fail when presented 
with the increased insulin demands associated with insulin resis-
tance, the toxicity of IAPP oligomers, or mutations in genes 
involved in the unfolded protein response pathway (see later). 
 Mutations in the subunits of the ATP-sensitive potassium 
channel: β cells sense rising blood glucose concentrations by 
increasing the production of ATP from glucose. The rising intra-
cellular ATP levels cause the closure of ATP-sensitive potassium 
channels on the cell surface, which depolarizes the cell and sets 
off a cascade of events that leads to the secretion of insulin 
( Figure 17–5 ). Rare dominant activating mutations in either of the 
two units of the channel, SUR1 and Kir6.2 (gene names  ABCC8 
and  KCNJ11 , respectively), can cause the channels to remain open 
and prevent glucose-induced depolarization and insulin secretion. 
Children heterozygous for these mutations present with early-onset 
diabetes, commonly as neonates, and may have associated neuro-
logic deficits implying a role for these channels in the central ner-
vous system. Depending on the exact mutation, some of these 
children can still respond to treatment with sulfonylureas, which 
may also ameliorate the neurologic symptoms. 
 Other Genetic Defects of Pancreatic a Cells 
 Autosomal recessive genetic defects: Although less common 
than the autosomal dominant β cell disorders, mutations in sev-
eral genes causing autosomal recessive syndromes with defects in 
β cell function have been identified in patients with diabetes 
( Table 17–9 ). Due to the severity of the β cell defect, many of 
these present with neonatal diabetes. This group of disorders 
includes homozygous mutations in the MODY genes  GCK and 
 PDX1 . Homozygous mutations in  GCK cause a much more severe 
syndrome than the mild glucose-sensing defect seen in MODY 2. 
Patients with homozygous  GCK mutations present at birth with 
severe hyperglycemia and require insulin therapy. 
 In patients with mutations in both alleles of  PDX1 , the pan-
creas fails to form, and they have pancreatic exocrine deficiency as 
well as diabetes. Homozygous mutations in several other pancre-
atic transcription factor genes have been described as well, includ-
ing  PTF1A ,  NEUROG3 ,  RFX6 , and  GLIS3 . Like  PDX1 , 
homozygous mutation of  PTF1A causes diabetes and pancreatic 
agenesis, but it also causes cerebellar atrophy as well. The tran-
scription factor Neurog3 drives the formation of the endocrine 
cells in both the pancreas and gut. In addition to diabetes onset 
prior to puberty, infants born with homozygous  NEUROG3 
mutations have severe malabsorption associated with a lack of gut 
endocrine cells from birth. 
 Homozygous mutations in  RFX6 , which encodes a transcription 
factor that functions downstream of  NEUROG3 and upstream of 
 PDX1 in β cell development, cause  Mitchell–Riley syndrome in 
which neonates present with diabetes in association with complete 
absence of all islet cell types except PP cells, hypoplasia of the pancreas 
and gall bladder, intestinal atresia, and severe malabsorption. 
596    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
 The zinc finger transcription factor GLIS3 is expressed broadly 
in many tissues and plays a role in the transcription of the  insulin 
gene. Homozygous mutations in  GLIS3 cause congenital hypo-
thyroidism in addition to neonatal diabetes. 
 In the autosomal recessive  Wolcott-Rallison syndrome , 
affected children present with neonatal diabetes, epiphyseal 
dysplasia, and growth retardation together with a variety of 
progressive hepatic, renal, cardiac, and pancreatic exocrine 
defects and developmental delay. The causative gene,  EIF2AK3, 
encodes a kinase (PKR-like ER kinase [PERK]) activated by the 
presence of unfolded proteins in the ER. PERK controls one of 
the three parallel arms of the unfolded protein response; inosi-
tol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1) and activating transcription fac-
tor 6 (ATF6) activate the other two arms. Together these three 
molecules activate signaling pathways that protect the cell from 
ER stress but lead to apoptosis when these protective mecha-
nisms fail. Mice lacking PERK have an inadequate response to 
ER stress, which leads to accelerated β cell apoptosis. With the 
high load of insulin production in the ER, β cells are uniquely 
sensitive to ER stress, and this sensitivity probably underlies the 
damage caused by mutant insulins, IAPP oligomers, and 
Wolfram syndrome as well. 
 Wolfram syndrome is an autosomal recessive neurodegenera-
tive disorder first evident in childhood. Patients present with dia-
betes insipidus, diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy, and 
deafness—hence the acronym DIDMOAD. Diabetes mellitus 
usually develops in the first decade together with the optic atro-
phy, followed by central diabetes insipidus and sensorineural deaf-
ness during the second decade in 60% to 75% of patients. 
Ureterohydronephrosis, neurogenic bladder, cerebellar ataxia, 
peripheral neuropathy, and psychiatric illness develop later in 
many patients. The diabetes mellitus is nonimmune and not 
linked to specific HLA antigens, but on autopsy these patients 
have selective loss of β cells in the pancreas. Genetic studies 
mapped the causative mutations to a gene called  WFS1 , which 
encodes a 100.3-kDa transmembrane protein localized to the 
endoplasmic reticulum membranes of all cells.  WFS1 is expressed 
at particularly high levels in β cells. Studies in mice have shown 
that the WFS1 protein forms part of the unfolded protein 
response downstream of PERK and IRE1 and helps protect the 
β cells from ER stress and apoptosis, especially during periods of 
high insulin demand. 
 Children with  thiamine-responsive megaloblastic anemia 
syndrome carry mutations in the high-affinity thiamine trans-
porter SLC19A2 found on cell and mitochondrial membranes. 
They develop megalobastic anemia, diabetes, and sensorineuronal 
deafness. The diabetes usually presents in the first decade of life. 
In the absence of SLC19A2, cells and mitochondria can still trans-
port thiamine through lower affinity transporters, and both the 
anemia and the diabetes respond to pharmacologic treatment with 
thiamine. However, all patients eventually require insulin replace-
ment despite thiamine therapy. It remains unclear how partial 
defects in cellular and mitochondrial thiamine transport cause 
β cell failure. 
 Mitochondrial DNA mutations: Because sperm do not contain 
mitochondria, only the mother transmits mitochondrial genes to her 
offspring. Diabetes due to a mutation of mitochondrial DNA that 
impairs the transfer of leucine into mitochondrial proteins has now 
been described in a large number of families, and results from impaired 
β cell function. The incidence of this disorder is as high as 1% to 3% 
in patients with diabetes in Japan and Korea, but lower in European 
populations. Most patients have a mild form of maternally transmitted 
diabetes with insulin deficiency that responds to oral hypoglycemic 
agents; however, some patients have a more severe clinical picture 
similar to type 1a diabetes. As many as 63% of patients with this sub-
type of diabetes have hearing loss and a smaller proportion (15%) have 
a syndrome of myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and stroke-
like episodes. 
 Ketosis-Prone Diabetes 
 First described in young adult African American males from the 
Flatbush neighborhood in New York City, but since described in 
a number of populations of both African and non-African ances-
try, these patients typically present with diabetic ketoacidosis and 
absolute insulin deficiency, followed by extended clinical remis-
sion off insulin. When tested during remission, however, maximal 
insulin secretory capacity remains markedly reduced, and these 
TABLE 17–9 Autosomal recessive genetic defects of pancreatic a cell function.
Function
Protein
Gene
Associated Defects
Glucose sensing
Transcription 
 factor
Unfolded protein 
 response
Thiamine 
 transport
Glucokinase
Pancreatic duodenal homeobox-1
Pancreatic transcription factor 1a
Neurogenenin3
Regulatory factor X-box 6
GLI Similar-3
Eukaryotic translation initiation 
 factor 2-α kinase 3/PKR-like ER 
 kinase (PERK)
Wolfram syndrome protein 1 (WFS1)
Solute carrier family 19 
 (thiamine transporter), member 2
GCK
PDX1
PTF1A
NEUROG3
RFX6
GLIS3
EIF2AK3
WFS1
SLC19A2
Pancreatic agenesis
Pancreatic and cerebellar agenesis
Absence of gut endocrine cells, malabsorption
Mitchell-Riley syndrome: absence of gut endocrine and islet α, β, and δ cells, 
 pancreatic and gall bladder hypoplasia, intestinal atresia, malabsorption
Hypothyroidism, cholestasis, polycystic kidneys, hypoplastic pancreas
Wolcott-Rallison syndrome: epiphyseal dysplasia and growth 
 retardation; variable hepatic, renal, cardiac, and pancreatic 
 exocrine defects
Wolfram syndrome: diabetes insipidus, diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy
 and deafness (DIDMOAD)
Thiamine-responsive megaloblastic anemia: anemia, deafness
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     597
patients follow a relapsing course of DKA and hyperglycemia with 
eventual permanent insulin-deficient diabetes. These patients do 
not have islet cell autoantibodies or increased frequencies of HLA 
haplotypes associated with risk of autoimmune type 1a diabetes. 
Although there is often a family history of similar diabetes, the 
inheritance is not clearly Mendelian. Although KPD patients have 
been distinguished based on the history of relapsing β cell dysfunc-
tion, it remains controversial as to whether KPD represents a clini-
cal entity distinct from other forms of nonautoimmune type 1b 
diabetes. 
 In a study of KPD patients of West African ancestry, linkage 
was established with coding variants in the  PAX4 gene.  PAX4 
encodes for a transcription factor that functions downstream of 
 NEUROG3 in the formation of β cells. Fourteen to twenty-one 
percent of individuals of West African ancestry carry a coding vari-
ant that substitutes tryptophan for arginine at position 133 in 
Pax4 and reduces its ability to repress transcription of target genes. 
Interestingly, the R133W variant is unique to people of West 
African ancestry. The R133W allele is approximately twice as fre-
quent in individuals with KPD, and all individuals homozygous 
for R133W have KPD. An additional Pax4 coding variant with 
reduced ability to bind to DNA was identified in one patient with 
KPD. Different coding variants in  PAX4 have also been identified 
in Thai families with MODY (MODY 9) and in Japanese patients 
(both heterozygous and homozygous) with early onset insulin-
deficient diabetes similar to KPD. Taken together, these data sug-
gest that coding variants in the  PAX4 gene predispose to 
insulin-deficient diabetes, but the clinical phenotype may depend 
on the exact nature of the variant and interactions with other 
genes and environmental factors. 
 Genetic Defects of Insulin Action 
 These are rare and unusual causes of diabetes that result from 
mutations of the insulin receptor or from other genetically deter-
mined postreceptor abnormalities of insulin action. Metabolic 
abnormalities associated with these disorders may range from 
hyperinsulinemia and modest hyperglycemia to severe diabetes. 
Many individuals have acanthosis nigricans, polycystic ovaries 
with hyperandrogenism, and, in exceptional cases, pseudoacro-
megaly (see earlier). 
 Familial forms of insulin resistance associated with acanthosis 
nigricans have been termed type A insulin resistance, and are often 
associated with heterozygous mutations in the  insulin receptor or 
homozygous mutations that retain some insulin-signaling capac-
ity. Because of the capacity of the β cell to compensate for insulin 
resistance, these patients often do not present with hyperglycemia, 
but have severely elevated levels of circulating insulin. 
 If both copies of the insulin receptor gene carry mutations that 
nearly or completely abrogate signaling, the affected children 
 present at birth with a syndrome known as  Leprechaunism 
(or  Donohue syndrome ) that includes growth retardation, multi-
ple developmental defects, lipoatrophy, severely elevated insulin 
levels, and hyperglycemia that does not respond to insulin therapy. 
These patients generally do not survive beyond a few weeks. 
Patients with  Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome also have homozy-
gous or compound heterozygous mutations in the insulin receptor, 
but with some small amount of residual signaling that results in a 
slightly less severe syndrome associated with abnormalities in the 
nails, teeth, and pineal gland. They may survive into adolescence. 
 Familial forms of type A insulin resistance without mutations 
in the insulin receptor have been described, and some of these may 
result from mutations in downstream components of the insulin-
signaling cascade, although to date few such mutations have been 
found in humans. Variants in IRS1 have been identified in 
patients with diabetes, but also occur in people with normal 
 insulin sensitivity. Rare coding mutations in the genes encoding the 
p85α subunit of PI3 kinase, in AKT2, and in PPARγ have been 
associated with severe insulin resistance in a very small number of 
patients. The one patient with homozygous mutation of  AKT2 also 
had mild atrophy of subcutaneous limb adipose tissue. 
 Congenital and acquired forms of lipodystrophy can cause 
severe insulin resistance. Except in newborns with lipoatrophy 
secondary to complete loss of insulin receptors (Leprechaunism), 
alterations in the structure and function of the insulin receptor 
cannot be demonstrated in patients with insulin-resistant lip-
odystrophic diabetes, suggesting that the cause of the insulin 
resistance in these patients must reside in postreceptor pathways. 
Replacement of the adipokines leptin and adiponectin can reverse 
insulin resistance in mouse models of severe lipoatrophy, and lep-
tin has been helpful in human cases of generalized lipodystrophy, 
demonstrating the importance of the adipocyte in regulating 
insulin function. Also, the loss of adipose storage depots in 
lipoatrophy leads to very high levels of circulating triglyceride-rich 
lipoprotein particles and increased deposition of fat in nonadipose 
tissues such as liver and muscle, which may contribute to dysfunc-
tion and insulin resistance in these tissues. The increase in ectopic 
fat deposition leads to profound hepatic steatosis in affected 
patients and can progress to cirrhosis and liver failure. 
 The congenital syndromes can be divided into generalized and 
partial lipodystrophies with or without dystrophic features in 
other tissues. The generalized syndromes are often identified in 
neonates, have severe insulin resistance at diagnosis and rapidly 
develop hyperglycemia, acanthosis nigricans, hyperandrogenism, 
and pseudoacromegaly. Recessive mutations causing generalized 
congenital lipodystrophy have been identified in three genes 
encoding proteins involved in the formation of lipid droplets 
(seipin and caveolin-1) and triglyceride (1-acylglycerol-3- 
phosphate- O -acyltransferase 2 [AGPAT2]). 
 Two syndromes of familial partial lipodystrophy without asso-
ciated dysmorphic defects have been described in which the lipoa-
trophy usually first appears late in childhood, but may be 
proceeded by evidence of insulin resistance. The type 1 syndrome 
consists of atrophy of limb, gluteal and subcutaneous abdominal 
fat with sparing or increases of the abdominal visceral, upper 
trunk, head, and neck fat. In the type 2 syndrome, truncal and 
visceral fat are also affected and only vulval and head and neck 
depots are spared. 
 To date no genetic causes of the type 1 syndrome have been 
identified. In the type 2 syndrome, dominant mutations have 
598    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
been found in  LMNA , the gene encoding the nuclear intermediate 
filament lamin A/C. In addition, one individual with the type 2 
syndrome has been identified with a homozygous nonsense muta-
tion in the gene encoding the lipid droplet protein CIDEC, and 
one individual was identified with a homozygous truncation of 
the gene encoding lipase maturation factor 1, a protein required 
for the maturation of both lipoprotein lipase and hepatic lipase. 
 Consistent with its known role in adipocytes differentiation, 
dominant mutations in the gene encoding PPARγ have also been 
described in patients with familial partial lipodystrophy and insu-
lin resistance. These patients have a pattern of lipoatrophy similar 
to the type 2 syndrome with  LMNA mutations, but with less 
severe subcutaneous fat loss, and have been labeled type 3 familial 
partial lipodystrophy. 
 Several syndromes of lipodystrophy associated with other 
 dysmorphic features have been described. Autosomal recessive 
mutations in  ZMPSTE24 , which encodes a metalloproteinase that 
cleaves prolamin A to produce mature lamin A, cause generalized 
lipodystrophy associated with mandibulo-acral dysplasia. In 
patients with partial lipodystrophy combined with mandibulo-
acral dysplasia, autosomal recessive mutations have been identified 
in  LMNA , but these mutations are distinct from those that cause 
familial partial lipodystrophy type 2. Remarkably, yet a different 
set of mutations in  LMNA cause the autosomal recessive syn-
drome Hutchinson–Gilford progeria, which includes severe early 
onset generalized lipodystrophy. Additional distinct mutations in 
 LMNA cause several other congenital dysmorphic syndromes, 
including muscular dystrophies, familial dilated cardiomyopathy, 
and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. 
 Acquired forms of partial and generalized lipodystrophy with 
insulin resistance and diabetes can develop secondary to infec-
tions, autoimmunity, paraneoplastic syndromes, collagen vascular 
disorders, drugs, or unknown causes. One common form is seen 
in patients with HIV infection following treatment with protease 
inhibitors. 
 Neonatal Diabetes 
 Neonatal diabetes, defined as diabetes diagnosed before 6 months 
of age, is rare, occurring in fewer than 1 in 200,000 live births. 
Children with neonatal diabetes often present with decreased 
birth weight (intrauterine growth retardation, IUGR) and 
decreased fat stores in addition to hyperglycemia. Most commonly 
these children have reduced circulating insulin and C-peptide 
levels caused by inherited β cells defects, although rare inherited 
defects in insulin signaling can also present in neonates. In 
approximately half of cases, neonatal diabetes is transient: the 
diabetes goes into remission (normoglycemia with no therapy) 
before 18 months of age, although it usually returns at puberty. In 
the remainder of cases, the diabetes is permanent. 
 Transient neonatal diabetes (TNDM): Defects in imprinting 
underlie most cases of TNDM. The most common genetic defect 
is paternal uniparental isodysomy (replacement of the maternal 
copy of the region with the paternal copy) of an imprinted region 
at chromosome 6q24. In this region, the maternal copy of 
the chromosome is normally silenced by methylation. Simple 
duplication of the paternal copy of this region, or mutations in 
ZFP57, a zinc-finger protein required globally for the methylation 
of imprinted regions, can give the same TNDM phenotype. The 
affected region of 6q24 contains two genes of uncertain function, 
but one of them,  ZAC , has been identified as a tumor suppressor 
gene and may activate the expression of an inhibitor of cell prolif-
eration. An increase in hypomethylated copies of  ZAC may lead to 
the inhibition of β cell proliferation and inadequate β cell mass. 
 Some autosomal dominant activating mutations in  KCNJ11 
and  ABCC8 , the genes encoding the two subunits of the ATP-
sensitive potassium channels in β cells ( Figure 17–5 ) and listed 
among autosomal dominant forms of heritable diabetes (see 
 earlier) can cause TNDM. Autosomal dominant mutations in the 
MODY 5 gene,  HNF1B , can also cause TNDM. 
 Permanent neonatal diabetes (PNDM): Autosomal domi-
nant activating mutations in  KCNJ11 and  ABCC8 can also cause 
PNDM. Some of the autosomal dominant insulin mutations that 
cause rapid β cell apoptosis will result in permanent diabetes in 
neonates. In addition, most of the syndromes caused by autosomal 
recessive genetic defects in β cells (see  Table 17–9 ) present in neo-
nates. These include mutations in the MODY genes  GCK and 
 PDX1 , the transcription factor genes  PTF1A ,  GLIS3 , and  RFX6 , 
and the Wolcott–Rallison syndrome gene  EIF2AK3 . The IPEX 
syndrome (see Genetics of Type 1 Diabetes above), caused by muta-
tions in  FOXP3 , can also present with accelerated autoimmune type 
1 diabetes in neonates. Finally, mutations that cause complete, or 
nearly complete, loss of insulin signaling (Leprechaunism) also 
present with PNDM. 
 Several other syndromes of neonatal diabetes of unknown eti-
ology associated with a variety of other developmental defects have 
been described. With the advent of rapid whole genome sequenc-
ing, the genetic defects that cause these syndromes, as well as later 
onset diabetes, may soon be identified, providing further insights 
into the pathogenesis of diabetes and identifying potential thera-
peutic targets. 
 Diabetes due to Diseases of the 
Exocrine Pancreas 
 Any process that diffusely damages or substantially displaces the 
pancreas can cause diabetes, although individuals with a predis-
position to type 2 diabetes are probably more susceptible to develop-
ing diabetes with lesser degrees of pancreatic involvement. Because 
glucagon-secreting α cells are also damaged or removed by these 
processes, less insulin is usually required for replacement—as com-
pared with most other forms of diabetes that leave α cells intact. 
 Acquired causes include pancreatitis, trauma, infection, pan-
creatic carcinoma, and pancreatectomy. Fibrocalculous pancre-
atopathy, a form of acquired pancreatitis with extensive fibrosis 
and ductal calculi seen commonly in tropical regions, may result 
from both dietary and genetic contributors, although the exact 
cause remains obscure. Like chronic pancreatitis from a variety of 
causes, fibrocalculous involvement of the pancreas may be accom-
panied by abdominal pain radiating to the back and associated 
with pancreatic calcifications on x-ray. When extensive enough, 
hemochromatosis and cystic fibrosis can also displace β cells and 
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     599
reduce insulin secretion. Autosomal dominant mutations in 
carboxyl-ester lipase (CEL), an exocrine enzyme, cause accelerated 
exocrine pancreatic damage and diabetes at a young age, and have 
been designated as MODY 8 (see  Table 17–8 ). 
 Endocrinopathies 
 Excess production of certain hormones—GH (acromegaly), gluco-
corticoids (Cushing syndrome or disease), catecholamines (pheo-
chromocytoma), thyroid hormone (thyrotoxicosis), glucagon 
(glucagonoma), or pancreatic somatostatin (somatostatinoma)—can 
produce relative insulin deficiency and diabetes by a number of 
mechanisms. In all but the last instance (somatostatinoma), periph-
eral responsiveness to insulin is impaired. In addition, excess of cat-
echolamines or somatostatin decreases insulin release from β cells. 
Diabetes mainly occurs in individuals with underlying defects in 
insulin secretion, and hyperglycemia typically resolves when the 
hormone excess is corrected. 
 Drug- or Chemical-Induced Diabetes 
 Many drugs are associated with carbohydrate intolerance or frank 
diabetes mellitus. Some act by interfering with insulin release from 
the β cells (thiazides, phenytoin, cyclosporine), some by inducing 
insulin resistance (glucocorticoids, oral contraceptive pills, niacin, 
and antiviral protease inhibitors), and some by causing β cell 
destruction (intravenous pentamidine). Patients receiving 
β interferon have been reported to develop diabetes associated 
with β cell antibodies and in certain instances severe insulin defi-
ciency. Atypical antipsychotic medications can provoke substantial 
weight gain and insulin resistance, but the high reported incidence 
of diabetic ketoacidosis in patients on these drugs suggests that 
they may also impair β cell function. 
 Adrenergic drugs impact glucose metabolism in complex and 
often opposing ways because of differing effects on insulin 
 secretion, glucagon secretion, hepatic glucose output, periph-
eral  insulin sensitivity, and weight gain. In clinical practice, the 
first generation, nonselective β blockers such as propanolol tend 
to modestly increase glucose levels, at least in part due to 
increases in insulin resistance, but potentially by decreasing 
insulin secretion as well. The second generation, selective 
β1 blockers also tend to increase blood glucose, but the third 
generation drugs with combined α and β blockade have mini-
mal effects on blood glucose. In contrast, nonselective α agonist 
and α2 agonists tend to raise blood glucose, probably due to 
their combined effects on insulin secretion and hepatic glucose 
output. However, although β blockers and α2 agonists like clo-
nidine, as well as calcium channel blockers, inhibit glucose-in-
duced insulin release from  in vitro preparations of pancreatic 
β cells, these drugs have minimal or modest effects on blood 
glucose control at the levels used in standard antihypertensive 
therapy in humans. 
 Finally it must be kept in mind that the most common toxin 
causing diabetes is ethanol. Chronic alcoholic pancreatitis with 
secondary loss of β cells accounts for approximately 1% of diabetes 
in the United States. 
 Infections Causing Diabetes 
 Certain viruses have been associated with direct pancreatic β cell 
destruction in animals. Diabetes is also known to develop 
 frequently in humans who had congenital rubella, although most 
of these patients have HLA and immune markers characteristic of 
type 1 diabetes. In addition, coxsackievirus B, cytomegalovirus, 
adenovirus, and mumps have been implicated in inducing certain 
cases of diabetes. 
 Uncommon Forms of Immune-Mediated 
Diabetes 
 A severe form of insulin resistance has been reported in patients 
who developed high titers of antibodies that bind to the insulin 
receptor and block the action of insulin in its target tissues. As in 
other states of extreme insulin resistance, these patients often have 
acanthosis nigricans. In the past, this form of immune-mediated 
diabetes was termed type B insulin resistance. Most commonly 
these antibodies are of idiopathic origin, but they have also been 
described in monoclonal gamopathies and multiple myeloma and 
in patients with ataxia telangectasia syndrome. 
 Several syndromes of altered immune function with multiple 
endocrine gland involvement have been described. The APS1 and 
IPEX syndromes are described in the section on the genetics of 
type 1 diabetes and in Chapter 2. Patients with POEMS, a syn-
drome of plasma cell dyscrasia associated with polyneuropathy, 
organomegaly, endocrinopathy, monoclonal gammopathy, and 
skin changes, have an increased incidence of diabetes as well as 
other endocrine disorders. The cause of the diabetes in these 
patients has not been established. 
 Other Genetic Syndromes Sometimes 
Associated with Diabetes 
 More than 50 distinct genetic syndromes involve an increased 
incidence of diabetes mellitus. These include the chromosomal 
abnormalities of Down syndrome, Klinefelter syndrome, and 
Turner syndrome. In addition, a number of complex syndromes 
associated with neuromuscular pathologies (Freidriech ataxia, 
Huntington chorea, porphyria, muscular dystrophies) or severe 
obesity (Laurence-Moon-Biedl, Bardet-Biedl, and Prader-Willi 
syndromes) have been associated with diabetes. 
 CLINICAL FEATURES OF DIABETES 
MELLITUS 
 The principal clinical features of the two major types of diabetes 
mellitus are listed for comparison in  Table 17–10 . 
 Type 1 Diabetes 
 Patients with type 1 diabetes present with symptoms and signs 
related to hyperglycemia and hyperketonemia. The severity of the 
insulin deficiency and the acuteness with which the catabolic state 
develops determine the intensity of the osmotic and ketotic excess. 
600    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
 A. Symptoms 
 Increased urination is a consequence of osmotic 
diuresis secondary to sustained hyperglycemia. This results in a 
loss of glucose as well as free water and electrolytes in the urine. 
Nocturnal enuresis due to polyuria may signal the onset of diabe-
tes in very young children. Thirst is a consequence of the hyperos-
molar state, as is blurred vision, which often develops as the lenses 
and retinas are exposed to hyperosmolar fluids. 
 Weight loss, despite normal or increased appetite, is a common 
feature of type 1 diabetes when it develops subacutely over a 
period of weeks. The weight loss is initially due to depletion of 
water, glycogen, and triglyceride stores. Chronic weight loss due 
to reduced muscle mass occurs as amino acids are diverted to form 
glucose and ketone bodies. 
 Lowered plasma volume produces dizziness and weakness due 
to postural hypotension when sitting or standing. Total body 
potassium loss and the general catabolism of muscle protein con-
tribute to the weakness. 
 Paresthesias may be present at the time of diagnosis of type 1 
diabetes, particularly when the onset is subacute. They reflect a 
temporary dysfunction of peripheral sensory nerves and usually 
clear, as insulin replacement restores glycemic levels closer to nor-
mal; thus, their presence suggests neurotoxicity from sustained 
hyperglycemia. 
 When insulin deficiency is severe and of acute onset, the above 
symptoms progress in an accelerated manner. Ketoacidosis exacer-
bates the dehydration and hyperosmolality by producing anorexia, 
nausea, and vomiting, thus interfering with oral fluid replace-
ment. As plasma osmolality exceeds 330 mOsm/kg (normal, 285-
295 mOsm/kg), impaired consciousness ensues. With progression 
of acidosis to a pH of 7.1 or less, deep breathing with a rapid 
ventilatory rate (Kussmaul respiration) occurs as the body attempts 
to eliminate carbonic acid. With worsening acidosis (to pH 7.0 or 
less), the cardiovascular system may be unable to maintain com-
pensatory vasoconstriction; severe circulatory collapse may result. 
 B. Signs 
 The patient’s level of consciousness can vary depend-
ing on the degree of hyperosmolality. When insulin deficiency 
develops relatively slowly and sufficient water intake is maintained 
to permit renal excretion of glucose and appropriate dilution of 
extracellular sodium chloride concentration, patients remain rela-
tively alert and physical findings may be minimal. When vomiting 
occurs in response to worsening ketoacidosis, dehydration 
 progresses and compensatory mechanisms become inadequate to 
keep plasma osmolality below 330 mOsm/kg. Under these cir-
cumstances, stupor or even coma may occur. Evidence of dehydra-
tion in a stuporous patient, with rapid deep breathing and the 
fruity breath odor of acetone, suggests the diagnosis of diabetic 
ketoacidosis. 
 Postural hypotension indicates a depleted plasma volume; 
hypotension in the recumbent position is a serious prognostic 
sign. Loss of subcutaneous fat and muscle wasting are features of 
more slowly developing insulin deficiency. In occasional patients 
with slow, insidious onset of insulin deficiency, subcutaneous fat 
may be considerably depleted. An enlarged liver, eruptive 
 xanthomas on the flexor surface of the limbs and on the buttocks, 
and lipemia retinalis indicate that chronic insulin deficiency has 
resulted in chylomicronemia, with elevated circulating  triglycerides, 
usually to over 2000 mg/dL (Chapter 19). 
 Type 2 Diabetes 
 Patients with type 2 diabetes usually have less severe insulin defi-
ciency than type 1 patients and the symptoms and signs at presen-
tation reflect this difference. 
 A. Symptoms 
 Many patients with type 2 diabetes have an 
insidious onset of hyperglycemia and may be relatively asymptom-
atic initially. The diagnosis may be made only after glycosuria or 
hyperglycemia is noted during routine laboratory studies. Chronic 
skin infections are common. Generalized pruritus and symptoms 
of candidal vaginitis are frequently the initial complaints of 
women with type 2 diabetes. Men may complain of an itchy rash 
of the prepuce. Some patients can remain undiagnosed for many 
years and the initial presentation may be due to complications 
such as visual disturbance due to retinopathy or foot pain or infec-
tion due to a peripheral neuropathy. Patients with a more severe 
insulin deficiency have the classical symptoms of polyuria, thirst, 
blurred vision, paresthesias, and fatigue. This is especially true in 
individuals who consume large amounts of carbohydrate-rich 
fluids in response to the thirst. 
 B. Signs 
 Many patients are obese or overweight. Even those 
patients who are not significantly overweight often have a charac-
teristic fat distribution with more fat in the upper part of the body 
(particularly the abdomen, chest, neck, and face) and relatively 
less fat on the appendages, which may be quite muscular (the 
 metabolically obese ). This centripetal fat distribution has been 
termed  android and is characterized by a high waist circumfer-
ence. It differs from the more centrifugal  gynecoid form of obe-
sity, in which fat is localized more in the hips and thighs and less 
in the upper parts of the trunk. A larger waist circumference 
increases the risk for diabetes for any given body mass index 
(BMI). Thus in patients with the metabolic syndrome, a waist 
circumference >40 in (102 cm) in men and >35 in (88 cm) in 
women is associated with an increased risk of diabetes. MRI and 
CT scans reveal that these patients with increased waist circumfer-
ence have accumulation of fat in the omental and mesenteric dis-
tributions. This visceral fat correlates with insulin resistance, 
TABLE 17–10  Clinical features of diabetes at 
diagnosis.
Diabetes
Type 1
Diabetes
Type 2
Polyuria and thirst
Weakness or fatigue
Polyphagia with weight loss
Recurrent blurred vision
Vulvovaginitis or pruritus
Peripheral neuropathy
Nocturnal enuresis
Often asymptomatic
++
++
++
+
+
+
++
–
+
+
–
++
++
++
–
++
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     601
whereas fat predominantly in subcutaneous tissues of the  abdomen 
has little, if any, association with insulin insensitivity. 
 Some patients, especially the obese, may have acanthosis nigri-
cans—hyperpigmented, hyperkeratotic skin in the axilla, groin, 
and back of neck. This sign is associated with significant insulin 
resistance. Hypertension may be present especially in the obese 
patient. Eruptive xanthomata on the flexor surface of the limbs 
and on the buttocks and lipemia retinalis due to hyperchylomi-
cronemia can occur in patients with uncontrolled type 2 diabetes 
who also have a familial form of hypertriglyceridemia. In women, 
candidal vaginitis with a reddened, inflamed vulvar area and a 
profuse whitish discharge may herald the presence of diabetes. In 
men, candidal infection of the penis may lead to reddish appear-
ance of the penis and/or prepuce with eroded white papules and a 
white discharge. The occasional patient who has had undiagnosed 
diabetes for some time may present with retinopathy or peripheral 
neuropathy. 
 Patients can also present in hyperglycemic hyperosmolar 
coma—profoundly dehydrated, hypotensive, lethargic, or coma-
tose without Kussmaul respirations. 
 Laboratory Testing in Diabetes Mellitus 
 Tests of urine glucose and ketone bodies, as well as whole blood or 
plasma glucose measured in samples obtained under basal condi-
tions and after glucose administration, are very important in 
evaluation of the patient with diabetes. Tests for glycosylated 
hemoglobin have proved useful in both initial evaluation and in 
assessment of the effectiveness of therapeutic management. In cer-
tain circumstances, measurements of insulin or C-peptide levels 
and levels of other hormones involved in carbohydrate homeostasis 
(eg, glucagon, GH) may be useful. In view of the increased risk of 
atherosclerosis in patients with diabetes, determination of serum 
cholesterol, HDL—cholesterol, triglycerides, and LDL-cholesterol 
may be helpful. 
 Urine Glucose 
 Several problems are associated with using urine glucose as an 
index of blood glucose, regardless of the method employed. First 
of all, the glucose concentration in bladder urine reflects the blood 
glucose at the time the urine was formed. Therefore, the first 
voided specimen in the morning contains glucose that was 
excreted throughout the night and does not reflect the morning 
blood glucose at all. Some improvement in the correlation of urine 
glucose to blood glucose can be obtained if the patient  double 
voids —that is, empties the bladder completely, discards that sam-
ple, and then urinates again about one-half hour later, testing only 
the second specimen for glucose content. However, difficulty in 
completely emptying the bladder (large residual volumes), prob-
lems in understanding the instructions, and the inconvenience 
impair the usefulness of this test. Self-monitoring of blood glucose 
has replaced urine glucose testing in most patients with diabetes 
(particularly those receiving insulin therapy). 
 Several commercial products are available for determining the 
presence and amount of glucose in urine. The older and more 
cumbersome bedside assessment of glycosuria with Clinitest tab-
lets has generally been replaced by the dipstick method, which is 
rapid, convenient, and glucose specific. This method consists 
of paper strips (Clinistix, Tes-Tape) impregnated with enzymes 
(glucose oxidase and hydrogen peroxidase) and a chromogenic dye 
that is colorless in the reduced state. Enzymatic generation of 
hydrogen peroxide oxidizes the dye to produce colors whose inten-
sity depends on the glucose concentration. These dipsticks are 
sensitive to as little as 0.1% glucose (100 mg/dL) but do not react 
with the smaller amounts of glucose normally present in nondia-
betic urine. The strips are subject to deterioration if exposed to air, 
moisture, and extreme heat and must be kept in tightly closed 
containers except when in use. False-negative results may be 
obtained in the presence of alkaptonuria and when certain sub-
stances such as salicylic acid or ascorbic acid are ingested in excess. 
All these false-negative results occur because of the interference of 
strong reducing agents with oxidation of the chromogen. 
 Although glycosuria reflects hyperglycemia in more than 90% 
of patients, two major classes of nondiabetic glycosuria must be 
considered: 
 A. Alterations in renal handing of glucose 
 Disorders 
associated with abnormalities in renal glucose handling include 
Fanconi syndrome, a group of disorders characterized by combined 
renal wasting of multiple solutes including amino acids, uric acid, 
phosphate, and bicarbonate as well as glucose and caused by both 
genetic and acquired defects of the proximal renal tubule. Familial 
renal glycosuria, a benign inherited disorder manifest only by per-
sistent glycosuria in the setting of euglycemia is caused by muta-
tions in SGLT2, the sodium-glucose cotransporter responsible for 
the bulk of glucose reabsorption in the proximal tubule. 
 In addition, glycosuria is relatively common in pregnancy as a 
consequence of the increased load of glucose presented to the 
tubules by the elevated glomerular filtration rate during pregnancy. 
As many as 50% of pregnant women normally have demonstrable 
sugar in the urine, especially after the first trimester. 
 B. Excretion of sugars other than glucose in the 
urine 
 Occasionally, a sugar other than glucose is excreted in the 
urine. Lactosuria during the late stages of pregnancy and the 
period of lactation is the most common example. Much rarer are 
other conditions in which inborn errors of metabolism allow fruc-
tose, galactose, or a pentose (1-xylose) to be excreted in the urine. 
Testing the urine with glucose-specific strips helps differentiate 
true glucosuria from other glycosurias. 
 Microalbuminuria and Proteinuria 
 Urinary albumin can now be detected in microgram concentra-
tions using high-performance liquid chromatography or immuno-
assay methodology that is more sensitive than previous available 
tests. Conventional 24-hour urine collections, in addition to being 
inconvenient for patients, also show wide variability of albumin 
excretion, because several factors such as sustained upright pos-
ture, dietary protein, and exercise tend to increase albumin excre-
tion rates. For these reasons, it is preferable to measure the 
602    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
albumin-creatinine ratio in an early morning spot urine collected 
on awakening—prior to breakfast or exercise—and brought in by 
the patient for laboratory analysis. A ratio of albumin (μg/L) to 
creatinine (mg/L) of less than 30 is normal, and a ratio of 30 to 
300 indicates abnormal microalbuminuria. Values greater than 
300 are referred to as macroalbuminuria. 
 The minimal detection limit of protein on a standard urine 
dipstick is 10 to 20 mg/dL. If the dipstick is positive then it is 
likely that the patient has microalbuminuria and this should be 
specifically tested. The information from a spot urine sample is 
adequate for diagnosis and treatment and it is not usually neces-
sary to perform a 24-hour urine collection for protein loss and 
creatinine clearance. 
 Blood Glucose Testing 
 A. Venous blood samples  Venous glucose samples should be 
collected in tubes containing sodium fluoride, which inhibits enolase 
and prevents glycolysis in the blood sample that would artifactually 
lower the measured glucose level. In the absence of fluoride, the rate 
of disappearance of glucose in the presence of blood cells has been 
reported to average 10 mg/dL/h—the rate increases with glucose 
concentration, temperature, and white blood cell count. Fluoride 
takes about 1 hour to effectively stop glycolysis. Therefore, the rate 
of decline during the first hour is the same in tubes with or without 
fluoride. A very high white blood cell count will lower glucose levels 
even in the presence of fluoride. Ideally the blood should be collected 
in a sodium fluoride/potassium oxalate tube, placed on ice and the 
plasma separated from the cells within 60 minutes. 
 Plasma or serum from venous blood samples has the advantage 
over whole blood of providing values for glucose that are indepen-
dent of hematocrit and reflect levels in the interstitial spaces to 
which body tissues are exposed. For these reasons—and because 
plasma and serum lend themselves to automated analytic 
 procedures—they are used in most laboratories. The glucose con-
centration is 10% to 15% higher in plasma or serum than in 
whole blood because structural components of blood cells are 
absent. Whole blood glucose determinations are seldom used in 
clinical laboratories, but are used by patients using home blood 
glucose monitors. 
 Glucose levels can be measured in the laboratory using enzy-
matic methods (such as glucose oxidase or hexokinase), condensa-
tion methods (such as  o -toluidine), or reducing methods. The 
reducing methods take advantage of the reducing properties of 
glucose to change the redox state of a metal ion; however, the 
method is nonspecific and any strong reducing agent can cross-
react to yield spuriously elevated glucose values. In condensation 
methods, the aldehyde group of glucose undergoes condensation 
with aromatic compounds to yield a colored product. In the most 
commonly used condensation reaction,  o -toluidine reacts with 
glucose to form a glucosamine that has an intense green color. The 
colour is measured spectrophotometrically to estimate the glucose 
concentration.  o -Toluidine, however, has the drawback of being 
highly corrosive and toxic. In the enzymatic method, glucose oxi-
dase reacts with glucose, water, and oxygen to form gluconic acid 
and hydrogen peroxide. The hydrogen peroxide can then be used 
to oxidize a chromogen or the consumption of oxygen measured 
to estimate the amount of glucose present. Current laboratories 
use enzymatic methods to determine glucose levels. 
 The range of normal fasting plasma or serum glucose is 70 to 
100 mg/dL (3.9-5.5 mmol/L). A plasma glucose level of 126 mg/dL 
(7.0 mmol/L) or higher on more than one occasion after at least 
8 hours of fasting is diagnostic of diabetes mellitus ( Table 17–11 ). 
Fasting plasma glucose levels of 100 mg/dL (5.6 mmol/L) to 125 
mg/dL (6.9 mmol/L) are associated with increased risk for diabe-
tes (impaired fasting glucose). 
 B. Capillary blood samples  Capillary blood glucose measure-
ments performed by patients themselves, as outpatients, are extremely 
useful. In type 1 patients in whom tight metabolic control is attempted, 
they are indispensable. There are several paper strip (glucose oxidase; 
hexokinase; glucose dehydrogenase with nicotinamide adenine dinu-
cleotide, glucose dehydrogenase with flavin-adenine dinucleotide, 
glucose dehydrogenase with pyrroloquinoline quinine) methods for 
measuring glucose on capillary blood samples. A reflectance photom-
eter or an amperometric system is then used to measure the reaction 
that takes place on the reagent strip. A large number of blood glucose 
meters are now available. All are accurate, but they vary with regard to 
speed, convenience, size of blood samples required, and cost. Popular 
models include those manufactured by Life-Scan (One Touch), Bayer 
Corporation (Breeze, Contour), Roche Diagnostics (Accu-Chek), and 
Abbott Laboratories (Precision, FreeStyle). A Freestyle Flash meter, for 
example, which requires only 0.3 microliter of blood and gives a result 
in 5 seconds, is illustrative of the continued progress in this technologic 
area. Various glucometers appeal to a particular consumer need and are 
relatively inexpensive, ranging from $50.00 to $100.00 each. Test 
strips remain a major expense, costing 50 to 75 cents each. The meters 
have memories and can compute blood glucose averages. The data can 
TABLE 17–11  Criteria for the diagnosis of diabetes.
Normal Glucose 
Tolerance
Prediabetes
Diabetes 
Mellitusa
Fasting plasma 
 glucose 
 (mg/dL)b
<100
100-125
(impaired fasting 
glucose)
≥126
2 h after 
 glucose load 
 (mg/dL)c
<140
≥140-199
(impaired glucose 
tolerance)
≥200
HbA1c (%)a
<5.7
5.7-6.4
≥6.5
Symptoms and 
 random 
 glucose level 
 (mg/dL)
–
–
≥200
aA fasting plasma glucose or HbA1c is diagnostic of diabetes if confirmed by repeat 
testing. HbA1c test should be performed using an assay certified by the National 
Glycohemoglobin Standardization program and standardized to the DCCT assay.
bA fasting plasma glucose ≥126 mg/dL is diagnostic of diabetes if confirmed on a 
subsequent day to be in the diabetic range after an overnight fast.
cGive 75 g of glucose dissolved in 300 mL of water after an overnight fast in subjects 
who have been receiving at least 150 to 200 g of carbohydrate daily for 3 days before 
the test. In the absence of unequivocal hyperglycemia, the result should be con-
firmed by repeat testing.
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     603
be downloaded into a computer. In self-monitoring of blood glucose, 
patients must prick a finger with 26- to 33-gauge lancets. This can be 
facilitated by a small plastic trigger device such as an Accu-chek multi-
clix (Roche Diagnostics), Microlet (Boehringer-Mannheim), or one 
touch lancing device (Lifescan, Inc.). Some meters such as the FreeStyle 
(Abbott Laboratories) have been approved for measuring glucose in 
blood samples obtained at alternative sites such as the forearm and 
thigh. There is, however, a 5- to 20-minute lag in the glucose response 
on the arm with respect to the glucose response on the finger. Forearm 
blood glucose measurements could therefore result in a delay in detec-
tion of rapidly developing hypoglycemia. 
 The clinician should be aware of the limitations of the self-glu-
cose monitoring systems. First, some meters require input of a code 
for each batch of strips—failure to enter the code can result in mis-
leading results. Many of the newer meters no longer require this 
step. Second, increases or decreases in hematocrit can decrease or 
increase the measured glucose values, respectively. The mechanism 
underlying this effect is not known, but presumably it is due to the 
impact of red cells on the diffusion of plasma into the reagent layer. 
Third, the meters and the test strips are calibrated over glucose 
concentrations ranging from 60 to 160 mg/dL, and the accuracy is 
not as good for higher and lower glucose levels. Thus, when the 
glucose is less than 60 mg/dL, the difference between the meter and 
the laboratory value may be as much as 20%. Fourth, glucose-
oxidase-based amperometric systems underestimate glucose levels in 
the presence of high oxygen tension. This may be important in 
critically ill patients who are on supplemental oxygen, and under 
these circumstances, a glucose dehydrogenase-based system may be 
preferable. Fifth, glucose-dehydrogenase pyrroloquinoline quinine 
(GDH-PQQ) systems may report falsely high glucose levels in 
patients who are receiving parenteral products containing nonglu-
cose sugars such as maltose, galactose, or xylose or their metabolites. 
Patients have been given insulin based on the falsely high glucose 
values resulting in life-threatening hypoglycemia. The accuracy of 
data obtained by glucose monitoring requires education of the 
patient in sampling and measuring procedures as well as in proper 
calibration of the instruments. Bedside glucose monitoring in a 
hospital setting requires rigorous quality control programs and cer-
tification of personnel to avoid errors. 
 Interstitial Fluid Glucose Samples 
 A number of continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) systems are 
currently available for clinical use. The systems manufactured by 
Medtronic MiniMed, Abbott Diagnostics, and Dex Com involve 
inserting a subcutaneous biosensor (rather like an insulin pump 
cannula) that measures glucose concentrations in the interstitial 
fluid for 3 to 7 days. The glucose values are available for review by 
the patient at time of measurement. The systems also display 
directional arrows indicating rate and direction of change and 
alarms can be set for dangerously low or high glucose values. 
Patients still have to calibrate the devices with periodic fingerstix 
glucose levels; and since there are concerns about the reliability of 
the measurements, it is still necessary to perform a confirmatory 
capillary blood glucose measurement before intervening. The 
individual glucose levels are not that critical—what matters are the 
direction and the rate at which glucose is changing and the low 
glucose alerts that allow the user to take corrective action. The user 
also gains insight into the way particular foods or activities affect 
their glucose levels. Clinical trials with these systems show that 
they do enable some patients with type 1 diabetes to improve 
control without increasing the risk for hypoglycemia. The 
MiniMed insulin pump marketed in Europe can be programmed 
to automatically suspend insulin delivery for two hours when the 
glucose levels on their CGM device falls to a preset level. This 
feature may help reduce the risk for dangerous hypoglycemia espe-
cially when the patient is asleep. They are increasingly being 
approved by insurance companies. The out of pocket cost of the 
systems is about $4000 annually. 
 There is great interest in using the data obtained from these 
CGM systems to automatically deliver insulin by continuous sub-
cutaneous insulin infusion pump. Algorithms have been devised 
to link CGM to insulin delivery and preliminary clinical studies 
appear promising. 
 Urine and Serum Ketone Determinations 
 In the absence of adequate insulin, three major ketone bodies are 
formed and excreted into the urine: β-hydroxybutyrate (often the 
most prevalent in diabetic ketoacidosis), acetoacetate, and acetone. 
Acetone and acetoacetate react with sodium nitroprusside 
 (nitroferricyanide) in the presence of alkali to produce a purple-
colored complex. Acetest tablets, Ketostix, and Keto-Diastix strips 
utilize this nitroprusside reaction to quantify acetone and acetoac-
etate levels in urine and plasma. When a few drops of serum are 
placed on a crushed Acetest tablet, the appearance of a purple 
color indicates the presence of ketones. A strongly positive reac-
tion in undiluted serum correlates with a serum ketone concentra-
tion of at least 4 mmol/L. Although these tests do not detect 
β-hydroxybutyric acid, which lacks a ketone group, the semiquan-
titative estimation of the other ketone bodies is nonetheless usu-
ally adequate for clinical assessment of ketonuria. Ketostix and 
Keto-Diastix have short shelf-lives (90 days) once the containers 
are opened and using expired strips can give false-negative results. 
It is better therefore to buy individually foil wrapped strips. 
 Specific enzymatic techniques are available to quantitate each 
of the ketone acids, but these techniques are cumbersome and are 
not necessary in most clinical situations. There is also a paper strip 
method that patients can use to measure capillary blood 
β-hydroxybutyrate levels (Precision Xtra, Abbott Diagnostics). 
This technology uses hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase to catalyse 
the oxidation of β-hydroxybutyrate to acetoacetate with concomi-
tant reduction of NAD + to NADH. The NADH is reoxidized 
to NAD + by a redox mediator and a current is generated that is 
directily proportional to β-hydroxybutyrate concentration. 
β-Hydroxybutyrate levels >0.6 nmol/L require evaluation. Levels 
>3.0 nmol/L, which is equivalent to very large urine ketones, will 
require hospitalization. 
 Other conditions besides diabetic ketoacidosis may cause 
ketone bodies to appear in the urine; these include starvation, 
high-fat diets, alcoholic ketoacidosis, fever, and other conditions 
in which metabolic requirements are increased. 
604    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
 Glycated Hemoglobin Assays 
 Ketoamine reactions between glucose and other sugars and free 
amino groups on the alpha and beta chain lead to glycated forms 
of hemoglobin. Only glycation of the  N -terminal valine of the 
beta chain imparts sufficient negative charge to the hemoglobin 
molecule to allow separation by charge-dependent techniques. 
The charge-separated hemoglobins are collectively referred to as 
hemoglobin A 1 (HbA 1 ). The major form of HbA 1 is hemoglobin 
A 1c (HbA 1c ), where glucose is the carbohydrate. This form com-
prises 4% to 6% of total hemoglobin. The remaining HbA 1  species 
contain fructose 1,6-diphosphate (HbA 1a1 ), glucose 6-phosphate 
(HbA 1a2 ), and an unknown carbohydrate moiety (HbA 1b ). The 
hemoglobin A 1C fraction is abnormally elevated in diabetic 
patients with chronic hyperglycemia. Some laboratories measure 
the sum of these glycohemoglobins (GHbs) and report the total 
as hemoglobin A 1 , but most laboratories have converted to the 
highly specific HbA 1c assay. Methods for measuring Hb A1c include 
electrophoresis, cation exchange chromatography, boronate affinity 
 chromatography, and immunoassays. 
 Office-based immunoassays using capillary blood give a result in 
about 9 minutes, and this allows for immediate feedback to the 
patients regarding their glycemic control. Because GHbs circulate 
within red blood cells whose life span lasts up to 120 days, they 
generally reflect the state of glycemia over the preceding 8 to 
12 weeks, thereby providing an improved method of assessing diabetic 
control. The HbA 1c value, however, is weighted to more recent 
glucose levels (previous month) and this explains why significant 
changes in HbA 1c are observed with short term (1 month) changes 
in mean plasma glucose levels. Measurements should be made in 
patients with either type of diabetes mellitus at 3- to 4-month inter-
vals so that adjustments in therapy can be made if GHb is either 
subnormal or if it is more than 1% above the upper limits of normal 
for a particular laboratory. In patients monitoring their own blood 
glucose levels, GHb values provide a valuable check on the accuracy 
of monitoring. In patients who do not monitor their own blood 
glucose levels, GHb values are essential for adjusting therapy. 
 The various HbA 1c assays have been standardized to the assay 
used in the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial (DCCT) 
allowing the results to be related to the risks of developing 
microvascular complications. There is a linear relationship 
between the HbA 1c value and average glucose. A recent study 
(A1 c -Derived Average Glucose Study) collected 3 months of 
blood glucose data on 507 subjects—normals, type 1 and type 
2 diabetics. The estimated average glucose was calculated by 
combining weighted results from 2 days of continuous glucose 
monitoring per month and seven point capillary blood glucose 
profiles (preprandial, postprandial, and bedtime) for at least 
3 d/wk. The HbA 1c was measured at the end of the 3 months. 
The relationship between average glucose and HbA 1c based on 
liner regression analysis was: 
Average glucose = (28.7 × HbA1c) – 46.7 (see also Table 17–12)
 The accuracy of HbA 1c values can be affected by hemoglobin 
variants or derivatives, the effect depending on the specific 
 hemoglobin variant or derivative and the specific assay used. 
Immunoassays that use an antibody to the glycated amino termi-
nus of β globin do not recognize the terminus of the γ globin of 
hemoglobin F, and so in patients with high levels of hemoglobin F, 
immunoassays give falsely low estimates of HbA 1c . Cation exchange 
chromatography separates hemoglobin species by charge differ-
ences. Therefore, hemoglobin variants that coelute with HbA 1c can 
lead to an overestimation of the HbA 1c value. Chemically modified 
derivatives of hemoglobin such as carbamylated (in renal failure) or 
acetylated (high-dose aspirin therapy) hemoglobin can, in some 
methods, coelute with HbA 1c . 
 Any condition that shortens erythrocyte survival or decreases 
mean erythrocyte age (eg, recovery from acute blood loss, hemo-
lytic anemia) falsely lower HbA 1c irrespective of the assay method 
used. Alternative methods such as fructosamine (see later) should 
be considered for these patients. Vitamins C and E are reported to 
falsely lower test results, possibly by inhibiting glycation of hemo-
globin. The National Glycohemoglobin Standardization Program 
website (www.ngsp.org) has information on the impact of fre-
quently encountered hemoglobin variants and derivatives on the 
results obtained with the commonly used HbA 1c assays. 
 The American Diabetes Association (ADA) has now endorsed 
using the HbA 1c as a diagnostic test for diabetes (see  Table 17–11 ). 
A cutoff value of 6.5% was chosen because the risk for retinopathy 
increases substantially above this value. The advantages of using 
the HbA 1c to diagnose diabetes is that there is no need to fast; it 
has lower intra-individual variability than the fasting glucose test 
and the oral glucose tolerance test; and it gives a better picture of 
glucose control for 2 to 3 months. People with HbA 1c levels of 
5.7 % to 6.4% should be considered at high risk for developing 
diabetes (prediabetes). The diagnosis should be confirmed with a 
repeat HbA 1c test, unless the patient is symptomatic with plasma 
glucose levels >200 mg/dL. This test would not be appropriate to 
use in populations with high prevalence of hemoglobinopathies or 
in conditions with increased red cell turnover. Also, the testing 
TABLE 17–12   Correlations of HbA1c levels with 
average of capillary glucose 
measurements (preprandial, 
postprandial, and bedtime) in the 
previous 3 months.
HbA1c Value (%) Determined 
Using DCCT Standardized Assay
Mean Capillary Blood Glucose 
Levels (mg/dL)
 5
  97
 6
126
 7
154
 8
183
 9
212
10
240
11
269
12
298
Adapted from Nathan, et al. Translating the A1c assay into estimated average glucose 
values. Diabetes Care. 2008 Aug;31(8):1473-1478.
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     605
should be performed using a National Glycohemoglobin 
Standardization Program certified method and standardized to the 
Diabetes Control and Complications Trial assay. 
 Serum Fructosamine 
 Serum fructosamine is formed by nonenzymatic glycosylation of 
serum proteins (predominantly albumin). Because serum albumin 
has a much shorter half-life (14-21 days) than hemoglobin, 
serum fructosamine generally reflects the state of glycemic con-
trol for the preceding 2 or 3 weeks. Reductions in serum albumin 
(eg, nephrotic state or hepatic disease) lower the serum fruc-
tosamine value. When abnormal hemoglobins or hemolytic states 
affect the interpretation of GHb or when a narrower time frame 
is required, such as for ascertaining glycemic control at the time 
of conception in a woman with diabetes who has recently become 
pregnant, serum fructosamine assays offer some advantage. 
Normal values vary in relation to the serum albumin concentra-
tion and are 200 to 285 umol/L when the serum albumin level is 
5 g/dL. HbA 1c values and fructosamine are highly correlated. The 
following relationship between fructosamine levels and HbA 1c has 
been reported based on linear regression analysis: 
 HbA1c = 0.017 × fructosamine level (uM/L) + 1.61.
 Thus fructosamine levels of 317, 375, and 435 are equivalent 
to HbA 1c values of 7%, 8%, and 9%, respectively. 
 In most circumstances, however, glycohemoglobin assays 
remain the preferred method for assessing long-term glycemic 
control in patients with diabetes. 
 Oral Glucose Tolerance Test 
 It is easy to screen for diabetes using an HbA 1c or a fasting plasma 
glucose level (see  Table 17–11 ). The oral glucose tolerance test, 
therefore, is mostly performed for research studies or when there 
is a suspicion of the diagnosis but the fasting plasma glucose is less 
than 126 mg/dL or the HBA 1c level is below 6.5%. The test might 
be considered, for example, in a woman with a history of deliver-
ing an infant above 9 lb (4.1 kg). 
 In order to optimize insulin secretion and effectiveness, espe-
cially when patients have been on a low-carbohydrate diet, a 
minimum of 150 to 200 g of carbohydrate per day should be 
included in the diet for 3 days preceding the test. The patient 
should eat nothing after midnight prior to the test day. Adults are 
given 75 g of glucose in 300 mL of water; children are given 1.75 g 
of glucose per kilogram of ideal body weight. The glucose load is 
consumed within 5 minutes. The test should be performed in the 
morning because there is some diurnal variation in oral glucose 
tolerance and patients should not smoke; drink coffee, tea, or 
 alcohol; or be active during the test. 
 Blood samples for plasma glucose are obtained at 0 and 
120 minutes after ingestion of glucose. A fasting plasma glucose value 
of 126 mg/dL (7 mmol/L) or higher or a 2-hour value of greater than 
200 mg/dL (11.1 mmol/L) is diagnostic of diabetes mellitus 
( see Table 17–11 ). An oral glucose tolerance test is normal if the fast-
ing venous plasma glucose value is less than 100 mg/dL (5.6 mmol/L) 
and the 2-hour value falls below 140 mg/dL (7.8 mmol/L). Patients 
with 2-hour values of 140 to 199 mg/dL have impaired glucose toler-
ance. False-positive results may occur in patients who are malnour-
ished at test time, bedridden, or afflicted with an infection or severe 
emotional stress. Diuretics, oral contraceptives, glucocorticoids, 
excess thyroxine, phenytoin, nicotinic acid, and some of the psycho-
tropic drugs may also cause false-positive results. 
 Insulin Levels 
 Normal immunoreactive insulin levels range from 5 to 20 μU/mL 
in the fasting state. During an oral glucose tolerance test, they 
reach 50 to 130 μU/mL at 1 hour, and usually return to levels 
below 30 μU/mL by 2 hours. Insulin measurements are rarely of 
clinical usefulness. They are principally used in research studies to 
determine insulin sensitivity. 
 The homeostasis model of insulin resistance (HOMA IR ) esti-
mates insulin sensitivity using the following formula: 
 HOMAIR (mmol/L × μU/mL) = (fasting glucose [mmol/L] 
× fasting insulin [μU/mL])/22.5
 The higher the HOMA IR value the more resistant the individ-
ual. Data from the oral glucose tolerance test can also be used to 
estimate insulin sensitivity. The Matsuda & DeFronzo Insulin 
Sensitivity Index is calculated as: 
 Insulin sensitivity index (ISI) = 10,000/square root of 
  [fasting glucose × fasting insulin] × [mean glucose × 
  mean insulin during OGTT] 
 The lower the ISI the more insulin resistant the subject. 
 Intravenous Glucose Tolerance Test 
 The intravenous glucose tolerance test (IVGTT) is performed by 
giving a bolus of 50 g of glucose per 1.7 m 2 body surface area (or 
0.5 g/kg of ideal body weight) as a 25% or 50% solution over 2 
to 3 minutes after an overnight fast. Timing begins with injection 
and samples for plasma glucose determination are obtained from 
an indwelling needle in the opposite arm at 0, 10, 15, 20, and 
30 minutes. The plasma glucose values are plotted on semiloga-
rithmic paper against time.  K , a rate constant that reflects the rate 
of fall of blood glucose in percent per minute, is calculated by 
determining the time necessary for the glucose concentration to 
fall by one-half ( t 1/2 ) and using the following equation: 
 
K (
)
gluc
0.693
1/2
=
×
t
100
 The average  K value for a nondiabetic patient is approximately 
1.72% per minute; this value declines with age but remains above 
1.3% per minute. Patients with diabetes almost always have a 
K value of less than 1% per minute. The disappearance rate reflects 
the patient’s ability to dispose of a glucose load. Perhaps its most 
widespread present use is to screen siblings at risk for type 1 diabetes 
to determine if autoimmune destruction of β cells has reduced first 
606    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
phase insulin responses (at 1-5 minutes after the glucose bolus) to 
levels below the normal lower limit of 40 μU/mL. 
 The IVGTT has been modified by giving a glucose dose of 
0.3 g/kg, with more frequent plasma sampling and extending the 
test to 3 to 4 hours. Also at 20 minutes, a 5-minute infusion of 
insulin is given (0.03 U/kg for the subject who is likely to be insulin 
sensitive and 0.06 U/kg for the likely resistant subject). Plasma 
glucose is sampled at 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 14, 19, 22, 25, 27, 30, 40, 
50, 60, 80, 100, 140, and 180 minutes. Analysis of the time 
course of glucose and insulin during this frequently sampled 
IVGTT (FSIVGTT) allows for measurements of insulin sensitivity 
(Si), that is, fractional glucose clearance per unit insulin concentration; 
the first phase insulin response (AIR glucose ); and glucose effective-
ness (S G ), the ability of glucose itself to enhance its own disappear-
ance independent of any change in insulin. The data analysis 
requires use of specific software (Minmod). 
 Lipoproteins in Diabetes 
 Levels of circulating lipoproteins are dependent on normal levels 
and action of insulin, just as is the plasma glucose. In type 1 dia-
betes, moderately deficient control of hyperglycemia is associated 
with only a slight elevation of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cho-
lesterol and serum triglycerides and little if any changes in HDL 
cholesterol. Once the hyperglycemia is corrected, lipoprotein lev-
els are generally normal. However, patients with type 2 diabetes 
frequently have a dyslipidemia that is characteristic of the insulin 
resistance syndrome. Its features are a high serum triglyceride level 
(300-400 mg/dL), a low HDL cholesterol (<30 mg/dL), and a 
qualitative change in LDL particles producing a smaller dense 
LDL whose membrane carries supranormal amounts of free 
 cholesterol. Because  low HDL cholesterol is a major feature predis-
posing to macrovascular disease, the term  dyslipidemia has pre-
empted the previous label of  hyperlipidemia , which mainly described 
the elevated triglycerides. Measures designed to correct obesity and 
hyperglycemia, such as exercise, diet, and hypoglycemic therapy 
substantially correct the dyslipidemia but most patients require 
pharmacotherapy. Chapter 19 discusses these matters in detail. 
 Clinical Trials in Diabetes 
 Findings of the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial 
(DCCT) and of the United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study 
(UKPDS) have confirmed the beneficial effects of intensive ther-
apy to achieve improved glycemic control in both type 1 and type 
2 diabetes, respectively (see later). In addition, with increased 
understanding of the pathophysiology of both type 1 and type 2 
diabetes, large prospective studies—Diabetes Prevention Trial-1 
(DPT-1) and the Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP) have been 
conducted to identify interventions that prevent the onset of these 
disorders. 
 Clinical Trials in Type 1 Diabetes 
 A. The Diabetes Control and Complications Trial 
(DCCT) 
 This long-term randomized prospective study of 
patients with type 1 diabetes reported that lowering of blood 
glucose levels with intensive insulin therapy delayed the onset and 
slowed the progression of microvascular and neuropathic compli-
cations of diabetes. 
 More than 1000 patients from 29 medical centers ranging in 
age from 13 to 39 were divided into two study groups with equal 
numbers of subjects. Approximately half of the total group had no 
detectable diabetic complications (primary prevention group), 
whereas mild background retinopathy was present in the other 
half (secondary prevention group). Some patients in the latter 
group also had slightly elevated microalbuminuria and mild neu-
ropathy, but no one with serious diabetic complications was 
enrolled in the trial. Multiple insulin injections (66%) or insulin 
pumps (34%) were used in the intensively treated group, and 
those subjects were trained to modify their therapy in response to 
frequent glucose monitoring. The conventionally treated group 
used no more than two insulin injections, and clinical well-being 
was the goal with no attempt to modify management based on 
glycated hemoglobin or glucose results. 
 In the intensively treated subjects, mean glycated hemoglobin 
of 7.2% (normal, <6%) and a mean blood glucose of 155 mg/dL 
were achieved, whereas in the conventionally treated group gly-
cated hemoglobin averaged 8.9% and the average blood glucose 
was 225 mg/dL. Over the study period, which averaged 6.5 years, 
there was an approximately 60% reduction in risk of diabetic 
retinopathy, nephropathy, and neuropathy in the intensively 
treated group. The benefits were seen in both the primary and 
secondary prevention groups. The intensively treated group also 
had a nonsignficant reduction in the risk of macrovascular disease 
of 41% (95% CI, −10%-68%). 
 Intensively treated patients had a three fold greater risk of seri-
ous hypoglycemia as well as a greater tendency toward weight 
gain. However, there were no deaths from hypoglycemia in any 
subjects in the DCCT study, and no evidence of posthypoglyce-
mic neurologic damage was detected. 
 Subjects participating in the DCCT study were subsequently 
enrolled in a follow-up observational study (Epidemiology of 
Diabetes Interventions and Complications [EDIC]). Even though 
the between group differences in HbA 1c narrowed within 4 years, 
the group assigned to intensive therapy had a lower risk for retin-
opathy at 4 years and microalbuminuria at 7 to 8 years of post 
study follow-up. Moreover, by the end of the 11 year follow-up 
period, the intensive therapy group had significantly reduced risk 
of any cardiovascular disease events by 42% (95% CI, 
9%-23%; p = 0.02). Thus it seems that the benefits of good glu-
cose control persist even if control deteriorates at a later date. 
 The general consensus of the ADA is that intensive insulin 
therapy associated with comprehensive self-management training 
should become standard therapy in most patients with type 1 dia-
betes after the age of puberty. Exceptions include those with 
advanced renal disease and the elderly, because the detrimental risks 
of hypoglycemia outweigh the benefit of tight glycemic control in 
these groups. In children under age 7 years, the risk of developing 
brain damage from hypoglycemia contraindicates attempts at tight 
glycemic control, particularly because diabetic complications do not 
seem to occur until some years after the onset of puberty. 
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     607
 B. Diabetes Prevention Trial-1 (DPT-1) 
 This NIH-
sponsored multicenter study was designed to determine whether 
the development of type 1 diabetes could be prevented or delayed 
by immune intervention therapy. Daily low-dose insulin injec-
tions were administered for up to 8 years in first-degree relatives 
of individuals with type 1 diabetes who were selected as being at 
high risk for development of type 1 diabetes because of detectable 
ICAs and reduced early-insulin release. Unfortunately, this 
immune intervention failed to affect the onset of type 1 diabetes, 
which was approximately 15% per year in both the treated and 
control groups. A related study using oral insulin in lower risk 
first-degree relatives, who had ICAs but whose early insulin release 
remained intact also failed to show an effect on the onset of type 
1 diabetes. After an average of 4.3 years of observation, type 1 
diabetes developed in about 35% of persons in both the oral insu-
lin and the placebo groups. 
 C. Immune intervention trials in new-onset type 1 
diabetes 
 At time of diagnosis of type 1 diabetes, patients still 
have significant β cell function. This explains why soon after diag-
nosis, patients go into a partial clinical remission (honeymoon) 
requiring little or no insulin. This clinical remission is short-lived, 
however, and eventually patients lose all β cell function and have 
more labile glucose control. Attempts have been made to prolong 
this partial clinical remission using drugs such as cyclosporine, 
azathioprine, prednisone, and antithymocyte globulin. These 
agents, however, have had limited efficacy, and there were con-
cerns about their toxicity and the need for continuous treatment. 
 More specific strategies for immunosuppression, such as the 
use of monoclonal antibodies against particular T-cell products, 
may reduce the hazards of long-term immunotherapy. Phase I/II 
clinical trials using humanized monoclonal antibodies against 
CD3, hOKT3γ1 (Ala-Ala) (teplizumab), and ChAglyCD3 
 (otelexizumab) showed efficacy in reducing the decline in insulin 
production in patients newly diagnosed with type 1 diabetes. The 
CD3 complex is the major signal transducing element of the T-cell 
receptor. The anti-CD3 antibodies are believed to modulate the 
autoimmune response by selectively inhibiting pathogenic T cells 
and/or by inducing regulatory T cells. Patients were treated with 
the antibody for 14 days within 6 weeks of diagnosis of type 1 
diabetes. One year later, the majority of patients in the treated 
group had maintained or increased insulin production and 
improved glycemic control relative to the control group. Larger 
phase II/III clinical trials are currently in progress. 
 These and other approaches that selectively modulate the auto-
immune T-cell response hold the promise that type 1 diabetes may 
eventually be preventable without prolonged immunosuppression. 
 Clinical Trials in Type 2 Diabetes 
 A. Kumamoto study 
 The Kumamoto study involved a rela-
tively small number of patients with type 2 diabetes ( n = 110) who 
were nonobese and only slightly insulin resistant, requiring less 
than 30 units of insulin per day for intensive therapy. Over a 6-year 
period it was shown that intensive insulin therapy, achieving a 
mean HbA 1c of 7.1%, significantly reduced microvascular end 
points compared with conventional insulin therapy, which achieved 
a mean HbA 1c of 9.4%. Cardiovascular events were neither wors-
ened nor improved by intensive therapy, and weight changes were 
likewise not influenced by either form of treatment. 
 B. The United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study 
(UKPDS) 
This multicenter study was designed to determine 
whether the risk of macrovascular or microvascular complications 
in patients with type 2 diabetes could be reduced by intensive 
blood glucose control with oral hypoglycemic agents or insulin 
and whether any particular therapy was better than the others. 
Patients aged 25 to 65 years who were newly diagnosed with type 
2 diabetes were recruited between 1977 and 1991, and a total of 
3867 were studied over 10 years. The median age at baseline was 
54 years; 44% were overweight (>20% over ideal weight), and 
baseline HbA 1c was 9.1%. Therapies were randomized to include 
a control group on diet alone and separate groups intensively 
treated with insulin, chlorpropamide, glyburide, or glipizide. 
Metformin was included as a randomization option in a subgroup 
of 342 overweight patients, and—much later in the study—an 
additional subgroup of both normal-weight and overweight 
patients, who were responding unsatisfactorily to sulfonylurea 
therapy, were randomized to either continue on their sulfonylurea 
therapy alone or to have metformin combined with it. 
 After the study was initiated, a further modification was made 
to evaluate whether tight control of blood pressure with stepwise 
antihypertensive therapy would prevent macrovascular and micro-
vascular complications in 758 hypertensive patients among this 
UKPDS population—compared with 390 patients whose blood 
pressure was treated less intensively. The tight control group was 
randomly assigned to treatment with either an angiotensin- 
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor (captopril) or a beta blocker 
(atenolol). Both drugs were stepped up to maximum doses of 
100 mg/d, and then, if blood pressure remained higher than the 
target level of less than 150/85 mm Hg, more drugs were added in 
the following stepwise sequence—a diuretic, slow-release 
 nifedipine, methyldopa, and prazosin—until the target level of 
tight control was achieved. In the control group, hypertension 
was conventionally treated to achieve target levels less than 
180/105 mm Hg, but these patients were not given either ACE 
inhibitors or beta blockers. 
 Intensive glycemic therapy in the entire group of 3897 patients 
newly diagnosed with type 2 diabetes patients followed over 
10 years showed that intensive treatment with either sulfonylu-
reas, metformin, combinations of these, or insulin achieved mean 
HbA 1c levels of 7.0%. This level of glycemic control decreased the 
risk of microvascular complications in comparison with conven-
tional therapy (mostly diet alone), which achieved mean levels of 
HbA 1c of 7.9%. Weight gain occurred in intensively treated 
patients except when metformin was used as monotherapy. There 
was a trend towards reduction in cardiovascular events (fatal or 
nonfatal MI; sudden death) with intensive treatment but this did 
not reach statistical significance (16% reduction, p = 0.052). 
Hypoglycemic reactions occurred in the intensive treatment 
608    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
groups, but only one death from hypoglycemia was documented 
over 27,000 patient-years of intensive therapy. 
 When therapeutic subgroups were analyzed, some unexpected 
and paradoxical results were noted. Among the obese patients, 
intensive treatment with insulin or sulfonylureas did not reduce 
microvascular complications compared with diet therapy alone. 
This was in contrast to the significant benefit of intensive therapy 
with these drugs in the total group. Furthermore, intensive ther-
apy with metformin was more beneficial in the overweight and 
obese persons than diet alone with regard to reducing myocardial 
infarctions, strokes, and diabetes-related deaths, but there was no 
significant reduction of diabetic microvascular complications with 
metformin as compared with the diet group. Moreover, in the 
subgroup of obese and nonobese patients in whom metformin was 
added to sulfonylurea failures, rather than showing a benefit, there 
was a 96% increase in diabetes-related deaths compared with the 
matched cohort of patients with unsatisfactory glycemic control 
on sulfonylureas who remained on sulfonylurea therapy. 
Chlorpropamide also came out poorly on subgroup analysis in 
that those receiving it as intensive therapy did less well as regards 
progression to retinopathy than those conventionally treated with 
diet. The University Group Diabetes Program (UGDP) study was 
designed to evaluate the effects of glucose-lowering therapies on 
vascular complications in type 2 diabetes and reported that tolbu-
tamide may increase the risk for cardiovascular deaths. The 
UKPDS study refutes this concern by failing to confirm any 
 cardiovascular hazard with sulfonylurea treatment. 
 Intensive antihypertensive therapy to a mean of 144/82 mm Hg 
had beneficial effects on microvascular disease as well as on all 
 diabetes-related end points, including virtually all cardiovascular out-
comes, in comparison with looser control at a mean of 154/87 mm 
Hg. In fact, the advantage of reducing hypertension by this amount 
was substantially more impressive than the benefit that accrued by 
improving the degree of glycemic control from a mean HbA 1c of 
7.9% to 7.0%. More than half of the patients needed two or more 
drugs for adequate therapy of their hypertension, and there was no 
demonstrable advantage of ACE inhibitor therapy over beta 
 blockers as regards diabetes end points. Use of a calcium channel 
blocker added to both treatment groups appeared to be safe over the 
long term in this population with diabetes, despite some controversy 
in the literature about its safety in such individuals. 
 The UKPDS researchers, like the DCCT group, performed 
posttrial monitoring to determine if there were long-term benefits 
of having been in the intensively treated glucose and blood pres-
sure arms of the study. The between group differences in HbA 1c 
were lost within the first year of follow-up but the reduced risk of 
development or progression of microvascular complications in 
the intensively treated group persisted for 10 years (24%, 
p = 0.001). The intensively treated group also had significantly 
reduced risk for myocardial infarction (15%, p = 0.01) and death 
from any cause (13%, p = 0.007) during the follow-up period. 
The subgroup of overweight or obese subjects who were initially 
randomized to metformin therapy showed sustained reduction in 
risk of myocardial infarction and death from any cause in the 
follow-up period. The between group blood pressure differences 
disappeared within 2 years of the end of the trial. Unlike the 
sustained benefits seen with glucose control, there was no sus-
tained benefit from having been in the more tightly controlled 
blood pressure group. Both blood pressure groups had similar 
risks for microvascular events and diabetes related end-points in 
the follow-up period. 
 Thus, the follow-up of the UKPDS type 2 diabetes cohort 
showed that, as in type 1 diabetes, the benefits of good glucose 
control persist even if control deteriorates at a later date. Blood 
pressure benefits, however, last only as long as the blood pressure 
is well controlled. 
 C. Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP) 
 This was a ran-
domized clinical trial in 3234 overweight men and women, aged 
25 to 85 years, who showed impaired glucose tolerance. Results 
from this study indicated that intervention with a low-fat diet and 
150 minutes of moderate exercise (equivalent to a brisk walk) per 
week reduces the risk of progression to type 2 diabetes by 58% as 
compared with a matched control group. Another arm of this trial 
demonstrated that use of 850 mg of metformin twice daily 
reduced the risk of developing type 2 diabetes by 31% but was 
relatively ineffective in those who were either less obese or in the 
older age group. 
 D. The Steno-2 Study 
 This was designed in 1990 to vali-
date the efficacy of targeting multiple concomitant risk factors 
for both microvascular and macrovascular disorders in type 2 
diabetes. A prospective, randomized, open, blinded end-point 
design was used in which 160 patients with type 
2 diabetes and microalbuminuria were assigned to conventional 
therapy with their general practitioner or to intensive care at the 
Steno Diabetes Center. In the intensively treated group, stepwise 
introduction of lifestyle and pharmacologic interventions was 
aimed at keeping glycated hemoglobin less than 6.5%, blood 
pressure less than 130/80 mm Hg, total cholesterol less than 
175 mg/dL, and triglycerides less than 150 mg/dL. All subjects 
in the intensively treated group received ACE inhibitors and if 
intolerant, an angiotensin II receptor blocker. The lifestyle com-
ponent of intensive intervention included reduction in dietary 
fat intake to less than 30% of total calories, a smoking cessation 
program, light to moderate exercise, and a daily vitamin-mineral 
supplement (vitamins C and E and chromium picolinate). 
Initially, aspirin was given as secondary prevention to patients 
with a history of ischemic cardiovascular disease, but later all 
patients received aspirin. 
 After a mean follow-up of 7.8 years, 44% of patients in the 
conventional arm and 24% in the intensive multifactorial arm 
developed cardiovascular events (myocardial infarction, angio-
plasties, coronary bypass grafts, strokes, amputations, vascular 
surgical interventions)—a 53% reduction. Rates of nephropathy, 
retinopathy, and autonomic neuropathy were also lower in the 
multifactorial intervention arm—61%, 58%, and 63% of rates in 
the conventional arm, respectively. 
 The subjects who participated in this trial were subsequently 
enrolled in an observational follow-up study for an average of 
5.5 years. Even though the significant differences in glycemic 
control and levels of risk factors for cardiovascular disease between 
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     609
the groups had disappeared by the end of the follow-up period, 
the interventional group continued to have a lower risk for retinal 
photocoagulation, renal failure, cardiovascular endpoints, and 
cardiovascular mortality. 
 The data from the UKPDS and this study thus provide sup-
port for guidelines recommending vigorous treatment of con-
comitant microvascular and cardiovascular risk factors in patients 
with type 2 diabetes. 
 E. Accord, Advance, and VADT studies 
 The ACCORD 
study was a randomized controlled study designed to determine 
whether normal HbA 1c levels would reduce the risk of cardiovas-
cular events in middle-aged or older individuals with type 2 
diabetes. About 35% of the 10,251 recruited subjects had estab-
lished cardiovascular disease at study entry. The intensive arm of 
the study was discontinued after 3.5 years of follow-up because 
of more unexplained deaths in the intensive arm when compared 
to the conventional treatment arm (22%, p = 0.020). Analysis of 
the data at time of discontinuation showed that the intensively 
treated group (HbA 1c 6.4%) had a 10% reduction in cardiovas-
cular event rate compared to the standard treated group (HbA 1c 
7.5%), but this difference was not statistically significant. The 
ADVANCE trial randomly assigned 11,140 patients in their 
60s with type 2 diabetes to standard or intensive glucose control. 
The primary outcomes were major macrovascular (nonfatal 
myocardial infarction or stroke or death from cardiovascular 
causes) or microvascular events. Thirty-two percent of the sub-
jects had established cardiovascular disease at study entry. After 
a median follow-up of 5 years, there was a nonsignificant reduc-
tion (6%) in major macrovascular event rate in the intensively 
treated group (HbA 1c 6.5%) compared to the standard therapy 
group (HbA 1c 7.3%). 
 The Veteran Administration Diabetes Trial (VADT) ran-
domly assigned 1791 patients in their 50s and 60s with type 
2 diabetes to standard or intensive glucose control. Ninety 
seven percent of the subjects were men. The primary outcome 
was a composite of myocardial infarction, death from cardio-
vascular causes, congestive heart failure, vascular surgery, 
 inoperable coronary artery disease, and amputation for gan-
grene. All patients had optimized blood pressure and lipid lev-
els. After a median follow-up of 5.6 years, there was no 
significant difference in the primary outcome in the intensively 
treated group (HbA 1c 6.9%) compared to the standard therapy 
(HbA 1c 8.4%). Within this larger study, there was an embedded 
study evaluating the impact of intensive therapy in patients who 
were categorized as having low, moderate, and high coronary 
calcium scores on CT scans. Patients with low coronary calcium 
score showed reduced number of cardiovascular events with 
intensive therapy. 
 Thus, the ACCORD, ADVANCE, and VADT results do not 
provide support for the hypothesis that near-normal glucose 
control in type 2 diabetes will reduce cardiovascular events. It is, 
however, important not to over-interpret the results of these 
three studies. The results do not exclude the possibility that 
cardiovascular benefits might accrue with longer duration of 
near-normal glucose control. In the UKPDS, risk reductions for 
myocardial infarction and death from any cause were only 
observed during 10 years of posttrial follow-up. Specific sub-
groups of type 2 diabetes patients may also have different out-
comes. The ACCORD, ADVANCE, and VADT studies recruited 
patients who had diabetes for 8 to 10 years, and a third of them 
had established cardiovascular disease. Patients in the UKPDS, 
in contrast, had newly diagnosed diabetes, and only 7.5% had a 
history of macrovascular disease. It is possible that the benefits 
of tight glycemic control on macrovascular events are attenuated 
in patients with longer duration of diabetes or with established 
vascular disease. Specific therapies used to lower glucose may 
also affect cardiovascular event rate or mortality. Severe hypogly-
cemia occurred more frequently in the intensively treated groups 
of the ACCORD, ADVANCE, and VADT studies; and the 
ACCORD investigators were not able to exclude undiagnosed 
hypoglycemia as a potential cause for the increased death rate in 
their intensive arm group. 
 A formal meta-analysis performed on the raw trial data from 
the ACCORD, ADVANCE, VADT, and UKPDS studies found 
that allocation to more intensive glucose control reduced the risk 
of MI by 15% (hazard ratio 0.85, 95% CI 0.76-0.94). The 
benefit appeared to be in patients who did not have preexisting 
macrovascular disease. 
 TREATMENT OF DIABETES MELLITUS 
 Diet 
 A well-balanced, nutritious diet remains a fundamental element 
of therapy for diabetes. However, in more than half of cases, 
patients with diabetes fail to follow their diets. The American 
Diabetes Association (ADA) recommends about 45% to 65% of 
total daily calories in the form of carbohydrates; 25% to 35% 
in the form of fat (of which less than 7% are from saturated fat), 
and 10% to 35% in the form of protein. In prescribing a diet, it 
is important to relate dietary objectives to the type of diabetes. 
In patients with type 2 diabetes, limiting the carbohydrate 
intake and substituting some of the calories with monounsatu-
rated fats, such as olive oil, rapeseed (canola) oil, or the oils in 
nuts and avocados, can lower triglycerides and increase HDL 
cholesterol. In addition, in those patients with obesity and type 
2 diabetes, weight reduction by caloric restriction is an impor-
tant goal of the diet. Patients with type 1 diabetes or type 2 dia-
betes who take insulin should be taught  carbohydrate counting , 
so they can administer their insulin bolus for each meal based 
on its carbohydrate content. 
 The current recommendations for both types of diabetes con-
tinue to limit cholesterol to 300 mg daily, and individuals with 
LDL cholesterol more than 100 mg/dL should limit dietary cho-
lesterol to 200 mg daily. High protein intake may cause progres-
sion of renal disease in patients with diabetic nephropathy; for 
these individuals, a reduction in protein intake to 0.8 kg/d (or 
about 10% of total calories daily) is recommended. 
 Exchange lists for meal planning can be obtained from the 
American Diabetes Association and its affiliate associations or 
610    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
from the American Dietetic Association, 216 W. Jackson Blvd., 
Chicago, IL 60606 (312-899-0040 or http://www.eatright.org). 
 Special Considerations in Dietary Control 
 A. Dietary fiber 
 Plant components such as cellulose, gum, and 
pectin are indigestible by humans and are termed  dietary fiber .
Insoluble fibers such as cellulose or hemicellulose increase stool 
bulk and decrease transit time. Soluble fibers such as gums and 
pectins, found in beans, oatmeal, or apple skin, can delay glucose 
absorption and so diminish postprandial hyperglycemia. Although 
the ADA diet does not require insoluble fiber supplements such as 
added bran, it recommends foods such as oatmeal, cereals, and 
beans with relatively high soluble fiber content as stable compo-
nents of the diet in patients with diabetes. High soluble fiber 
content in the diet may also have a favorable effect on blood 
 cholesterol levels. 
 B. Glycemic index 
 Quantitation of the relative glycemic con-
tribution of different carbohydrate foods has formed the basis of a 
 glycemic index in which the area of blood glucose (plotted on a 
graph) generated over a 3-hour period following ingestion of a test 
food containing 50 g of carbohydrate is compared with the area 
plotted after giving a similar quantity of reference food such as 
glucose or white bread: 
Blood glucose area of test food
Blood glucose ara ea of reference food ×100
 White bread is preferred to glucose as a reference standard 
because it is more palatable and has less tendency to slow gastric 
emptying by high tonicity, as happens when glucose solution is 
used. Eating foods with low glycemic index will result in lower 
glucose levels after meals. Low glycemic index foods have values of 
55 or less and include many fruits (apples, oranges) and vegetables, 
grainy breads, pasta, legumes, milk, and yoghurt. High glycemic 
index foods have values of 70 and over and include baked potato, 
white bread, and most white rice. Glycemic index is lowered by the 
presence of fats and protein when the food is consumed in a mixed 
meal. Cooking methods can also affect the glycemic index—thus 
mashed potatoes have a higher glycemic index than baked potato. 
Since you have to have 50 g of available carbohydrate to measure 
the glycemic index, you cannot assign glycemic indices to foods 
which have very little carbohydrate. Even though it may not be 
possible to accurately predict the impact of the glycemic index of a 
particular food in the context of a meal, it is still reasonable to 
choose foods with low glycemic index. 
 C. Sweeteners 
 The nonnutritive sweetener  saccharin is 
widely used as a sugar substitute (sweet and low).  Aspartame 
(NutraSweet) consists of two major amino acids, aspartic acid, and 
phenylalanine, which combine to produce a nutritive sweetener 
180 times as sweet as sucrose. A major limitation is its heat lability, 
which precludes its use in baking or cooking. Sucralose (Splenda) 
and acesulfame potassium (Sunett, Sweet One, DiabetiSweet) are 
two other nonnutritive sweeteners that are heat stable and can be 
used in cooking and baking. 
Fructose represents a  natural sugar substance that is a highly 
effective sweetener. It induces only slight increases in plasma 
 glucose levels and does not require insulin for its utilization. 
However, because of potential adverse effects of large amounts of 
fructose (up to 20% of total calories) on raising serum cholesterol, 
triglycerides, and LDL cholesterol, it does not have any advantage 
as a sweetening agent in the diabetic diet. This does not preclude, 
however, ingestion of fructose-containing fruits and vegetables or 
fructose-sweetened foods in moderation. 
 Sugar alcohols, also known as polyols or polyalcohol, are com-
monly used as sweeteners and bulking agents. They occur natu-
rally in a variety of fruits and vegetables but are also commercially 
made from sucrose, glucose, and starch. Examples are sorbitol, 
xylitol, mannitol, lactitol, isomalt, maltitol, and hydrogenated 
starch hydrolysates (HSH). They are not as easily absorbed as 
sugar, so they do not raise blood glucose levels as much as conven-
tional sugars. Therefore, sugar alcohols are often used in food 
products that are labeled as  sugar free , such as chewing gum, 
 lozenges, hard candy, and sugar-free ice cream. However, if con-
sumed in large quantities, they will raise blood glucose and can 
also cause bloating and diarrhea. 
 D. Fish oils and other oils 
 Omega-3 fatty acids in high 
doses have been shown to lower plasma triglycerides and VLDL 
cholesterol. They may also reduce platelet aggregation. In the 
Lyon Diet Heart Study in nondiabetic patients, a high intake of 
α-linolenic acid was beneficial in secondary prevention of coro-
nary heart disease. This diet, which is rich in vegetables and 
fruits, also supplies a high intake of natural antioxidants. There is 
limited clinical information on the use of these oils in patients 
with diabetes. 
 AGENTS FOR THE TREATMENT OF 
HYPERGLYCEMIA 
 The drugs for treating type 2 diabetes ( Table 17–13 ), other than 
insulin, fall into several categories. (1) Drugs that act on the sul-
fonylurea receptor complex of the β cell: sulfonylureas remain the 
most widely prescribed drugs for treating hyperglycemia. The 
meglitinide analog repaglinide and the D-phenylalanine derivative 
nateglinide also bind the sulfonylurea receptor and stimulate insu-
lin secretion. (2) Drugs that principally lower glucose levels by 
their actions on liver, skeletal muscle, or adipose tissue: metformin 
works primarily in the liver, and the peroxisome proliferator-activated 
receptor agonists (PPARs) rosiglitazone and pioglitazone appear to 
have their main effects on skeletal muscle and adipose tissue. (3) 
Drugs that principally affect absorption of glucose: the α-glucosidase 
inhibitors acarbose and miglitol are currently available drugs in this 
class. (4) Drugs that mimic incretin effects or prolong incretin 
action: the GLP-1 receptor agonists and the DPP-4 inhibitors fall 
into this category. (5) Other drugs: these include pramlintide, 
which lowers glucose by suppressing glucagon and slowing gastric 
emptying. 
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     611
TABLE 17–13 Drugs for treatment of type 2 diabetes.
Drug
Tablet Size
Daily Dose
Duration of 
Action (h)
Sulfonylureas
Tolbutamide (Orinase)
250 and 500 mg
0.5-2 g in two or three divided doses
6-12
Tolazamide (Tolinase)
100, 250, and 500 mg
0.1-1 g as single dose or in two divided doses
Up to 24
Acetohexamide (Dymelor)
250 and 500 mg
0.25-1.5 g as single dose or in two divided doses
8-24
Chlorpropamide (Diabinese)
100 and 250 mg
0.1-0.5 as single dose
24-72
Glyburide
 (DiaBeta, Micronase)
1.25, 2.5, and 5 mg
1.25-20 mg as single dose or in two divided doses
Up to 24
 (Glynase)
1.5, 3, and 6 mg
1.5-18 mg as single dose or in two divided doses
Up to 24
Glipizide
 (Glucotrol)
5 and 10 mg
2.5-40 mg as single dose or in two divided doses on an empty stomach
6-12
 (Glucotrol XL)
2.5, 5, and 10 mg
Up to 20 mg daily as a single dose
Up to 24
Gliclazide (not available in 
 United States)
80 mg
40-80 mg as single dose; 160-320 mg as divided dose
12
Glimepiride (Amaryl)
1, 2, and 4 mg
1-4 mg as single dose
Up to 24
Meglitinide Analogs
Repaglinide (Prandin)
0.5, 1, and 2 mg
0.5 to 4 mg three times a day before meals
3
Mitiglinide (available in Japan)
5 and 10 mg
5 or 10 mg three times a day before meals
2
D-Phenylalanine
Nateglinide (Starlix)
60 and 120 mg
60 or 120 mg three times a day before meals
1.5
Biguanides
Metformin (Glucophage)
500, 850, and 1000 mg
1-2.5 g; one tablet with meals two or thee times daily
7-12
Extended-release metformin 
 (Glucophage XR)
500 and 750 mg
500-2000 mg once a day
Up to 24
Thiazolidinediones
Rosiglitazone (Avandia)
2, 4, and 8 mg
4-8 mg daily (can be divided)
Up to 24
Pioglitazone (Actos)
15, 30, and 45 mg
15-45 mg daily
Up to 24
`-Glucosidase inhibitors
Acarbose (Precose)
50 and 100 mg
75-300 mg in three divided doses with first bite of food
4
Miglitol (Glyset)
25, 50, and 100 mg
75-300 mg in three divided doses with first bite of food
4
GLP-1 receptor agonists
Exenatide
Liraglutide 
5 and 10 μg
0.6, 1.2, and 1.8 mg
5 μg by subcutaneous injection within 1 hour of breakfast and 
 dinner. Increase to 10 μg twice a day after about a month. 
Refrigerate between uses.
0.6 mg by subcutaneous injection once a day starting dose. 
 Increase to 1.2 mg after a week if no adverse reactions. Dose can 
 be further increased to 1.8 mg if necessary.
6
24
DPP-4 inhibitors
Sitagliptin
25, 50, and 100 mg
100 mg orally once a day. Reduce dose to 50 mg if calculated 
creatinine clearance is 30 to 50 mL/min. Give 25 mg daily if 
creatinine clearance less than 30.
24
Saxagliptin
2.5 and 5 mg
2.5 or 5 mg once a day. Use 2.5 mg dose if calculated creatinine 
clearance is ≤50 mL/min or if also taking strong CYP3A4/5 
inhibitors like ketoconazole
24
Vildagliptin (not available in 
 United States)
50 mg
50 mg once or twice a day. Contraindicated in patients with 
calculated creatinine clearance ≤60 mL/min or AST/ALT three times 
upper limit of normal
24
Others
Pramlintide
5-mL vial containing 
0.6 mg/mL
For insulin-treated type 2 patients, start at 60-μg dose three times a 
day (10 U on U100 insulin syringe) and increase to 120 μg three times 
a day (20 U) if patient has no nausea for 3-7 d. Give immediately 
before meal. For type 1 patients, start at 15 μg three times a day 
(2.5 U on U100 insulin syringe) and increase by increments of 15 μg 
to a maximum of 60 μg three times a day as tolerated. Lower 
insulin dose by 50% on initiation of therapy to avoid hypoglycemia.
3
612    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
 1. DRUGS THAT ACT ON THE 
SULFONYLUREA RECEPTOR COMPLEX 
 Sulfonylureas 
 The sulfonylureas contain a sulfonic acid-urea nucleus that can be 
modified by chemical substitutions to produce agents that have 
similar qualitative actions but differ widely in potency. They bind 
the ATP-sensitive potassium channels (K ATP ) on the surface of 
pancreatic β cells, resulting in closure of the channel and depolar-
ization of the β cell. This depolarized state permits calcium to 
enter the cell and actively promote insulin release ( Figure 17–5 ). 
 In β cells, the ATP-sensitive channels contain four copies each 
of two subunits, the regulatory subunit SUR1, which binds ATP, 
ADP, and sulfonylureas, and the potassium channel subunit 
Kir6.2. K ATP channels composed of the same subunits are found in 
α cells, GLP-1 secreting intestinal L-cells, and the brain. The 
SUR1/Kir6.2 complexes are opened by diazoxide and closed by 
sulfonylureas at low concentrations (IC 50 about 1 nM for glyburide). 
Inactivating mutations in SUR1 or Kir6.2 cause persistent depo-
larization of the β cells and have been identified in patients with 
hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of infancy (see Chapter 18). 
Activating mutations in SUR1 or Kir6.2 prevent depolarization of 
the β cells and have been identified in patients with neonatal dia-
betes (see section on Neonatal Diabetes earlier). 
 K ATP channels with different subunit combinations are found 
in other tissues. The combination of SUR2A/Kir6.2 is found in 
cardiac and skeletal muscle, and SUR2B/Kir6.1 in vascular 
smooth muscle. Channel configurations containing SUR2 sub-
units are insensitive to diazoxide but sensitive to other potassium 
channel agonists such as pinacidil and cromakalim. Certain channel 
 closers have much higher affinity for SUR1-containing channels 
than SUR2-containing channels (the sulfonylureas tolbutamide 
and gliclazide and the meglitinides nateglinide and mitiglinide), 
while others have similar affinities for both of them (glyburide, 
glimepiride, and repeglinide). It remains uncertain whether the 
different affinities of these drugs for the two classes of receptors 
have clinical relevance. 
 Sulfonylureas are not indicated for use in type 1 diabetes patients 
since these drugs require functioning pancreatic β cells to produce 
their effect on blood glucose. These drugs are used in patients with 
type 2 diabetes, in whom acute administration improves the early 
phase of insulin release that is refractory to acute glucose stimulation. 
Sulfonylureas are metabolized by the liver and apart from acetohex-
amide, whose metabolite is more active than the parent compound, 
the metabolites of all the other sulfonylureas are weakly active or 
inactive. The metabolites are excreted by the kidney and, in the case 
of the second-generation sulfonylureas, partly excreted in the bile. 
Sulfonylureas are generally contraindicated in patients with severe 
liver or kidney impairment. Idiosyncratic reactions are rare, with skin 
rashes or hematologic toxicity (leukopenia, thrombocytopenia) 
occurring in less than 0.1% of users. 
 First-generation sulfonylureas (tolbutamide, tolazamide, aceto-
hexamide, and chlorpropamide)— Tolbutamide is supplied in 
tablets of 500 mg. It is rapidly oxidized in the liver to an inactive 
form. Because its duration of effect is short (6-10 hours), it is 
usually administered in divided doses (eg, 500 mg before each 
meal and at bedtime). The usual daily dose is 1.5 to 3 g; some 
patients, however, require only 250 to 500 mg daily. Acute toxic 
reactions such as skin rashes are rare. Because of its short duration 
of action, which is independent of renal function, tolbutamide is 
probably the safest agent to use in elderly patients, in whom hypo-
glycemia would be a particularly serious risk. Prolonged hypoglyce-
mia has been reported rarely, mainly in patients receiving certain 
drugs (eg, warfarin, phenylbutazone, or sulfonamides) that com-
pete with sulfonylureas for hepatic oxidation, resulting in mainte-
nance of high levels of unmetabolized active sulfonylureas in the 
circulation. 
 Tolazamide, acetohexamide, and chlorpropamide are rarely used. 
Chlorpropamide has a prolonged biologic effect, and severe hypogly-
cemia can occur especially in the elderly, because their renal clearance 
declines with aging. Its other side effects include alcohol-induced flush-
ing and hyponatremia due to its effect on vasopressin secretion and 
action. Tolazamide is comparable to chlorpropamide in potency but is 
devoid of  disulfiram-like or water-retaining effects. Its duration of 
action may last up to 20 hours, with maximal hypoglycemic effect 
occurring between the 4th and 14th hours. 
 Second-generation sulfonylureas: glyburide, glipizide,  gliclazide, 
and glimepiride—these agents have similar chemical structures, 
with cyclic carbon rings at each end of the sulfonylurea nucleus; 
this causes them to be highly potent (100- to 200-fold more so 
than tolbutamide). The drugs should be used with caution in 
patients with cardiovascular disease as well as in elderly patients, 
in whom hypoglycemia would be especially dangerous. 
 a. Glyburide (glibenclamide)— Glyburide is supplied in tab-
lets containing 1.25, 2.5, and 5 mg. The usual starting dose 
is 2.5 mg/d, and the average maintenance dose is 5 to 
10 mg/d given as a single morning dose. If patients are going 
to respond to glyburide, they generally do so at doses of 
10 mg/d or less, given once daily. If they fail to respond to 
10 mg/d, it is uncommon for an increase in dosage to result 
in improved glycemic control. Maintenance doses higher 
than 20 mg/d are not recommended and may even worsen 
hyperglycemia. Glyburide is metabolized in the liver into 
products with such low hypoglycemic activity that they are 
considered clinically unimportant unless renal excretion is 
compromised. Although assays specific for the unmetabolized 
compound suggest a plasma half-life of only 1 to 2 hours, the 
biologic effects of glyburide clearly persist for 24 hours after 
a single morning dose in diabetic patients. Glyburide is 
unique among sulfonylureas in that it not only binds to the 
pancreatic β cell membrane sulfonylurea receptor but also 
becomes sequestered within the β cell. This may also con-
tribute to its prolonged biologic effect despite its relatively 
short circulating half-life. 
 A formulation of micronized glyburide, which appar-
ently increases its bioavailability, is available in easy to divide 
tablet sizes of 1.5, 3, and 6 mg. 
 Glyburide has few adverse effects other than its potential 
for causing hypoglycemia. It should not be used in patients 
with liver failure and renal failure because of the risk of 
hypoglycemia. Elderly patients are at particular risk of 
 hypoglycemia even with relatively small daily doses. For this 
reason, drugs with a shorter half-life (eg, tolbutamide or 
possibly glipizide) are preferable in the treatment of type 2 
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     613
diabetes in the elderly patient. Glyburide does not cause 
water retention, as chlorpropamide does, and even slightly 
enhances free water clearance. 
 b. Glipizide (glydiazinamide)— Glipizide is supplied in tab-
lets containing 5 and 10 mg. For maximum effect in reduc-
ing postprandial hyperglycemia, this agent should be ingested 
30 minutes before breakfast, because rapid absorption is 
delayed when the drug is taken with food. The recom-
mended starting dose is 5 mg daily but 2.5-mg dose may be 
sufficient in elderly patients with early diabetes. The dose can 
gradually be increased by 2.5 or 5-mg increments. Although 
as much as 15 mg can be given as a single daily dose before 
breakfast, most patients do better with divided dosing, taking 
5 mg before each meal or taking 10 mg before breakfast and 
before dinner. The maximum recommended dose is 
40 mg/d, although doses above 20 mg probably provide little 
additional benefit in poor responders. Because of its lower 
potency and shorter half-life, it is preferable to glyburide in 
elderly patients. At least 90% of glipizide is metabolized in 
the liver to inactive products, and only a small fraction is 
excreted unchanged in the urine. Glipizide therapy is con-
traindicated in patients with liver failure. 
 Glipizide is also available as a slow-release preparation 
(Glucotrol-XL, 2.5, 5, and 10-mg tablets). The medication 
is enclosed in a nonabsorbable shell that contains an osmotic 
compartment that expands slowly, thereby slowly pumping 
out the glipizide in a sustained manner. It provides extended 
release during transit through the gastrointestinal tract, with 
greater effectiveness in lowering of prebreakfast hyperglycemia 
than the shorter duration, immediate-release standard 
 glipizide tablets. However, this formulation appears to have 
sacrificed glipizide’s reduced propensity for severe hypoglyce-
mia compared with longer acting glyburide without showing 
any demonstrable therapeutic advantages over glyburide. 
 c. Gliclazide (not available in the United States)— This 
drug is another intermediate duration sulfonylurea with a 
duration of action of about 12 hours. It is available as 80-mg 
tablets. The recommended starting dose is 40 to 80 mg/d 
with a maximum dose of 320 mg. Doses of 160 mg and 
above are given as divided doses before breakfast and dinner. 
The drug is metabolized by the liver, and the metabolites 
and conjugates have no hypoglycemic effect. An extended-
release preparation is also available. 
 d. Glimepiride— This sulfonylurea is supplied in tablets con-
taining 1, 2, and 4 mg. It has a long duration of effect with 
a half-life of 5 hours, allowing once-daily administration. 
Glimepiride achieves blood glucose lowering with the lowest 
dose of any sulfonylurea compound. A single daily dose of 
1 mg/d has been shown to be effective, and the maximal 
recommended dose is 8 mg. It is completely metabolized by 
the liver to relatively inactive metabolic products. 
 Meglitinide Analogs 
 Repaglinide is supplied as 0.5, 1, and 2-mg tablets. Its structure is 
similar to that of glyburide but lacks the sulfonic acid-urea  moiety. 
It also acts by binding to the sulfonylurea receptor and closing the 
ATP-sensitive potassium channel. It is rapidly absorbed from the intes-
tine and then undergoes complete metabolism in the liver to inactive 
biliary products, giving it a plasma half-life of less than 1 hour. The 
drug therefore causes a brief but rapid pulse of insulin. The starting 
dose is 0.5 mg three times a day 15 minutes before each meal. 
The dose can be titrated to a maximum daily dose of 16 mg. Like 
the sulfonylureas, repaglinide can be used in combination with met-
formin. Hypoglycemia is the main side effect. In clinical trials, when 
the drug was compared with glyburide, a long-acting sulfonylurea, 
there was a trend toward less hypoglycemia. Like the sulfonylureas, 
it causes weight gain. Metabolism is by the cytochrome P4503A4 
isoenzyme. Other drugs that induce or inhibit this isoenzyme may 
increase or inhibit the metabolism of repaglinide. The drug may be 
useful in patients with renal impairment or in the elderly. 
 Mitiglinide is a benzylsuccinic acid derivative that is very 
similar to repaglinide in its clinical effects. It binds to the sulfony-
lurea receptor causing a brief pulse of insulin. It is given as a 5 or 
10-mg dose just before a meal and reduces the postprandial rise in 
blood glucose. It has been approved for use in Japan. 
 δ-Phenylalanine Derivative 
 Nateglinide is supplied in tablets of 60 and 120 mg. This drug 
binds the sulfonylurea receptor and closes the ATP-sensitive 
 potassium channel. The drug is rapidly absorbed from the intestine, 
reaching peak plasma levels within 1 hour. It is metabolized in the 
liver and has a plasma half-life of about 1.5 hours. Like repaglinide, 
it causes a brief rapid pulse of insulin, and when given before a meal, 
it reduces the postprandial rise in blood glucose. The 60-mg dose is 
used in patients with mild elevations in HbA 1c . For most patients, 
the recommended starting and maintenance dosage is 120 mg three 
times a day before meals. Like the other insulin secretagogues, its 
main side effects are hypoglycemia and weight gain. 
 2. DRUGS THAT ACT ON INSULIN 
TARGET TISSUES 
 Metformin 
 Metformin (1,1-dimethylbiguanide hydrochloride) is used, either 
alone or in conjunction with other oral agents or insulin, in the 
treatment of patients with type 2 diabetes. 
 Metformin acts primarily through AMPK ( Figure 17–8 ), which 
it activates by uncoupling mitochondrial oxidative phosphoryla-
tion and increasing cellular AMP levels. Metformin’s therapeutic 
effects primarily derive from its effects on the liver, where increased 
AMPK activity reduces hepatic gluconeogenesis and lipogenesis. 
Metformin is a substrate for organic cation transporter 1, which is 
abundantly expressed in hepatocytes and in the gut. 
 Metformin has a half-life of 1.5 to 3 hours, does not bind to 
plasma proteins, and is not metabolized in humans, being excreted 
unchanged by the kidneys. 
 Metformin is the first-line therapy for patients with type 2 
diabetes. The current recommendation is to start this drug at 
diagnosis. A side benefit of metformin therapy is its tendency to 
improve both fasting and postprandial hyperglycemia and hyper-
triglyceridemia in obese patients with diabetes without the weight 
gain associated with insulin or sulfonylurea therapy. Metformin is 
ineffective in patients with type 1 diabetes. Patients with renal 
failure (calculated GFR less than 50 mL/min) should not get this 
drug because failure to excrete this drug may produce high blood 
614    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
and tissue levels of metformin that would stimulate lactic acid 
overproduction. Likewise, patients with liver failure or abusers of 
ethanol should not receive this drug; lactic acid production from 
the gut and other tissues, which rises during metformin therapy, 
can result in lactic acidosis when defective hepatocytes cannot 
remove the lactate or when alcohol-induced reduction of nucle-
otides interferes with lactate clearance. Finally, metformin is rela-
tively contraindicated in patients with cardiorespiratory 
insufficiency, because they have a propensity to develop hypoxia 
that would aggravate the lactic acid production already occurring 
from metformin therapy. The age cutoff for prescribing met-
formin has not been defined and remains a function of the overall 
health of the patient. In general, there is concern that after the age 
of 65 to 70 years the potential for progressive impairment of renal 
function or development of a cardiac event while taking met-
formin raises the risk enough to outweigh the benefits of prescrib-
ing the drug for patients with type 2 diabetes. 
 Metformin is dispensed as 500, 850, and 1000-mg tablets. A 
500 and 750-mg extended-release preparation is also available. 
Eighty-five percent of the maximal glucose-lowering effect is 
achieved by a daily dose of 1500 mg, and there is little benefit 
from giving more than 2000 mg daily. It is important to begin 
with a low dose and increase the dosage very gradually in divided 
doses—taken with meals—to reduce minor gastrointestinal upsets. 
A common schedule would be one 500-mg tablet three times a 
day with meals or one 850-mg or 1000-mg tablet twice daily at 
breakfast and dinner. The maximum recommended dose is 850 
mg three times a day. Up to 2000 mg of the extended-release 
preparation can be given once a day. 
 The epithelial cells of the gut efficiently absorb metformin, 
where it accumulates at high concentrations and causes toxicity 
due to uncoupling of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation 
and increased lactate production. The most frequent side effects of 
metformin are gastrointestinal symptoms (anorexia, nausea, 
 vomiting, abdominal discomfort, diarrhea), which occur in up to 
20% of patients. These effects are dose-related, tend to occur at 
onset of therapy, and often are transient. However, in 3% to 5% 
of patients, therapy may have to be discontinued because of per-
sistent diarrheal discomfort. In a retrospective analysis, it has been 
reported that patients who switched from immediate-release 
 metformin to a comparable dose of extended-release metformin 
experienced fewer gastrointestinal side effects. 
 Absorption of vitamin B 12 appears to be reduced during 
chronic metformin therapy but usually the vitamin B 12 levels 
remain in the normal range. Screening of serum vitamin B 12 levels 
should be considered if the patient develops a macrocytic anemia 
or if the patient develops peripheral neuropathy symptoms. 
Hypoglycemia does not occur with therapeutic doses of met-
formin, which permits its description as a euglycemic or antihy-
perglycemic drug rather than an oral hypoglycemic agent. 
Dermatologic or hematologic toxicity is rare. 
 Lactic acidosis has been reported as a side effect but is uncom-
mon with metformin in contrast to phenformin. Metformin both 
increases lactate production by uncoupling mitochondrial oxida-
tive phosphorylation, especially in the gut, and reduces lactate 
removal by the liver by blocking gluconeogenesis. At therapeutic 
doses of metformin, serum lactate levels rise only minimally if at 
all, since other organs such as the kidney can remove the slight 
excess. However, if tissue hypoxia occurs, the metformin-treated 
patient is at higher risk for lactic acidosis due to compromised 
lactate removal. Similarly, when kidney function deteriorates, 
affecting not only lactate removal by the kidney but also met-
formin excretion, plasma levels of metformin rise far above the 
therapeutic range and can increase lactate production and block 
hepatic uptake sufficiently to provoke lactic acidosis even in the 
absence of other causes of increased lactic acid production. Acute 
renal failure can occur rarely following radiocontrast administra-
tion. Metformin therapy should therefore be temporarily halted 
on the day of radiocontrast administration and restarted a day or 
two later after confirmation that renal function is normal. Almost 
all reported cases of lactic acidosis have involved subjects with 
associated risk factors that should have contraindicated its use 
(kidney, liver, or cardiorespiratory insufficiency, alcoholism, 
advanced age). 
 Peroxisome Proliferator–Activated 
Receptor Agonists 
 Thiazolidinediones are insulin sensitizers exerting their antidia-
betic effects through the activation of PPARγ (see discussion on 
PPAR nuclear receptors in insulin action and insulin resistance 
earlier). Observed effects of thiazolidinediones include increased 
glucose transporter expression (GLUT 1 and GLUT 4); decreased 
free fatty acid levels; decreased hepatic glucose output; increased 
adiponectin and decreased resistin release from adipocytes; and 
increased differentiation of preadipocytes into adipocytes. They 
have also been demonstrated to decrease levels of plasminogen 
activator inhibitor type 1, matrix metalloproteinase 9, C-reactive 
protein, and interleukin-6. Like the biguanides, this class of drugs 
does not cause hypoglycemia. Troglitazone, the first drug in this 
class to go into widespread clinical use, was withdrawn from 
clinical use because of drug-associated fatal liver failure. 
 Two other drugs in the same class are available for clinical use: 
 rosiglitazone and  pioglitazone . Both are effective as monotherapy 
and in combination with sulfonylureas, metformin, or insulin. When 
used as monotherapy, these drugs lower HbA 1c by about 1 or 2 percent-
age points. When used in combination with insulin, they can result in 
a 30% to 50% reduction in insulin dosage, and some patients can 
come off insulin completely. The combination of a thiazolidinedione 
and metformin has the advantage of not causing hypoglycemia. 
Patients inadequately managed on sulfonylureas can do well on a com-
bination of sulfonylurea and rosiglitazone or pioglitazone. About 25% 
of patients in clinical trials fail to respond to these drugs, presumably 
because they are significantly insulinopenic. 
 In addition to glucose-lowering, the thiazolidinediones have 
effects on lipids and other cardiovascular risk factors. Rosiglitazone 
therapy is associated with increases in total cholesterol, LDL 
 cholesterol (15%), and HDL cholesterol (10%). There is a reduc-
tion in free fatty acids of about 8% to 15%. The changes in triglyc-
erides were generally not different from placebo. Pioglitazone in 
clinical trials lowered triglycerides (9%) and increased HDL 
 cholesterol (15%) but did not cause a consistent change in total 
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     615
cholesterol and LDL cholesterol levels. A prospective randomized 
comparison of the metabolic effects of pioglitazone and rosiglita-
zone in patients who had previously taken troglitazone (now with-
drawn from clinical use) showed similar effects on HbA 1c and 
weight gain. Pioglitazone-treated subjects, however, had lower total 
cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, and triglyceride levels when compared 
with rosiglitazone. A study in patients with type 2 diabetes who 
were not on lipid-lowering therapy has recently confirmed this dif-
ference in lipid-lowering effects of the two thiazolidinediones. Small 
prospective studies have also shown that treatment with these drugs 
leads to improvement of biochemical and histological features of 
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. The thiazolidinediones also may 
limit vascular smooth muscle proliferation after injury and there are 
reports that troglitazone and pioglitazone reduce neointimal prolif-
eration after coronary stent placement. Also, in one double-blind, 
placebo-controlled study, rosiglitazone was shown to be associated 
with a decrease in the ratio of urinary albumin to creatinine. 
 The dosage of rosiglitazone is 4 to 8 mg daily and of pioglitazone 
15 to 45 mg daily, and the drugs do not have to be taken with food. 
Rosiglitazone is primarily metabolized by the CYP 2C8 isoenzyme 
and pioglitazone is metabolized by CYP 2C8 and CYP 3A4. 
 Safety concerns and some troublesome side effects have 
emerged about this class of drugs that limit their use. 
 A meta-analysis of 42 randomized clinical trials with rosiglita-
zone suggested that this drug increases the risk of angina pectoris 
or myocardial infarction. A meta-analysis of clinical trials with 
pioglitazone did not show a similar finding. Although conclusive 
data are lacking, the European Medicines Agency has suspended 
the use of rosiglitazone in Europe. In the United States, the FDA 
has mandated that it can be prescribed to new patients only if they 
are unable to achieve glucose control on other medications or are 
unable to take pioglitazone. 
 Edema occurs in about 3% to 4% of patients receiving mono-
therapy with rosiglitazone or pioglitazone. The edema occurs 
more frequently (10%-15%) in patients receiving concomitant 
insulin therapy and may result in congestive heart failure. The 
drugs are contraindicated in diabetic individuals with New York 
Heart Association class III and IV cardiac status. Thiazolidinediones 
have also rarely been reported as being associated with new onset 
or worsening macular edema which resolved or improved once the 
drug was discontinued. 
 In experimental animals, rosiglitazone stimulates bone marrow adi-
pogenesis at the expense of osteoblastogenesis resulting in a decrease in 
bone mineral density. An increase in fracture risk in women (but not 
men) has been reported with both rosiglitazone and pioglitazone. The 
fracture risk is in the range of 1.9 per 100 patient-years with the thiazo-
lidinedione. In at least one study of rosiglitazone, the fracture risk was 
increased in premenopausal as well as postmenopausal women. This 
increased risk for fractures is perhaps the most important reason for 
limiting the use of this class of drugs. 
 Other side effects include anemia, which occurs in 4% of patients 
treated with these drugs; it may be due to a dilutional effect of 
increased plasma volume rather than a reduction in red cell mass. 
Weight gain occurs, especially when the drug is combined with a sul-
fonylurea or insulin. Some of the weight gain is fluid retention, but 
there is also an increase in total fat mass. In preclinical studies with 
pioglitazone, bladder tumors were observed in male rats receiving 
clinically relevant doses of the medication. In a planned five-interim 
analysis of data from a long term observational cohort there was no 
overall  increased risk of bladder cancer with pioglitazone therapy. 
However, increased bladder cancer risk was observed with increasing 
dose and duration of pioglitazone use, reaching statistical significance 
after 24 months of exposure. 
 Troglitazone, the first drug in this class, was withdrawn from 
clinical use because of drug-associated fatal liver failure. The two 
currently available agents, rosiglitazone and pioglitazone, have 
thus far not caused hepatotoxicity. The FDA has, however, recom-
mended that patients should not initiate drug therapy if there is 
clinical evidence of active liver disease or pretreatment elevation of 
the alanine aminotransferase (ALT) level that is 2.5 times greater 
than the upper limit of normal. Obviously, caution should be used 
in initiation of therapy in patients with even mild ALT elevations. 
Liver biochemical tests should be performed prior to initiation of 
treatment and periodically thereafter. 
 3. DRUGS THAT AFFECT GLUCOSE 
ABSORPTION 
 Alpha-Glucosidase Inhibitors 
 Drugs of this family are competitive inhibitors of intestinal brush 
border α glucosidases. Two of these drugs, acarbose and miglitol, 
are available for clinical use in the United States. Voglibose, 
another α glucosidase inhibitor, is available in Japan, Korea, and 
India. Acarbose and miglitol are potent inhibitors of glucoamylase, 
α-amylase, and sucrase. They are less effective on isomaltase and 
are ineffective on trehalase or lactase. Acarbose binds 1000 times 
more avidly to the intestinal disaccharidases than do products of 
carbohydrate digestion or sucrose. A fundamental difference exists 
between acarbose and miglitol in their absorption. Acarbose has 
the molecular mass and structural features of a tetrasaccharide, 
and very little (∼2%) crosses the microvillar membrane. Miglitol, 
however, is structurally similar to glucose and is absorbable. Both 
drugs delay the absorption of carbohydrates and reduce postpran-
dial glycemic excursion. 
 a. Acarbose is available as 50 and 100-mg tablets. The recom-
mended starting dose is 50 mg twice daily, gradually increas-
ing to 100 mg three times daily. For maximal benefit on 
postprandial hyperglycemia, acarbose should be given with 
the first mouthful of food ingested. In diabetic patients it 
reduces postprandial hyperglycemia by 30% to 50%, and its 
overall effect is to lower the HbA 1c by 0.5% to 1%. 
The principal adverse effect, seen in 20% to 30% of 
patients, is flatulence. This is caused by undigested carbohy-
drate reaching the lower bowel, where gases are produced by 
bacterial flora. In 3% of cases, troublesome diarrhea occurs. 
This gastrointestinal discomfort tends to discourage exces-
sive carbohydrate consumption and promotes improved 
compliance of patients with type 2 diabetes with their diet 
prescriptions. 
 When acarbose is given alone, there is no risk of 
hypoglycemia. However, if combined with insulin or sulfo-
nylureas, it may increase risk of hypoglycemia from these 
agents. A slight rise in hepatic aminotransferases has been 
noted in clinical trials (5% vs 2% in placebo controls, and 
616    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
particularly with doses >300 mg/d). This generally returns to 
normal on stopping this drug. In the UKPDS, approximately 
2000 patients on diet, sulfonylurea, metformin, or insulin 
therapy were randomized to acarbose or placebo therapy. By 
3 years, 60% of the patients had discontinued the drug, 
mostly because of gastrointestinal symptoms. In the 40% of 
patients who remained on the drug, acarbose was associated 
with a 0.5% lowering of HbA 1c compared with placebo. 
 b. Miglitol is similar to acarbose in terms of its clinical effects. It is 
indicated for use in diet- or sulfonylurea-treated patients with 
type 2 diabetes. Therapy is initiated at the lowest effective dosage 
of 25 mg three times a day. The usual maintenance dose is 50 mg 
three times a day, although some patients may benefit from 
increasing the dose to 100 mg three times a day. Gastrointestinal 
side effects occur as with acarbose. The drug is not metabolized 
and is excreted unchanged by the kidney. Theoretically, absorb-
able α-glucosidase inhibitors could induce a deficiency of one or 
more of α-glucosidases involved in cellular glycogen metabolism 
and biosynthesis of glycoproteins. This does not occur in prac-
tice because—unlike the intestinal mucosa, which is exposed to 
a high concentration of the drug—circulating plasma levels are 
200-fold to 1000-fold lower than those needed to inhibit intra-
cellular α glucosidases. Miglitol should not be used in renal 
failure because its clearance is impaired in this setting. 
 4. INCRETINS 
 The gut makes several incretins, gut hormones that amplify post-
prandial insulin secretion, including glucagon-like peptide-1 
(GLP-1,  Figure 17–9 ) and glucose-dependent insulinotropic poly-
peptide (GIP). Therapeutic drugs in this class include GLP-1 
receptor agonists and  dipeptidyl peptidase 4 ( DPP-4) inhibitors, 
which increase levels of both GLP-1 and GIP. 
 When GLP-1 is infused in patients with type 2 diabetes, it stimu-
lates insulin secretion and lowers glucose levels. GLP-1, unlike the 
sulfonylureas, has only a modest insulin stimulatory effect under nor-
moglycemic conditions. This means that GLP-1 administration has a 
lower risk of causing hypoglycemia than the sulfonylureas. GLP-1, in 
addition to its insulin stimulatory effect, also has a number of other 
pancreatic and extrapancreatic effects ( see Table 17–4 ). 
 GLP-1 Receptor Agonists 
 GLP-1 is rapidly proteolyzed by DPP-4 and by other enzymes such 
as endopeptidase 24.11. It is also cleared rapidly by the  kidney. As a 
result, the half-life of GLP-1 is only 1 to 2 minutes. The native pep-
tide, therefore, cannot be used therapeutically. Instead, the approach 
taken has been to develop metabolically stable analogs or derivatives 
of GLP-1 that are not subject to the same enzymatic degradation or 
renal clearance. Two GLP-1 receptor agonists, exenatide and lira-
glutide, are currently available for clinical use. 
 a. Exenatide or exendin 4 is a GLP-1 receptor agonist iso-
lated from the saliva of the Gila monster (a venomous lizard) 
that is resistant to DPP-4 action and is cleared from the 
plasma by glomerular filtration. When given to patients 
with type 2 diabetes by subcutaneous injection twice a day, 
this compound lowers blood glucose and HbA 1c levels. 
Exenatide appears to have the same effects as GLP-1 on 
glucagon suppression and gastric emptying. In clinical trials, 
adding exenatide to the therapeutic regimen of patients with 
type 2 diabetes who are already taking metformin or a 
 sulfonylurea (or both) further lowered the HbA 1c value by 
0.4% to 0.6% over a 30-week period. These patients also 
lost 3 to 6 lb in weight. In an open-label extension study up 
to 80 weeks, the HbA 1c reduction was sustained, and there 
was further weight loss (to a total loss of ∼10 lb). 
 The main side effect was nausea, affecting over 40% of 
patients. The nausea was dose-dependent and declined with 
time. The risk of hypoglycemia was higher in subjects on 
sulfonylureas. The delay in gastric emptying may affect the 
absorption of some other drugs; therefore, antibiotics and 
oral contraceptives should be taken 1 hour before exenatide 
doses. Low-titer antibodies against exenatide develop in over 
one-third (38%) of patients, but the clinical effects are not 
attenuated. High-titer antibodies develop in a subset of 
patients (∼6%), and in about half of these cases, an attenu-
ation of glycemic response has been seen. 
 The FDA has received 30 postmarketing reports of acute 
pancreatitis in patients taking exenatide.The pancreatitis was 
severe (hemorrhagic or necrotizing) in six instances and two 
of these patients died. Many of the patients had other risk 
factors for pancreatitis, but the possibility remains that the 
drug was causally responsible for some cases. Patients taking 
exenatide should be advised to seek immediate medical care if 
they experience unexplained, persistent, severe abdominal 
pain. The drug should be discontinued if pancreatitis is sus-
pected. The FDA also reported 16 cases of renal impairment 
and 62 cases of acute renal failure in patients taking exenatide. 
Some of these patients had preexisting kidney disease and 
others had one or more risk factors for kidney disease. A num-
ber reported nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea and it is possible 
that these side effects cause volume depletion and contributed 
to the development of renal failure. 
 Exenatide is dispensed as two fixed-dose pens (5 and 
10 μg). It is injected 60 minutes before breakfast and before 
dinner. Patients should be prescribed the 5-μg pen for the 
first month and then, if tolerated, the dose should be 
increased to 10 μg twice daily. The drug is not recom-
mended in patients with glomerular filtration rate less than 
30 mL/min. 
 b. Liraglutide is a soluble fatty acid acylated GLP-1 analog—
with replacement of lysine with arginine at position 34 and 
the attachment of a C16 acyl chain to a lysine at position 26. 
The fatty-acyl GLP-1 retains affinity for GLP-1 receptors, 
but the addition of the C16 acyl chain allows for noncova-
lent binding to albumin, both hindering DPP-4 access to 
the molecule and contributing to a prolonged half-life and 
duration of action. The half-life is approximately 12 hours 
allowing the drug to be injected once a day. 
 In clinical trials lasting 26 and 52 weeks, adding liraglutide to 
the therapeutic regimen (metformin, sulfonylurea, thiazolidine-
dione) of patients with type 2 diabetes further lowered the 
HbA 1c value. Depending on the dose and design of the study, 
the HbA 1c decline was in the range of 0.6% to 1.5%. The 
patients had sustained weight loss of 1 to 6 lb. 
 Like exenatide, the most frequent side effect is nausea 
and vomiting affecting approximately 10% of subjects. 
There was also an increase in incidence of diarrhea. About 
2% to 5% of subjects withdrew from the studies because of 
the GI symptoms. Pancreatitis may also occur—in the 
 clinical trials there were seven cases of pancreatitis in the 
liraglutide-treated group with one case in the comparator 
group (2.2 vs 0.6 cases per 1000 patient-years). Liraglutide 
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     617
stimulates C-cell neoplasia and causes medullary thyroid 
carcinoma in rats. Human C cells express very few GLP-1 
receptors and the relevance to human therapy is unclear but 
because of the animal data, the drug should not be used 
in patients with personal or family history of medullary 
 thyroid carcinoma or multiple endocrine neoplasia syndrome 
type 2. 
 The dosing is initiated at 0.6 mg daily increased after 1 
week to 1.2 mg daily. An additional increase in dose to 1.8 
mg is recommended if needed for optimal glycemic control. 
Titration should of course be based on tolerability. There is 
limited experience using the drug in renal failure but no 
dose adjustment is recommended. 
 DPP-4 Inhibitors 
 An alternative to the use of GLP-1 receptor agonists involves inhi-
bition of the enzyme DPP-4 with prolongation of the action of 
endogenously released GLP-1 and GIP. Two oral DPP-4 inhibi-
tors, sitagliptin and saxagliptin, are available for the treatment of 
type 2 diabetes in the United States. An additional DPP-4 inhibitor, 
Vildagliptin, is available in Europe. 
 a. Sitagliptin in clinical trials was shown to be effective in 
lowering glucose when used alone and in combination with 
metformin and pioglitazone. In various clinical trials, 
improvements in HbA 1c ranged from 0.5% to 1.4%. The 
usual dose of sitagliptin is 100 mg once daily, but the dose 
is reduced to 50 mg daily if the calculated creatinine clear-
ance is 30 to 50 mL/min and to 25 mg for clearances less 
than 30 mL/min. Unlike exenatide, sitagliptin does not 
cause nausea or vomiting. It also does not result in weight 
loss. The main adverse effect appears to be a predisposition 
to nasopharyngitis or upper respiratory tract infection. 
A small increase in neutrophil count of approximately 
200 cells/mL has also occurred. Since its FDA approval and 
clinical use, there have been reports of serious allergic reac-
tions to sitagliptin, including anaphylaxis, angioedema, and 
exfoliative skin conditions, including Stevens-Johnson 
syndrome. There have also been reports of pancreatitis (88 cases 
including two cases of hemorrhagic or necrotizing pancrea-
titis). The frequency of these events is unclear. DPP-4 is a 
pleiotropic enzyme that inactivates a variety of peptide hor-
mones, neuropeptides, and chemokines and DPP-4 inhibi-
tors have been shown to prolong the action of neuropeptide 
Y and substance P. Whether its inhibition over a long-term 
period will have negative consequences is not known. 
 b. Saxagliptin when added to the therapeutic regimen (met-
formin, sulfonylurea, thiazolidinedione) of patients with 
type 2 diabetes further lowered the HbA 1c value by about 
0.7% to 0.9%. The dose is 2.5 or 5 mg once a day. The 
2.5-mg dose should be used in patients with calculated crea-
tinine clearance less than 50 mL/min. It lowers HbA 1c by 
about 0.6% when added to metformin, glyburide, or thiazo-
lidine in various 24-week clinical trials. The drug is weight 
neutral. The main adverse reactions were upper respiratory 
tract infection, naspharyngitis, headache, and urinary tract 
infection. There is also small reversible dose-dependent 
reduction in absolute lymphocyte count which remains 
within normal limits. Hypersensitivity reactions such as 
urticaria and facial edema occurred in 1.5% of patients on 
the drug compared to 0.4% with placebo. The metabolism 
of saxagliptin is through CYP 3A4/5; so strong inhibitors or 
inducers of CYP 3A4/5 will affect the pharmacokinetics of 
saxagliptin and its active metabolite. 
 c. Vildagliptin , like the other DPP-4 inhibitors, lowers HbA 1c 
by about 0.5% to 1% when added to the therapeutic regi-
men of patients with type 2 diabetes. The dose is 50 mg 
once a day or twice a day. The adverse reactions include 
upper respiratory tract infections, nasopharyngitis, dizzi-
ness, and headache. Rare cases of hepatic dysfunction 
including hepatitis have been reported. Liver function test-
ing is recommended, quarterly the first year, and periodi-
cally thereafter. 
 5. OTHERS 
 Pramlintide is a synthetic analog of islet amyloid polypeptide 
(IAPP) that when given subcutaneously (1) delays gastric emptying, 
(2) suppresses glucagon secretion, and (3) decreases appetite. It is 
approved for use both in type 1 and insulin-treated type 2 patients. 
In 6-month clinical studies with type 1 and insulin-treated type 2 
patients, those on the drug had approximately a 0.4% reduction in 
HbA 1c and lost about 1.7 kg compared to placebo. The HbA 1c 
reduction was sustained for 2 years, but some of the weight was 
regained. The drug is given immediately before the meal by injec-
tion. Hypoglycemia is the most concerning adverse event, and it is 
recommended that the short-acting or premixed insulin doses be 
reduced by 50% when the drug is started. Since the drug slows 
gastric emptying, recovery from hypoglycemia can be a problem 
because of delay in absorption of the fast-acting carbohydrate. 
Nausea was the other main side effect, affecting 30% to 50% of 
subjects. It tended to improve with time. In patients with type 1 
diabetes, pramlintide is initiated at the dose of 15 μg before each 
meal and titrated by 15 μg increments to a maintenance dose of 30 
or 60 μg before each meal. In patients with type 2 diabetes, the 
initiation dose is 60 μg premeals increased to 120 μg in 3 to 7 days 
if no significant nausea occurs. 
 A combination of pramlintide and recombinant human leptin 
(metreleptin) is currently being evaluated in clinical trials for 
weight loss. 
 Drug Combinations 
 A number of drug combinations, glyburide-metformin 
(Glucovance), glipizide-metformin (Metaglip), repaglinide- 
metformin (Prandi-Met), rosiglitazone-metformin (Avandamet), 
pioglitazone-metformin (ACTOplus Met), sitagliptin-metformin 
(Janumet), saxagliptin-metformin extended release (kombiglyze 
XR), rosiglitazone-glimepiride (Avandaryl), and pioglitazone-
glimepiride (Duetact) are available. These combinations, how-
ever, limit the clinician’s ability to optimally adjust dosage of the 
individual drugs and for that reason are of questionable merit. 
 6. INSULIN 
 Insulin is indicated for individuals with type 1 diabetes as well as 
for those with type 2 diabetes whose hyperglycemia does not 
respond to diet therapy and other diabetes drugs. 
 Human insulin is now produced by recombinant DNA tech-
niques (biosynthetic human insulin). Animal insulins are no longer 
618    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
available in the United States. With the availability of highly puri-
fied human insulin preparations, immunogenicity has been mark-
edly reduced, thereby decreasing the incidence of therapeutic 
complications such as insulin allergy, immune insulin resistance, 
and localized lipoatrophy at the injection site. The insulins are also 
quite stable and refrigeration while in use is not necessary. During 
travel, reserve supplies of insulin can be readily transported with-
out significant loss of potency, provided they are protected from 
extremes of heat or cold. 
 Insulins in Europe and United States are available only in a 
concentration of 100 U/mL (U100). Low-dose (0.3 mL) dispos-
able insulin syringes allow for accurate dosing of as low as 1 or 
2 U. If extremely low doses of insulin are needed, diluted insulin 
can be prepared using diluent available from the insulin manufac-
turer. For use in rare cases of severe insulin resistance in which 
large quantities of insulin are required, a U500 (500 U/mL) regu-
lar human insulin is available from Eli Lilly. 
 Insulin preparations differ with regard to their time of onset 
and duration of biologic action ( Figure 17–11 ;  Table 17–14 ). 
The short-acting preparations are regular insulin and the rapidly 
acting insulin analogs ( Table 17–15 ). They are dispensed as clear 
solutions at neutral pH and contain small amounts of zinc to 
improve their stability and shelf life. The long-acting preparations 
are neutral protamine hagedorn (NPH) insulin and the long- 
acting insulin analogs. NPH insulin is dispensed as a turbid sus-
pension at neutral pH with protamine in phosphate buffer. The 
long-acting insulin analogs are dispensed as clear solutions; insulin 
glargine is at acidic pH and insulin detemir is at neutral pH. The 
rapidly acting insulin analogs and the long-acting insulins are 
designed for subcutaneous administration, while regular insulin 
can also be given intravenously. While insulin aspart has been 
approved for intravenous use (eg, in hyperglycemic emergencies), 
there is no advantage in using insulin aspart over regular insulin 
by this route. 
 It is important to recognize that values given for time of onset 
of action, peak effect, and duration of action are only approximate 
and that there is great variability in these parameters from patient 
to patient and even in a given patient depending on the size of the 
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Glucose utilization rate (mg/kg/h)
10
Time (h) after SC injection
End of 
observation period
20
NPH
Detemir
Glargine
Regular
insulin
Insulin
aspart
30
0
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
Glucose infusion rate (mg/kg/min)
120
240
Time (min)
0.2 IU/kg SQ
360
480
600
0
 FIGURE 17–11  Extent and duration of action of various types of 
insulin (in a fasting diabetic). Duration of action may be extended 
considerably when the dose of a given insulin formulation increases 
above the average therapeutic doses depicted here. 
TABLE 17–15   Insulin preparations available in the 
United States.a
Short Acting Insulin Preparations
Insulin lispro (Humalog, Lilly)
Insulin aspart (Novolog, Novo Nordisk)
Insulin glusisine (Apidra, Sanofi Aventis)
Regular insulin (Lilly, Novo Nordisk)
Long acting Insulin Preparations
NPH insulin (Lilly, Novo Nordisk)
Insulin glargine (Lantus, Sanofi Aventis)
Insulin detemir (Levemir, Novo Nordisk)
Premixed Insulins
 % NPH/% regular
  70/30 (Lilly, Novo Nordisk)
 75% insulin lispro/protamine (NPL) 25% insulin lispro
  Humalog mix 75/25 (Lilly)
 50% NPL/50% insulin lispro
  Humalog mix 50/50 (Lilly)
 70% insulin aspart/protamine/30% insulin aspart
  Novolog Mix 70/30 (Novo Nordisk)
aAll types of insulin available in the United States are recombinant human or human 
insulin analog origin. All the insulins are dispensed at U100 concentration. There is an 
additional U500 preparation of regular insulin.
TABLE 17–14  Summary of bioavailability 
characteristics of the injectable 
insulins.
Insulin Preparations
Onset of 
Action
Peak 
Action
Effective 
Duration
Insulins lispro, aspart, 
 glulisine
Human regular
Human NPH
Insulin glargine
Insulin detemir
5-15 min
30-60 min
2-4 h
1.5 h
1 h
1-1.5 h
2 h
6-7 h
Flat
Flat
3-4 h
6-8 h
10-20 h
~24 h
17 h
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     619
dose, the site of injection, the degree of exercise, the avidity of 
circulating anti-insulin antibodies, and other less well-defined 
variables. 
 Short-Acting Insulin Preparations 
 A. Regular insulin 
 Regular insulin is a short-acting, soluble 
crystalline zinc insulin whose hypoglycemic effect appears within 
30 minutes after subcutaneous injection, peaks at about 2 hours, 
and lasts for about 5 to 7 hours when usual quantities (ie, 5-15 U) 
are administered. Intravenous infusions of regular insulin are par-
ticularly useful in the treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis and dur-
ing the perioperative management of insulin-requiring diabetics. 
Regular insulin is indicated when the subcutaneous insulin 
requirement is changing rapidly, such as after surgery or during 
acute infections—although the rapidly acting insulin analogs may 
be preferable in these situations. 
 For very insulin-resistant subjects who would otherwise require 
large volumes of insulin solution, a U500 preparation of human 
regular insulin is available. Because a U500 syringe is not available, 
a U100-insulin syringe or tuberculin syringe is used to measure 
doses. The physician should carefully note dosages in both units 
and volume to avoid overdosage. 
 B. Rapidly acting insulin analogs 
 Insulin lispro (Humalog) 
is an insulin analog produced by recombinant technology, wherein 
two amino acids near the carboxyl terminal of the B chain have 
been reversed in position; proline at position B28 has been moved 
to B29 and lysine has been moved from B29 to B28.  Insulin 
aspart (Novolog) is a single substitution of proline by aspartic acid 
at position B28.  Insulin glulisine (Apidra) differs from human 
insulin in that the amino acid asparagine at position B3 is replaced 
by lysine and the lysine in position B29 by glutamic acid. These 
changes reduce the tendency to form hexamers in these three 
 analogs, in contrast to human insulin. When injected subcutane-
ously, the analogs quickly dissociate into monomers and are 
absorbed very rapidly, reaching peak serum values in as soon as 1 
hour—in contrast to regular human insulin, whose hexamers 
require considerably more time to dissociate and become absorbed. 
The amino acid changes in these analogs do not interfere with 
their binding to the insulin receptor, with the circulating half-life, 
or with their immunogenicity, which are all identical to those of 
human regular insulin. 
 Clinical trials have demonstrated that the optimal times of pre-
prandial subcutaneous injection of comparable doses of the rapid-
acting insulin analogs and of regular human insulin are 20 minutes 
and 60 minutes before the meal, respectively. Although this more 
rapid onset of action has been welcomed as a great convenience by 
patients with diabetes who object to waiting as long as 60 minutes 
after injecting regular human insulin before they can begin their 
meal, patients must be taught to ingest adequate absorbable carbo-
hydrate early in the meal to avoid hypoglycemia during the meal. 
Another desirable feature of rapidly acting insulin analogs is that 
their duration of action remains at about 4 hours irrespective of 
dosage. This contrasts with regular insulin, whose duration of 
action is prolonged when larger doses are used. 
 The rapidly acting analogs are also commonly used in pumps. 
In a double-blind crossover study comparing insulin lispro with 
regular insulin in insulin pumps, persons using insulin lispro had 
lower HbA 1c values and improved postprandial glucose control 
with the same frequency of hypoglycemia. The concern remains 
that in the event of pump failure, users of the rapidly acting insulin 
analogs will have more rapid onset of hyperglycemia and ketosis. 
 The structural differences between insulin lispro and human 
insulin may be sufficient to prevent insulin lispro from binding to 
human insulin antibodies in some patients, and there have been 
case reports of successful use of insulin lispro in those rare patients 
who have a generalized allergy to human insulin or who have 
severe antibody-mediated insulin resistance. 
 Long-Acting Insulin Preparations 
 a. Neutral Protamine Hagedorn (NPH) , or isophane, insu-
lin is an intermediate-acting insulin in which the onset of 
action is delayed by combining two parts of soluble crystal-
line zinc insulin with one part protamine zinc insulin. The 
mixture has equivalent concentrations of protamine and 
insulin, so that neither is in excess (isophane). Its onset of 
action is delayed by 2 to 4 hours, and its peak response is 
generally reached in about 8 to 10 hours. Because its dura-
tion of action is often less than 24 hours (with a range of 
10-20 hours), most patients require at least two injections 
daily to maintain a sustained insulin effect. 
 Flocculation of suspended particles may occasionally 
frost the sides of a bottle of NPH insulin or clump within 
bottles from which multiple small doses are withdrawn over 
a prolonged period. This instability is a rare phenomenon 
and might occur less frequently if NPH human insulin were 
refrigerated when not in use and if bottles were discarded 
after 1 month of use. Patients should be vigilant for early 
signs of frosting or clumping of the NPH insulin, because 
it indicates a pronounced loss of potency. Several cases of 
diabetic ketoacidosis have been reported in patients with 
type 1 diabetes who had been inadvertently injecting this 
denatured insulin. 
 b. Insulin glargine is an insulin analog in which the asparag-
ine at position 21 of the A chain of the human insulin 
molecule is replaced by glycine and two arginines are added 
to the carboxyl terminal of the B chain. The arginines raise 
the isoelectric point of the molecule close to neutral, making 
it more soluble in an acidic environment. In contrast, 
human insulin has an isoelectric point of pH 5.4. Insulin 
glargine is a clear insulin that, when injected into the neutral 
pH environment of the subcutaneous tissue, forms micro-
precipitates that slowly release the insulin into the circula-
tion. It lasts for about 24 hours without any pronounced 
peaks and is given once a day to provide basal coverage. This 
insulin cannot be mixed with the other insulins because of 
its acidic pH. When this insulin was given as a single injec-
tion at bedtime to type 1 diabetes patients, fasting hypergly-
cemia was better controlled when compared with bedtime 
NPH insulin. The clinical trials also suggest that there may 
be less nocturnal hypoglycemia with this insulin when com-
pared with NPH insulin. 
 In one clinical trial involving patients with type 2 diabetes, 
insulin glargine was associated with a slightly more rapid 
progression of retinopathy when compared with NPH 
620    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
 insulin. The frequency was 7.5% with the analog and 2.7% 
with the NPH. This observation however, was not con-
firmed in a 5-year open label prospective study of 1024 
subjects randomized to NPH or insulin glargine. There was 
no increase in the risk of progression of retinopathy with the 
analog insulin. 
 In  in vitro studies, insulin glargine has a sixfold greater 
affinity for the IGF-1 receptor compared with the human 
insulin. There has also been a report that insulin glargine has 
increased mitogenicity compared with human insulin in a 
human osteosarcoma cell line. Circulating levels of insulin 
glargine, however, are low, and the clinical significance of 
these observations is not yet clear. An observational study 
from Germany of 127,031 patients who had exposure to 
regular insulin, short-acting insulin analogs, and insulin 
glargine reported a strong correlation between increased 
insulin dose and cancer risk. Moreover insulin glargine, dose 
for dose, appeared to carry a higher risk than regular insulin. 
Additional studies are needed to confirm or refute this 
observation. Because of lack of safety data, use of insulin 
glargine during pregnancy is not recommended. 
 c. Insulin detemir is an insulin analog in which the tyrosine at 
position 30 of the B chain has been removed and a 14-C fatty 
acid chain (tetradecanoic acid) is attached to the lysine at 
position 29 by acylation. The fatty acid chain makes the 
 molecule more lipophilic than native insulin, and the addition 
of zinc stabilizes the molecule and leads to formation of hex-
amers. After injection, self-association at the injection site and 
albumin binding in the circulation via the fatty acid side chain 
lead to slower distribution to peripheral target tissues and 
prolonged duration of action. The affinity of insulin detemir 
is four- to fivefold lower than that of human soluble insulin 
and, therefore, the U100 formulation of insulin detemir has a 
concentration of 2400 nmol/mL compared to 600 nmol/mL 
for NPH. The duration of action for insulin detemir is about 
17 hours at therapeutically relevant doses. It is recommended 
that the insulin is injected once or twice a day to achieve a 
stable basal coverage. Apparently this insulin has been 
reported to have lower within-subject pharmacodynamic vari-
ability compared to NPH insulin and insulin glargine.  In vitro 
studies do not suggest any clinically relevant albumin binding 
interactions between insulin detemir and fatty acids or pro-
tein-bound drugs. Because there is a vast excess (∼400,000) of 
albumin-binding sites available in plasma per insulin detemir 
molecule, it is unlikely that hypoalbuminemic disease states 
will affect the ratio of bound to free insulin detemir. 
 Insulin Mixtures 
 Because intermediate-acting insulins require several hours to reach 
adequate therapeutic levels, their use in patients with type 1 diabetes 
requires supplements of regular insulin or insulin lispro or insulin 
aspart preprandially. For convenience, regular or NPH insulin may 
be mixed together in the same syringe and injected subcutaneously 
in split dosage before breakfast and supper. It is recommended that 
the regular insulin be withdrawn first, then the NPH insulin. No 
attempt should be made to mix the insulins in the syringe, and the 
injection is preferably given immediately after the syringe is loaded. 
Stable premixed insulins (70% NPH and 30% regular) are available 
as a convenience to patients who have difficulty mixing insulin 
because of visual problems or insufficient manual dexterity. 
 With increasing use of rapid-acting insulin analogs as a pre-
prandial insulin, it has become evident that combination with an 
intermediate-acting or long-acting insulin is essential to maintain 
postabsorptive glycemic control. It has been demonstrated that 
insulin lispro can be acutely mixed with NPH insulin without 
affecting its rapid absorption. Premixed preparations of insulin 
lispro and NPH insulin however are unstable because of exchange 
of insulin lispro with the human insulin in the protamine 
 complex. Consequently, over time, the soluble component 
becomes a mixture of regular and insulin lispro at varying ratios. 
In an attempt to remedy this, an intermediate insulin composed of 
isophane complexes of protamine with insulin lispro was devel-
oped and given the name NPL (neutral protamine lispro). 
Premixed combinations of NPL and insulin lispro are now 
 available for clinical use (Humalog Mix 75/25 and Humalog 
Mix 50/50). These mixtures have a more rapid onset of glucose-
lowering activity compared with 70% NPH/30% regular human 
insulin mixture and can be given within 15 minutes before or after 
starting a meal. Similarly, a 70% insulin aspart protamine/30% 
insulin aspart (NovoLogMix 70/30) is now available. The main 
advantages of these new mixtures are that (1) they can be given 
within 15 minutes of starting a meal and (2) they are superior in 
controlling the postprandial glucose rise after a carbohydrate-rich 
meal. These benefits have not translated into improvements in 
HbA 1c levels when compared with the usual 70% NPH/30% 
regular mixture. 
 The longer-acting insulin analogs (insulin glargine or insulin 
detemir) cannot be acutely mixed with either regular insulin or the 
rapid-acting insulin analogs. 
 Methods of Insulin Administration 
 a. Insulin syringes and needles— Disposable plastic syringes 
with needles attached are available in 1-mL, 0.5-mL, and 
0.3-mL sizes. Their finely honed 30- to 31-gauge attached 
needles have greatly reduced the pain of injections. They are 
light, not susceptible to damage, and convenient when trav-
eling. Moreover, their clear markings and tight plungers 
allow accurate measurement of insulin dosage. The  low-dose 
syringes have become increasingly popular, because most 
patients take less than 30 U at one injection and also it is 
available with half unit markings. Two lengths of needles are 
available: short (8 mm) and long (12.7 mm). Long needles 
are preferable in obese patients to reduce the variability of 
insulin absorption. 
 b. Sites for injection —Any part of the body covered by loose 
skin can be used as an injection site, including the abdomen, 
thighs, upper arms, flanks, and upper-outer quadrants of the 
buttocks. In general, regular insulin is absorbed more rap-
idly from upper regions of the body such as the deltoid area 
or the abdomen rather than from the thighs or buttocks. 
Exercise appears to facilitate insulin absorption when the 
injection site is adjacent to the exercising muscle. Rotation 
of sites continues to be recommended to avoid delayed 
absorption when fibrosis or lipohypertrophy occurs due to 
repeated use of a single site. However, considerable variabil-
ity of absorption rates from different regions, particularly 
with exercise, may contribute to the instability of glycemic 
control in certain patients with type 1 diabetes if injection 
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     621
sites are rotated indiscriminately over different areas of the 
body. Consequently, diabetologists recommend limiting 
injection sites to a single region of the body and rotating 
sites within that region. It is possible that some of the stabil-
ity of glycemic control achieved by infusion pumps may be 
related to the constancy of the region of infusion from day 
to day. For most patients, the abdomen is the recommended 
region for injection because it provides a considerable area 
in which to rotate sites, and there may be less variability of 
absorption with exercise than when the thigh or deltoid 
areas are used. The effect of anatomic regions appears to be 
much less pronounced with the analogs. 
 c. Insulin pen injector devices —Insulin pens eliminate the 
need for carrying insulin vials and syringes. Cartridges of 
insulin lispro, insulin aspart, and insulin glargine are available 
for reusable pens (Lilly, Novo Nordisk, and Owen Mumford). 
Disposable prefilled pens are also available for insulin lispro, 
insulin aspart, insulin glulisine, insulin detemir, insulin 
glargine, NPH, 70% NPH/30% regular, 75% NPL/25% 
insulin lispro, and 70% insulin aspart protamine/30% insu-
lin aspart. Thirty-one-gauge needles (5, 6, and 8-mm long) 
for these pens make injections almost painless. 
 d. Insulin pumps —Several small portable open loop pumps 
for the delivery of insulin are in the market. These devices 
contain an insulin reservoir and a pump programmed to 
deliver regular insulin subcutaneously; they do not contain a 
glucose sensor. With improved methods for self-monitoring 
of  blood glucose at home (see later), these pump systems are 
becoming increasingly popular. In the United States, 
Medtronic MiniMed, Insulet, Animas, and Roche insulin 
infusion pumps are available for subcutaneous delivery of 
insulin. These pumps are small (about the size of a pager) 
and easy to program. They have many features, including 
the ability to record a number of different basal rates 
throughout a 24-hour period and adjust the time over which 
bolus doses are given. They are able also to detect pressure 
build-up if the catheter is kinked. The catheter connecting 
the insulin reservoir to the subcutaneous cannula can be 
disconnected so the patient can remove the pump temporar-
ily (eg, for bathing). Ominpod (Insulet Corporation) is an 
insulin infusion system in which the insulin reservoir and 
infusion set are integrated into one unit (pod), so it does not 
use a catheter. The pod, placed on the skin, delivers subcu-
taneous basal and bolus insulin based on wirelessly transmit-
ted instructions from a personal digital assistant. 
 The great advantage of  continuous subcutaneous insu-
lin infusion (CSII) is that it allows for establishment of a 
basal profile tailored to the patient. The patient, therefore, is 
able to eat with less regard to timing because the basal insu-
lin infusion should maintain a constant blood glucose level 
between meals. Also, the ability to adjust the basals makes it 
easier for the patient to manage glycemic excursions that 
occur with exercise. The pumps also have software that can 
assist the patient to calculate boluses based on glucose read-
ing and carbohydrates to be consumed. They also keep track 
of the time elapsed since last insulin bolus and the patient is 
reminded of this when he or she attempts to give additional 
correction bolus before the effect of the previous bolus has 
worn off ( insulin on board feature). This feature reduces the 
risk of overcorrecting and subsequent hypoglycemia. 
 CSII therapy is appropriate for patients who are motivated, 
mechanically adept, educated about diabetes (diet, insulin 
action, treatment of hypo- and hyperglycemia), and willing 
to monitor their blood glucose four to six times a day. 
Known complications of CSII include ketoacidosis, which 
can occur when insulin delivery is interrupted, and skin 
infections. Another major disadvantage is the cost and the 
time demanded of physicians and staff in initiating therapy. 
Almost all patients use the rapid-acting insulin analogs in 
their pumps. Clinical trials have shown that when compared 
with regular insulin, subjects using rapid-acting insulin ana-
logs in pumps had lower HbA 1c values and improved post-
prandial glucose control with the same frequency of 
hypoglycemia. There does remain a concern that in the 
event of pump failure, the insulin analogs could result in 
more rapid onset of hyperglycemia and ketosis. 
 e. Inhaled insulin —Exubera, the first inhaled insulin prepara-
tion approved by the FDA is no longer available; the manu-
facturer stopped marketing it because of lack of demand. In 
clinical trials, Exubera was as effective as subcutaneous regular 
insulin in controlling postprandial glucose excursions. 
Physicians, however, were reluctant to prescribe Exubera for a 
number of reasons, including a lack of long-term safety data 
on pulmonary function, availability of other insulin delivery 
systems, cost, lack of insurance coverage, and awkward dos-
ing. The manufacturer also subsequently reported that there 
were six cases of lung cancer in patients who were on inhaled 
insulin and one case in the comparator-treated patients. All 
the patients who developed lung cancer had a history of prior 
cigarette smoking. There is currently only one pharmaceutical 
company that is still conducting clinical trials with inhaled 
insulin (Technosphere insulin, MannKind Corporation). 
 f. Pancreas transplantation— This transplantation done at the 
time of renal transplantation is becoming more widely 
accepted. Patients undergoing simultaneous pancreas and kid-
ney transplantation have an 85% chance of pancreatic graft 
survival and a 92% chance of renal graft survival after 1 year. 
About 1200 pancreas transplants are performed yearly in the 
United States. About 75% of the transplants are perfomed at 
the same time as the kidney transplant with both organs from 
the same donor. About 15% of the pancreas transplants are 
performed after a previously successful kidney transplant and 
10% are performed without a kidney transplant. Solitary pan-
creatic transplantation in the absence of a need for renal trans-
plantation should be considered only in those rare patients 
who fail all other insulin therapeutic approaches and who have 
frequent severe hypoglycemia or who have life-threatening 
complications related to their lack of metabolic control. 
 g. Islet cell transplantation —This is a minimally invasive 
procedure, and investigators in Edmonton, Canada, reported 
initial insulin independence in a small number of patients 
with type 1 diabetes, who underwent this procedure. Using 
islets from multiple donors and steroid-free immunosup-
pression, percutaneous transhepatic portal vein transplanta-
tion of islets was achieved in more than 20 subjects. Several 
centers around the world have successfully replicated this 
experience. Unfortunately, although all of the initial cohorts 
achieved insulin independence posttransplantation, some 
for more than 2 years of follow-up, a decline in insulin secre-
tion occurred with time, and the subjects have again 
required supplemental insulin. However, patients with 
 successful transplants had complete correction of severe 
hypoglycemic reactions, leading to a marked improvement 
in overall quality of life. Islet transplant trials with different 
immunosuppressive regimens are currently underway. Even 
if long-term insulin independence is demonstrated, wide 
622    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
application of this procedure for the treatment of type 1 
diabetes is limited by the dependence on multiple donors 
and the requirement for potent long-term immunotherapy. 
 STEPS IN THE MANAGEMENT OF THE 
DIABETIC PATIENT 
 History and Examination 
 A complete history is taken and physical examination is performed 
for diagnostic purposes and to rule out the presence of coexisting 
or complicating disease. Nutritional status should be noted, par-
ticularly if catabolic features such as progressive weight loss are 
present despite a normal or increased food intake. The family his-
tory should include not only the incidence but also the age at 
onset of diabetes in other members of the family, and it should be 
noted whether affected family members were obese, whether they 
required insulin, and whether they developed complications from 
their diabetes. Other factors that increase cardiovascular risk, such 
as a smoking history, presence of hypertension or hyperlipidemia, 
or oral contraceptive pill use should be documented. 
 A careful physical examination should include baseline height 
and weight, pulse rate, and blood pressure. If obesity is present, it 
should be characterized as to its distribution, and a waist-to-hip 
ratio should be recorded. All peripheral arterial pulses should be 
examined, noting whether bruits or other signs of atherosclerotic 
disease are present. Neurologic and ophthalmologic examinations 
should be performed, with emphasis on investigation of abnor-
malities that may be related to diabetes, such as neovascularization 
of the retina or stocking/glove sensory loss in the extremities. 
 Laboratory Diagnosis 
 See also Laboratory Testing in diabetes mellitus earlier. Laboratory 
diagnosis should include documentation of the presence of fasting 
hyperglycemia (plasma glucose ≥126 mg/dL [7 mmol/L]), postpran-
dial (post-glucose tolerance test) values consistently ≥200 mg/dL 
(11.1 mmol/L) or HbA 1c ≥6.5%. An attempt should be made to 
characterize the diabetes as type 1 or type 2, based on the clinical 
features present and on whether ketonuria accompanies the glyco-
suria. For the occasional patient, measurement of ICA, ICA 512, 
GAD, and insulin antibodies can help in distinguishing bet-
ween type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Many newly diagnosed patients 
with type 1 diabetes still have significant endogenous insulin pro-
duction, and C-peptide levels may not reliably distinguish between 
type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Other baseline laboratory measure-
ments that should be made part of the record include hemoglobin 
A 1c , lipid profile, serum creatinine and electrolytes, complete 
blood count, electrocardiogram, and urine albumin measurement 
(type 2 patient). 
 Patient Education and Self-Management 
Training 
 Since diabetes is a lifelong disorder, education of the patient 
and the family is probably the most important obligation of the 
clinician who provides initial care. The best persons to manage a 
disease that is affected so markedly by daily fluctuations in envi-
ronmental stress, exercise, diet, and infections are the patients 
themselves and their families. It must be remembered that educa-
tion is necessary not only for patients with newly diagnosed dia-
betes and their families, but also for patients with diabetes of any 
duration who may never have been properly educated about their 
disorder or who may not be aware of advances in diabetes manage-
ment. The  teaching curriculum should include explanations by the 
physician or nurse of the nature of diabetes and its potential acute 
and chronic hazards and how they can be recognized early and 
prevented or treated. Self-monitoring of blood glucose should be 
emphasized, especially in insulin-requiring diabetic patients, and 
instructions must be given on proper testing and recording of 
data. Patients must also be helped to accept the fact that they have 
diabetes; until this difficult adjustment is made, efforts to cope 
with the disorder are likely to be futile. Counseling should be 
directed at avoidance of extremes such as compulsive rigidity or 
self-destructive neglect. 
 Patients on insulin should have an understanding of the actions 
of basal and bolus insulins. They should be taught how to deter-
mine whether the basal dose is appropriate and how to adjust the 
rapidly acting insulin dose for the carbohydrate content of a meal. 
Patients and their families or friends should also be taught to rec-
ognize signs and symptoms of hypoglycemia and how to institute 
appropriate therapy for hypoglycemic reactions. Strenuous exercise 
can precipitate hypoglycemia, and patients should know how 
much to reduce their insulin dosage in anticipation of strenuous 
activity or to take supplemental carbohydrate. Injection of insulin 
into a site farthest away from the muscles most involved in exercise 
may help ameliorate exercise-induced hypoglycemia, since insulin 
injected in the proximity of exercising muscle may be more rapidly 
mobilized. Exercise training also increases the effectiveness of insu-
lin and insulin doses should be adjusted accordingly. Because infec-
tions, particularly pyogenic ones with fever and toxemia, provoke a 
marked increase in insulin requirements, patients must be taught 
how to appropriately administer supplemental rapid-acting insulin 
as needed to correct hyperglycemia during infections. 
 Type 2 diabetes on noninsulin medications should be informed 
about the time of onset, peak action, duration of action, and any 
adverse effects of pharmacologic agents being used. They should 
also learn to inquire about possible drug interactions whenever 
any new medications are added to their regimens. 
 The targets for blood glucose control should be elevated appro-
priately in elderly patients since they have the greatest risk if sub-
jected to hypoglycemia and the least long-term benefit from more 
rigid glycemic control. Patients should be provided advice on 
personal hygiene, including detailed instructions on foot and 
 dental care. All infections (especially pyogenic ones) provoke the 
release of high levels of insulin antagonists such as catecholamines 
or glucagon and thus bring about a marked increase in insulin 
requirements. Patients who are oral agents may decompensate and 
temporarily require insulin. All patients receiving therapy that can 
cause hypoglycemia should wear a MedicAlert bracelet or necklace 
that clearly states that insulin or an oral sulfonylurea drug is being 
taken. Patients should be told about community agencies, such as 
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     623
American Diabetes Association chapters, that can serve as a con-
tinuing source of instruction. 
 Finally, vigorous efforts should be made to persuade new 
 diabetics who smoke to give up the habit, since large vessel periph-
eral vascular disease and debilitating retinopathy are less common 
in nonsmoking diabetic patients. 
 Specific Therapy 
 With the publication of data from the DCCT and the UKPDS, 
there has been a shift in the guidelines regarding acceptable levels 
of control. The ADA recommends that for patients with either 
type 1 and type 2 diabetes, the goal is to achieve preprandial blood 
glucose values of 80 to 120 mg/dL and an average bedtime glucose 
of 100 to 140 mg/dL and HbA 1c of <7% (nondiabetic range: 
4%-6%). Obviously, these goals should be modified by taking 
into account the patient’s ability to carry out the treatment regi-
men, the risk of severe hypoglycemia, and other patient factors 
that may reduce the benefit of such tight control. 
 A. Type 1 diabetes 
 Patients with type 1 diabetes require 
replacement therapy with exogenous insulin. This should be insti-
tuted under conditions of an individualized diabetic diet with 
multiple feedings and normal daily activities so that an appropri-
ate dosage regimen can be developed. 
 At the onset of type 1 diabetes, many patients recover some 
pancreatic β cell function and may temporarily need only low 
doses of exogenous insulin to supplement their own endogenous 
insulin secretion. This is known as the  honeymoon period . Within 
8 weeks to 2 years, however, most of these patients show either absent 
or negligible pancreatic β cell function. At this point, these patients 
should be switched to a more flexible insulin regimen with a com-
bination of rapid-acting insulin analogs or regular insulin together 
with intermediate-acting or long-acting insulin. At a minimum, 
the patient should be on a three-injection regimen and frequently 
may need four or more injections. Twice-daily split-dose insulin 
mixtures cannot maintain near-normalization of blood glucose 
without hypoglycemia (particularly at night) and are not recom-
mended. Self-monitoring of blood glucose levels is required for 
determining the optimal adjustment of insulin dosage and the 
modulation of food intake and exercise in type 1 diabetes. 
 Certain caveats should be kept in mind regarding insulin 
treatment. Considerable variations in absorption and bioavail-
ability exist, even when the same dose is injected in the same 
region on different days in the same individual. Such variation 
often can be minimized by injecting smaller quantities of insulin 
at each injection and consequently using multiple injections. 
Furthermore, a given insulin dosage may demonstrate consider-
able variability in pharmacokinetics in different individuals, 
either because of insulin antibodies that bind insulin with differ-
ent avidity or for other as yet unknown reasons. A properly edu-
cated patient should be taught to adjust insulin dosage by 
observing the pattern of recorded self-monitored blood glucose 
levels and correlating it with the approximate duration of action 
and the time to peak effect after injection of the various insulin 
preparations (see  Table 17–14 ). 
 A combination of rapid-acting insulin analogs and long-acting 
insulins (insulin glargine or insulin detemir) allows for more 
physiologic insulin replacement. In clinical studies, combinations 
of rapid-acting insulin analogs (insulin lispro or insulin aspart) 
with meals together with intermediate-acting (NPH) or longer- 
acting insulin (insulin glargine) for basal coverage have now been 
shown to have improved HbA 1c values with less hypoglycemia 
when compared with a regimen of regular insulin with meals and 
NPH at night.  Table 17–16 illustrates some regimens that might 
be appropriate for a 70-kg person with type 1 diabetes eating 
meals of standard carbohydrate intake and moderate to low fat 
content. 
 Multiple injections of NPH insulin can be mixed in the same 
syringe as the insulin lispro, insulin aspart, and insulin glulisine. 
Insulin glargine is usually given once in the evening to provide 
24-hour coverage. This insulin  should not be mixed with any of the 
other insulins and must be given as a separate injection. There are 
occasional patients in whom insulin glargine does not seem to last 
for 24 hours, and in such cases it needs to be given twice a day. 
 Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion by portable battery-
operated  open loop devices currently provides the most flexible 
approach, allowing the setting of different basal rates throughout 
the 24 hours and permitting patients to delay or skip meals and 
vary meal size and composition (see Methods of Insulin 
Administration, earlier). The dosage is usually based on providing 
50% of the estimated insulin dose as basal and the remainder 
as intermittent boluses prior to meals. For example, a 70-kg 
man requiring 35 U of insulin per day may require a basal rate of 
TABLE 17–16  Examples of intensive insulin 
regimens using rapid-acting insulin 
analogs (insulin lispro, aspart, or 
glulisine) and NPH, or insulin glargine 
in a 70-kg man with type 1 
diabetes.a-c
Prebreakfast
Prelunch
Predinner
Bedtime
Rapid-
 acting 
 insulin 
 analog
5 U
4 U
6 U
—
NPH insulin
3 U
3 U
2 U
8-9 U
OR
Rapid-
 acting 
 insulin 
 analog
5 U
4 U
6 U
—
Insulin 
 glargine
—
—
—
15-16 U
aAssumes that patient is consuming approximately 75 g carbohydrate at breakfast, 
60 g at lunch, and 90 g at dinner.
bThe dose of rapid-acting insulin analogs can be raised by 1 or 2 U if extra 
 carbohydrate (15-30 g) is ingested or if premeal blood glucose is >170 mg/dL. The 
rapid- acting insulin analogs can be mixed in the same syringe with NPH insulin.
cInsulin glargine cannot be mixed with any of the available insulins and must be given 
as a separate injection.
624    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
0.7 U/h throughout the 24 hours with the exception of 3 AM to 8 AM, 
when 0.8 U/h might be appropriate (for the  dawn phenomenon ). 
The meal bolus would depend on the carbohydrate content of the 
meal and the premeal blood glucose value. One unit per 15 g of 
carbohydrate plus 1 U for 50 mg/dL of blood glucose above a 
target value (eg, 120 mg/dL) is a common starting point. Further 
adjustments to basal and bolus dosages would depend on the 
results of blood glucose monitoring. Most patients use the rapid-
acting insulin analogs in the pumps. 
 One of the more difficult therapeutic problems in managing 
patients with type 1 diabetes is determining the proper adjust-
ment of insulin dose when the early morning blood glucose level 
is high before breakfast ( Table 17–17 ). Prebreakfast hyperglyce-
mia is sometimes due to the  Somogyi effect , in which nocturnal 
hypoglycemia evokes a surge of counterregulatory hormones to 
produce high blood glucose levels by 7 AM. However, a more 
common cause of prebreakfast hyperglycemia is the waning of the 
evening or bedtime insulin and/or the dawn phenomenon. That 
is, reduced tissue sensitivity to insulin between 5 AM and 8 AM 
(dawn), due to spikes of growth hormone released hours before, 
at onset of sleep.  Table 17–17 shows that diagnosis of the cause 
of prebreakfast hyperglycemia can be facilitated by self-monitor-
ing of blood glucose at 3 AM in addition to the usual bedtime and 
7 AM measurements. This is required for only a few nights, and 
when a particular pattern emerges from monitoring blood glu-
cose levels overnight, appropriate therapeutic measures can be 
taken. Prebreakfast hyperglycemia due to the Somogyi effect can 
be treated by reducing the dose of either intermediate- or long-
acting insulin analog at bedtime. For hyperglycemia due to wan-
ing of overnight basal insulin and/or dawn phenomenon, an 
increase in the evening dose of the basal insulin or shifting it from 
dinnertime to bedtime (or both) can be effective. A bedtime dose 
either of insulin glargine or insulin detemir provides more sus-
tained overnight insulin levels than human NPH and may be 
effective in managing refractory prebreakfast hyperglycemia. If 
this fails, insulin pump therapy may be required with a higher 
basal insulin infusion rate (eg, from 0.8 U/h to 0.9 U/h from 
6 AM until breakfast). 
 B. Type 2 diabetes 
 Therapeutic recommendations are based 
on the relative contributions of β cell insufficiency and insulin 
insensitivity in individual patients. The possibility that the indi-
vidual patient has a specific etiological cause for their diabetes 
should always be considered, especially when the patient does not 
have a family history of type 2 diabetes or does not have any evi-
dence of central obesity or insulin resistance. Such patients should 
be evaluated for other types of diabetes such as LADA or MODY. 
Patients with LADA should be prescribed insulin when their dis-
ease is diagnosed and treated like patients with type 1 diabetes. It 
is also important to note that many type 2 patients have a progres-
sive loss of β cell function and will require additional therapeutic 
interventions with time. 
 Weight reduction— One of the primary modes of therapy 
in the obese patient with type 2 diabetes is weight reduction. 
Normalization of glycemia can be achieved by reducing adi-
pose stores, with consequent restoration of tissue sensitivity to 
insulin. A combination of caloric restriction, increased exercise, 
modification of behavior, and consistent reinforcement of 
good eating habits is required if a weight reduction program is 
to be successful. Knowledge of the symptoms of diabetes and 
an understanding of the risks and complications of diabetes 
often increase the patient’s motivation for weight reduction. 
Even so, significant weight loss is seldom achieved and is even 
more difficult to maintain in the morbidly obese patient. 
Weight control is variable in moderately obese patients, 
depending on the enthusiasm of the therapist and the motiva-
tion of the patient. 
 For selected patients, medical or surgical options for weight 
loss should be considered (also see Chapter 20). Sibutramine, 
a combined serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor, is 
moderately effective  in promoting weight loss. It  has however 
been associated with increased risk of heart attack and stroke 
and has been withdrawn from clinical use. 
 Orlistat is a reversible inhibitor of gastric and pancreatic 
lipases and prevents the hydrolysis of dietary triglycerides. 
These triglycerides are then excreted in the feces. In a 1-year 
study in obese patients with type 2 diabetes, those taking 
orlistat had lost more weight, had lower HbA 1c values, and had 
improved lipid profiles. The main adverse reactions were gas-
trointestinal, with oily spotting, oily stool, flatus, and fecal 
TABLE 17–17  Typical patterns of overnight blood glucose levels and serum-free 
immunoreactive insulin levels in prebreakfast hyperglycemia due to 
various causes in patients with type 1 diabetes.
Blood Glucose Levels (mg/dL)
Serum-Free Immunoreactive 
Insulin Levels (μU/mL)
10 PM
3 AM
7 AM
10 PM
3 AM
7 AM
Somogyi effect
90
40
200
High
Slightly 
high
Normal
Dawn phenomenon
110
110
150
Normal
Normal
Normal
Waning of circulating insulin levels plus 
 dawn phenomenon
110
190
220
Normal
Low
Low
Waning of circulating insulin levels plus 
 dawn phenomenon plus Somogyi effect
110
40
380
High
Normal
Low
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     625
urgency and frequency. Malabsorption of fat-soluble vitamins 
also occurs. Patients should take a multivitamin tablet contain-
ing fat-soluble vitamins at least 2 hours before or 2 hours after 
the administration of orlistat. Cases of severe liver injury have 
been reported with this drug although a cause and effect rela-
tionship has not been established. 
 Bariatric surgery (Roux-en-Y, gastric sleeve, biliopancre-
atic diversion/duodenal switch, or gastric banding) typi-
cally result in substantial weight loss, and long-term 
follow-up has shown that many patients with diabetes who 
undergo these procedures maintain the weight reduction. 
 Nonobese patients with type 2 diabetes frequently have 
increased visceral adiposity—the so-called metabolically 
obese normal-weight patient. There is less emphasis on 
weight loss but exercise remains an important aspect of 
treatment. 
 Antihyperglycemic agents— The current recommenda-
tion is to start metformin therapy at diagnosis and not wait 
to see if the patient can achieve target glycemic control 
with weight management and exercise.  Metformin is 
advantageous because, apart from lowering glucose without 
the risk of hypoglycemia, it also lowers triglycerides and 
promotes some modest weight loss. The drug, however, 
cannot be used in patients with renal failure, and some 
patients have gastrointestinal side effects at even the lowest 
doses. Under these circumstances the choice of the initial 
agent depends on a number of factors, including comorbid 
conditions, adverse reactions to the medications, ability of 
the patient to monitor for hypoglycemia, drug cost, and 
patient and physician preferences.  Sulfonylureas have been 
available for many years, and their use in combination with 
metformin is well established. They do, however, have the 
propensity to cause hypoglycemia and weight gain. 
 Thiazolidinediones improve peripheral insulin resistance 
and lower glucose without causing hypoglycemia. They 
also have been reported to improve nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease. In addition, they have beneficial effects on the 
lipid profile and some other cardiovascular risk factors. 
They decrease microalbuminuria, and reduce neointimal 
tissue hyperplasia after coronary artery stent placement. 
Thiazolidinediones, however, can cause fluid retention and 
are contraindicated in patients with heart failure. They also 
very commonly increase weight, which patients find dis-
tressing, affecting adherence. The drugs are associated with 
increased fracture risk in women and this adverse effect 
significantly limits their use. Pioglitazone is the preferred 
choice because of concerns regarding rosiglitazone and the 
risk of ischemic heart disease. Both drugs are contraindi-
cated in patients with active liver disease and in patients 
with liver enzyme levels ≥2.5 times the upper limit of nor-
mal. The `- glucosidase inhibitors have modest glucose-
lowering effects and have gastrointestinal side effects. They 
have a lower risk of hypoglycemia than the sulfonylureas and 
promote weight loss. The GLP-1 receptor agonists (exenatide 
and liraglutide) have a lower risk of hypoglycemia than the 
sulfonylureas, and they promote weight loss. However, they 
need to be given by injection, cause nausea, may cause pan-
creatitis, and are contraindicated in patients with gastropare-
sis. The DPP-4 inhibitors (sitagliptin and saxagliptin) also 
have a low risk of hypoglycemia, and they do not cause nau-
sea or vomiting. They can also be used in patients with kid-
ney impairment. There are, however, reports of serious 
allergic reactions, including anaphylaxis, angioedema, and 
Stevens-Johnson syndrome. There is concern that sitagliptin, 
like the GLP-1 receptor agonists, may cause pancreatitis. 
 When patients are not well controlled on their initial therapy 
(usually metformin) then a second agent should be added. 
In those patients where the problem is hyperglycemia after a 
carbohydrate-rich meal (such as dinner), a short-acting secret-
agogue before meals may suffice to put the glucose levels into 
the target range. Patients with severe insulin resistance or non-
alcoholic fatty liver disease or microalbuminuria may be candi-
dates for pioglitazone. Subjects who are very concerned about 
weight gain may benefit from a trial of a GLP-1-receptor 
 agonist or DPP-4 inhibitor. If two agents are inadequate, then 
a third agent is added, although data on efficacy with such 
combined therapy are limited. When the combination of oral 
agents (and injectable GLP-1 receptor agonists) fail to achieve 
target glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes or if 
there are contraindications to their use, then insulin treatment 
should be instituted. Various insulin regimens may be effective. 
One proposed regimen is to continue the oral combination 
therapy and then simply add a bedtime dose of NPH or long-
acting insulin analog (insulin glargine or insulin detemir) to 
reduce excessive nocturnal hepatic glucose output and improve 
fasting glucose levels. If the patient does not achieve target 
glucose levels during the day, then daytime insulin treatment 
can be initiated. A convenient insulin regimen under these 
circumstances is a split dose of 70/30 NPH/regular mixture (or 
Humalog Mix 75/25 or NovoLogMix 70/30) before breakfast 
and before dinner. If this regimen fails to achieve satisfactory 
glycemic goals or is associated with unacceptable frequency of 
hypoglycemic episodes, then a more intensive regimen of mul-
tiple insulin injections can be instituted as in patients with type 
1 diabetes. Metformin principally reduces hepatic glucose out-
put, and it is reasonable to continue with this drug when 
insulin therapy is instituted. The thiazolidinediones, which 
improve peripheral insulin sensitivity, can be used together 
with insulin, but this combination is associated with more 
weight gain and peripheral edema. The sulfonylureas also have 
been shown to be of continued benefit. There is limited infor-
mation on the benefits of continuing the GLP1-receptor ago-
nists or the DPP-4 inhibitors once insulin therapy is initiated. 
Weight-reducing interventions should continue even after 
 initiation of insulin therapy and may allow for simplification 
of the therapeutic regimen in the future. 
 IMMUNOPATHOLOGY OF 
INSULIN THERAPY 
 At least five molecular classes of insulin antibodies are produced during 
the course of insulin therapy: IgA, IgD, IgE, IgG, and IgM. Human 
insulin is much less antigenic than the older formulations of animal 
(especially beef) insulins, but because of its hexameric presentation at 
therapeutic injection doses, it is also treated as a foreign substance by 
the immune system and results in detectable—albeit low—titers of 
insulin antibodies in most patients. 
 A. Insulin allergy 
 Insulin allergy, a hypersensitivity reaction 
of the immediate type, is a rare condition in which local or sys-
temic urticaria occurs immediately after insulin injection. This 
reaction is due to histamine release from tissue mast cells sensi-
tized by adherence of IgE antibodies to their surface. In severe 
cases, anaphylaxis can occur. The appearance of a subcutaneous 
626    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
nodule at the site of insulin injection, occurring several hours after 
the injection and lasting for up to 24 hours, has been attributed to 
an IgG-mediated complement-binding Arthus reaction. Because 
sensitivity was often due to noninsulin protein contaminants, the 
highly purified insulins have markedly reduced the incidence of 
insulin allergy, especially of the local variety. Antihistamines, 
 corticosteroids, and even desensitization may be required, espe-
cially for systemic hypersensitivity in an insulin-dependent 
patient. A protocol for allergy testing and insulin desensitization is 
available from the Lilly Company. A trial of insulin analogs should 
also be considered. There is a case report of successful use of insu-
lin lispro in the face of generalized allergy to human insulin. 
 B. Immune insulin resistance 
 All patients who receive 
insulin (including insulin analogs) develop a low titer of circulat-
ing IgG antibodies, and this neutralizes the rapid action of insulin 
to a small extent. With the animal insulins, a high titer of circulat-
ing antibodies is sometimes developed, resulting in extremely high 
insulin requirements, often to more than 200 U/d. This is now 
very rarely seen with the switch to the highly purified human 
insulins and has not been reported with use of the analogs. 
 C. Lipodystrophy at injection sites 
 Rarely, a disfiguring 
atrophy of subcutaneous fatty tissue occurs at the site of insulin 
injection. Although the cause of this complication is obscure, it 
seems to represent a form of immune reaction, particularly 
because it occurs predominantly in females and is associated with 
lymphocyte infiltration in the lipoatrophic area. This complica-
tion has become even less common because of the development of 
highly purified insulin preparations of neutral pH. Injection of 
highly purified preparations of insulin directly into the atrophic 
area often results in restoration of normal contours. 
 Lipohypertrophy, on the other hand, is not a consequence of 
immune responses; rather, it seems to be due to the pharmacologic 
effects of depositing insulin in the same location repeatedly. It is 
prevented by rotation of injection sites. There is a case report of a 
male patient who had intractable lipohypertrophy (fatty  infiltration 
of injection site) with human insulin but no longer had the problem 
when he switched to insulin lispro. 
 ACUTE COMPLICATIONS OF 
DIABETES MELLITUS 
 Hypoglycemia 
 Hypoglycemic reactions (see later and Chapter 18) are the most 
common complications that occur in patients with diabetes who 
are treated with insulin. Hypoglycemia may result from delay in 
taking a meal, from unusual physical exertion without supplemental 
calories, or from an increase in insulin dose. In addition, it can 
occur in any patient taking oral agents that stimulate pancreatic 
β cells (eg, sulfonylureas, meglitinide, D-phenylalanine analogs), 
particularly if the patient is elderly, has renal or liver disease, or is 
taking certain other medications that alter metabolism of the sul-
fonylureas (eg, phenylbutazone, sulfonamides, or warfarin). It 
occurs more frequently with the use of long-acting sulfonylureas. 
 The signs and symptoms of hypoglycemia may be divided into 
those resulting from stimulation of the autonomic nervous system 
and those arising from neuroglycopenia (insufficient glucose for 
normal central nervous system function). When the blood glucose 
falls to around 54 mg/dL, the patient starts to experience both 
sympathetic (tachycardia, palpitations, sweating, tremulousness) 
and parasympathetic (nausea, hunger) nervous system symptoms. 
If these autonomic symptoms are ignored and the glucose levels 
fall further (to around 50 mg/dL), then neuroglycopenic symp-
toms appear, including irritability, confusion, blurred vision, 
tiredness, headache, and difficulty speaking. A further decline in 
glucose (below 30 mg/dL) can then lead to loss of consciousness 
or even a seizure. 
 With repeated episodes of hypoglycemia, there is adaptation 
and autonomic symptoms do not occur until the blood glucose 
levels are much lower and so the first symptoms are often due 
to neuroglycopenia. This condition, which is referred to as 
 hypoglycemic unawareness , results from failure of the sympa-
thetic nervous system to respond to hypoglycemia ( Table 17–18 ). 
This adaptation of the central nervous system to recurrent hypo-
glycemic episodes is due to upregulation of the GLUT 1 trans-
porters at the blood-brain barrier and increased glucose transport 
into the brain despite subnormal levels of plasma glucose. It has 
been shown that hypoglycemic unawareness can be reversed by 
keeping glucose levels high for a period of several weeks. Except 
for sweating, most of the sympathetic symptoms of hypoglycemia 
are blunted in patients receiving β-blocking agents for angina 
pectoris or hypertension. Though not absolutely contraindicated, 
these drugs must be used with caution in insulin-requiring diabet-
ics, and β 1 -selective blocking agents are preferred. 
 Hypoglycemia in insulin-treated patients with diabetes occurs 
as a consequence of three factors: behavioral issues, impaired 
counterregulatory systems, and complications of diabetes. 
TABLE 17–18  Hypoglycemic “unawareness” in type 1 
diabetes mellitus.
 I. Sleeping patient (nocturnal hypoglycemia)
II. Hypoglycemia with unawareness while awake
 A. Manifestations
  a. Neuroglycopenic symptoms first (weakness, lethargy,
   confusion, incoordination, blurred vision)
  b. Autonomic symptoms  are delayed and blunted (tremor,
   anxiety, palpitations, sweating, hunger)
 B. Mechanisms
  1. Defective autonomic response:
   a. Adaptation to chronic hypoglycemia (increased brain 
    glucose transporter I)
   b. Due to diabetic autonomic neuropathy
 C. Management
  1. Identify patients at risk and reevaluate glycemic goals
  2. Advise frequent self-monitoring of blood glucose; use of 
   continuous glucose monitoring systems
  3. Learn to detect subtle symptoms of neuroglycopenia
  4. Avoid recurrent hypoglycemia
  5. Injectable glucagon made available to family
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     627
 Behavioral issues include injecting too much insulin for the 
amount of carbohydrates ingested. Drinking alcohol in excess, 
especially on an empty stomach, can also cause hypoglycemia. In 
patients with type 1 diabetes, hypoglycemia can occur during or 
even several hours after exercise, and so glucose levels need to be 
monitored and food and insulin adjusted. Some patients do not 
like their glucose levels to be high, and they treat every high 
 glucose level aggressively. These individuals who  stack their  insulin, 
that is, give another dose of insulin before the first injection has 
had its full action, can develop hypoglycemia. 
 Counterregulatory issues resulting in hypoglycemia include 
impaired glucagon response and impaired sympatho-adrenal 
responses ( Table 17–19 ). Patients with diabetes of greater than 
5 years duration lose their glucagon response to hypoglycemia. 
As a result, they are at a significant disadvantage in protecting 
themselves against falling glucose levels. Once the glucagon 
response is lost, their sympatho-adrenal responses take on added 
importance. Unfortunately, aging, autonomic neuropathy, or 
hypoglycemic unawareness due to repeated low glucose levels 
further blunts the sympatho-adrenal responses. Occasionally, 
Addison disease develops in persons with type 1 diabetes mel-
litus; when this happens, insulin requirements fall significantly, 
and unless insulin dose is reduced, recurrent hypoglycemia will 
develop. 
 Complications of diabetes that increase the risk for hypogly-
cemia include autonomic neuropathy, gastroparesis, and renal 
failure. The sympathetic nervous system is an important sys-
tem alerting the individual that the glucose level is falling by 
causing symptoms of tachycardia, palpitations, sweating, and 
tremulousness. Failure of the sympatho-adrenal responses 
increases the risk of hypoglycemia. In patients with gastropare-
sis, insulin given before a meal promotes maximal glucose 
uptake into cells before the food is absorbed, causing the 
glucose levels to fall. Finally, in renal failure, hypoglycemia 
can occur presumably because of decreased insulin clearance as 
well as loss of the renal contribution to gluconeogenesis in the 
postabsorptive state. 
 Treatment 
 To treat insulin-induced hypoglycemia, the diabetic patient 
should carry glucose tablets or juice at all times. For most epi-
sodes, ingestion of 15 g of carbohydrate is sufficient to reverse the 
hypoglycemia. The patient should be instructed to check the 
blood glucose in 15 minutes and treat again if the glucose level is 
still low. 
 A parenteral glucagon emergency kit (1 mg) should be pro-
vided to every patient with diabetes who is on insulin therapy. 
Family or friends should be instructed how to inject it subcutane-
ously or intramuscularly into the buttock, arm, or thigh in the 
event that the patient is unconscious or refuses food. The drug 
can occasionally cause vomiting and the unconscious patient 
should be turned on his or her side to protect the airway. 
Glucagon mobilizes glycogen from the liver raising the blood 
glucose by about 36 mg/dL in about 15 minutes. After the 
patient recovers consciousness additional oral carbohydrate 
should be given. Glucagon is contraindicated in sulfonylurea- 
induced hypoglycemia where it paradoxically causes insulin 
release. People with diabetes on hypoglycemic drug therapy 
should also wear a MedicAlert bracelet or necklace or carry a card 
in his or her wallet. 
 Medical personnel treating severe hypoglycemia can give 
50 mL of 50% glucose solution by rapid intravenous infusion. If 
intravenous therapy is not available, 1 mg of glucagon can be 
injected intramuscularly. If the patient is stuporous and glucagon 
is not available, small amounts of honey or maple syrup or glucose 
gel (15 g) can be inserted within the buccal pouch, although, in 
general, oral feeding is contraindicated in unconscious patients. 
Rectal administration of maple syrup or honey (30 mL per 
500 mL of warm water) has been effective. 
 Most patients who arrive at emergency departments in hypo-
glycemic coma appear to recover fully; however, profound hypo-
glycemia or delays in therapy can result in permanent neurologic 
deficit or even death. Furthermore, repeated episodes of hypo-
glycemia may have a cumulative adverse effect on intellectual 
functioning. The physician should carefully review with the 
patient the events leading up to the hypoglycemic episode. 
Associated use of other medications, as well as alcohol or narcot-
ics, should be noted. Careful attention should be paid to diet, 
exercise pattern, insulin or sulfonylurea dosage, and general 
compliance with the prescribed diabetes treatment regimen. Any 
factors thought to have contributed to the development of the 
episode should be identified and recommendations made in 
order to prevent recurrences of this potentially disastrous com-
plication of diabetes therapy. 
 If the patient is hypoglycemic from use of a long-acting oral 
hypoglycemic agent (eg, chlorpropamide or glyburide) or from 
high doses of a long-acting insulin, admission to hospital for treat-
ment with continuous intravenous glucose and careful monitoring 
of blood glucose is indicated. 
TABLE 17–19  Counterregulatory responses to 
hypoglycemia.
Normal Counterregulation
Defective Counterregulation 
in Type 1 Diabetesa
Glucagon rises rapidly to three to 
 five times baseline after insulin-
 induced hypoglycemia, 
 provoking hepatic glycogenolysis.
Glucagon response to insulin-
induced hypoglycemia is lost 
after onset of type 1 diabetes.
Adrenergic discharge (1) raises 
 hepatic glucose output by 
 glycogenolysis and (2) provides 
 warning to subject of impending 
 hypoglycemic crisis.
Blunted or absent adrenergic 
response may occur as a result 
of:
(1) Neural damage associated 
 
 with advanced age or 
 
 autonomic neuropathy
(2) Neural dysfunction 
 
 (iatrogenic) from frequent 
 
 hypoglycemia
aType 2 diabetics are less well characterized as to their defective counterregulation of 
glucagon loss, but appear to have the same frequency and causes of adrenergic loss 
as do type 1 diabetics.
628    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
 Coma 
 Coma is a  medical emergency calling for immediate evaluation to 
determine its cause so that proper therapy can be started. Patients 
with diabetes may be comatose because of hypoglycemia, diabetic 
ketoacidosis, hyperglycemic hyperosmolar coma, or lactic acidosis. 
When evaluating a comatose diabetic patient, these must be con-
sidered  in addition to the myriad causes included in the differen-
tial diagnosis of coma (eg, cerebrovascular accidents, head trauma, 
intoxication with alcohol, or other drugs). 
 After emergency measures have been instituted (airway protec-
tion; laboratory tests; intravenous dextrose unless fingerstix blood 
glucose shows hyperglycemia), a careful history (from family, 
friends, or paramedics), physical examination, and laboratory 
evaluation are required to resolve the differential diagnosis. 
Patients in deep coma from a hyperosmolar nonketotic state or from 
hypoglycemia are generally flaccid and have quiet breathing—in 
contrast to patients with acidosis, whose respirations are rapid and 
deep if the pH of arterial blood has dropped to 7.1 or below. 
When hypoglycemia is a cause of the coma, the state of hydration 
is usually normal. Although the clinical laboratory remains the 
final arbiter in confirming the diagnosis, a rapid  estimate of blood 
glucose and ketones can be obtained by the use of bedside glucose 
and ketone meters (see Laboratory Findings in diabetes mellitus, 
earlier).  Table 17–20 is a summary of some laboratory abnormali-
ties found in diabetic patients with coma attributable to diabetes 
or its treatment. 
 1. DIABETIC KETOACIDOSIS 
 This acute complication of diabetes mellitus may be the first 
manifestation of previously undiagnosed type 1 diabetes or may 
result from increased insulin requirements in type 1 diabetes 
patients during the course of infection, trauma, myocardial infarc-
tion, or surgery. The National Data Group reports an annual 
incidence of five to eight episodes of diabetic ketoacidosis per 
1000 diabetic patients. In all cases, precipitating factors such as 
infection should be searched for and treated appropriately. Poor 
compliance, either for psychological reasons or because of 
 inadequate patient education, is probably the most common cause 
of diabetic ketoacidosis, particularly when episodes are recurrent. 
In adolescents with type 1 diabetes, recurrent episodes of severe 
ketoacidosis often indicate the need for counseling to alter this 
behavior. 
 Diabetic ketoacidosis has been found to be one of the more 
common serious complications of insulin pump therapy, occur-
ring in approximately 1 per 80 patient-months of treatment. 
 Patients with type 2 diabetes may also develop ketoacidosis 
under severe stress such as sepsis, trauma, or major surgery. 
 Pathogenesis 
 Acute insulin deficiency results in rapid mobilization of energy 
from stores in muscle and fat depots, leading to an increased flux 
of amino acids to the liver for conversion to glucose and of fatty 
acids for conversion to ketones (acetoacetate, β-hydroxybutyrate, 
and acetone). In addition to this increased availability of precur-
sor, there is a direct effect of the low insulin-glucagon ratio on the 
liver that promotes increased production of ketones as well as of 
glucose. In response to both the acute insulin deficiency and the 
metabolic stress of ketosis, the levels of insulin-antagonistic 
 hormones (corticosteroids, catecholamines, glucagon, and GH) 
are consistently elevated. Furthermore, in the absence of insulin, 
peripheral utilization of glucose and ketones is reduced. The com-
bination of increased production and decreased utilization leads to 
an accumulation of these substances in blood, with plasma glucose 
levels reaching 500 mg/dL (27.8 mmol/L) or more and plasma 
ketones reaching levels of 8 to 15 mmol/L or more. 
β-Hydroxybutyrate is the predominant ketone and its ratio to 
acetoacetate increases from 1:1 to as much as 5:1. 
 The hyperglycemia causes osmotic diuresis leading to depletion 
of intravascular volume. As this progresses, impaired renal blood 
flow reduces the kidney’s ability to excrete glucose, and hyperos-
molality worsens. Severe hyperosmolality (>330 mOsm/kg) 
correlates closely with central nervous system depression and coma. 
 In a similar manner, impaired renal excretion of hydrogen ions 
aggravates the metabolic acidosis that occurs as a result of the accu-
mulation of the ketoacids, β-hydroxybutyrate, and acetoacetate. 
TABLE 17–20  Summary of some laboratory abnormalities in patients with coma directly attributable to diabetes 
or its treatment.
Urine
Plasma
Glucose
Acetone
Glucose
Bicarbonate
Acetone
Osmolality
Diabetic ketoacidosis
++ to ++++
++++
High
Low
++++
+++
Hyperglycemic nonketotic 
 coma
++ to ++++
0 or +a
High
Normal or slightly 
lowb
0
++++
Hypoglycemia
0c
0 or +
Low
Normal
0
Normal
Lactic acidosis
0 to +
0 or +
Normal, low, or 
high
Low
0 or +
Normal
aA small degree of ketonuria may be present if the patient is severely stressed or has not been eating because of illness.
bA patient may be acidotic if there is severe volume depletion with cardiovascular collapse or if sepsis is present.
cLeftover urine in bladder might still contain sugar from earlier hyperglycemia.
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     629
The accumulation of ketones may cause vomiting, which exacer-
bates the intravascular volume depletion. In addition, prolonged 
acidosis can compromise cardiac output and reduce vascular tone. 
The result may be severe cardiovascular collapse with generation 
of lactic acid, which then adds to the already existent metabolic 
acidosis. 
 Clinical Features 
 A. Symptoms and signs 
 The appearance of diabetic 
 ketoacidosis is usually preceded by a day or more of polyuria and 
polydipsia associated with marked fatigue, nausea, and vomiting. 
Eventually, mental stupor ensues and can progress to frank coma. 
On physical examination, evidence of dehydration in a stuporous 
patient with rapid and deep respirations and the  fruity breath odor 
of acetone strongly suggest the diagnosis. Postural hypotension 
with tachycardia indicates profound dehydration and salt deple-
tion. Abdominal pain and even tenderness may be present in the 
absence of abdominal disease, and mild hypothermia is usually 
present. 
 B. Laboratory findings 
 Typically, the patient with moder-
ately severe diabetic ketoacidosis has a plasma glucose of 350 to 
900 mg/dL (19.4-50 mmol/L), serum ketones are positive at a 
dilution of 1:8 or greater, hyperkalemia of 5 to 8 mEq/L, slight 
hyponatremia of approximately 130 mEq/L, hyperphosphatemia 
of 6 to 7 mg/dL, and an elevated blood urea nitrogen and 
 creatinine. Acidosis may be severe (pH ranging from 6.9-7.2 with 
a bicarbonate concentration ranging from 5-15 mEq/L); pCO 2 is 
low (15-20 mm Hg) secondary to hyperventilation. 
 The fluid depletion is typically about 100 mL/kg. The hyper-
kalemia occurs despite total body potassium depletion, because of 
the shift of potassium from the intracellular to extracellular spaces 
in systemic acidosis. The average total body potassium deficit 
resulting from osmotic diuresis, acidosis, and gastrointestinal 
losses is about 3 to 5 mEq/kg body weight. Similarly despite the 
elevated serum phosphate, total body phosphate is generally 
depleted. Serum sodium is generally reduced, due to loss of 
sodium ions by polyuria and vomiting (7-10 mEq/kg), and 
because severe hyperglycemia shifts intracellular water into the 
interstitial compartment (for every 100 mg/dL of plasma glucose 
above normal, serum sodium decreases by 1.6 mEq/L). Serum 
osmolality can be directly measured by standard tests of freezing 
point depression or can be estimated by calculating the molarity 
of sodium, chloride, and glucose in the serum. A convenient for-
mula for estimating  effective serum osmolality is: 
 
mOsm/kg = 2[measured Na ]
Glucose (mg/dL)
1
+ +
8
 The effective serum osmolality in humans is generally between 
280 and 300 mOsm/kg. These calculated estimates are usually 
10 to 20 mOsm/kg lower than values recorded by standard 
cryoscopic techniques. Central nervous depression or coma 
occurs when the effective serum osmolality exceeds 320 to 
330 mOsm/L .
 Blood urea nitrogen and serum creatinine are invariably ele-
vated because of dehydration. Urea exerts an effect on freezing 
point depression as measured in the laboratory, but it is freely 
permeable across cell membranes and therefore not included in 
calculations of effective serum osmolality. Serum creatinine may 
also be falsely elevated due to interference from acetoacetate with 
some automated creatinine assays. However, most laboratories can 
correct for these interfering chromogens by using a more specific 
method, if asked to do so. 
 The nitroprusside reagents (Acetest and Ketostix) used for the 
bedside assessment of ketoacidemia and ketoaciduria measure 
only acetoacetate and its by-product, acetone. The sensitivity of 
these reagents for acetone, however, is quite poor, requiring over 
10 mmol/L, which is seldom reached in the plasma of ketoacidotic 
subjects—although this detectable concentration is readily 
achieved in urine. Thus, in the plasma of ketotic patients, only 
acetoacetate is measured by these reagents. The more prevalent 
β-hydroxybutyrate has no ketone group and is therefore not 
detected by the conventional nitroprusside tests. This takes on 
special importance in the presence of circulatory collapse during 
diabetic ketoacidosis, wherein an increase in lactic acid can shift 
the redox state to increase β-hydroxybutyrate at the expense of the 
readily detectable acetoacetate. Bedside diagnostic reagents would 
then be unreliable, suggesting no ketonemia in cases where 
β-hydroxybutyrate is a major factor in producing the acidosis. 
Under these circumstances, β-hydroxybutyrate can be directly 
measured at the bedside using the Precision Xtra meter (Abbott 
Diagnostics). Many clinical laboratories now offer β-hydroxybutyrate 
measurement. 
 In about 90% of cases, serum amylase is elevated. However, 
this often represents salivary as well as pancreatic amylase and cor-
relates poorly with symptoms of pancreatitis, such as pain and 
vomiting. Therefore, in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis, an 
elevated serum amylase does not justify a diagnosis of acute pan-
creatitis; serum lipase may be useful if the diagnosis of pancreatitis 
is being seriously considered. 
 Treatment 
 Patients with mild DKA are alert and have pH between 7.25 and 
7.30; those with moderate DKA have pH between 7.0 and 7.24 
and are alert or slightly drowsy; and those with severe DKA are 
stuporous and have pH <7.0. Those with mild DKA can be treated 
in the emergency room, but those with moderate or severe DKA 
require admission to the intensive care unit or step-down unit. 
 The therapeutic goals are to restore plasma volume and tissue 
perfusion; reduce blood glucose and osmolality toward normal; 
correct acidosis; replenish electrolyte losses; and identify and treat 
precipitating factors. Gastric intubation is recommended in the 
comatose patient to prevent vomiting and aspiration that may 
occur as a result of gastric atony, a common complication of dia-
betic ketoacidosis. In patients with preexisting cardiac or renal 
failure or those in severe cardiovascular collapse, a central venous 
pressure catheter or a Swan-Ganz catheter should be inserted to 
evaluate the degree of hypovolemia and to monitor subsequent 
fluid administration. 
630    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
 Plasma glucose should be recorded hourly and electrolytes and 
pH at least every 2 to 3 hours during the initial treatment period. 
A bedside glucose meter should be used to titrate the insulin 
therapy. 
 1. Fluid replacement. In most adult patients, the fluid deficit is 
4 to 5 L. Once the diagnosis of diabetic ketoacidosis is estab-
lished in the emergency department, administration of at least 
2 L of isotonic saline (0.9% saline solution) in an adult patient 
in the first 2 to 3 hours is necessary to help restore plasma 
volume and stabilize blood pressure while acutely reducing the 
hyperosmolar state. In addition, by improving renal plasma 
flow, fluid replacement also restores the renal capacity to 
excrete hydrogen ions, thereby ameliorating the acidosis as 
well. After the first 2 L of fluid have been given, the fluid 
should be changed to 0.45% saline solution given at a rate of 
300 to 400 mL/h, because water loss exceeds sodium loss in 
uncontrolled diabetes with osmotic diuresis. Failure to give 
sufficient volume replacement (at least 3-4 L in 8 hours) to 
restore normal perfusion is one of the most serious therapeutic 
shortcomings affecting satisfactory recovery. In the same way, 
excessive fluid replacement (>5 L in 8 hours) may contribute 
to acute respiratory distress syndrome or cerebral edema. When 
blood glucose falls to approximately 250 mg/dL, the fluids 
should be changed to a 5% glucose solution to maintain 
plasma glucose in the range of 250 to 300 mg/dL. This pre-
vents the development of hypoglycemia and also reduces the 
likelihood of cerebral edema, which may result from a too 
rapid decline of blood glucose. 
 2. Insulin. Immediately after the initiation of fluid replacement, 
a rapid bolus of 0.15 U of regular insulin per kilogram of body 
weight should be given intravenously to prime the tissue insulin 
receptors. This inhibits both gluconeogenesis and ketogenesis 
while promoting utilization of glucose and keto acids. Follow-
ing the initial bolus, an insulin infusion is initiated at a rate 
of 0.1 U/kg/h. When a continuous infusion of insulin 
is used, 25 U of regular human insulin should be placed in 
250 mL of isotonic saline and the first 50 mL of solution 
flushed through to saturate the tubing before connecting it to 
the intravenous line. The insulin infusion should be piggy-
backed into the fluid line so that the rate of fluid replacement 
can be changed without altering the insulin delivery rate. If the 
plasma glucose level fails to fall at least 10% in the first hour, a 
repeat loading dose is recommended. Rarely, a patient with 
insulin resistance is encountered; this requires doubling the 
insulin dose every 2 to 4 hours if severe hyperglycemia does not 
improve after the first two doses of insulin and fluid replace-
ment. The insulin dose should be adjusted with the goal of 
lowering the glucose concentration by about 50 to 70 mg/
dL/h. If clinical circumstances prevent use of insulin infusion, 
then the insulin can be given intramuscularly. An initial 0.15 
U/kg of regular insulin is given intravenously, and at the same 
time, the same size dose is given intramuscularly. Subsequently, 
regular insulin is given intramuscularly hourly at a dose of 
0.1 U/kg until the blood glucose falls to around 250 mg/dL, 
when the insulin can be given subcutaneously. Insulin therapy, 
either as a continuous infusion or as injections given every 1 to 
2 hours, should be continued until arterial pH has normalized. 
 3. Potassium. Total body potassium loss from polyuria and vom-
iting may be as high as 200 mEq. However, because of shifts of 
potassium from cells into the extracellular space as a conse-
quence of acidosis, serum potassium is usually normal 
to slightly elevated prior to institution of treatment. As the 
acidosis is corrected, potassium flows back into the cells, and 
hypokalemia can develop if potassium replacement is not insti-
tuted. If the patient is not uremic and has an adequate urine 
output, potassium chloride in doses of 10 to 30 mEq/h should 
be infused during the second and third hours after beginning 
therapy. Replacement should be started sooner, if the initial 
serum potassium is inappropriately normal or low, and should 
be delayed, if serum potassium fails to respond to initial ther-
apy and remains above 5 mEq/L, as in cases of renal insuffi-
ciency. Cooperative patients with only mild ketoacidosis may 
receive part or all of their potassium replacement orally. 
 An electrocardiogram can be of help in monitoring the 
patient’s potassium status: high peaked T waves are a sign of 
hyperkalemia, and flattened T waves with U waves are a sign of 
hypokalemia. 
 Foods high in potassium content should be prescribed 
when the patient has recovered sufficiently to take food orally. 
Tomato juice has 14 mEq of potassium per 240 mL, and a 
medium-sized banana has about 10 mEq. 
 4. Sodium bicarbonate. The use of sodium bicarbonate in man-
agement of diabetic ketoacidosis has been questioned because 
clinical benefit was not demonstrated in one prospective ran-
domized trial and because of the following potentially harmful 
consequences: (1) development of hypokalemia from rapid 
shift of potassium into cells if the acidosis is overcorrected, (2) 
tissue anoxia from reduced dissociation of oxygen from hemo-
globin when acidosis is rapidly reversed (leftward shift of the 
oxygen dissociation curve), and (3) cerebral acidosis resulting 
from lowering of cerebrospinal fluid pH. It must be empha-
sized, however, that these considerations are less important 
when severe acidosis exists. It is therefore recommended that 
bicarbonate be administered to diabetic patients in ketoacido-
sis if the arterial blood pH is 7.0 or less with careful monitoring 
to prevent overcorrection. 
 One to two ampules of sodium bicarbonate (one ampule 
contains 44 mEq/50 mL) should be added to 1 L of 0.45% 
saline. ( Note: Addition of sodium bicarbonate to 0.9% saline 
would produce a markedly hypertonic solution that could 
aggravate the hyperosmolar state already present.) This should 
be administered rapidly (over the first hour). It can be repeated 
until the arterial pH reaches 7.1, but  it should not be given if the 
pH is 7.1 or greater , because additional bicarbonate increases 
the risk of rebound metabolic alkalosis as ketones are metabo-
lized. Alkalosis shifts potassium from serum into cells, which 
can precipitate a fatal cardiac arrhythmia. As noted earlier, seri-
ous consideration should be given to placement of a central 
venous catheter when administering fluids to severely ill 
patients with cardiovascular compromise. 
 5. Phosphate. Phosphate replacement is seldom required in 
treating diabetic ketoacidosis. However, if severe hypophos-
phatemia of less than 1 mg/dL (<0.35 mmol/L) develops dur-
ing insulin therapy, a small amount of phosphate can be 
replaced per hour as the potassium salt. Correction of hypo-
phosphatemia helps restore the buffering capacity of the 
plasma, thereby facilitating renal excretion of hydrogen. It also 
corrects the impaired oxygen dissociation from hemoglobin by 
regenerating 2,3-diphosphoglycerate. However, three random-
ized studies in which phosphate was replaced in only half of a 
group of patients with diabetic ketoacidosis did not show any 
apparent clinical benefit from phosphate administration. 
Moreover, attempts to use potassium phosphate as the sole 
means of replacing potassium have led to a number of reported 
cases of severe hypocalcemia with tetany. To minimize the risk 
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     631
of inducing tetany from too rapid replacement of phosphate, 
the average deficit of 40 to 50 mmol of phosphate should be 
replaced intravenously at a rate  no greater than 3 to 4 mmol/h in 
a 60- to 70-kg person. A stock solution (Abbott) provides a 
mixture of 1.12 g KH 2 PO 4 and 1.18 g K 2 HPO 4 in a 5-mL 
single-dose vial (this equals 22 mmol of potassium and 
15 mmol of phosphate). One-half of this vial (2.5 mL) should 
be added to 1 L of either 0.45% saline or 5% dextrose in water. 
Two liters of this solution, infused at a rate of 400 mL/h, cor-
rects the phosphate deficit at the optimal rate of 3 mmol/h and 
provides 4.4 mEq of potassium per hour. Additional potassium 
should be administered as potassium chloride to provide a total 
of 10 to 30 mEq of potassium per hour, as noted earlier. If the 
serum phosphate remains below 2.5 mg/dL after this infusion, 
a repeat 5-hour infusion can be given. 
 6. Hyperchloremic acidosis during therapy. Because of the 
considerable loss of keto acids in the urine during the initial 
phase of therapy, substrate for subsequent regeneration of bicar-
bonate is lost, and correction of the total bicarbonate deficit is 
hampered. A portion of the bicarbonate deficit is replaced with 
chloride ions infused in large amounts as saline to correct the 
dehydration. In most patients, as the ketoacidosis clears during 
insulin replacement, a hyperchloremic, low-bicarbonate pattern 
emerges with a normal anion gap. This is a relatively benign 
condition that reverses itself over the subsequent 12 to 24 hours 
once intravenous saline is no longer being administered. 
 TRANSITION TO SUBCUTANEOUS 
INSULIN REGIMEN 
 Once the diabetic ketoacidosis is controlled and the patient is 
awake and able to eat, subcutaneous insulin therapy can be initi-
ated. Initially, the patient may still have significant tissue insulin 
resistance and may require a total daily insulin dose of ~0.6 U/kg. 
Half of the total daily dose can be given as a long-acting basal 
insulin and the other half as short-acting insulin premeals. The 
patient should get injection of the basal insulin and a dose of the 
rapid-acting insulin analog with the first meal and the insulin 
infusion discontinued an hour later. The overlap of the subcutane-
ous insulin action and insulin infusion is necessary to prevent 
relapse of diabetic ketoacidiosis. The increased tissue insulin resis-
tance is only present for a few days at most and as the patient 
improves the doses of both basal and bolus insulins should be 
reduced to avoid hypoglycemia. In fact, a patient with new diag-
nosis of type 1 diabetes who still has significant β cell function 
may not require any basal insulin and only very low doses of rapid-
acting insulin analogs before meals. 
 Complications and Prognosis 
 Low-dose insulin infusion and fluid and electrolyte replacement 
combined with careful monitoring of patients’ clinical and labora-
tory responses to therapy have dramatically reduced the mortality 
rates of diabetic ketoacidosis to less than 5%. However, this com-
plication remains a significant risk in the aged who have mortality 
rates over 20% and in patients in profound coma in whom treat-
ment has been delayed. Acute myocardial infarction and infarc-
tion of the bowel following prolonged hypotension worsen the 
outlook. Prior kidney dysfunction worsens prognosis because the 
kidney plays a key role in compensating for pH and electrolyte 
abnormalities. Symptomatic cerebral edema occurs primarily in 
the pediatric population. Risk factors for development include 
severe baseline acidosis, rapid correction of hyperglycemia, and 
excess volume administration in the first 4 hours. Onset of 
 headache or deterioration in mental status during treatment 
should lead to consideration of this complication. Intravenous 
mannitol at a dosage of 1 to 2 g/kg given over 15 minutes is the 
mainstay of therapy. Excess crystalloid infusion can precipitate 
pulmonary edema. Acute respiratory distress syndrome is a rare 
complication of treatment for DKA. 
 Disposition 
 After recovery and stabilization, patients should receive intensive 
detailed instructions about how to avoid this potentially disastrous 
complication of diabetes mellitus. They should be taught to rec-
ognize the early symptoms and signs of ketoacidosis. 
 Urine ketones or capillary blood β-hydroxybutyrate should be 
measured in patients with signs of infection or in those using an 
insulin pump when capillary blood glucose is unexpectedly and 
persistently high. When heavy ketonuria and glycosuria persist on 
several successive examinations, supplemental regular insulin should 
be administered, and liquid foods such as lightly salted tomato juice 
and broth should be ingested to replenish fluids and electrolytes. 
Patients should be instructed to contact the physician if ketonuria 
persists and, especially, if vomiting develops, or if appropriate 
adjustment of the infusion rate on an insulin pump does not correct 
the hyperglycemia and ketonuria.  Table 17–21 summarizes the 
guidelines for patients regarding ketone testing and what to do with 
the results. In adolescents, recurrent episodes of severe diabetic 
ketoacidosis often indicate poor compliance with the insulin regi-
men, and these patients should receive intensive family counseling. 
 2. HYPERGLYCEMIC, HYPEROSMOLAR 
STATE 
 This form of hyperglycemic coma is characterized by severe 
hyperglycemia, hyperosmolality, and dehydration in the absence 
TABLE 17–21  Guidelines for treatment of ketones in 
patients with type 1 diabetes.
Check ketones if blood glucose persistently over 250 mg/dL or
if nauseated or vomiting
Blood ketones <1.5 mmol/L or 
 urine ketones absent or small
Blood ketones >1.5 or urine 
ketones moderate or large
Drink plenty of fluids
Give fast-acting insulin by 
 syringe
Monitor glucose levels
Call medical team for advise or go 
to urgent care or emergency 
room
Drink plenty of fluids
Give fast-acting insulin by syringe
Monitor ketone levels
Note: Blood ketones <0.6 mmol/L are normal.
632    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
of significant ketosis. It occurs in patients with mild or occult 
diabetes and patients are typically middle-aged or elderly. Lethargy 
and confusion develop as serum osmolality exceeds 300 mOsm/kg, 
and coma can occur if osmolality exceeds 330 mOsm/kg. 
Underlying renal insufficiency or congestive heart failure is com-
mon, and the presence of either worsens the prognosis. A precipi-
tating event such as pneumonia, cerebrovascular accident, 
myocardial infarction, burns, or recent operation can often be 
identified. Certain drugs, such as phenytoin, diazoxide, glucocor-
ticoids, and thiazide diuretics, have been implicated in its develop-
ment, as have procedures associated with glucose loading such as 
peritoneal dialysis. 
 Pathogenesis 
 A partial or relative insulin deficiency may initiate the syndrome 
by reducing glucose utilization by muscle, fat, and liver, while 
promoting hyperglucagonemia and increasing hepatic glucose 
output. The result is hyperglycemia that leads to glycosuria and 
osmotic diuresis with obligatory water loss. The presence of even 
small amounts of insulin is believed to prevent the development of 
ketosis by inhibiting lipolysis in the adipose stores. Therefore, 
even though a low insulin-glucagon ratio promotes ketogenesis in 
the liver, the limited availability of precursor free fatty acids from 
the periphery restricts the rate at which ketones are formed. If a 
patient is unable to maintain adequate fluid intake because of an 
associated acute or chronic illness or has suffered excessive fluid loss 
(eg, from burns or therapy with diuretics), marked dehydration 
results. As plasma volume contracts, renal insufficiency develops; 
this, then, limits renal glucose excretion and contributes markedly 
to the rise in serum glucose and osmolality. As serum osmolality 
exceeds 320 to 330 mOsm/kg, water is drawn out of cerebral 
neurons, resulting in mental obtundation and coma. 
 Clinical Features 
 A. Symptoms and signs 
 The onset of the hyperglycemic, 
hyperosmolar, nonketotic state may be insidious, preceded for 
days or weeks by symptoms of weakness, polyuria, and polydipsia. 
A history of reduced fluid intake is common, whether due to inap-
propriate absence of thirst, gastrointestinal upset, or, in the case of 
elderly or bedridden patients, lack of access to water. A history of 
ingestion of large quantities of glucose-containing fluids, such as 
soft drinks or orange juice, can occasionally be obtained; these 
patients are usually less hyperosmolar than those in whom fluid 
intake was restricted. The absence of toxic features of ketoacidosis 
may retard recognition of the syndrome and thus delay institution 
of therapy until dehydration is profound. Because of this delay in 
diagnosis, the hyperglycemia, hyperosmolality, and dehydration in 
hyperglycemic, hyperosmolar, nonketotic coma is often more 
severe than in diabetic ketoacidosis. 
 Physical examination reveals the presence of profound dehydration 
(orthostatic fall in blood pressure and rise in pulse, supine tachy-
cardia, or even frank shock, dry mucous membranes, decreased 
skin turgor). The patient may be lethargic, confused, or comatose. 
Kussmaul respirations are absent unless the precipitating event for 
the hyperosmolar state has also led to the development of meta-
bolic acidosis (eg, sepsis or myocardial infarction with shock). 
 B. Laboratory findings 
 Severe hyperglycemia is present, 
with blood glucose values ranging from 800 to as high as 
2400 mg/dL (44.4-133.2 mmol/L). In mild cases, where dehydra-
tion is less severe, dilutional hyponatremia as well as urinary sodium 
losses may reduce serum sodium to about 120 to 125 mEq/L—
this protects, to some extent, against extreme hyperosmolality. 
Once dehydration progresses further, however, serum sodium can 
exceed 140 mEq/L, producing serum osmolalities of 330 to 
440 mOsm/kg (normal, 280 to 295 mOsm/kg; see the section 
Diabetic Ketoacidosis for a convenient method for estimating 
serum osmolality). Ketosis is usually absent or mild; however, a 
small degree of ketonuria may be present if the patient has not 
been eating because of illness. Acidosis is not a part of the hyper-
glycemic, hyperosmolar state, but it may be present (often lactic 
acidosis) because of other acute underlying conditions (eg, sepsis, 
acute renal failure, myocardial infarction). Prerenal azotemia is the 
rule with blood urea nitrogen frequently over 100 mg/dL. 
 The physician must initiate a careful search for the event that 
precipitated the episode of hyperglycemic, hyperosmolar state if it 
is not obvious after the initial history and physical examination. 
Chest x-rays and cultures of blood, urine, and other body fluids 
should be obtained to look for occult sources of sepsis. Cardiac 
enzymes and serial electrocardiograms can be ordered to look for 
evidence of silent myocardial infarction. 
 Treatment 
 There are some differences in fluid, insulin, and electrolyte 
replacement in this disorder, as compared with diabetic ketoacidosis. 
However, in common with the treatment of ketoacidotic patients, 
careful monitoring of the patient’s clinical and laboratory response 
to therapy is essential. 
 1. Fluid replacement. The fluid deficit may be as much as 
100 to 200 mL/kg or about 9 L. If circulatory collapse is present, 
fluid therapy should be initiated with isotonic saline. In all 
other cases, initial replacement with hypotonic (usually 0.45%) 
saline is preferable, because these patients are hyperosmolar 
with considerable loss of body water and excess solute in the 
vascular compartment. As much as 4 to 6 L of fluid may be 
required in the first 8 to 10 hours. Careful monitoring of fluid 
quantity and type, urine output, blood pressure, and pulse is 
essential. Placement of a central venous pressure catheter should 
be strongly considered to guide replacement of fluid, especially 
if the patient is elderly or has underlying renal or cardiac disease. 
Because insulin therapy decreases plasma glucose and therefore 
serum osmolality, a change to isotonic saline may be necessary 
at some time during treatment. Once blood glucose reaches 
250 mg/dL, 5% dextrose in 0.45% or 0.9% saline solution should 
be substituted for the sugar-free fluids. When consciousness 
returns, oral fluids should be encouraged. 
 2. Electrolyte replacement. Hyperkalemia is less marked, 
and much less potassium is lost in the urine during the osmotic 
diuresis of hyperglycemic, hyperosmolar, nonketotic coma 
than in diabetic ketoacidosis. There is, therefore, less severe 
total potassium depletion, and less potassium replacement is 
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     633
needed to restore potassium stores to normal. However, 
because the initial serum potassium usually is not elevated and 
because it declines rapidly as insulin therapy allows glucose and 
potassium to enter cells, it is recommended that potassium 
replacement be initiated earlier than in ketotic patients: 
10 mEq of potassium chloride can be added to the  initial liter 
of fluid administered if the initial serum potassium is not ele-
vated and if the patient is making urine. When serum phos-
phate falls below 1 mg/dL during insulin therapy, phosphate 
replacement can be given intravenously with the same precau-
tions as those outlined for ketoacidotic patients (see earlier). 
If the patient is awake and cooperative, part or all of the potas-
sium and phosphate replacement can be given orally. 
 3. Insulin therapy. In general, less insulin is required to 
reduce the hyperglycemia of nonketotic patients than is the case 
for patients in diabetic ketoacidosis. In fact, fluid replacement 
alone can decrease glucose levels considerably. An initial insulin 
bolus of 0.15 U/kg is followed by an insulin infusion rate of 
0.1 U/kg/h titrated to lower blood glucose by 50 to 70 mg/
dL/h. Once the patient has stabilized and the blood glucose falls 
to around 250 mg/dL, insulin can be given subcutaneously. 
 Complications and Prognosis 
 The severe dehydration and low output state may predispose the 
patient to complications such as myocardial infarction, stroke, 
pulmonary embolism, mesenteric vein thrombosis, and dissemi-
nated intravascular coagulation. Fluid resuscitation remains the 
primary approach to the prevention of these complications. Low-
dose heparin prophylaxis is reasonable but benefits of routine 
anticoagulation remain doubtful. Rhabdomyolysis is a recognized 
complication of the hyperosmolar state, and it should be looked 
for and treated. 
 The overall mortality rate of hyperglycemic, hyperosmolar, 
nonketotic coma is over 10 times that of diabetic ketoacidosis, 
chiefly because of its higher incidence in older patients, who may 
have compromised cardiovascular systems or associated major 
 illnesses. When patients are matched for age, the prognoses of these 
two forms of hyperosmolar coma are reasonably comparable. 
 Disposition 
 After the patient is stabilized, the appropriate form of long-term 
management of the diabetes must be determined. Insulin treatment 
should be continued for a few weeks, but the patients usually recover 
sufficient endogenous insulin secretion to make a trial of diet or diet 
plus oral agents worthwhile. When the episode occurs in a patient 
who has known diabetes, then education of the patient and caregiv-
ers should be instituted. They should be taught how to recognize 
situations (gastrointestinal upset, infection) that predispose to recur-
rence of hyperglycemic, hyperosmolar state as well as detailed infor-
mation on how to prevent the escalating dehydration (small sips of 
sugar-free liquids, increase in usual hypoglycemic therapy, or early 
contact with the physician) that culminates in hyperosmolar coma. 
 3. LACTIC ACIDOSIS 
 When severely ill diabetic patients present with profound acidosis 
and an anion gap over 15 mEq/L but relatively low or undetectable 
levels of keto acids in plasma, the presence of excessive plasma 
lactate (>5 mmol/L) should be considered, especially if other causes 
of acidosis such as uremia are not present. 
 Pathogenesis 
 Lactic acid is the end product of the anaerobic metabolism of 
glucose. Normally, the principal sources of this acid are the eryth-
rocytes (which lack the enzymes for aerobic oxidation), skeletal 
muscle, skin, and brain. The chief pathway for removal of lactic 
acid is by hepatic (and to some degree renal) uptake for conver-
sion first to pyruvate and eventually back to glucose, a process 
that requires oxygen. Lactic acidosis occurs when excess lactic 
acid accumulates in the blood. This can be the result of overpro-
duction (tissue hypoxia), deficient removal (hepatic failure), or 
both (circulatory collapse). Lactic acidosis is not uncommon in 
any severely ill patient suffering from cardiac decompensation, 
respiratory or hepatic failure, septicemia, or infarction of the 
bowel or extremities. Type A lactic acidosis is associated with tis-
sue hypoxia from hypovolemia or endotoxic shock and need not 
be associated with hyperglycemia. Type B lactic acidosis is defined 
as that which occurs in the absence of clinical evidence for tissue 
hypoxia and is associated with diabetes  per se or with biguanide 
therapy. 
 With the discontinuance of phenformin therapy in the United 
States, lactic acidosis in patients with diabetes mellitus has become 
uncommon, but it still must be considered in the acidotic diabetic 
patient if the patient is seriously ill, and especially if the patient is 
receiving metformin therapy as well. Most cases of metformin-
associated lactic acidosis occur in patients in whom there were 
contraindications to the use of metformin, in particular renal 
failure. 
 Clinical Features 
 A. Symptoms and signs 
 The main clinical features of lactic 
acidosis are marked hyperventilation and mental confusion, which 
may progress to stupor or coma. When lactic acidosis is secondary 
to tissue hypoxia or vascular collapse, the clinical presentation is 
variable, reflecting that of the prevailing catastrophic illness. In the 
rare instance of idiopathic or spontaneous lactic acidosis, the onset 
is rapid (usually over a few hours), the cardiopulmonary status is 
stable, and mentation may be relatively normal. 
 B. Laboratory findings 
 Plasma glucose can be low, normal, 
or high in diabetic patients with lactic acidosis, but usually it is 
moderately elevated. Plasma bicarbonate and arterial pH are quite 
low. An anion gap is present (calculated by subtracting the sum of 
the plasma bicarbonate and chloride from the plasma sodium; 
normal is 12-15 mEq/L). Ketones are usually absent from plasma, 
but small amounts may be present in urine if the patient has not 
been eating recently. Other causes of anion gap metabolic acidosis 
should be excluded—for example, uremia, diabetic or alcoholic 
ketoacidosis, and salicylate, methanol, ethylene glycol, or paralde-
hyde intoxication. In the absence of azotemia, hyperphosphatemia 
may be a clue to the presence of lactic acidosis. 
634    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
 The diagnosis is confirmed by demonstrating, in a sample of 
blood that is promptly chilled and separated, a plasma lactate 
concentration of 6 mmol/L or higher (normal is ∼1 mmol/L). 
Failure to rapidly chill the sample and separate the plasma can lead 
to falsely high plasma lactate values as a result of continued 
 glycolysis by the red blood cells. Frozen plasma remains stable for 
subsequent assay. 
 Treatment 
 The cornerstone of therapy is aggressive treatment of the pre-
cipitating cause. An adequate airway and good oxygenation 
should be ensured. If hypotension is present, fluids and, if 
appropriate, pressor agents must be given to restore tissue perfu-
sion. Appropriate cultures and empiric antibiotic coverage 
should be instituted in any seriously ill patient with lactic acido-
sis in whom the cause is not immediately apparent. Alkalinization 
with intravenous sodium bicarbonate to keep the pH above 7.2 
has been recommended in the emergency treatment of severe 
lactic acidosis. However, there is no evidence that the mortality 
rate is favorably affected by administering bicarbonate, and the 
matter is at present controversial, particularly because of the 
hazards associated with bicarbonate therapy. Hemodialysis may 
be useful in those cases associated with metformin toxicity. 
Dichloroacetate, an anion that facilitates pyruvate removal by 
activating pyruvate dehydrogenase, reverses certain types of lac-
tic acidosis in animals, but in a prospective controlled clinical 
trial involving 252 patients with lactic acidosis, dichloroacetate 
failed to alter either hemodynamics or survival. 
 CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES 
MELLITUS ( TABLE 17–22 ) 
 In most patients with diabetes, a number of pathologic changes 
occur at variable intervals during the course of the disease. These 
changes involve the vascular system for the most part; however, 
they also occur in the nerves, the skin, and the lens. In addition to 
these complications, patients with diabetes have an increased inci-
dence of certain types of infections and may handle their infec-
tions less well than the general population. 
 Classifications of Diabetic 
Vascular Disease 
 Diabetic vascular disease is conveniently divided into two main 
categories: microvascular disease and macrovascular disease. 
 A. Microvascular disease 
 Disease of the smallest blood ves-
sels, the capillary and the precapillary arterioles, is manifested 
mainly by thickening of the capillary basement membrane. 
Microvascular disease involving the retina leads to diabetic retin-
opathy, and disease involving the kidney causes diabetic neph-
ropathy. Small vessel disease may also involve the heart, and 
cardiomegaly with heart failure has been described in diabetic 
patients with patent coronary arteries. 
TABLE 17–22  Chronic complications of diabetes 
mellitus.
Eyes
 Diabetic retinopathy
  Nonproliferative (background)
  Proliferative
 Cataracts
  Subcapsular (snowflake)
  Nuclear (senile)
Kidneys
 Intercapillary glomerulosclerosis
  Diffuse
  Nodular
 Infection
  Pyelonephritis
  Perinephric abscess
  Renal papillary necrosis
 Renal tubular necrosis
  Following dye studies (urograms, arteriograms)
Nervous System
 Peripheral neuropathy
  Distal, symmetric sensory loss
 Motor neuropathy
  Foot drop, wrist drop
  Cranial nerves III, IV, VI, VII
  Diabetic amyotrophy
 Autonomic neuropathy
  Postural hypotension
  Resting tachycardia
  Loss of sweating
  Gastroparesis
  Diabetic diarrhea
  Urinary bladder atony
  Impotence (may also be secondary to pelvic vascular disease)
Skin
 Diabetic dermopathy (shin spots)
 Necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum
 Candidiasis
 Foot and leg ulcers
  Neurotropic
  Ischemic
Cardiovascular System
 Heart disease
  Myocardial infarction
  Cardiomyopathy
 Peripheral vascular disease
  Ischemic ulcers: gangrene
 Cerebrovascular disease
Bones and Joints
  Diabetic cheiroarthropathy
  Dupuytren contracture
  Charcot joint
  Osteomyelitis
Unusual Infections
  Necrotizing fasciitis
  Necrotizing myositis
  Mucor meningitis
  Emphysematous cholecystitis
  Malignant otitis externa
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     635
 B. Macrovascular disease 
 Large vessel disease in diabetes is 
essentially an accelerated form of atherosclerosis. It accounts for 
the increased incidence of myocardial infarction, stroke, and 
peripheral gangrene in diabetic patients. Just as in the case of ath-
erosclerosis in the general population, the exact cause of acceler-
ated atherosclerosis in the diabetic population remains unclear. 
Abnormalities in vessel walls, platelets and other components of 
the clotting system, red blood cells, and lipid metabolism have all 
been postulated to play a role. In addition, there is evidence that 
coexistent risk factors such as cigarette smoking and hypertension 
may be important in determining the course of the disease. 
 Prevalence of Chronic Complications by 
Type of Diabetes 
 Although all of the known complications of diabetes can be found 
in both types of the disease, some are more common in one type 
than in the other. In type 1 diabetes, end-stage renal disease devel-
ops in up to 40% of patients, compared with less than 20% of 
patients with type 2 diabetes. Although blindness occurs in both 
types, it occurs more commonly as a result of severe proliferative 
retinopathy, vitreous hemorrhages, and retinal detachment in type 
1 disease, whereas macular edema and ischemia are the usual cause 
in type 2. Similarly, although diabetic neuropathy is common in 
both type 1 and type 2 diabetes, severe autonomic neuropathy 
with gastroparesis, diabetic diarrhea, resting tachycardia, and pos-
tural hypotension is much more common in type 1. 
 In patients with type 1 diabetes, complications from end-stage 
renal disease are a major cause of death, whereas patients with type 2 
diabetes are more likely to have macrovascular diseases leading to 
myocardial infarction and stroke as the main causes of death. 
Cigarette use adds significantly to the risk of both microvascular 
and macrovascular complications in diabetic patients. 
 Molecular Mechanisms by Which 
Hyperglycemia Causes Microvascular 
and Macrovascular Damage 
 Epidemiological data and prospective intervention studies such as 
the DCCT have confirmed the central role of glucose in the devel-
opment of chronic diabetic complications. 
 Four molecular mechanisms of glucose-induced damage have 
been proposed: (1) increased polyol pathway flux; (2) increased 
intracellular advanced glycation end product (AGE) formation; 
(3) activation of protein kinase C; and (4) increased hexosamine 
pathway flux. 
 Increase flux through the polyol pathway consumes NADPH. 
Because this cofactor is needed to regenerate reduced glutathione, 
NADPH depletion is predicted to exacerbate intracellular oxida-
tive stress and cause cellular injury. Inhibitors of aldose reductase, 
the first enzyme in the polyol pathway have been shown to 
improve diabetic neuropathy. 
 Intracellular autoxidation of glucose results in production of 
intracellular dicarbonyls (glyoxal, 3-deoxyglucosone, methylgly-
oxal), also referred to as AGE precursors. These precursors damage 
target tissues by modifying intracellular and extracellular proteins 
and matrix components. Intracellular protein modifications may 
alter cellular functions. Modifications of extracellular matrix pro-
teins result in abnormal interactions with other matrix proteins 
and integrins. The modified plasma proteins bind to receptors on 
endothelial cells, mesangial cells, and macrophages causing expres-
sion of cytokines and growth factors including interleukin 1, 
IGF-1, TNF-α, transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), mac-
rophage colony stimulating factor, granulocyte-macrophage stim-
ulating factor, platelet-derived growth factor, thrombomodulin, 
tissue factor, vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM 1), and 
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Induction of VEGF 
has been implicated in the vascular hyperpermeability associated 
with diabetes. 
 Protein kinase C isoforms β and δ are activated by diacylglyc-
erol whose levels are increased by elevated intracellular glucose. 
Activation of these isoforms leads to alterations in expression of 
endothelial nitric oxide synthase, endothelin 1, VEGF, TGF-β, 
PAI-1, and activation of nuclear factor κB and NADPH oxidases. 
Inhibitors of the protein kinase β isoform improve retinopathy 
and nephropathy in experimental models. 
 Hyperglycemia increases hexosamine pathway flux by providing 
more fructose-6-phosphate for the rate-limiting enzyme of the path-
way glutamine: fructose-6-phosphate amidotransferase. Activity of 
this pathway leads to increased donation of  N -acetylglucosamine 
moieties to serine and threonine moieties of complication- promoting 
factors such as PAI-1 or TGF-β. 
 It has been proposed that all four of these pathways are associ-
ated with overproduction of superoxide by mitochondria. High 
ambient glucose leads to increased substrate flux through glycolysis 
and the tricarboxylic acid cycle. This leads to increased potential 
difference across the inner mitochondrial membrane and genera-
tion of superoxide by the electron transport chain. The increased 
production of superoxide reduces glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate 
dehydrogenase (GAPDH) activity, which in turn leads to upstream 
increase in intracellular glucose and accumulation of glycolytic 
intermediates such as glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate and fructose 
6-phosphate. The increased intracellular glucose leads to increased 
flux through the polyol pathway and also is the primary initiating 
event in the formation of both intracellular and extracellular 
AGEs. The glycolytic intermediates are important initiators of the 
hexosamine pathway (fructose 6-phosphate) or the protein kinase 
C pathway (glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate). 
 Genetic Factors in Susceptibility to 
Development of Chronic 
Complications of Diabetes 
 Although no genetic susceptibility genes have been identified as 
yet, two unrelated observations indicate that approximately 40% 
of people with diabetes may be unusually susceptible to the rav-
ages of hyperglycemia or other metabolic sequelae of an inade-
quate insulin effect. 
 (1)  In one retrospective study of 164 juvenile-onset 
diabetic patients with a median age at onset of 9 years, 40% 
were incapacitated or dead from end-stage renal disease with 
636    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
proliferative retinopathy after a 25-year follow-up, whereas 
the remaining subjects were either mildly affected (40%) or 
had no clinically detected microvascular disease (20%). This 
study was completed long before the availability of glycemic 
self- monitoring methodology, so it is unlikely that any of 
these patients were near optimal glycemic control. 
 (2)  Data from renal transplantation indicate that only about 40% of 
normal kidneys developed evidence of moderate to severe dia-
betic nephropathy within 6 to 14 years of being transplanted 
into diabetic subjects with end-stage renal failure, whereas as 
many as 60% were only minimally affected. These observations 
support the hypothesis that although approximately 60% of 
people suffer only minimal consequences from hyperglycemia 
and other metabolic hazards of insulin insufficiency, 40% or so 
suffer severe, potentially catastrophic microvascular complica-
tions if the disease is poorly controlled. The genetic mechanisms 
for this increased susceptibility are as yet unknown but could be 
related to one or more of the molecular mechanisms outlined 
above. Identification of the genetic mechanism(s) would be very 
helpful in justifying more intensive insulin therapy in the group 
susceptible to complications in an effort to achieve near- 
normalization of blood glucose. The remaining 60% of less 
susceptible individuals might then be spared the inconveniences 
of strict glycemic control as well as the risks of hypoglycemia 
inherent in present methods of intensive insulin therapy. 
 SPECIFIC CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS OF 
DIABETES MELLITUS ( TABLE 17–22 ) 
 1. OPHTHALMOLOGIC COMPLICATIONS 
 Diabetic Retinopathy 
 For early detection of diabetic retinopathy, adolescent or adult 
patients who have had type 1 diabetes for more than 5 years and 
 all patients with type 2 diabetes should be referred to an ophthal-
mologist for examination and follow-up. In patients with type 1 
diabetes, after 10 to 15 years, 25% to 50% of patients show some 
signs of retinopathy. This prevalence increases to 75% to 95% 
after 15 years and approaches 100% after 30 years of diabetes. In 
patients with type 2 diabetes, 60% have nonproliferative retinopa-
thy after 16 years. When hypertension is present in a patient with 
diabetes, it should be treated vigorously because hypertension is 
associated with an increased incidence and accelerated progression 
of diabetic retinopathy. 
 A. Pathogenesis and clinical features 
 Two main catego-
ries of diabetic retinopathy exist: nonproliferative and prolifera-
tive. Diabetic macular edema can occur at any stage .
 Nonproliferative (background) retinopathy represents the 
earliest stage of retinal involvement by diabetes and is character-
ized by such changes as microaneurysms, dot hemorrhages, exu-
dates, and retinal edema. During this stage, the retinal capillaries 
leak proteins, lipids, or red cells into the retina. When this process 
occurs in the macula (clinically significant macular edema), the 
area of greatest concentration of visual cells, there is interference 
with visual acuity; this is the most common cause of visual impair-
ment in type 2 diabetes. 
 Proliferative retinopathy involves the growth of new capillaries 
and fibrous tissue within the retina and into the vitreous chamber. 
It is a consequence of small vessel occlusion, which causes retinal 
hypoxia; this in turn stimulates new vessel growth. New vessel 
formation may occur at the optic disc or elsewhere on the retina. 
Proliferative retinopathy can occur in both types of diabetes but is 
more common in type 1, developing about 7 to 10 years after 
onset of symptoms, with a prevalence of 25% after 15 years’ dura-
tion. Prior to proliferation of new capillaries, a preproliferative 
phase often occurs in which arteriolar ischemia is manifested as 
cotton-wool spots (small infarcted areas of retina). Vision is usu-
ally normal until vitreous hemorrhage or retinal detachment 
occurs. Proliferative retinopathy is a leading cause of blindness in 
the United States, particularly because it increases the risk of reti-
nal detachment. 
 B. Treatment 
 Extensive scatter xenon or argon photocoagula-
tion and focal treatment of new vessels reduce severe visual loss in 
those cases in which proliferative retinopathy is associated with 
recent vitreous hemorrhages or in which extensive new vessels are 
located on or near the optic disk. Macular edema, which is more 
common than proliferative retinopathy in patients with type 2 
diabetes (up to 20% prevalence), has a guarded prognosis, but it 
has also responded to scatter therapy with improvement in visual 
acuity if detected early. Injection of bevacizumab (Avastin), an 
antivascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF), into the eye 
has been shown to stop the growth of the new blood vessels in 
diabetic eye disease. Avoiding tobacco use and correction of asso-
ciated hypertension are important therapeutic measures in the 
management of diabetic retinopathy. There is no contraindication 
to using aspirin in patients with proliferative retinopathy. 
 Cataracts 
 Two types of cataracts occur in diabetic patients: subcapsular and 
senile.  Subcapsular cataract occurs predominantly in patients 
with type 1 diabetes, may come on fairly rapidly, and has a sig-
nificant correlation with the hyperglycemia of uncontrolled diabe-
tes. This type of cataract has a flocculent or  snowflake appearance 
and develops just below the lens capsule. 
 Senile cataract represents a sclerotic change of the lens nucleus. 
It is by far the most common type of cataract found in either dia-
betic or nondiabetic adults and tends to occur at a younger age in 
diabetic patients, particularly when glycemic control is poor. 
 Two separate abnormalities found in diabetic patients, both of 
which are related to elevated blood glucose levels, may contribute 
to the formation of cataracts: (1) glycosylation of the lens protein, 
and (2) an excess of sorbitol, which is formed from the increased 
quantities of glucose found in the insulin-independent lens. 
Accumulation of sorbitol leads to osmotic changes in the lens that 
ultimately result in fibrosis and cataract formation. 
 Glaucoma 
 Glaucoma occurs in approximately 6% of persons with diabetes. It 
is generally responsive to the usual therapy for open-angle disease. 
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     637
Closed-angle glaucoma can result from neovascularization of the 
iris in diabetic persons, but this is relatively uncommon except after 
cataract extraction when accelerated new vessel growth involving 
the angle of the iris obstructs outflow. 
 2. RENAL COMPLICATIONS 
 Diabetic Nephropathy 
 A. Pathogenesis and clinical findings 
 About 4000 cases 
of end-stage renal disease due to diabetic nephropathy occur 
annually among diabetic patients in the United States. This repre-
sents about one-third of all patients being treated for renal failure. 
The cumulative incidence of nephropathy differs between the two 
major types of diabetes. Patients with type 1 diabetes, who have 
not received intensive insulin therapy and have had only fair to 
poor glycemic control, have a 30% to 40% chance of having 
nephropathy after 20 years—in contrast to the much lower fre-
quency in patients with type 2 diabetes, who are not receiving 
intensive therapy, in whom only about 15% to 20% develop 
clinical renal disease. However, because so many more individuals 
are affected with type 2 diabetes, end-stage renal disease is much 
more prevalent in people with type 2 diabetes in the United States 
and especially throughout the rest of the world. There is no ques-
tion that improved glycemic control and more effective therapeutic 
measures to correct hypertension can reduce the incidence of end-
stage renal disease in both types of diabetes in the future. 
 Diabetic nephropathy is initially manifested by proteinuria; 
subsequently, as kidney function declines, urea and creatinine 
accumulate in the blood. Thickening of capillary basement mem-
branes and of the mesangium of renal glomeruli produces varying 
degrees of glomerulosclerosis and renal insufficiency. Diffuse 
glomerulosclerosis is more common than nodular intercapillary 
glomerulosclerosis (Kimmelstiel-Wilson lesions); both produce 
heavy proteinuria. 
 Sensitive radioimmunoassay methods have permitted detection 
of microgram concentrations of urinary albumin. Conventional 
24-hour urine collections, in addition to being inconvenient for 
patients, also show wide variability of albumin excretion, since 
several factors such as sustained erect posture, dietary protein, and 
exercise tend to increase albumin excretion rates. For these  reasons, 
an albumin-creatinine ratio in an early morning spot urine col-
lected upon awakening is preferable. In the early morning spot 
urine, a ratio of albumin (μg/L) to creatinine (mg/L) of <30 μg/mg 
creatinine is normal, and a ratio of 30 to 300 μg/mg creatinine 
suggests abnormal microalbuminuria. At least two of early morn-
ing spot urine collections over a 3- to 6-month period should be 
abnormal before a diagnosis of microalbuminuria is justified. 
 Subsequent renal failure can be predicted by persistent urinary 
albumin excretion rates exceeding 30 μg/min. Glycemic control as 
well as a low-protein diet (0.8 g/kg/d) may reduce both the hyper-
filtration and the elevated microalbuminuria in patients in the 
early stages of diabetes and those with incipient diabetic neph-
ropathy. Increased microalbuminuria correlates with increased 
levels of blood pressure and antihypertensive therapy decreases 
microalbuminuria. Evidence from some studies—but not the 
UKPDS—supports a specific role for ACE inhibitors in reducing 
intraglomerular pressure in addition to lowering systemic blood 
pressure. An ACE inhibitor (captopril, 50 mg twice daily) in 
 normotensive diabetics impedes progression to proteinuria and 
prevents the increase in albumin excretion rate. Since microalbu-
minuria has been shown to correlate with elevated nocturnal sys-
tolic blood pressure, it is possible that normotensive diabetic 
patients with microalbuminuria have slightly elevated systolic 
blood pressure during sleep, which is lowered during antihyper-
tensive therapy. This action may contribute to the reported effi-
cacy of ACE inhibitors in reducing microalbuminuria in 
normotensive patients. 
 If treatment is inadequate, then the disease progresses with 
proteinuria of varying severity, occasionally leading to nephrotic 
syndrome with hypoalbuminemia, edema, and an increase in 
 circulating LDL cholesterol as well as progressive azotemia. In 
contrast to all other renal disorders, the proteinuria associated 
with diabetic nephropathy does not diminish with progressive 
renal failure (patients continue to excrete 10 to 11 g daily as crea-
tinine clearance diminishes). As renal failure progresses, there is an 
elevation in the renal threshold at which glycosuria appears. 
 Patients with diabetic nephropathy should be evaluated and 
followed by a nephrologist. 
 B. Treatment 
 Hemodialysis has been of limited success in the 
treatment of renal failure due to diabetic nephropathy, primarily 
because of progression of large vessel disease with resultant death 
and disability from stroke and myocardial infarction. Growing 
experience with chronic ambulatory peritoneal dialysis suggests 
that it may be a more convenient method of providing adequate 
dialysis with a lower incidence of complications. 
 Renal transplantation, especially from related donors, is often 
successful. For patients with compatible donors and no contrain-
dications (such as severe cardiovascular disease), it is the treatment 
of choice. 
 Necrotizing Papillitis 
 This unusual complication of pyelonephritis occurs primarily in 
diabetic patients. It is characterized by fever, flank pain, pyuria, 
and sloughing of renal papillae in the urine. It is treated by intra-
venous administration of appropriate antibiotics. 
 Renal Decompensation After 
Radiographic Dyes 
 The use of radiographic contrast agents in diabetic patients with 
reduced creatinine clearance has been associated with the develop-
ment of acute renal failure. Contrast-induced nephropathy is 
defined as an increase in serum creatinine of at least 0.5 mg/dL or 
25% compared with baseline after exposure to intravenous 
 contrast. The increase in serum creatinine occurs shortly after the 
procedure and peaks 3 to 5 days later before improving over the 
next 1 to 3 weeks. Although frequently transient, it can cause 
 permanent impairment of renal function. Diabetic patients with 
normal renal function do not appear to be at increased risk for 
638    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
contrast nephropathy. If a contrast study is considered essential, 
patients with a serum creatinine of 1.5 to 2.5 mg/dL should be 
adequately hydrated before the procedure. Hydration with saline 
has been the cornerstone of contrast nephropathy prevention: 
intravenous saline 1 mL/kg/h is started 12 hours before the proce-
dure and continued for 12 hours afterward. Some studies suggest 
that sodium bicarbonate infusions are more effective, and an alter-
nate option is to infuse sodium bicarbonate: 150 mL of sodium 
bicarbonate (1 mEq/mL) is added to 1 L of 5% dextrose and 
infused at 3.5 mL/kg/h for 1 hour before the procedure; 
1.2 mg/kg/h during the procedure and for 6 hours afterward. 
 N -acetylcysteine has also been shown in some trials to decrease the 
incidence of contrast nephropathy. One regimen consists of using 
oral  N -acetylcysteine 600 mg twice a day starting the day before the 
procedure for a total of four doses. A combination of  N -acetylcysteine 
and intravenous saline or intravenous sodium bicarbonate may be 
more beneficial. Radiographic contrast material should not be given 
to a patient with a serum creatinine greater than 3 mg/dL unless the 
potential benefit outweighs the high risk of acute renal failure. 
 3. NEUROLOGIC COMPLICATIONS 
(DIABETIC NEUROPATHY) 
 Peripheral and autonomic neuropathy are the two most common 
complications of both types of diabetes. Up to 50% of patients 
with type 2 diabetes are affected. The pathogenesis of both types 
of neuropathy is poorly understood. Some lesions, such as the 
acute cranial nerve palsies and diabetic amyotrophy, have been 
attributed to ischemic infarction of the involved peripheral nerve. 
The much more common symmetric sensory and motor periph-
eral neuropathies and autonomic neuropathy are felt to be due to 
metabolic complications. 
 Unfortunately, there is no consistently effective treatment for 
any of the neuropathies. However, several long-term clinical trials 
have definitively shown that normalization of blood glucose levels 
can prevent development and progression of this devastating 
complication. 
 Peripheral Neuropathy 
 A. Distal symmetric polyneuropathy  This is the most com-
mon form of diabetic peripheral neuropathy in which loss of func-
tion appears in a stocking-glove pattern and is due to an axonal 
neuropathic process. Longer nerves are especially vulnerable—hence 
the impact on the foot. Both motor and sensory nerve conduction is 
delayed in the peripheral nerves, and ankle jerks may be absent. 
 Sensory involvement usually occurs first and is generally bilat-
eral, symmetric, and associated with dulled perception of vibration, 
and temperature. Pain, when present, can range from mild dis-
comfort to severe incapacitating symptoms (see later). The sensory 
deficit may eventually be of sufficient degree to prevent patients 
from feeling pain. Patients with symptoms of sensory neuropathy 
should be examined with a 5.07 Semmes-Weinstein filament. 
Those who cannot feel the filament must be considered at risk for 
unperceived neuropathic injury. 
 The denervation of the small muscles of the foot results in 
clawing of the toes and displacement of the submetatarsal fat pads 
anteriorly. These changes, together with the joint and connective 
tissue changes, alter the biomechanics of the foot, increasing plan-
tar pressures. This combination of decreased pain threshold, 
abnormally high foot pressures, and repetitive stress (eg, walking) 
can lead to calluses and ulcerations in the high-pressure areas such 
as over the metatarsal heads. Peripheral neuropathy also predis-
poses to the development of Charcot arthropathy. Other predis-
posing factors for this condition include autonomic neuropathy 
and trauma. The acute Charcot foot presents with pain and swell-
ing, and if the condition is untreated, it leads to a rocker bottom 
deformity and ulceration. The early radiologic changes are of joint 
subluxation and periarticular fractures. As the process progresses, 
there is frank osteoclastic destruction leading to deranged and 
unstable joints particularly in the midfoot. 
 Not surprisingly, the key issue for healing of neuropathic ulcers 
in a foot with good vascular status is mechanical unloading. 
Additionally, any infection should be treated with debridement 
and appropriate antibiotics. Healing times of 8 to 10 weeks are 
typical. In the occasional patient, where healing appears refractory, 
platelet-derived growth factor (becaplermin) should be considered 
for local application. A postmarket epidemiologic study showed 
increased cancer deaths in patients who had used three or more 
tubes of becaplermin on their leg or feet ulcers, and there is now 
a boxed warning in the drug label. Once ulcers are healed, thera-
peutic footwear is key to preventing recurrences. Custom-molded 
shoes are reserved for patients with significant foot deformities. 
Other patients with neuropathy may require accommodative 
insoles that distribute the load over as wide an area as possible. 
Patients with foot deformities and loss of protective threshold 
should seek regular care from a podiatrist. They should be edu-
cated about appropriate footwear, and those patients with loss of 
protective threshold should be instructed to inspect their feet daily 
for reddened areas, blisters, abrasions, or lacerations. 
 B. Isolated peripheral neuropathy 
 Involvement of the 
distribution of only one nerve (mononeuropathy) or of several 
nerves (mononeuropathy multiplex) is characterized by sudden 
onset with subsequent recovery of all or most of the function. This 
neuropathology has been attributed to vascular ischemia or trau-
matic damage. Cranial and femoral nerves are commonly involved, 
and motor abnormalities predominate. The patient with cranial 
nerve involvement usually presents with diplopia. Clinical exami-
nation reveals signs of single third, fourth, or sixth nerve weakness, 
and the pupil is spared. A full recovery of function occurs in 6 to 
12 weeks. Diabetic amyotrophy presents with onset of severe pain 
in the front of the thigh. Within a few days or weeks of the onset 
of pain, the patient develops weakness and wasting of the quadri-
ceps. Usually as the weakness appears, the pain tends to improve. 
Management includes analgesia and improved diabetic control. 
The symptoms improve over 6 to 18 months. 
 C. Painful diabetic neuropathy 
 Hypersensitivity to light 
touch and occasionally severe  burning pain, particularly at night, 
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     639
can become physically and emotionally disabling. Amitriptyline, 
25 to 75 mg at bedtime, has been recommended for pain associ-
ated with diabetic neuropathy. Dramatic relief has often resulted 
within 48 to 72 hours. This rapid response is in contrast to the 2 
or 3 weeks required for an antidepressant effect. Patients often 
attribute benefit to having a full night’s sleep after amitriptyline, 
compared to many previously sleepless nights occasioned by 
 neuropathic pain. Mild to moderate morning drowsiness is a side 
effect that generally improves with time or can be lessened by 
 giving the medication several hours before bedtime. This drug 
should not be continued if improvement has not occurred after 
5 days of therapy. If amitriptyline’s anticholinergic effects are too 
troublesome, then nortriptyline can be used. Desipramine in doses 
of 25 to 150 mg/d seems to have the same efficacy as amitriptyline. 
Tricyclic antidepressants in combination with phenothiazine or 
fluphenazine have been shown in two studies to be efficacious in 
painful neuropathy, with benefits unrelated to relief of depression. 
Gabapentin (900-1800 mg/d in three divided doses) has also been 
shown to be effective in the treatment of painful neuropathy and 
should be tried if the tricyclic drugs prove ineffective. Pregabalin, a 
congener of gabapentin, has been shown in an 8-week study to be 
more effective than placebo in treating painful diabetic peripheral 
neuropathy. However, this drug was not compared with an active 
control. Also, because of its abuse potential, it has been catego-
rized as a Schedule V controlled substance. Duloxetine, a sero-
tonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor, has been approved 
for the treatment of painful diabetic neuropathy. In clinical trials, 
this drug reduced the pain sensitivity score by 40% to 50%. 
Capsaicin, a topical irritant, has been found to be effective in 
reducing local nerve pain; it is dispensed as a cream (Zostrix 
0.025%, Zostrix-HP 0.075%) to be rubbed into the skin over the 
painful region two to four times daily. Gloves should be used for 
application, because hand contamination could result in discom-
fort if the cream comes in contact with eyes or sensitive areas such 
as the genitalia. Five percent lidocaine patch applied over an area 
of maximal pain has been reported to be of benefit and this ther-
apy is currently in clinical trials.
 Diabetic neuropathic cachexia is a syndrome characterized by a 
symmetric peripheral neuropathy associated with profound weight 
loss (up to 60% of total body weight) and painful dysesthesias 
affecting the proximal lower limbs, the hands, or the lower trunk. 
Treatment is usually with insulin and analgesics. The prognosis is 
usually good, and patients typically recover their baseline weight 
with resolution of the painful sensory symptoms within 1 year. 
 Autonomic Neuropathy 
 Neuropathy of the autonomic nervous system is common in 
patients with diabetes of long duration and can be a very discon-
certing clinical problem. It can affect many diverse visceral func-
tions including blood pressure and pulse, gastrointestinal activity, 
bladder function, and erectile function. Treatment is directed spe-
cifically at each abnormality. 
 Involvement of the gastrointestinal system may be manifested 
by nausea, vomiting, and postprandial fullness (from gastric 
atony); symptoms of reflux or dysphagia (from esophageal 
 involvement); constipation and recurrent diarrhea, especially at 
night (from involvement of the small bowel and colon); and fecal 
incontinence (from anal sphincter dysfunction). Gallbladder func-
tion is altered, and this enhances stone formation. 
 Gastroparesis should be considered in type 1 diabetic patients 
in whom unexpected fluctuations and variability in their blood 
glucose levels develops after meals. Radiographic studies of the 
stomach and radioisotopic examination of gastric emptying after 
liquid and solid meals are of diagnostic value in these patients. 
Metoclopramide has been of some help in treating diabetic gastro-
paresis. It is a dopamine antagonist that has central antiemetic 
effects as well as a cholinergic action to facilitate gastric emptying. 
It is given in a dose of 10 mg orally three or four times a day, 
30 minutes before meals and at bedtime. Drowsiness, restlessness, 
fatigue, and lassitude are common adverse effects. Tardive dyski-
nesia and extrapyramidal effects can occur especially when the 
drug is used for longer than 3 months and the FDA has cautioned 
against its chronic use. Erythromycin appears to bind to motilin 
receptors in the stomach and has been found to improve gastric 
emptying in doses of 250 mg three times daily over the short term, 
but its effectiveness seems to diminish over time. Tegaserod 
(Zelnorm), the partial 5-HT4 agonist, has been withdrawn from 
the US market by the FDA, so it is no longer used for this indica-
tion. In selected patients, injections of botulinum toxin into the 
pylorus can reduce sphincter resistance and enhance gastric emp-
tying. Gastric electrical stimulation has been reported to improve 
symptoms and quality of life indices in patients with gastroparesis 
refractory to pharmacologic therapy. 
 Diarrhea associated with autonomic neuropathy has occasionally 
responded to broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy, although it often 
undergoes spontaneous remission. Refractory diabetic diarrhea is 
often associated with impaired sphincter control and fecal inconti-
nence. Therapy with loperamide, 4 to 8 mg daily, or diphenoxylate 
with atropine, two tablets up to four times a day, may provide 
relief. In more severe cases, tincture of paregoric or codeine (60-mg 
tablets) may be required to reduce the frequency of diarrhea and 
improve the consistency of the stools. Clonidine has been reported 
to lessen diabetic diarrhea; however, its usefulness is limited by its 
tendency to cause orthostatic hypotension in these patients who 
already have autonomic neuropathy. Constipation usually responds 
to stimulant laxatives such as senna. Metamucil and other bulk-
providing agents may relieve either the diarrhea or the constipation 
phases, which often alternate. 
 Inability to completely empty the bladder can sometimes occur. 
Bethanechol in doses of 10 to 50 mg three times a day has occa-
sionally improved emptying of the atonic urinary bladder. Catheter 
decompression of the distended bladder has been reported to 
improve its function, and considerable benefit has been reported 
after surgical severing of the internal vesicle sphincter. 
 Use of Jobst fitted stockings, tilting the head of the bed, and 
arising slowly from the supine position are useful in minimizing 
symptoms of orthostatic hypotension. Some patients may require 
the addition of a mineralocorticoid such as fludrocortisone acetate 
(0.1-0.2 mg twice daily). Fludrocortisone therapy, however, can 
640    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
result in supine hypertension and hypokalemia. Midodrine 
(10 mg three times a day), an alpha adrenergic agonist, can be 
tried if Jobst stockings and sleeping upright prove ineffective in 
providing symptomatic relief. 
 Erectile dysfunction due to neuropathy differs from the 
 psychogenic variety in that the latter may be intermittent (erections 
occur under special circumstances), whereas diabetic erectile 
 dysfunction is usually persistent. To distinguish neuropathic or 
psychogenic erectile dysfunction from the erectile dysfunction 
caused by aortoiliac occlusive disease or vasculopathy, papaverine 
is injected into the corpus cavernosum of the penis. If the blood 
supply is competent, a penile erection occurs (Chapter 12). 
Urinary incontinence, with large volumes of residual urine, and 
retrograde ejaculation can also result from pelvic neuropathy. 
 There are medical, mechanical, and surgical approaches avail-
able for treatment of erectile dysfunction. Penile erection depends 
on relaxation of the smooth muscle in the arteries of the corpus 
cavernosum, and this is mediated by nitric oxide-induced cyclic 
3′,5′-guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) formation. cGMP- 
specific phosphodiesterase type 5 (PDE5) inhibitors impair the 
breakdown of cGMP and improve the ability to attain and main-
tain an erection. Sildenafil (Viagra), vardenafil (Levitra), and 
tadalafil (Cialis) have been shown in placebo-controlled clinical 
trials to improve erections in response to sexual stimulation. The 
recommended dose of sildenafil for most patients is one 50-mg 
tablet taken approximately 1 hour before sexual activity. The peak 
effect is at 1.5 to 2 hours, with some effect persisting for 4 hours. 
Patients with diabetes mellitus using sildenafil reported 50% to 
60% improvement in erectile function. The maximum recom-
mended dose is 100 mg. The recommended dose of both vardena-
fil and tadalafil is 10 mg. The doses may be increased to 20 mg or 
decreased to 5 mg based on efficacy and side effects. Tadalafil has 
been shown to improve erectile function for up to 36 hours after 
dosing. In clinical trials, only a few adverse effects have been 
reported—transient mild headache, flushing, dyspepsia, and in 
some altered color vision. Priapism can occur with these drugs and 
patients should be advised to seek immediate medical attention if 
an erection persists for longer than 4 hours. The PDE5 inhibitors 
potentiate the hypotensive effects of nitrates, and their use is con-
traindicated in patients who are concurrently using organic 
nitrates in any form. Caution is advised for men who have suffered 
a heart attack, stroke, or life-threatening arrhythmia within the 
previous 6 months; men who have resting hypotension or hyper-
tension, and men who have a history of cardiac failure or have 
unstable angina. Rarely, a decrease in vision or permanent visual 
loss has been reported after PDE5 inhibitor use. 
 Intracorporeal injection of vasoactive drugs causes penile 
engorgement and erection. Drugs most commonly used include 
papaverine alone, papaverine with phentolamine, and alprostadil 
(prostaglandin E 1 ). Alprostadil injections are relatively painless, 
but careful instruction is essential to prevent local trauma, pria-
pism, and fibrosis. Intraurethral pellets of alprostadil avoid the 
problem of injection of the drug. 
 External vacuum therapy (Erec-Aid System) is a nonsurgical treat-
ment consisting of a suction chamber operated by a hand pump that 
creates a vacuum around the penis. This draws blood into the penis 
to produce an erection that is maintained by a specially designed ten-
sion ring inserted around the base of the penis and which can be kept 
in place for up to 20 to 30 minutes. Although this method is generally 
effective, its cumbersome nature limits its appeal. 
 In view of the recent development of nonsurgical approaches 
to therapy of erectile dysfunction, resort to surgical implants of 
penile prostheses is becoming less common. 
 4. CARDIOVASCULAR COMPLICATIONS 
 Heart Disease 
 Microangiopathy occurs in the heart and may explain the exis-
tence of congestive cardiomyopathies found in diabetic patients 
without demonstrable coronary artery disease. Much more com-
monly, however, heart failure in patients with diabetes is a conse-
quence of coronary atherosclerosis. Myocardial infarction is three 
to five times more common in diabetic patients than in age-
matched controls and is the leading cause of death in patients with 
type 2 diabetes. Cardiovascular disease risk is increased in patients 
with type 1 diabetes as well, although the absolute risk is lower 
than in patients with type 2 diabetes. Women with diabetes lose 
the protection against myocardial infarction that is usually present 
during the childbearing years. The increased risk of atherosclerosis 
in people with diabetes may reflect the combination of hyperlipi-
demia, abnormalities of platelet adhesiveness, coagulation factors, 
hypertension, and oxidative stress and inflammation. 
 Large intervention studies of risk factor reduction in diabetes 
are lacking, but it is reasonable to assume that reducing these risk 
factors would have beneficial effects. Lowering LDL cholesterol 
reduces first events in patients without known coronary disease 
and secondary events in patients with known coronary disease. 
These intervention studies included some patients with diabetes, 
and the benefits of lowering LDL cholesterol were apparent in this 
group. The National Cholesterol Education Program clinical prac-
tice guidelines have designated diabetes as a coronary risk equiva-
lent and have recommended that patients with diabetes should 
have an LDL cholesterol goal of <100 mg/dL. Lowering LDL 
cholesterol to 70 mg/dL may have additional benefit and is a rea-
sonable target for most patients with type 2 diabetes who have 
multiple risk factors for cardiovascular disease. 
 The ADA also recommends lowering blood pressure to 130/80 
mm Hg or less. The Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment 
to Prevent Heart Attack Trial (ALLHAT) randomized 33,357 subjects 
(age 
55 
years 
or 
older) 
with 
hypertension 
and 
at least one other coronary artery disease risk factor to receive treat-
ment with chlorthalidone, amlodipine, or lisinopril. Chlorthalidone 
appeared to be superior to amlodipine and lisinopril in lowering 
blood pressure, in reducing the incidence of cardiovascular events, in 
tolerability, and in cost. The study included 12,063 individuals with 
type 2 diabetes. The Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation (HOPE) 
study randomized 9297 high-risk patients who had evidence of vas-
cular disease or diabetes plus one other cardiovascular risk factor to 
receive ramipril or placebo for a mean period of 5 years. Treatment 
with ramipril resulted in a 25% reduction of the risk of myocardial 
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     641
infarction, stroke, or death from cardiovascular disease. The mean dif-
ference in blood pressure between the placebo and ramipril groups was 
2.2 mm Hg systolic and 1.4 mm Hg diastolic, and the reduction in 
car diovascular event rate remained significant after adjustment for this 
small difference in blood pressure. The mechanism underlying this 
protective effect of ramipril is unknown. Patients with type 2 diabetes 
who already have cardiovascular disease or microalbuminuria should 
therefore be considered for treatment with an ACE inhibitor. More 
clinical studies are needed to address the question of whether patients 
with type 2 diabetes, who do not have cardiovascular disease or 
microalbuminuria, would specifically benefit from ACE inhibitor 
treatment. 
 Aspirin (81-325 mg daily) inhibits thromboxane synthesis by plate-
lets and is effective in reducing cardiovascular morbidity and mortality 
in patients who have a history of myocardial infarction or stroke (sec-
ondary prevention). It is unclear if aspirin prevents primary cardiovas-
cular events in people with diabetes.  The current recommendation is 
to give aspirin to those people with diabetes who are at increased  risk 
for cardiovascular events (greater than 10% 10 year risk of cardiovas-
cular events). Typically this includes most 50-year-old men and 
60-year-old women with one or more additional risk factors (smoking, 
hypertension, dyslipidemia, family history of premature cardiovascular 
disease, and albuminuria). Contraindications for aspirin therapy 
include age less than 21 years (because of risk of Reye syndrome), 
aspirin allergy, bleeding tendency (eg, anticoagulant therapy), recent 
gastrointestinal bleeding, or active hepatic disease. The Early Treatment 
Diabetic Retinopathy Study (ETDRS) showed that aspirin does not 
influence the course of proliferative retinopathy. There was no statisti-
cally significant difference in the severity of vitreous/preretinal hemor-
rhages or their rate of resolution between the aspirin and placebo 
groups. Thus, it appears that there is no contraindication to aspirin use 
to achieve cardiovascular benefit in diabetic patients who have prolif-
erative retinopathy. 
 Peripheral Vascular Disease 
 Atherosclerosis is markedly accelerated in the larger arteries. It is 
often diffuse, with localized enhancement in certain areas of turbu-
lent blood flow, such as at the bifurcation of the aorta or other large 
vessels. Clinical manifestations of peripheral vascular disease include 
ischemia of the lower extremities, impotence, and intestinal angina. 
 The incidence of  gangrene of the feet in people with diabetes 
is 30 times that in age-matched controls. The factors responsible 
for the development of this condition, in addition to peripheral 
vascular disease, are small vessel disease, peripheral neuropathy 
with loss of both pain sensation and neurogenic inflammatory 
responses, and secondary infection. In two-thirds of patients with 
ischemic gangrene, pedal pulses are not palpable. In the remaining 
one-third who has palpable pulses, reduced blood flow through 
these vessels can be demonstrated by plethysmographic or Doppler 
ultrasound examination. Prevention of foot injury is imperative. 
Agents that reduce peripheral blood flow such as tobacco and 
propranolol should be avoided. Control of other risk factors such 
as hypertension is essential. Cholesterol-lowering agents are useful 
as adjunctive therapy when early ischemic signs are detected and 
when dyslipidemia is present. Patients should be advised to seek 
immediate medical care if a diabetic foot ulcer develops. 
Improvement in peripheral blood flow with endarterectomy and 
bypass operations is possible in certain patients. 
 5. SKIN AND MUCOUS MEMBRANE 
COMPLICATIONS 
 Chronic pyogenic infections of the skin may occur, especially in 
poorly controlled diabetic patients. Eruptive xanthomas can result 
from hypertriglyceridemia, associated with poor glycemic control. 
Candidal infection can produce erythema and edema of inter-
triginous areas below the breasts, in the axillas, and between the 
fingers. It causes vulvovaginitis in most chronically uncontrolled 
diabetic women with persistent glucosuria and is a frequent cause 
of pruritus. While antifungal creams containing miconazole or 
clotrimazole offer immediate relief of vulvovaginitis, recurrence is 
frequent unless glucosuria is reduced. 
 Necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum are oval or irregularly 
shaped plaques with reddish demarcated borders and a glistening 
yellowish surface usually located over the anterior surfaces of the 
legs or the dorsal surfaces of the ankles. Rarely, lesions can occur 
on the hands, fingers, forearms, face, and scalp. The necrobiosis 
lesion usually starts out as an oval violaceous patch that slowly 
expands. The advancing border is red and the central area turns 
yellow-brown. The thinning of the dermis in the center of the 
lesion leads to the shiny surface and prominent telangiectasia. It 
also allows the subcutaneous fat to become more visible hence 
the yellowish appearance. Pathologically, the lesions show degen-
eration of collagen, granulomatous inflammation of subcutane-
ous tissues and blood vessels, capillary basement membrane 
thickening, and obliteration of vessel lumina. The condition is 
associated with type 1 diabetes, although it can occur in patients 
with type 2 diabetes and also in people without diabetes. It 
occurs in about 0.3% of patients with diabetes, usually in 
patients in their 30s and 40s, and is about three times more com-
mon in women than in men. In some studies an association with 
microalbuminuria and retinopathy has been reported. Improving 
glycemic control may help the condition. The first-line treat-
ment includes topical and subcutaneous corticosteroids. Second-
line treatments include systemic steroids, cyclosporine, 
ticlodipine, nicotinamide,  clofazimine, fumarate esters, intrale-
sional etanercept, and topical psoralen with ultraviolet A. Pulsed 
dye lasers can improve the appearance of telangiectasias. Flare-
ups are frequent. No treatment is completely effective. 
 Shin spots are uncommon in adult diabetics. They are brownish, 
rounded, painless atrophic lesions of the skin in the pretibial area. 
 6. BONE AND JOINT COMPLICATIONS 
 Bone and joint complications are generally attributed to metabolic 
or vascular sequelae of long-standing diabetes. 
 Diabetic cheiroarthropathy is a syndrome of chronic progres-
sive stiffness of the hand secondary to contracture and tightening 
of the skin over the joints. It is characterized by inability to flatten 
the palms against a flat surface (prayer sign). It is believed to be 
642    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
due to glycosylation of collagen and perhaps other proteins in con-
nective tissue. It is associated with poor glycemic control and with 
longer duration of diabetes. 
 Dupuytren contractures consist of nodular thickening and 
contracture of the palmar fascia of the hand, producing flexure 
contractures of the fingers. It can occur in the absence of diabetes, 
but is more common in people with diabetes. The etiology is 
unclear but there may be an inflammatory component. 
Glucocorticoid injection into discrete nodules can sometimes help 
but the standard treatment is surgical fasciectomy. 
 Carpal tunnel syndrome occurs when the median nerve is 
compressed within the carpal tunnel. It is more common in people 
with diabetes, especially those who also have diabetic cheiroar-
thropathy. It is presumably due to glycosylation of collagen and 
other proteins in the connective tissue. 
 Patients with adhesive capsulitis of the shoulder (frozen 
shoulder) complain primarily of stiffness and loss of range of 
motion. They may also have shoulder pain. It occurs more 
 frequently in people with long-standing diabetes—the incidence 
being two to four times higher than in the general population. 
The patients may also have diabetic cheiroarthropathy or 
Dupuytren contractures. In most cases it is a limited condition 
that responds to physical therapy. Patients should be warned that 
recovery may take 6 to 18 months. For a few patients surgery 
may be necessary. Adhesive capsulitis of the hip has also been 
described. 
 Data on bone mineral density and fracture risk in people 
with diabetes are contradictory. Bone mineral density has been 
reported to be low, normal, or high in type 2 diabetes patients. 
Type 2 diabetes patients do appear to be at increased risk for 
nonvertebral factures. Women with type 1 diabetes have 
an increased risk of fracture when compared to women with-
out diabetes. It is likely that other factors such as duration 
of diabetes and diabetes complications such as neuropathy 
and renal disease affect both the bone mineral density and 
fracture risk. 
 Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH) is a skeletal 
disease characterized by ossification of the anterior longitudinal 
ligament of the spine and various extraspinal ligaments. It causes 
stiffness and decreased range of spinal motion. The peripheral 
joints most commonly affected are the metacarpophalangeal 
joints, elbows, and shoulders. Diabetes, obesity, hypertension, and 
dyslipidemia are risk factors for this condition. 
 Hyperuricemia and gout are disorders associated with the 
metabolic syndrome. Thus, it is not surprising that type 2 diabetes 
patients are at increased risk for acute gout as well as chronic 
tophaceous gout. 
 Bursitis, particularly of the shoulders and hips, occurs more 
frequently than expected in patients with diabetes. 
 7. INFECTION 
 There are also several unusual infections that occur almost exclu-
sively in diabetic patients (eg, emphysematous cholecystitis, 
mucormycosis, malignant otitis externa, and necrotizing papillitis). 
As noted earlier, atherosclerosis with peripheral vascular disease is 
very common in the diabetic population, and the resultant isch-
emia undoubtedly plays a role in the frequent and severe lower 
extremity infections seen in these patients. 
 MANAGEMENT OF DIABETES IN THE 
HOSPITALIZED PATIENT 
 A number of studies have observed that hospitalized patients with 
diabetes and those with new-onset hyperglycemia (ie, those with-
out a preadmission diagnosis of diabetes) have higher inpatient 
morbidity and mortality. The morbidity and mortality in diabetics 
is twice that of nondiabetics. Those with new-onset hyperglycemia 
have even a higher mortality—almost eightfold greater in one 
study. These observations have led to increased interest in improv-
ing glucose control in the hospitalized diabetic patient. 
 Most patients with diabetes are hospitalized for reasons other 
than their diabetes. Up to 10% to 15% of all hospitalized patients 
have diabetes. Audits suggest that as many as a 30% of hospitalized 
diabetic patients have inappropriate management of their diabetes 
such as being given metformin where contraindicated; failure to act 
on high blood glucose levels; omission of diabetes medication; no 
record of diabetes complications; inappropriate insulin manage-
ment; or blood glucose monitoring. Use of outpatient oral thera-
pies or insulin regimens in the hospital is challenging. Patients are 
not eating according to their normal schedule and are often fasting 
for procedures. It is, therefore, usual to use insulin, subcutaneous 
or intravenous, in the hospitalized patient. Insulin is safe to use in 
patients with cardiac, renal, and liver disease and its dosing can be 
adjusted to match changing inpatient needs. 
 Surgery represents a stressful situation during which most of the 
insulin antagonists (catecholamines, GH, corticosteroids) are 
mobilized. In the patient with diabetes, this can lead to a worsening 
of hyperglycemia and perhaps even ketoacidosis. The aim of medi-
cal management of people with diabetes during the perioperative 
period is to minimize these stress-induced changes. Recommendations 
for management depend both on the patient’s usual diabetic regi-
men and on the type of surgery (major or minor) to be done. 
 For people with diabetes controlled with diet alone, no special 
precautions are necessary unless diabetic control is markedly dis-
turbed by the procedure. If this occurs, small amounts of short-
acting insulin, as needed, will correct the hyperglycemia. Patients 
on oral agents should not take them on the day of surgery. If there 
is significant hyperglycemia, short-acting insulin can be given as 
needed. If this approach does not provide adequate control, an 
insulin infusion should be started in the manner indicated below. 
The oral agents can be restarted once the patient is eating nor-
mally after the operation. It is important to order a postoperative 
serum creatinine level to ensure normal renal function prior to 
restarting metformin therapy. 
 Patients taking insulin represent the only serious challenge to 
management of diabetes when surgery is necessary. The insulin regi-
men used to control the glucose depends on the kind of diabetes (type 
1 or type 2); whether it is minor surgery (<2 hour and patient eating 
afterward) or major surgery (longer than 2 hours, invasion of body 
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     643
cavity, not eating afterward); and the preoperative insulin regimen 
(basal bolus or premixed insulin twice a day or premeal bolus only 
or regular before meals and NPH at bedtime). Type 1 patients have 
to be on some insulin to prevent the development of diabetic 
 ketoacidosis. Many type 2 patients on insulin are fine without insu-
lin for a few hours. Ideally patients with diabetes should undergo 
surgery early in the morning.  Table 17–23 summarizes the approach 
for these various kinds of patients. One insulin infusion method 
adds 10 U of regular insulin to 1 L of 5% dextrose in half-normal 
saline, and this is infused intravenously at a rate of 100 to 
180 mL/h. This gives the patient 1 to 1.8 U of insulin per hour, 
which, except in the most severe cases, generally keeps the blood glu-
cose within the range of 100 to 250 mg/dL (5.5-13.9 mmol/L). The 
infusion may be continued for several days if necessary. Plasma glucose 
or blood glucose should be determined every 2 to 4 hours to be sure 
metabolic control is adequate. If it is not, adjustments in the ratio of 
insulin to dextrose in the intravenous solution can be made. 
 An alternative method, which is gaining increasing popularity, 
consists of separate infusions of insulin and glucose delivered by 
pumps to permit independent adjustments of each infusion rate, 
depending on hourly variation of blood glucose values. There are 
a number of different algorithms available for insulin infusions. 
 Table 17–24 provides guidelines for management with an insulin 
infusion and an algorithm designed to achieve glycemic control in 
the range of 120 to 180 mg/dL blood glucose. 
 After surgery, when the patient has resumed an adequate oral 
intake, intravenous administration of insulin and dextrose can be 
stopped half an hour after the first subcutaneous insulin injection. 
Insulin needs may vary in the first several days after surgery 
because of continuing postoperative stresses and because of vari-
able caloric intake. In this situation, multiple doses of regular 
insulin, guided by blood glucose determinations, can keep the 
patient in acceptable metabolic control. 
 In the intensive care units, glucose levels are controlled most 
frequently using insulin infusions. Patients on total parental nutri-
tion (TPN) can have insulin added to the bag. Standard TPN 
contains 25% dextrose, so 50-mL/h infusion delivers 12.5 g of 
dextrose per hour. 
 On the general surgical and medical wards, most patients are 
managed on subcutaneous insulin regimens. Limited cross- sectional 
and prospective studies suggest that the best glucose control is 
achieved on a combination of basal and bolus regimen with 50% 
of daily insulin needs provided by intermediate or long-acting 
insulins. Standardized order sets prompt medical personnel to 
write more physiological insulin orders, reduce errors, and 
include algorithms for recognition and treatment of hypoglycemia. 
 Table 17–25 is an example of one such order set for a subcutaneous 
insulin regimen. 
 Targets for Glucose Control in the 
Hospitalized Patient 
 A number of studies have observed that hospitalized patients with 
diabetes and those with new-onset hyperglycemia (ie, those without 
a preadmission diagnosis of diabetes) have higher inpatient  morbidity 
and mortality. Also, poor glucose control in diabetics at admission 
is associated with increased size of myocardial infarction and in 
some studies increased nosocomial infections after surgery. These 
observations have led to the question of whether lowering glucose 
levels close to normal in the hospital improves outcomes. 
 A prospective trial in surgical ICU patients (Leuven 1 study) 
reported that aggressive treatment of hyperglycemia (blood glucose 
<110 mg/dL) reduced mortality (35 deaths vs 63, p <0.04) and 
morbidity. Only a small number of persons in this study (204 of 
1548) had a diagnosis of diabetes preoperatively, and so this study 
suggests that controlling hyperglycemia per se (independent of a 
diagnosis of diabetes) was beneficial. The benefits, however, were 
principally seen in patients who were in the ICU for longer than 
5 days, and it was unclear whether the benefits would also apply to 
most surgical patients who stay in the ICU for only 1 to 2 days. 
 The same investigators performed a similar prospective trial 
among 1200 medical ICU patients (Leuven 2 study) and reported 
that aggressive treatment of hyperglycemia reduced morbidity 
(reduction in acquired renal injury and increased early weaning 
from mechanical ventilation) but not mortality. Again, as in the 
surgical ICU study, only a small number of persons (16.9%) had 
a diagnosis of diabetes at admission. 
 The findings of the Leuven studies however have not been 
confirmed in other prospective studies. Two other ICU-based 
studies (Glucontrol and VISEP) that attempted to confirm the 
TABLE 17–23 Recommendations for management of insulin-treated diabetes during surgery.
Minor surgical procedures
(<2 h; eating afterward) 
Major surgical procedures
(>2 h; invasion of body cavity; not eating 
immediately after recovery
Type 2 patients on basal bolus insulin 
 regimen; twice daily premixed insulin
No insulin on the day of operation. Start 5% 
dextrose infusion; monitor fingerstix blood glucose 
and give subcutaneous short-acting insulin every 
4 or 6 h
Same regimen as minor procedure. If control is 
not satisfactory, then intravenous insulin infusion
Type 1 patient on basal bolus insulin 
 regimen or on insulin pump
Patients on pump should discontinue the pump the 
evening before procedure and should be given a
24 h basal insulin. On day of procedure, start 
5% dextrose; monitor blood glucose and give 
subcutaneous short-acting insulin every 4 or 6 h
Initiate insulin infusion on morning of procedure 
and transition back to usual regimen when eating
644    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
findings were unable to do so. These two studies, however, were 
stopped prematurely for the following reasons: an interim analysis 
(falsely) suggested increased mortality in the test group in the 
Glucontrol study, and hypoglycemic events increased sevenfold in 
the intensive treatment group in the VISEP study. A large multi-
center, multinational study (NICE-SUGAR) recruited 6104 sur-
gical and medical ICU patients with hyperglycemia (20% had 
diabetes) and randomized them to tight control (81-108 mg/dL) 
or less tight control (<180 mg/dL). The tight group achieved 
blood glucose levels of 115 ± 18 and the conventional group 
144 ± 23. There were more deaths (829 vs 751) in the tight glu-
cose control group compared to the less tight glucose control 
group (p = 0.02). The intensively treated group also had more 
cases of severe hypoglycemia (206 vs 15 cases), and the excess 
deaths in the intensive group were due to cardiovascular events. 
 A study on tight intraoperative glycemic control during cardiac 
surgery also failed to show any benefit; if anything, the intensively 
treated group had more events. The United Kingdom Glucose 
Insulin in Stroke Trial (GIST-UK) failed to show beneficial 
effect of tight glycemic control in stroke patients; however, the 
investigators acknowledged that, because of slow recruitment, the 
study was underpowered. 
 Based on the evidence available so far, ICU patients with 
blood glucose levels above 180 mg/dL (diabetes and new-onset 
hyperglycemia) should be treated aiming for target glucose levels 
between 140 and 180 mg/dL. Targeting blood glucose control in 
the intensive care unit close to 100 mg/dL is not beneficial and 
may even be harmful. When patients leave the ICU, target glu-
cose values between 100 mg/dL and 180 mg/dL may be appropri-
ate, although this view is based on clinical observations rather 
than conclusive evidence. 
 DIABETES MELLITUS AND PREGNANCY 
 Hormone and Fuel Balance 
During Pregnancy 
 During pregnancy, the rapidly growing fetus impacts metabolism 
in the mother and causes profound hormonal and metabolic 
changes. These changes significantly affect the management of 
TABLE 17–24 Guideline for perioperative diabetes management with an intravenous insulin infusion.
 
1. Maintenance of IV fluids (IV dextrose infusion must be maintained while the patient is on insulin infusion. Minimum rate of 10 mL/h.)
  
 D5 NS at 100 mL/h
  
 D5 1/2 NS at 100 mL/h
  
 D10 NS at _________ mL/h (for patients with fluid restrictions or renal failure)
  
 Additive: KCl 20 mEq/L (generally 20 mEq/L)
  
 Other_________ at _____________mL/h
 
2. Regular insulin infusion 100 U regular insulin in 100 mL NS (1 U = 1 mL)
 
A. Flush first 20 mL of infusion through tubing before connecting to patient.
 
B. Before beginning infusion, check blood glucose (BG) with glucose meter.
 
3. Start insulin infusion rate as follows (when BG ≥100 mg/dL)
  
 0.3 U/h taking <30 U insulin daily (recommended for type 1; Pancreatectomy)
  
 1 U/h for patients previously diet controlled, taking oral hypoglycemic agent, or <30 U insulin daily
  
 1.5 U/h for patients taking >30 U insulin daily
  
 Other ________ U/h
 
4. Adjust insulin infusion rate as follows:
  
 Standard adjustment
  
BG <80 mg/dL; stop infusion and call MD;
  
see instruction # 5 below
  
Do not restart insulin infusion
  
until BG > 100 mg/dLa
  
BG 80-120; decrease drip by 0.5 U/h
  
BG 121-180; no change in drip rate
  
BG 181-250; increase drip by 0.5 U/h
  
BG >250 bolus 5 U regular insulin IV and
  
increase drip by 0.5 U/h
 Sensitive Adjustment (for Type 1; Pancreatectomy)
BG <80 mg/dL; stop infusion and call MD;
see instruction # 5 below
Do not restart insulin infusion
until BG > 100 mg/dLa
BG 80-120; decrease drip by 0.2 U/h
BG 121-180; no change in drip rate
BG 181-250; increase drip by 0.2 U/h
BG >250 bolus 2 U regular insulin IV and
increase drip by 0.2 U/h
 
5. For a BG <80 mg/dL or >400 mg/dL on insulin infusion, call MD.
  
 BG <80 mg/dL but >60 mg/dL, stop insulin infusion; check BG every 15 min.
  
 BG ≤60 mg/dL, stop insulin infusion; give 50-mL D50W IV push; check BG every 15 min and repeat treatment until BG ≥100 mg/dL. When 
  
 
BG ≥100 mg/dL, call MD for new insulin infusion rate.
  
 BG >400 mg/dL, call MD to reassess insulin infusion rate.
  
 If TPN or tube feeds are interrupted for longer than 30 min, start D10W at 50 mL/h. Notify MD about change and future action.
 
6. When converting to subcutaneous (SQ) insulin, give prescribed SQ dose 30 min prior to discontinuing insulin infusion. Use Adult SQ Insulin 
  
Order Sheet.
 
7. If patient eating meals give ______ U aspart SQ after patient eats carbohydrates and continue insulin infusion.
 
8. Discontinue insulin infusion maintenance IV fluids when insulin infusion discontinued.
aCheck BG every hour with glucose meter until stable (range 100-180 mg/dL) for two consecutive readings and then every 2 hours.
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     645
TABLE 17–25 Example of a standardized subcutaneous insulin order set for inpatient use.
1. Check blood glucose and give insulin before meals, bedtime, and 2 AM.
2. Discontinue previous SQ insulin order.
3. If patient becomes NPO for procedure/stops eating:
• HOLD nutritional dose of rapid-acting analog.
• Give correctional dose of rapid-acting analog if BG >130 mg/dL.
• Give glargine dose. If BG has been <70 mg/dL in last 24 h, call MD to consider adjusting glargine dose.
• Call MD for NPO orders if patient on 70/30, NPH insulin or has been NPO >12 h.
A. Basal and nutritional insulin dose (in units):
Time
Breakfast
Lunch
Dinner
Bedtime
Rapid-acting analog
NPH
Insulin glargine
Insulin mixture
B. Meal time correctional insulin with rapid-acting analog. Check box to choose scale. Add or subtract from nutritional dose of rapid-
acting analog.
Blood Glucose Range
 Sensitive
BMI <25 and/or <50 U/d
 Average 
BMI 25-30 and/or 
50-90 U/d
 Resistant 
BMI >30 and/or 
>90 U/d
 Custom
<70 mg/dL
Once BG • 100, give
Treat for hypoglycemia per protocol (see order #6). Once BG •100 mg/dL give rapid-acting analog with 
following change when patient eats:
2 U less
3 U less
4 U less
 --- U less
70-100
1 U less
2 U less
3 U less
 --- U less
101-130
Give nutritional rapid-acting insulin as in # 4A
131-150
+ 0
+ 1
+ 2
+ ---
151-200
+ 1
+ 2
+ 3
+ ---
201-250
+ 2
+ 4
+ 6
+ ---
251-300
+ 3
+ 6
+ 9
+ ---
301-350
+ 4
+ 8 
+ 12
+ ---
351-400
+ 5
+ 10
+ 15
+ ---
>400
+ 6
+ 12
+ 18
+ ---
C.   Bedtime and 2 AM correctional insulin with rapid-acting analog if BG ≥ 200 mg/dL.
BG Range (mg/dL)
Default Value (U)
Custom
200-250 
1 
---           U 
251-300
2 
---
>300 
3 
---
4. Call MD for BG <70 mg/dL or > 400 mg/dL.
5. For BG <70 mg/dL, use Hypoglycemia Protocol below. These hypoglycemia orders remain active for duration of SQ insulin 
administration. For patient taking PO, give 20 g of oral fast-acting carbohydrate per patient preference:
 Give 4 glucose tablets (5 g glucose/tablet). Repeat Q 15 min until BG ≥100 mg/dL.
or
 Give 6 oz fruit juice. Repeat Q 15 min until BG ≥100 mg/dL.
 Give 25-mL D50W IV push if patient cannot take PO. Repeat Q 15 min until BG ≥100 mg/dL.
 Check fingerstick glucose every 15 min and repeat treatment until BG is ≥100 mg/dL.
6. Discontinue above monitoring and intervention orders when SQ insulin is discontinued.
Note: Glargine (Lantus) cannot be mixed with any other insulin. Give glargine as a separate injection.
646    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
preexisting diabetes, and can precipitate hyperglycemia and diabetes 
in previously nondiabetic mothers. 
 Early in pregnancy, the hormones of pregnancy initiate changes 
that prepare the mother for the increasing nutrient requirements 
of the fetus late in pregnancy. Fat deposition is accentuated in 
early pregnancy due to enhanced conversion of glucose to triglyc-
eride after meals in pregnant compared with nonpregnant sub-
jects. Elevated prolactin and placental lactogen drive the production 
of serotonin by the β cell, which leads to β cell expansion, a pro-
cess that peaks in mid gestation. β cell mass approximately doubles 
during pregnancy, and both β cell glucose sensitivity and insulin 
secretory capacity increase. At the same time, α cell mass and 
glucagon secretion remain unchanged. 
 As the pregnancy progresses and nutrient utilization by the 
fetus increases, plasma concentrations of glucose in the fasting 
state tend to decline slightly. Since the flow of glucose and other 
nutrients to the fetus depends on the gradient across the placenta, 
maintenance of maternal glucose levels becomes increasingly 
important and is achieved through increasing insulin resistance in 
the liver, muscle, and adipose tissue. Several pregnancy hormones 
contribute to insulin resistance, but progesterone, which increases 
steadily through pregnancy and peaks shortly prior to parturition, 
provides the major drive. Glucose availability for the fetus 
increases as increased lipolysis in adipose tissue leads to a shift 
toward fatty acid utilization by maternal tissues. Ketogenesis is 
also accentuated in the postabsorptive state during pregnancy, 
secondary to hormonal effects on the maternal liver cells and 
increased provision of substrate FFA. The increased FFAs contribute 
to the marked reduction in insulin-mediated glucose uptake by 
skeletal muscle characteristic of late pregnancy. At the same time, 
increased insulin production from the previously expanded β cells 
balances this insulin resistance and ensures a consistent flow of 
glucose to the fetus, especially after meals. As a net result, during 
the third trimester, pregnant women without diabetes run slightly 
higher blood glucose and ketone levels than nondiabetic subjects, 
and women with preexisting diabetes that do not adjust therapy 
appropriately can develop severe hyperglycemia. 
 Pregnancy in Women with 
Preexisting Diabetes 
 A. Prevalence 
 The prevalence of pregestational diabetes in 
pregnant women is increasing. A study from Southern California 
showed that between 1999 and 2005, the prevalence of preexisting 
diabetes, age and race/ethnicity adjusted, increased from 0.81/100 
in 1999 to 1.82/100 in 2005 (p for trend <0.001). Significant 
increases were observed in all age groups and all racial/ethnic 
groups. The incidence of type 2 diabetes increasing and in some 
countries, pregnant women with type 2 diabetes now outnumber 
those with type 1 diabetes. 
 In 1988 0.5% of all pregnancies in the United States were com-
plicated by pregestational diabetes and this type accounted for 65% 
of the complicated pregnancies compared with 26% in 1980. 
 B. Maternal, fetal, and neonatal consequences of 
presence of diabetes during pregnancy 
 If diabetes is 
poorly controlled in the first weeks of pregnancy, the risks of spon-
taneous abortion and congenital malformation of the infant are 
increased. Poor glycemic control later in pregnancy is associated 
with still births, fetal macrosomia, polyhydramnios, and neonatal 
hypoglycemia. Preexisting diabetes-related complications, particu-
larly gastroenteropathy, retinopathy, and nephropathy can impact 
both the pregnant woman and the fetus. 
 Congenital anomalies . Poorly controlled diabetes in the 
first weeks of pregnancy raises the risks of spontaneous abor-
tion and congenital anomalies of the infant. The commonest 
anomalies are cardiac, neural tube defects, and genitourinary 
abnormalities. Their incidence compared to the normal popu-
lation and their presumed time of occurrence during embry-
onic development are listed in  Table 17–26 . The rate of 
anomalies is higher in diabetic women with poor preconcep-
tion control. Observational studies demonstrate a linear rela-
tionship between glycated hemoglobin levels and malformation 
rates. From a systematic review of several observational studies, 
it was estimated that the relative risk reduction of congenital 
anomalies for each 1% decrease in HbA 1c ranged from 0.39 to 
0.59. Attending preconception clinics with intensive diabetic 
management instituted prior to conception and continued 
through early pregnancy, results in significant reduction in the 
frequency of anomalies—to rates near the population norms. 
 Polyhdramnios. Later in pregnancy, polyhydramnios, a 
common complication in women with poorly controlled diabetes, 
may lead to preterm delivery. Polyhydramnios also increases the 
risk for placenta abruptio and postpartum uterine atony. 
TABLE 17–26  Congenital malformations in infants 
of diabetic mothers.a
Ratio of 
Incidences 
Diabetic vs 
Control Group
Latest 
Gestational Age 
for Occurrence 
(Weeks After 
Menstruation)
Caudal regression
252
5
Anencephaly
3
6
Spina bifida, hydrocephalus, 
 or other central nervous 
 system defects
2
6
Cardiac anomalies
4
Transposition of great 
 vessels
7
Ventricular septal defect
8
Atrial septal defect
8
Anal/rectal atresia
3
8
Renal anomalies
5
Agenesis
6
7
Cystic kidney
4
7
Ureter duplex
23
7
Situs inversus
84
6
aModified and reproduced, with permission, from Kucera J. Rate and type of congenital 
anomalies among offspring of diabetic women. J Reprod Med. 1971;7:61; and Mills JL, 
Baker L, Goldman AS. Malformations in infants of diabetic mothers occur before the 
seventh gestational week: implications for treatment. Diabetes. 1979;28:292.
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     647
Polyhydramnios is an excess volume of amniotic fluid 
(>1000 mL, often >3000 mL). It is most often associated with 
fetal macrosomia. The excess volume of amniotic fluid is not 
related simply to the concentration of glucose or other solutes in 
amniotic fluid or to excess fetal urine output as measured by 
change in bladder size on ultrasonography. Other possible fac-
tors include decreased fetal swallowing, decidual and amniotic 
fluid prolactin, and as yet unknown determinants of the compli-
cated multicompartmental intrauterine transfer of water. 
Polyhydramnios is rare in women with well-controlled diabetes. 
 Fetal macrosomia. Many fetuses of poorly controlled dia-
betic mothers are  macrosomic (birth weight >90th percentile 
for gestational age), with increased fat stores, increased length, 
and increased abdomen-to-head or thorax-to-head ratios. The 
hypothesis that fetal macrosomia results from the causal chain 
of maternal hyperglycemia → fetal hyperglycemia → fetal 
hyperinsulinemia → fetal macrosomia has been confirmed by 
clinical and experimental studies. Macrosomic infants of dia-
betic mothers have significantly higher concentrations of
C peptide (representing endogenous insulin secretion) in their 
cord sera or amniotic fluid than in those with birth weights 
appropriate for gestational age. Monkey fetuses with insulin-
releasing pellets implanted in utero become macrosomic. 
Other metabolic substrates that cross the placenta, such as 
branched-chain amino acids may also play a role in fetal mac-
rosomia, and transplacental lipids could contribute to fat 
deposition. 
 Prevention of maternal hyperglycemia throughout preg-
nancy can reduce the incidence of macrosomia. The glycemic 
threshold for fetal macrosomia seems to be  postprandial peak 
values above 130 mg/dL (7.2 mmol/L). On the other hand, 
excessively tight glycemic control (average peak postprandial 
blood glucose levels <110 mg/dL [6.1 mmol/L]) can be associ-
ated with insufficient fetal growth and small-for-date infants. 
 Complications of macrosomia include fetopelvic dispropor-
tion leading to shoulder dystocia and its attendant risk for 
brachial plexus injury and humeral and clavicle fractures. The 
neonate with macrosomia is also at increased risk for hypogly-
cemia, hyperbilirubinemia, hypocalcemia, respiratory distress 
syndrome, and polycythemia. 
 Adverse maternal outcomes of difficult vaginal delivery 
include severe perineal lacerations and subsequent urinary and/
or fecal incontinence. 
 Intrauterine growth retardation. The fetus of a woman 
with diabetes of long duration and vascular disease may suffer 
intrauterine fetal growth restriction related to inadequate 
uteroplacental perfusion. All body diameters may be below 
normal on ultrasonographic measurements, but the abdominal 
circumference is especially affected, and oligohydramnios and 
abnormal Doppler flow measurements of the umbilical cord 
are common. In these patients provision of adequate rest, 
meticulous control of hypertension (target <135/85 mm Hg), 
maintenance of normal blood glucose levels, and intensive fetal 
surveillance are all essential for success. 
 Intrauterine death. Prior to the 1970s, the incidence of 
apparently sudden intrauterine fetal demise in the third 
trimester of diabetic pregnancies was at least 5%. Except for 
congenital malformations, the cause of stillbirth is often not 
obvious. The risk is greater with poor diabetic control, and the 
incidence of fetal death exceeds 50%, if ketoacidosis develops 
in the mother. Some instances of fetal demise are associated 
with preeclampsia-eclampsia, which is more common in preg-
nancies complicated by diabetes. Fetal death has also been 
associated with pyelonephritis—this is now largely prevented 
by screening for and treating asymptomatic bacteriuria. Other 
than these known risk factors, one can presume (based on exper-
imental studies) that the combination of fetal hyperglycemia 
and hypoxia leads to acidosis and myocardial dysfunction. 
Good glycemic control in diabetic women greatly reduces the 
risk of stillbirth. 
 Neonatal hypoglycemia . Hypoglycemia is common in the 
first 48 hours after delivery from previously hyperglycemic 
mothers and is defined as blood glucose below 36 mg/dL 
(2.0 mmol/L) regardless of gestational age. The risk is as high 
for infants of mothers with type 2 diabetes as type 1 diabetes. 
Neonatal hypoglycemia is most closely linked to poor maternal 
glucose control and elevated fetal insulin levels during labor and 
delivery, although data from amniotic fluid insulin studies sug-
gest that the more hyperinsulinemic the fetus in the late third 
trimester, the higher the risk of neonatal hypoglycemia. Infants 
of diabetic mothers may also have deficient catecholamine and 
glucagon secretion, and the hypoglycemia may be related to 
diminished hepatic glucose production and oxidation of free 
fatty acids. The symptomatic infant may be lethargic with asso-
ciated apnea, tachypnea, cyanosis, or seizures. Early feeding 
with 10% dextrose in water by bottle or gavage by 1 hour of age 
should be instituted in the at-risk neonate. If this is not success-
ful, treatment with intravenous dextrose solutions is indicated. 
There are usually no long-term sequelae of episodes of neonatal 
hypoglycemia. Keeping maternal blood glucose levels below 
144 mg/dL and tight glycemic control during labor can reduce 
the frequency of neonatal hypoglycemia. 
 Diabetic gastroenteropathy. In early gestation, diabetic 
gastroparesis can severely exacerbate the nausea and vomiting 
of pregnancy (hyperemesis gravidarum), which sometimes 
continues into the third trimester. Drugs stimulating gastric 
motility such as erythromycin may be useful, but many 
patients with this complication require hyperalimentation to 
achieve nutritional intake adequate for fetal development. 
 Diabetic retinopathy . Background diabetic retinopathy 
may develop or progress during pregnancy, but it usually 
regresses postpartum. If background retinopathy is already 
present in early pregnancy, the rate of progression to neovascu-
larization over the course of the pregnancy (proliferative 
 diabetic retinopathy) is 6% if the background retinopathy is 
mild; 18% if it is moderate; and 38% if severe preproliferative 
changes are present. The risk factors for progression to prolif-
erative retinopathy include poor glycemic control before and 
during early pregnancy, rapid improvement in glycemic con-
trol during pregnancy, hypertension, and perhaps the many 
growth factors derived from placental tissue. These risks are an 
important reason to institute intensified preconception man-
agement of diabetes. During pregnancy, sequential ophthalmo-
logic examinations are essential in women with type 1 or type 2 
diabetes, and laser photocoagulation treatment of the retina 
may be necessary. 
 Diabetic nephropathy . The risk of worsening of diabetic 
nephropathy during pregnancy depends on baseline renal func-
tion and the degree of hypertension. Total urinary albumin 
excretion does not increase substantially in normal pregnancy, 
but total urinary protein collections, which obstetricians have 
used to define preeclampsia, may show a twofold increase in 
uncomplicated gestation. Diabetic women with microalbu-
minuria (30-299 mg/24 h) may have worsening of the albu-
minuria during pregnancy and 15% to 45% develop 
the preeclamptic syndrome. Albuminuria usually regresses 
648    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
postpartum. Women with macroalbuminuria (24-hour urinary 
albumin >300 mg) and well-preserved renal function (serum 
creatinine <1.2 mg/dL [<106 μmol/L]; creatinine clearance 
>80 mL/min) at the beginning of pregnancy are likely to have 
moderate decline in renal function during gestation, and 
approximately 6% may have renal failure at follow-up several 
years after pregnancy. The latter figure may not be different 
from the course of diabetic nephropathy in nonpregnant 
women with this level of renal dysfunction. If initial renal func-
tion in pregnancy is impaired (serum creatinine >1.2 mg/dL 
[>106 μmol/L]; creatinine clearance <80 mL/ min), then 
35% to 40% are expected to show further decline during preg-
nancy, and 45% to 50% have renal failure at follow-up several 
years later. Thus, careful preconception counseling is  important 
for these patients and their family members. 
 Management 
 Pregnant women with preexisiting diabetes should ideally receive 
care in a multidisciplinary clinic staffed by obstetricians, endocri-
nologists, diabetes nurse specialists, dietitians, and specialist mid-
wives. There is substantial evidence that this improves the 
outcomes in women with pregestational diabetes. 
 Preconception counseling . All diabetic women of reproduc-
tive age should be counseled to use adequate birth control and 
plan their pregnancies. Before any planned pregnancy, the couple 
should be referred for preconception assessment and counseling. 
There should be assessment and discussion regarding manage-
ment of diabetic complications. Baseline measurements should 
include thyroid function tests including autoantibodies; early 
morning spot urine albumin/creatinine ratio; urinalysis to rule 
out asymptomatic bacteruria; retinal examination; and cardio-
logical assessment in high-risk patients such as those with evi-
dence of microvascular disease. ACE inhibitors and ARBs cannot 
be used during pregnancy. If necessary, alternative antihyperten-
sive agents that are safe for use in pregnancy (methyldopa, 
 nifedipine, amlodipine, labetolol) should be prescribed. Lipid-
lowering therapies are also contraindicated, and lipid abnormalities 
must be managed by dietary measures. There should be discussion 
of risks and expected management strategies in the pregnancy. The 
patient should be given glycemic goals with the aim of achieving 
control as close to normal as possible before conception. 
 Glucose and insulin management . Women are seen every 2 
to 4 weeks in the first and second trimester and then every 1 to 2 
weeks until 36 weeks and then weekly to term. The goal of glucose 
management during pregnancy is to prevent both preprandial and 
postprandial hyperglycemia. Patients with type 2 diabetes on oral 
agents are usually switched to insulin treatment during pregnancy. 
There are small nonrandomized studies suggesting that metformin 
use is safe in the first trimester. The drug does cross the placenta, 
but it has not been associated with teratogenesis. Glyburide does 
not significantly cross the placenta, and studies in gestational dia-
betes suggest that it may be relatively safe late in pregnancy. 
Exposure to glyburide early in pregnancy does not appear to be 
associated with any harm but data are limited. Until randomized 
control studies of metformin and glyburide use at conception and 
early pregnancy are available, caution should be exercised regard-
ing their use early in pregnancy. 
 Perinatal outcome is optimal if patients aim for fasting plasma 
glucose levels below 100 mg/dL (5.6 mmol/L) and postprandial 
levels below 130 mg/dL (7.2 mmol/L). For patients with a history 
of recurrent severe hypoglycemic reactions, somewhat higher 
blood glucose targets should be selected. Self-monitoring of capil-
lary blood glucose should be performed eight or more times a day. 
Occasional monitoring in the middle of the night is recom-
mended to monitor for nocturnal hypoglycemia. There is evidence 
that continuous glucose monitoring systems may be helpful in 
reducing both hyperglycemia and hypoglycemic excursions. These 
systems do not replace self-monitoring of blood glucose but allow 
for fine-tuning of glycemic control and alert the patient to rapid 
changes in glucose levels. One randomized study showed that 
pregnancies using continuous glucose monitoring had better 
 glycemic control in the third trimester and lower risk of macroso-
mia. Clinical trials using continuous glucose monitors during 
pregnancy are currently underway. Confirmation of long-term 
control is provided by sequential measurement of glycosylated 
hemoglobin and fructosamine every 4 to 6 weeks. 
 Patients should see the nutritionist to assess caloric needs and 
get instructed on carbohydrate counting. The caloric intake is based 
on ideal body weight and it is approximated 30 to 35 kcal/kg 
for normal-weight women; about 24 kcal/kg current weight for 
overweight women; and 10 to 15 kcal/kg current weight for obese 
women. All patients should learn how to self-adjust their doses of 
short-acting insulin based on planned carbohydrate load or pre-
meal blood glucose levels. 
 Type 1 patients are typically on a basal bolus insulin regimen 
(see  Table 17–16 ). Currently, NPH is the only intermediate insu-
lin available for basal coverage during pregnancy. Typically a type 
1 patient might require up to three small injections of NPH to 
provide adequate basal coverage using short-acting insulin analogs 
to control the glucose rise with meals. Studies on insulin glargine 
use during pregnancy are limited. Retrospective case control stud-
ies have not shown any adverse effects of glargine use at the time 
of conception and during pregnancy. Many type 1 patients elect 
to use insulin pumps during pregnancy. Since the risk of diabetic 
ketoacidosis is increased with pump use, it is especially critical that 
patients have adequate instruction on the use of insulin pumps 
and can troubleshoot any problems that may arise. 
 Women with type 2 diabetes can be managed with regular 
insulin or short-acting insulin analogs before meals and NPH 
insulin at bedtime. Sometimes NPH insulin is also required in the 
morning. 
 Total insulin requirements vary during gestation. There is 
usually an increase in insulin dose between weeks 3 and 7, then 
a slight decrease between weeks 7 and 15 followed by a gradual 
increase until about week 35. The insulin requirements in type 
1 diabetes at around 35 weeks (1.0 U/kg/24 h) are almost 
double the prepregnancy requirements. Women with type 2 
diabetes usually start out with higher doses and may eventually 
require as much as 1.5 to 2 U/kg/24 h. Exercise can improve 
insulin sensitivity and should be encouraged in type 2 patients. 
The benefits of exercise are less obvious in women with type 1 
diabetes, and there is always a concern about exercise-induced 
hypoglycemia. 
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     649
 Hypoglycemic reactions are more frequent and sometimes 
more severe in early gestation but are a risk at any time during 
pregnancy. Therefore, insulin-treated patients should take snacks 
between meals and at bedtime to prevent hypoglycemia. Family 
members should be instructed in the use of glucagon. Hypoglycemic 
reactions have not been associated with fetal death or congenital 
anomalies, but they pose a risk to maternal health. 
 Fetal monitoring ( Table 17–27 ) . First-trimester ultrasound is 
often obtained to document viability, as the rate of miscarriage is 
higher in women with diabetes, and to estimate gestational age. 
A second-trimester, detailed ultrasound examination of fetal 
anatomy is performed at approximately 18 weeks for detection of 
congenital anomalies. Ultrasound examination in the third trimes-
ter (at 28-32 weeks and 38 weeks) is performed to assess fetal 
growth. 
 Antepartum fetal testing is recommended using fetal move-
ment counting, biophysical profile, nonstress test (NST), and/or 
contraction stress test (CST) initiated at 32 to 34 weeks of gesta-
tion. Most simply, the infrequency of fetal movement as noted in 
regular fetal kick counts (fewer than four per hour) may indicate 
fetal jeopardy. The fetal biophysical profile is a rigorous analysis of 
fetal activity patterns using ultrasound to assess gross body move-
ments, the tone of the limbs, and chest wall motions as well as 
reactivity of the fetal heart rate (FHR) and the volume of amniotic 
fluid. The presence of FHR accelerations and long-range variabil-
ity on the NST and the absence of late decelerations (lower FHR 
persisting after the contraction subsides) on the CST indicate that 
the fetus is well oxygenated. Generally, the NST and CST are 
sensitive screening tests, and abnormal results of FHR monitoring 
in these tests overestimate the diagnosis of fetal distress. Therefore, 
it is wise to obtain additional evidence of fetal jeopardy (by bio-
physical ultrasonographic assessment) before cesarean delivery is 
recommended in preterm pregnancies. In term gestation with 
abnormal fetal testing, there is little to be gained by continuing 
the pregnancy. In complicated patients with intrauterine growth 
retardation, olighohydramnios, preeclampsia, or poor blood glu-
cose control, testing may start as early as 26 weeks and is per-
formed more frequently. 
 Timing of delivery. Unless maternal or fetal complications 
arise, the goal for delivery in diabetic women should be 38 to 
41 weeks in order to reduce neonatal morbidity from preterm deliver-
ies. On the other hand, the obstetrician may wish to induce labor 
before 39 weeks, if there is concern about increasing fetal weight. 
Before a preterm delivery decision (<37 weeks) is made or delivery 
is considered in women with poor glycemic control at 37 to 
38 weeks of gestation, fetal pulmonary maturity should be deter-
mined. Tests for maturity using amniocentesis assess risk of neonatal 
respiratory distress syndrome and include the lecithin-sphingomyelin 
(L/S) ratio, phosphatidylglycerol, and other biochemical or 
physical assays of surfactant activity. In pregnancies complicated 
by hyperglycemia, fetal hyperinsulinemia can lead to low 
pulmonary surfactant apoprotein production. The lowest risk of 
respiratory distress syndrome is attained by delaying delivery (if 
possible) until 38 to 41 weeks and minimizing the need for cesarean 
sections. 
 Route of delivery. Once fetal lung maturity is likely, the route 
of delivery must be selected based on the usual obstetric indica-
tions. If the fetus seems large (>4200 g) on clinical and ultrasono-
graphic examination of diabetic women, cesarean section probably 
should be performed because of the possibility of shoulder dysto-
cia and birth trauma. Otherwise, induction of labor is reasonable, 
because maternal and peripartum risks are fewer following vaginal 
delivery. Once labor is underway, continuous FHR monitoring is 
essential. Maternal blood glucose levels greater than 150 mg/dL 
(8.3 mmol/L) can be associated with intrapartum fetal hypoxia. 
 Insulin and glucose management during labor and delivery . 
It is important to avoid maternal hyperglycemia during labor 
because it increases the risk for fetal acidemia and neonatal hypo-
glycemia. The goal is to maintain glucose levels between 70 and 
110 mg/dL (3.9-6.1 mmol/L). Maternal glucose levels above 
180 mg/dL (10 mmol/L) are consistently associated with neonatal 
hypoglycemia. During the latent phase of labor, maternal meta-
bolic demands are fairly stable but there is significant energy 
expenditure during active labor and delivery and insulin needs are 
minimal. Glucose control is typically managed using intravenous 
dextrose (at 100-125 mL/h) and insulin infusions ( Table 17–28 ). 
 After delivery of the placenta, the insulin-resistant state rapidly 
disappears, and insulin requirements are close to prepregnancy 
levels. Type 1 or type 2 patients who were previously on insulin 
can go back to their usual prepregnancy insulin regimens and 
doses once they start eating. Type 2 patients who were on oral 
agents prepregnancy frequently do not require any medication 
during the first 24 to 48 hours postpartum. They can stay on 
insulin while breastfeeding or go on metformin or glyburide 
which are safe while breastfeeding. 
 Neonatal management. Planning for the care of the infant 
should be started prior to delivery, with participation by the 
pediatrician or neonatologist in decisions about timing and man-
agement of delivery. In complicated cases, the pediatrician must 
TABLE 17–27  Schedule of obstetric tests and 
procedures.
Risk Based on Glycemic Control, 
Presence of Vascular Disease
Procedure
Low Risk
High Risk
Ultrasound to date gestation
8-12 wk
8-12 wk
Prenatal genetic diagnosis
As needed
As needed
Targeted perinatal ultrasound; 
 fetal echocardiography
18-22 wk
18-22 wk
Fetal kick counts
28 wk
28 wk
Ultrasound for fetal growth
28 and 37 wka
Every 3-8 wk
Antepartum FHR monitoring, 
 backup with biophysical 
 profile
36 wk, weekly
27 wk, 1-3 per 
wk
Amniocentesis for lung
…
35-38 wk
Induction of labor
41 wkb
35-38 wk
aNot needed in normoglycemic, diet-treated women with gestational diabetes mellitus.
bEarlier for obstetric reasons or for impending fetal macrosomia.
650    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
be in attendance to learn about antenatal problems, to assess the 
need for resuscitation, to identify major congenital anomalies, and 
to plan initial therapy for the sick infant if required. Infants of 
mothers with poorly controlled diabetes have an increased risk of 
respiratory distress syndrome. Possible reasons include abnormal 
production of pulmonary surfactant or connective tissue changes 
leading to decreased pulmonary compliance. However, in recent 
years, the incidence of respiratory distress syndrome in these preg-
nancies has declined from 24% to 5%, probably related to better 
maternal glycemic control, selected use of amniotic fluid tests, and 
delivery of most infants at term. Other possible problems in 
infants of diabetic mothers include hypocalcemia less than 7 mg/dL 
(1.75 mmol/L), hyperbilirubinemia greater than 15 mg/dL (256 
μmol/L), polycythemia (central hematocrit >70%), and poor 
feeding. These complications are presumably related to fetal 
hyperglycemia and hyperinsulinemia and probably to intermittent 
low-level fetal hypoxia. Improved control of the maternal diabetic 
state has reduced their incidence. 
 Gestational Diabetes 
 Gestational diabetes (GDM) is defined as glucose intolerance 
that develops or is first recognized during pregnancy. As insulin 
resistance increases during pregnancy, euglycemia depends on a 
compensatory increase in insulin secretion. Failure to compensate 
with increased insulin secretion leads to gestational diabetes. As 
the increase in insulin resistance is greatest in the third trimester, 
GDM usually develops going into this period. The prevalence of 
GDM in a population is reflective of the prevalence of type 2 
diabetes in that population. In low-risk populations, such as 
those found in Sweden, the prevalence in population-based stud-
ies is lower than 2% even when universal testing is offered, while 
studies in high-risk populations, such as the Native American 
Cree, Northern Californian Hispanics, and Northern Californian 
Asians, reported prevalence rates ranging from 4.9% to 12.8%. 
Other risk factors include a history of macrosomia (birth weight 
>4000 g), polycystic ovarian syndrome, essential hypertension or 
pregnancy-related hypertension, history of spontaneous abortions 
and unexplained still births, family history of diabetes, obesity, 
age older than 25 years, and history of gestational diabetes 
( Table 17–29 ). 
 Women with GDM are at increased risk for urinary tract infec-
tions, pyelonephritis, asymptomatic bacteriuria, and preeclampsia. 
There is a 10% risk of polyhydramnios. Fetal risks of poor glucose 
control include stillbirths and macrosomia. There is no increase in 
risk for congenital anomalies since the glucose intolerance devel-
ops later in pregnancy. 
 Strategies for diagnosis are outlined in  Table 17–30 . Currently, 
international consensus is lacking regarding the diagnostic criteria 
for GDM. The 100 g 3-hour OGTT test is commonly used in the 
United States and the 75 g 2-hour WHO test is used in many 
other countries. The risk assessment for GDM ( see Table 17–29 ) 
should be performed at the first prenatal visit. Those women at 
high risk should undergo OGTT testing as soon as feasible. If the 
test is negative, then they should be retested at 24 to 28 weeks of 
gestation. A fasting plasma glucose of ≥126 mg/dL or random 
glucose of ≥200 mg/dL confirmed on repeat testing is diagnostic 
of diabetes and negates the need to perform a glucose challenge 
test. Lower risk women are screened for GDM using a two-step 
protocol performed at 24 to 28 weeks. First, a glucose challenge test is 
performed using a 50 g glucose load. The patient does not have to 
be fasting. A 1-hour plasma glucose value of 140 mg/dL (7.8 
mmol/L) or greater identifies approximately 80% of women with 
GDM; decreasing the cutoff value to 130 mg/dL (7.2 mmol/L) 
TABLE 17–28  Protocol for intrapartum insulin 
infusion.a
Intravenous Fluids
If blood glucose is >130 mg/dL (>7.2 mmol/L), infuse mainline Ringer 
 lactate at a rate of 125 mL/h.
If blood glucose is <130 mg/dL (<7.2 mmol/L), infuse mainline Ringer 
 lactate to keep vein open and begin Ringer lactate and 5% dextrose 
 at a rate of 125 mL/h controlled by infusion pump.
Insulin Infusion
Mix 100 U of regular human insulin (U100) in 100 mL NaCl 0.9% and 
 piggyback to mainline. The concentration is 1 U/mL. Adjust 
 intravenous insulin hourly according to the following table when 
 the blood glucose is >70 mg/dL (>3.9 mmol/L). Target blood 
 glucose 70 to 110 mg/dL.
Blood 
Glucose in 
mg/dL(mmol/L)
Type 1
Type 2
Gestational 
Diabetes
Custom
<70 (<3.9)
No 
insulin
No insu-
lin
No insulin
71-90 (3.9-5)
0.5 U/h
No insu-
lin
No insulin
91-110 (5.1-6.1)
1
1 U/h
No insulin
111-130 (6.2-7.2)
1.5
2
1 U/h
131-150 (7.3-8.3)
2
3
2
151-170 (8.4-9.4)
2.5
4
3
171-190 
 (9.5-10.6)
3
5
4
>190 (>10.6)
Call MD and check urine ketones
aProtocol useful also for diabetic pregnant women who are “NPO” or being treated 
with beta-adrenergic tocolysis or corticosteroids. The scale dosages may need to be 
doubled for the latter. Boluses of short-acting insulin must be used to cover meals.
TABLE 17–29  Risk factors for gestational 
diabetes mellitus.
Maternal age >37 y
Ethnicity
 Indian subcontinent—11-fold
 Southeast Asian—eightfold
 Arab/Mediterranean—sixfold
 Afro-Caribbean—threefold
Prepregnancy weight >80 kg or BMI>28 kg/m2
Family history of diabetes in first-degree relative
Previous macrosomia/polyhydramnios
Previous unexplained stillbirth
Polycystic ovarian syndrome
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     651
increases the sensitivity to approximately 90%. Women with the 
positive glucose challenge test should undergo a 3-hour 100 g oral 
glucose tolerance test within the week. 
 Although there is continuing debate regarding universal 
screening, recent studies are supportive of this position. An obser-
vational study of Caucasian women, where all were tested with the 
oral glucose tolerance test, found that the prevalence of GDM 
among women with no risk factors was 2.8%. Excluding this low-
risk group would still require 80% of women to be tested and 
would miss 10% of all cases of GDM. The Hyperglycemia and 
Pregnancy Outcome (HAPO) study reported a continuous rela-
tionship between glucose concentration with the 28-week oral 
glucose tolerance test and neonatal adiposity, cesarean sections, 
neonatal hypoglycemia, premature delivery, shoulder dystocia, 
need for intensive neonatal care, hyperbilirubinemia, and preec-
lampsia. A study by Landon and colleagues of women with mild 
GDM on a 100 g 3-hour glucose tolerance test found that treat-
ment reduced the risk of fetal overgrowth, shoulder dystocia, 
cesarean delivery, and hypertensive disorders. The ADA policy 
states that screening may be omitted in low-risk women. The 
United States Preventive Services Task Force on Preventive Health 
Care has concluded that there is not enough evidence to support 
or deny universal screening for GDM. Women who have a history 
of GDM with previous pregnancy should undergo preconception 
counseling similar to those patients with pregestational diabetes. 
They should begin to monitor their glucose levels when they begin 
to try to conceive or as soon as their new pregnancy is confirmed. 
These women do not need retesting for GDM. 
 HbA 1c values are helpful for assessment of pregestational dia-
betes but are not helpful for management of GDM where they 
are normal. 
 The goal of therapy is prevention of fasting and postprandial 
hyperglycemia. The Australian Carbohydrate Intolerance Study in 
Pregnant Women (ACHOIS) trial found that intervention to 
lower glucose levels to less than 100 mg/dL before meals and less 
than 126 mg/dL 2 hours after meals reduced the rate of serious 
perinatal outcomes (defined as death, shoulder dystocia, bone 
fracture, and nerve palsy) from 4% to 1%. After diagnosis, the 
patient should be placed on a diabetic meal plan modified for 
pregnancy. The caloric intake is based on ideal body weight—25 
to –35 kcal/kg ideal weight, 40% to 55% carbohydrate, 20% 
protein, and 25% to 40% fat. Calories are distributed over three 
meals and three snacks (see  Table 17–25 ). Most patients can be 
taught to count their carbohydrates and to read food labels. This 
caloric distribution will help 75% to 80% of patients to become 
normoglycemic. Patients should also be encouraged to participate 
in moderate aerobic exercise such as walking or antenatal exercise 
classes, of at least 15 to 30-minutes duration, three or more times 
a week. In normal pregnancy, expected weight gain varies accord-
ing to the prepregnancy weight. The Fifth International Workshop-
Conference on GDM recommends a relatively small gain during 
pregnancy of 7 kg (15 lb) for obese women (BMI ≥30 kg/m 2 ) and 
a proportionally greater weight gain (up to 18 kg or 40 lb) for 
underweight women (BMI <18.5 kg/m 2 ) at the onset of preg-
nancy. However, there are no data on optimal weight gain for 
women with GDM. 
 If fasting capillary blood glucose levels exceed 90 to 100 mg/dL 
(5-5.6 mmol/L) or if 1-hour or 2-hour postprandial glucose values 
are consistently greater, respectively, than 130 or 105 mg/dL 
(7.2 or 5.8 mmol/L), therapy is begun with insulin. The total 
insulin dose varies from 0.7 to 2 U/kg. NPH is the preferred long-
acting insulin. Insulin glargine and insulin detemir have not been 
well studied. Insulin aspart or lispro and regular insulin can be 
used. Hypoglycemia is a risk factor with aggressive management of 
glucose levels with insulin. Patients and family members should be 
instructed on monitoring for and treating hypoglycemia. 
 Metformin and glyburide can be considered as alternative 
options to insulin therapy. Metformin does cross the placenta but 
has not been associated with teratogenesis. The advantage of this 
drug is that it does not result in hypoglycemia. An open label study 
(the MiG trial) of 751 women with GDM at 20 to 33 weeks’ 
gestation randomized to either metformin or insulin did not 
show a difference in primary composite outcome of neonatal 
complications. Forty-six percent of the subjects on metformin 
did, however, require supplemental insulin. Glyburide does not 
significantly cross the placenta. Langer and colleagues random-
ized 404 women with GDM at 11 to 33 weeks’ gestation to 
 glyburide therapy or insulin treatment. There was no significant 
difference in fetal outcomes in the two groups—large for gesta-
tional infants, macrosomia, neonatal ICU admission, or fetal 
abnormalities. Target glycemic control was achieved in 88% of 
patients on insulin and 82% on glyburide. There was significant 
reduction in maternal hypoglycemic episodes in the glyburide 
group compared to the insulin group (2% vs 20%). There were 
some differences in neonatal outcomes such as more neonatal 
hypoglycemia in the glyburide arm. The study was not adequately 
TABLE 17–30  Screening and diagnosis of 
gestational diabetes.
Perform blood glucose testing at 24-28 wk
Two-step protocol:
 A. Glucose challenge test: 1-h plasma glucose after 50 g 
  
glucose load.
  
≥140 mg/dL (≥7.8 mmol/L) identifies ~80 of women with GDM; 
  ≥130 mg/dL (≥7.2 mmol/L) increases sensitivity to ~90%.
 B. 100 g OGTT: If a woman meets or exceeds threshold on glucose 
  
challenge test then perform fasting diagnostic 100 g OGTT within 
  
a week. The test is performed after an at least 8-h overnight 
  
fast and after at least 3 d of unrestricted diet (≥150 g 
  
carbohydrate per day). Subject should be seated and should not 
  
smoke during test.
The test is positive if two of the following glucose levels are found.
 Fasting:       ≥95 mg/dL (≥5.3 mmol/L)
 1 h:              ≥180 mg/dL (≥10 mmol/L)
 2 h:              ≥155 mg/dL (≥ 8.6 mmol/L)
 3 h:               ≥140 mg/dL (≥7.8 mmol/L)
If one value is abnormal, repeat test in 4 wk
 One step protocol:
  Perform diagnostic 100 g OGTT testing as soon as feasible. If 
  negative, repeat at 24-28 wk.
Adapted from Summary and Recommendations, Fourth International Workshop-
Conference on Gestational Diabetes Mellitus. Diabetes Care. 1998;21(suppl 2):B162.
652    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
powered, however, to determine the statistical significance of 
these differences. 
 Patients are usually scheduled for follow-up visits every 1 to 
2 weeks. A 24-hour urine collection may be performed to establish 
baseline level of proteinuria and creatinine clearance due to the 
higher likelihood of preeclampsia. It is not necessary to routinely 
perform ophthalmic examinations in these patients unless there is 
a strong suspicion of preexisting type 2 diabetes mellitus. Fetal 
monitoring is warranted in those patients who are not well con-
trolled, requiring insulin therapy, or who have other complica-
tions of pregnancy. The most commonly used test is a twice-weekly 
nonstress test. 
 If blood glucose levels are close to normal and there are no 
other complications, the delivery can go to term. It is generally 
recommended that the pregnancy does not go beyond term. Most 
patients do not require insulin during delivery. Blood glucose 
levels should be monitored the following day to ensure that the 
patient has reverted to normoglycemia. About 95% of patients 
return to normal glucose status. 
 Progression to type 2 diabetes later in life occurs in 5% to 50% 
of women with gestational diabetes. The wide range in incidence 
is influenced by body weight, family history, glucose levels, and 
the need for insulin treatment during pregnancy—and the choice 
of contraception and lifestyle after pregnancy. All patients with 
gestational diabetes should undergo a 75 g 2-hour glucose toler-
ance test at 6 to 10 weeks after delivery to guide future medical 
management. Follow-up protocols after pregnancy and criteria for 
the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus in the nonpregnant state are 
presented in  Table 17–11 . 
 REFERENCES 
 The Endocrine Pancreas 
 Andralojc KM, Mercalli A, Nowak KW, et al. Ghrelin-producing epsilon cells in 
the developing and adult human pancreas.  Diabetologia . 2009;52:486. 
[PMID: 19096824] 
 Baggio LL, Drucker DJ. Biology of incretins: GLP-1 and GIP.  Gastroenterology . 
2007;132:2131. [PMID: 17498508] 
 Cabrera O, Berman DM, Kenyon NS, et al. The unique cytoarchitecture of 
human pancreatic islets has implications for islet cell function.  Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA . 2006;103:2334. [PMID: 16461897] 
 Gross DN, van den Heuvel AP, Birnbaum MJ. The role of FOXO in the regulation 
of metabolism.  Oncogene . 2008;27:2320. [PMID: 18391974] 
 Hiriart M, Aguilar-Bryan L. Channel regulation of glucose sensing in the pancreatic 
beta-cell.  Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab . 2008;295:E1298. [PMID: 
18940941] 
 Kieffer TJ, McIntosh CH, Pederson RA. Degradation of glucose-dependent insulino-
tropic polypeptide and truncated glucagon-like peptide 1  in vitro and  in vivo by 
dipeptidyl peptidase IV.  Endocrinology . 1995;136:3585. [PMID: 7628397] 
 McCarthy MI, Hattersley AT. Learning from molecular genetics: novel insights 
arising from the definition of genes for monogenic and type 2 diabetes. 
 Diabetes . 2008;57:2889. [PMID: 18971436] 
 Meier JJ, Butler AE, Saisho Y, et al. Beta-cell replication is the primary mechanism 
subserving the postnatal expansion of beta-cell mass in humans.  Diabetes . 
2008;57:1584. [PMID: 18334605] 
 Ohneda K, Ee H, German M. Regulation of insulin gene transcription.  Semin Cell 
Dev Biol . 2000;11:227. [PMID: 10966856] 
 Oliver-Krasinski JM, Stoffers DA. On the origin of the beta cell.  Genes Dev . 
2008;22:1998. [PMID: 18676806] 
 Rorsman P, Renstrom E. Insulin granule dynamics in pancreatic beta cells. 
 Diabetologia . 2003;46:1029. [PMID: 12879249] 
 Sinclair EM, Drucker DJ. Proglucagon-derived peptides: mechanisms of action 
and therapeutic potential.  Physiology (Bethesda) . 2005;20:357. [PMID: 
16174875] 
 Smith, SB, Qu, HQ, Taleb, N, et al. Rfx6 directs islet formation and insulin pro-
duction in mice and humans.  Nature . 2010;463:775. [PMID: 20148032] 
 Steinberg GR, Kemp BE. AMPK in health and disease.  Physiol Rev . 2009;89:1025. 
[PMID: 19584320] 
 Tontonoz P, Spiegelman BM. Fat and beyond: the diverse biology of PPAR 
gamma.  Annu Rev Biochem . 2008;77:289. [PMID: 18518822] 
 Vaxillaire M, Froguel P. Monogenic diabetes in the young, pharmacogenetics and 
relevance to multifactorial forms of type 2 diabetes.  Endocr Rev . 2008;29:254. 
[PMID: 18436708] 
 Wilson, ME, Scheel, D, German, MS. Gene expression cascades in pancreatic 
development.  Mech Dev . 2003;120:65. [PMID: 12490297] 
 Diagnosis, Classification, and Pathophysiology 
of Diabetes Mellitus 
 Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes Study Group. Effects of inten-
sive glucose lowering in type 2 diabetes.  N Engl J Med . 2008;358:2545. 
[PMID: 18539917] 
 ADVANCE Collaborative Group. Intensive blood glucose control and vascular 
outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes.  N Engl J Med . 2008;358:2560. 
[PMID: 18539916] 
 American Diabetes Association. Diagnosis and classification of diabetes mellitus. 
 Diabetes Care . 2010;33(suppl 1):S62. [PMID: 20042775] 
 Bell GI, Polonsky KS. Diabetes mellitus and genetically programmed defects in 
beta-cell function.  Nature . 2001;414:788. [PMID: 11742410] 
 Biddinger SB, Kahn CR. From mice to men: insights into the insulin resistance 
syndromes.  Annu Rev Physiol . 2006;68:123. [PMID: 16460269] 
 Bluestone, JA, Herold, K, Eisenbarth, G. Genetics, pathogenesis and clinical inter-
ventions in type 1 diabetes.  Nature . 2010;464:1293. [PMID: 20432533] 
 Butler, AE, Janson, J, Bonner-Weir, S, et al. Beta-cell deficit and increased beta-cell 
apoptosis in humans with type 2 diabetes.  Diabetes . 2003;52:102. [PMID: 
12502499] 
 Cohen RM, Holmes YR, Chenier TC, Joiner CH. Discordance between HbA1c 
and fructosamine: evidence for a glycosylation gap and its relation to diabetic 
nephropathy.  Diab Care . 2003;26:16. [PMID: 12502674] 
 Diabetes Prevention Trial, Type 1 Diabetes Study Group. Effects of insulin in rela-
tives of patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus.  N Engl J Med . 2002;346:1685. 
[PMID: 12037147] 
 Duckworth W, Abraira C, Moritz T, et al. VADT Investigators. Glucose control 
and vascular complications in veterans with type 2 diabetes.  N Engl J Med . 
2009;360:129. [PMID: 19092145] 
 Eisenbarth GS, Gottlieb PA. Autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes.  N Engl J 
Med . 2004;350:2068. [PMID: 15141045] 
 Fonseca, SG, Fukuma, M, Lipson, KL, et al. Wfs1 is a novel component of the 
unfolded protein response and maintains homeostasis of the endoplasmic 
reticulum in pancreatic beta-cells.  J Biol Chem . 2005;280:39609. [PMID: 
16195229] 
 Gaede P, Lund-Andersen H, Parving HH, Pedersen O. Effect of a multifactorial 
intervention on mortality in type 2 diabetes.  N Engl J Med . 2008;358:580.
[PMID: 18256393] 
 Gaede P, Vedel P, Larsen N, Jensen GV, Parving HH, Pedersen O. Multifactorial 
intervention and cardiovascular disease in patients with type 2 diabetes. 
 N Engl J Med . 2003;348:383. [PMID: 12556541] 
 Gallagher, EJ, LeRoith, D, Karnieli, E. The metabolic syndrome—from insulin 
resistance to obesity and diabetes.  Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am . 
2008;37:559. [PMID: 18775352] 
 Gandhi, GY, Basu, R, Dispenzieri, A, et al. Endocrinopathy in POEMS syndrome: 
the Mayo Clinic experience.  Mayo Clin Proc . 2007;82:836. [PMID: 
17605964] 
 Gottlieb PA, Eisenbarth GS. Diagnosis and treatment of pre-insulin dependent 
diabetes.  Annu Rev Med . 1998;49:391. [PMID: 9509271] 
 Greeley, SA, Tucker, SE, Worrell, HI, et al. Update in neonatal diabetes.  Curr Opin 
Endocrinol Diabetes Obes . 2010;17:13. [PMID: 19952737] 
 Harris R, Donahue K, Rathore SS, Frame P, Woolf SH, Lohr KN. Screening adults 
for type 2 diabetes: a review of the evidence for the U.S. Preventive Services 
Task Force.  Ann Intern Med . 2003;138:215. [PMID: 12558362] 
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     653
 Herold KC, Hagopian W, Auger JA, et al. Anti-CD3 monoclonal antibody in new-
onset type 1 diabetes mellitus.  N Engl J Med . 2002;346:1692. [PMID: 
12037148] 
 Holman RR, Paul SK, Bethel MA, Matthews DR, Neil HA. 10-year follow-up of 
intensive glucose control in type 2 diabetes.  N Engl J Med . 2008;359:1577. 
[PMID: 18784090] 
 Holman RR, Paul SK, Bethel MA, Neil HA, Matthews DR. Long-term follow-up 
after tight control of blood pressure in type 2 diabetes.  N Engl J Med . 
2008;359:1565. [PMID: 18784091] 
 Hull, RL, Westermark, GT, Westermark, P, et al. Islet amyloid: a critical entity in 
the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2004;89:3629. 
[PMID: 15292279] 
 International Expert Committee. International Expert Committee report on the 
role of the A1C assay in the diagnosis of diabetes.  Diab Care . 2009;32:1327 
[PMID: 19502545] 
 Knowler WC, Barrett-Connor E, Fowler SE, et al. Reduction in the incidence of 
type 2 diabetes with lifestyle intervention or metformin.  N Engl J Med . 
2002;346:393. [PMID: 11832527] 
 Kahn, R, Buse, J, Ferrannini, E, et al. The metabolic syndrome: time for a criti-
cal appraisal: joint statement from the American Diabetes Association and 
the European Association for the Study of Diabetes.  Diab Care . 
2005;28:2289. [PMID: 16123508] 
 Kahn SE. The relative contributions of insulin resistance and beta-cell dysfunction 
to the pathophysiology of type 2 diabetes.  Diabetologia . 2003;46:3. [PMID: 
12637977] 
 Monajemi, H, Stroes, E, Hegele, RA, et al. Inherited lipodystrophies and the 
metabolic syndrome.  Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) . 2007;67:479. [PMID: 
17561981] 
 Nathan DM, Kuenen J, Borg R, Zheng H, Schoenfeld D, Heine RJ. A1c-Derived 
Average Glucose Study Group. Translating the A1C assay into estimated 
average glucose values.  Diab Care . 2008;31(8):1473. [PMID: 18540046] 
 Ohkubo Y, Kishikawa H, Araki E, et al. Intensive insulin therapy prevents the 
progression of diabetic microvascular complications in Japanese patients 
with non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus: a randomized prospective 
6-year study.  Diab Res Clin Prac t. 1995;28:103. [PMID: 7587918] 
 Olefsky JM, Glass CK. Macrophages, inflammation, and insulin resistance.  Annu 
Rev Physiol . 2010;72:219. [PMID: 20148674] 
 O’Rahilly S. Human genetics illuminates the paths to metabolic disease.  Nature . 
2009;462:307. [PMID: 19924209] 
 Savage, DB, Petersen, KF, Shulman, GI. Disordered lipid metabolism and the 
pathogenesis of insulin resistance.  Physiol Rev . 2007;87:507. [PMID: 
17429039] 
 Shichiri M, Kishikawa H, Ohkubo Y, Wake N. Long term results of the Kumamoto 
Study on optimal diabetes control in type 2 diabetic patients.  Diab Care . 
2000;23(suppl 2):B21. [PMID: 10860187] 
 Simha V, Garg A. Inherited lipodystrophies and hypertriglyceridemia.  Curr Opin 
Lipidol . 2009;20:300. [PMID: 19494770] 
 Stumvoll M, Gerich J. Clinical features of insulin resistance and beta cell dysfunc-
tion and the relationship to type 2 diabetes.  Clin Lab Med . 2001;21:31. 
[PMID: 11321936] 
 The Diabetes Control and Complications Trial Research Group. The effect of 
intensive treatment of diabetes on the development and progression of long-
term complications in insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.  N Engl J Med . 
1993;329:977. [PMID: 8366922] 
 The Diabetes Control and Complications Trial/Epidemiology of Diabetes 
Interventions and Complications Research Group. Retinopathy and neph-
ropathy in patients with type 1 diabetes four years after a trial of intensive 
therapy.  N Engl J Med . 2000;342:381. [PMID: 10666428] 
 The Diabetes Control and Complications Trial/Epidemiology of Diabetes 
Interventions and Complications (DCCT/EDIC) Study Research Group. 
Intensive diabetes treatment and cardiovascular disease in patients with type 
1 diabetes.  N Engl J Med . 2005;353:2643. [PMID: 16371630] 
 The Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation Continuous Glucose Monitoring 
Study Group. Continuous glucose monitoring and intensive treatment of 
type 1 diabetes.  N Engl J Med . 2008;359:1464. [PMID: 18779236] 
 Turnbull FM, Abraira C, Anderson RJ, et al. Intensive glucose control and macro-
vascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes.  Diabetologia . 2009;52:2288. [PMID: 
19655124] 
 Turner RC, Cull CA, Frighi V, Holman RR. Glycemic control with diet, sulfonylu-
rea, metformin, or insulin in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: progres-
sive requirement for multiple therapies (UKPDS 49).  JAMA . 1999;281:2005. 
[PMID: 10359389] 
UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) Group. Effect of intensive blood- 
glucose control with metformin on complications in overweight patients 
with type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 34).  Lancet . 1998;352:854. 
UK Prospective Diabetes Study Group. Efficacy of atenolol and captopril in reduc-
ing risk of acrovascular and microvascular complications in type 2 diabetes: 
UKPDS 39. BMJ. 1998;317:713. [PMID: 9732338]
UK Prospective Diabetes Study Group. Intensive blood-glucose control with sul-
phonylureas or insulin compared with conventional treatment and risk 
ofcomplications in patients with type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 33). Lancet 
.1998;352:837. [PMID: 9742976]
UK Prospective Diabetes Study Group. Tight blood pressure control and risk of 
macrovascular and microvascular complications in type 2 diabetes 
(UKPDS38). BMJ. 1998;317:703. [PMID: 732337]
 U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement. Screening for 
type 2 diabetes mellitus in adults.  Ann Intern Med . 2008;148:846. [PMID: 
18519930] 
 Vaxillaire M, Froguel P. Monogenic diabetes in the young, pharmacogenetics and 
relevance to multifactorial forms of type 2 diabetes.  Endocr Rev . 2008;29:254. 
[PMID: 18436708] 
 Wajchenberg BL. Subcutaneous and visceral adipose tissue: their relation to the 
metabolic syndrome.  Endocr Rev . 2000;21:697. [PMID: 11133069] 
 Wenzlau, JM, Frisch, LM, Gardner, TJ, et al. Novel antigens in type 1 diabetes: the 
importance of znt8.  Curr Diab Rep . 2009;9:105. [PMID: 19323954] 
 Treatment of Diabetes Mellitus 
 Ahrén B. Clinical results of treating type 2 diabetic patients with sitagliptin, vilda-
gliptin or saxagliptin—diabetes control and potential adverse events.  Best 
Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2009;23:487. [PMID: 19748066] 
 American Diabetes Association. Standards of medical care in diabetes—2010. 
 Diab Care . 2010;33(suppl 1):S11. [PMID: 20042772] 
 American Diabetes Association. Physical activity/exercise and diabetes mellitus 
(position statement).  Diab Care . 2004;27(suppl 1):S58. [PMID: 
14693927] 
 Bode BW, Tamborlane WV, Davidson PC. Insulin pump therapy in the 21st cen-
tury. Strategies for successful use in adults, adolescents and children with 
diabetes.  Postgrad Med . 2002;111:69. [PMID: 12040864] 
 Bolli GB. Physiological insulin replacement in type 1 diabetes mellitus.  Exp Clin 
Endocrinol Diabetes . 2001;109(suppl 2):5317. [PMID: 11723567] 
 Boner G, Cao Z, Cooper ME. Combination antihypertensive therapy in the treat-
ment of diabetic nephropathy.  Diabetes Technol Ther . 2002;4:313. [PMID: 
12165170] 
 Brunkhorst FM, Engel C, Bloos F, et al. German Competence Network Sepsis 
(SepNet). Intensive insulin therapy and pentastarch resuscitation in severe 
sepsis.  N Engl J Med . 2008;358:125. [PMID: 18184958] 
 Coursin DB, Connery LE, Ketzler JT. Perioperative diabetic and hyperglycemic 
management issues.  Crit Care Med . 2004;32(4 suppl):S116. [PMID: 
15064670] 
 Cryer PE. The barrier of hypoglycemia in diabetes. Diabetes. 2008;57:3169. 
[PMID: 19033403] 
 Daneman D. Type 1 diabetes.  Lancet . 2006;367(9513):847. [PMID: 16530579] 
 Del Pilar Solano M, Goldberg RB. Management of diabetic dyslipidemia. 
 Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am . 2005;34:1. [PMID: 15752919] 
 DeWitt DE, Hirsch IB. Outpatient insulin therapy in type 1 and type 2 diabetes 
mellitus: scientific review.  JAMA . 2003;289:2254. [PMID: 12734137] 
 Drucker DJ, Sherman SI, Gorelick FS, Bergenstal RM, Sherwin RS, Buse JB. 
Incretin-based therapies for the treatment of type 2 diabetes: evaluation of 
the risks and benefits.  Diab Care . 2010;33:428. [PMID: 20103558] 
 Franz MJ, Bantle JP, Beebe CA, et al. Evidence-based nutrition principles and 
recommendations for the treatment and prevention of diabetes and related 
complications.  Diab Care . 2002;25:148. [PMID: 11772915] 
 Gaglia JL, Shapiro AM, Weir GC. Islet transplantation: progress and challenge. 
 Arch Med Res . 2005;36:273. [PMID: 15925017] 
654    CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus
 Gandhi GY,  Nuttall GA,  Abel MD, et al. Intensive intraoperative insulin therapy 
versus conventional glucose management during cardiac surgery: a random-
ized trial.  Ann Intern Med . 2007;146:233. [PMID: 17310047] 
 Gilliam LK, Hirsch IB. Practical aspects of real-time continuous glucose monitor-
ing.  Diabetes Technol Ther . 2009;11(suppl 1):S75. [PMID: 19469681] 
 Gray CS, Hildreth AJ, Sandercock PA, et al. Glucose-potassium-insulin infusions 
in the management of post-stroke hyperglycaemia: the UK Glucose Insulin 
in Stroke Trial (GIST-UK).  Lancet Neurol . 2007;6:397. [PMID: 17434094] 
 Grundy SM, Cleeman JI, Merz CN, et al. National Heart, Lung, and Blood 
Institute, American College of Cardiology Foundation, American Heart 
Association: implications of recent clinical trials for the National Cholesterol 
Education Program Adult Treatment Panel III guidelines.  Circulation . 
2004;110:227. [PMID: 15249516] 
 Hirsch IB. Insulin analogues.  N Engl J Med . 2005;352:174. [PMID: 15647580] 
 Holst JJ, Gromada J. Role of incretin hormones in the regulation of insulin secre-
tion in diabetic and nondiabetic humans.  Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab . 
2004;287:E199. [PMID: 15271645] 
 Jeitler K, Horvath K, Berghold A, et al. Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion 
versus multiple daily insulin injections in patients with diabetes mellitus: 
systematic review and meta-analysis.  Diabetologia . 2008;51:941. [PMID: 
18351320] 
 Khan MA, St Peter JV, Xue JL. The metabolic syndrome: time for a critical 
appraisal: joint statement from the American Diabetes Association and 
the European Association for the Study of Diabetes.  Diab Care . 
2005;28:2289. [ PMID: 16123508] 
 Khan M, et al. A prospective, randomized comparison of the metabolic effects of 
pioglitazone or rosiglitazone in patients with type 2 diabetes who were previ-
ously treated with troglitazone.  Diab Care . 2002;25:708. [PMID: 
11919129] 
 Krauss RM. Lipids and lipoproteins in patients with type 2 diabetes.  Diab Care . 
2004;27:1496. [PMID: 15161808] 
 Lee C-H, Olson P, Evans RM. Lipid metabolism, metabolic diseases, and peroxi-
some proliferator-activated receptors.  Endocrinology . 2003;144:2201. 
[PMID: 12746275] 
 Massicotte A. Contrast medium-induced nephropathy: strategies for prevention. 
 Pharmacother . 2008;28:1140. [PMID: 18752385] 
 Nathan, DM, Buse JB, Davidson MB, et al. American Diabetes Association; 
European Association for Study of Diabetes. Medical management of hyper-
glycemia in type 2 diabetes: a consensus algorithm for the initiation and 
adjustment of therapy: a consensus statement of the American Diabetes 
Association and the European Association for the Study of Diabetes.  Diab 
Care . 2009;32:193. [PMID: 18945920] 
 Neumiller JJ. Differential chemistry (structure), mechanism of action, and phar-
macology of GLP-1 receptor agonists and DPP-4 inhibitors.  J Am Pharm 
Assoc . 2009;49(suppl 1):S16. [PMID: 19801361] 
 NICE-SUGAR Study Investigators. Intensive versus conventional glucose control 
in critically ill patients.  N Engl J Med . 2009;360:1283. [PMID: 
19318384] 
 Rucker D, Padwal R, Li SK, Curioni C, Lau  DC. Long term pharmacotherapy for 
obesity and overweight: updated meta-analysis.  BMJ . 2007;335:1194. 
[PMID: 18006966] 
 Snow V, Weiss KB, Mottur-Pilson C. The evidence base for tight blood pressure 
control in the management of type 2 diabetes mellitus.  Ann Intern Med . 
2003;138:587. [PMID: 12667031] 
 Stacher G. Diabetes mellitus and the stomach.  Diabetologia . 2001;44:1080. 
[PMID: 11596661] 
 Tahrani AA, Piya MK, Kennedy A, Barnett AH. Glycaemic control in type 2 dia-
betes: targets and new therapies.  Pharmacol Ther . 2010;125:328. [PMID: 
19931305] 
 Tamborlane WV, Fredrickson LP, Ahern JH. Insulin pump therapy in childhood 
diabetes mellitus: guidelines for use.  Treat Endocrinol . 2003;2:11. [PMID: 
15871551] 
 Van den Berghe G,  Wouters P, Weekers F, et al. Intensive insulin therapy in the 
critically ill patient.  N Engl J Med . 2001;345:1359. [PMID: 11794168] 
 Van den Berghe G, Wilmer A, Hermans G, et al. Intensive insulin therapy in the 
medical ICU. N  Engl J Med . 2006;354:449. [PMID: 16452557] 
 Vijan S, Hayward RA. Treatment of hypertension in type 2 diabetes mellitus: 
blood pressure goals, choice of agents, and setting priorities in diabetes care. 
 Ann Intern Med . 2003;138:593. [PMID: 12667032] 
 Weissberg-Benchell J, Antisdel-Lomaglio J, Seshadri R. Insulin pump therapy: a 
meta-analysis.  Diab Care . 2003;26:1079.[PMID: 12663577] 
 White SA, Shaw JA, Sutherland DE. Pancreas transplantation.  Lancet . 
2009;373:1808. [PMID: 19465236] 
 Yki-Jarvinen H. Thiazolidinediones.  N Engl J Med . 2004;351:1106. 
[PMID:15356308] 
 Yusuf S, Sleight P, Pogue J, Bosch, J. Davies R, Dagenais G. Effects of an angio-
tensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, ramipril, on death from cardiovascular 
causes, myocardial infarction and stroke in high-risk patients. The Heart 
Outcomes Prevention Evaluation Study Investigators.  N Engl J Med . 
2000;342:145. [PMID: 10639539] 
 Zinman B, Ruderman N, Campaigne BN, Devlin JT, Schneider SH. 
American Diabetes Association. Physical activity/exercise and diabetes. 
 Diabetes Care . 2004;27(suppl 1):S58. [PMID: 14693927] 
 Zoungas S, Ninomiya T, Huxley R, et al. Systematic review: sodium bicarbonate 
treatment regimens for the prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy.  Ann 
Intern Med . 2009;151:631. [PMID: 19884624] 
 Acute Complications of Diabetes Mellitus 
 Herbel G,  Boyle PJ. Hypoglycemia: pathophysiology and treatment.  Endocrinol 
Metab Clin North Am . 2000;29:725. [PMID: 11149159] 
 Henderson G. The psychosocial treatment of recurrent diabetic ketoacidosis: an 
interdisciplinary team approach.  Diabetes Educator . 1991;17:119. [PMID: 
1899827] 
 Kitabchi AE, Nyenwe EA. Hyperglycemic crises in diabetes mellitus: diabetic 
ketoacidosis and hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state.  Endocrinol Metab Clin 
North Am . 2006;35:725. [PMID: 17127143] 
 Luft FC. Lactic acidosis update for critical care clinicians.  J Am Soc Nephrol . 
2001;12(suppl 17):S15. [PMID: 11251027] 
 Nugent BW. Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state.  Emerg Med Clin North Am . 
2005;23:629. [PMID: 15982538] 
 Okuda Y, Adrogue HJ, Field JB, Nohara H, Yamashita K. Counterproductive 
effects of sodium bicarbonate in diabetic ketoacidosis.  J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab . 1996;81:314. [PMID: 8550770] 
 Salpeter SR, Greyber E, Pasternak GA, Salpeter EE. Risk of fatal and nonfatal 
lactic acidosis with metformin use in type 2 diabetes mellitus.  Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev . 2010;4:CD002967. [PMID: 20091535] 
 Wagner A, Risse A, Brill HL, et al. Therapy of severe diabetic ketoacidosis. Zero 
mortality under very-low-dose insulin application.  Diab Care . 1999;22:674. 
[PMID: 10332664] 
 Wrenn KD, Slovis CM, Minion GE, Rutkowski R. The syndrome of alcoholic 
ketoacidosis.  Am J Med . 1991;91:119. [PMID: 1867237] 
 Chronic Complications of Diabetes Mellitus 
 Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment to Prevent Heart Attack Trial 
(ALLHAT). Major outcomes in high-risk hypertensive patients random-
ized to angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or calcium channel 
blocker vs diuretic: the Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment to 
Prevent Heart Attack Trial (ALLHAT).  JAMA . 2002;298:2981. [PMID: 
12479763] 
 American Diabetes Association Position Statement. Preventive foot care in people 
with diabetes.  Diab Care . 2004;27(suppl 1):S63. 
 Boulton AJ. The diabetic foot: from art to science. The 18th Camillo Golgi lecture. 
 Diabetologia . 2004;47:1343. [PMID: 15309286] 
 Boulton AJ, Vinik AI, Arezzo JC, et al. Diabetic neuropathies: a statement by the 
American Diabetes Association.  Diab Care . 2005;28:956. [PMID: 
15793206] 
 Brownlee M. The pathobiology of diabetic complications: a unifying mechanism. 
 Diabetes . 2005;54:1615. [PMID: 15919781] 
 Deckert T, Kofoed-Enevoldsen A, Norgaard K, Borch-Johnsen K, Feldt-Rasmussen B, 
Jensen T. Microalbuminuria: implications for micro- and macrovascular 
disease.  Diab Care . 1992;15:1181. [PMID: 1396015] 
 Horowitz M, O’Donovan D, Jones KL, Feinle C, Rayner CK, Samsom M. Gastric 
emptying in diabetes: clinical significance and treatment.  Diab Med . 
2002;19:177. [PMID: 11918620] 
 Marso SP, Hiatt WR. Peripheral arterial disease in patients with diabetes.  J Am Coll 
Cardiol . 2006;47:921. [PMID: 16516072] 
CHAPTER 17 Pancreatic Hormones and Diabetes Mellitus     655
 Mauer SM, Goetz FC, McHugh LE, et al. Long-term study of normal kidneys 
transplanted into  patients with type I diabetes.  Diabetes . 1989;38:516. 
[PMID: 2647558] 
 Mayfield JA, Reiber GE, Sanders LJ, Janisse D, Pogach LM. American Diabetes 
Association. Preventive foot care in diabetes.  Diab Care . 2004;27(suppl 
1):S63. [PMID: 14693928] 
 McGill JB. Improving microvascular outcomes in patients with diabetes through 
management of hypertension.  Postgrad Med . 2009;121:89. [PMID: 
19332966] 
 Mohamed Q, Gillies MC, Wong TY. Management of diabetic retinopathy: a sys-
tematic review.  JAMA . 2007;298:902. [PMID: 17712074] 
 Molitch  ME, DeFronzo RA, Franz MJ, et al. American Diabetes Association. 
Nephropathy in diabetes.  Diab Care . 2004;27(suppl 1):S79. [PMID: 
14693934] 
 Schwartz SG, Flynn HW Jr, Scott IU. Pharmacotherapy for diabetic retinopathy. 
 Expert Opin Pharmacother . 2009;10:1123.[PMID: 19405788] 
 SimÓ R, Hernández C. Advances in the medical treatment of diabetic retinopathy. 
 Diab Care . 2009;32:1556. [PMID: 19638526] 
 Vardi M, Nini A. Phosphodiesterase inhibitors for erectile dysfunction in patients 
with diabetes mellitus.  Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2007;1:CD002187. 
[PMID: 17253475] 
 Vinik AI, Mehrabyan A. Diabetic neuropathies.  Med Clin North Am . 2004;88:947. 
[PMID: 15308387] 
 Diabetes Mellitus and Pregnancy 
 Australian Carbohydrate Intolerance Study in Pregnant Women (ACHOIS) Trial 
Group. Effect of treatment of gestational diabetes mellitus on pregnancy 
outcomes.  N Engl J Med . 2005;352:2477.[PMID: 15951574] 
 Boinpally T, Jovanovic L. Management of type 2 diabetes and gestational diabetes 
in pregnancy.  Mt Sinai J Med . 2009;76:269. [PMID: 19421970] 
 HAPO Study Cooperative Research Group. Hyperglycemia and adverse pregnancy 
outcomes.  N Engl J Med . 2008;358:1991. [PMID: 18463375] 
 Kim H, Toyofuku Y, Lynn FC, et al. Serotonin regulates pancreatic beta cell mass 
during pregnancy.  Nat Med . 2010;16:804. [PMID: 20581837] 
 Kitzmiller JL, Gavin LA, Gin GD, Jovanovic-Peterson L, Main EK, Zigrang WD. 
Preconception management of diabetes continued through early pregnancy 
prevents the excess frequency of major congenital anomalies in infants of 
diabetic mothers.  JAMA . 1991;265:731. [PMID: 1990188] 
 Kitzmiller J.L, Block JM, Brown FM, et al. Managing preexisting diabetes for 
pregnancy: summary of evidence and consensus recommendations for care. 
 Diab Care . 2008;31:1060. [PMID: 18445730] 
 Landon MB, Spong CY, Thom E, et al. A multicenter, randomized trial of treat-
ment for mild  gestational diabetes.  N Engl J Med . 2009;361:1339.[PMID: 
19797280] 
 Langer O, et al. A comparison of glyburide and insulin in women with gestational 
diabetes.  N Engl J Med . 2000;343:1134. 
 Metzger B, Coustan DR, and the Organizing Committee. Summary and recom-
mendations of the Fourth International Workshop—Conference on 
Gestational Diabetes.  Diab Care . 1998;21(suppl 2):B162. 
 MiG Trial Investigators. Metformin versus insulin for the treatment of gestational 
diabetes.  N Engl J Med . 2008;358:2003. [PMID: 18463376] 
 Murphy HR, Rayman G, Lewis K, et al. Effectiveness of continuous glucose 
monitoring in pregnant women with diabetes: randomised clinical trial. 
 BMJ . 2008;337:1680. [PMID: 18818254] 
 Reece EA, Leguizamon G, Wiznitzer A. Gestational diabetes: the need for a com-
mon ground.  Lancet . 2009;373:1789. [PMID: 19465234] 
 Walkinshaw SA. Pregnancy in women with pre-existing diabetes: management 
issues.  Semin Fetal Neonatal Med . 2005;10:307. [PMID: 15927547] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This page intentionally left blank
657
8
1
 Hypoglycemic Disorders 
 Umesh Masharani, MB, BS, MRCP (UK), and  
 Stephen E. Gitelman, MD 
 ACTH 
Adrenocorticotrophic hormone 
 ACE 
Angiotensin-converting enzyme 
 ADP 
Adenosine diphosphate 
 ALS 
Acid-labile subunit 
 ATP 
Adenosine triphosphate 
 GDH 
Glutamate dehydrogenase 
 GIP 
Glucose-dependent insulinotropic 
 
polypeptide 
 GLP-1 
Glucagon-like peptide 1 
 G-6-Pase 
Glucose-6-phosphatase 
 HbA 1c 
Hemoglobin A 1c 
 ICMA 
Immunochemiluminometric 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 IGF-II 
Insulin-like growth factor II 
 IGFBP3 
IGF-binding protein-3 
 Kir 
Inward rectifier potassium channel 
 NADH 
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide 
 
(reduced form) 
 NICTH 
Nonislet cell tumor hypoglycemia 
 NIPHS 
Noninsulinoma pancreatogenous 
 
hypoglycemic syndrome 
 PEPCK 
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase 
 RIA 
Radioimmunoassay 
 SSTR 
Somatostatin receptor 
 SUR 
Sulfonylurea receptor 
 Circulating plasma glucose concentrations are kept within a rela-
tively narrow range by a complex system of interrelated neural, 
humoral, and cellular controls. Under the usual metabolic condi-
tions, the central nervous system is wholly dependent on plasma 
glucose and counteracts declining blood glucose concentrations 
with a carefully programmed response. This is often associated 
with a sensation of hunger and, as the brain receives insufficient 
glucose to meet its metabolic needs (neuroglycopenia), an auto-
nomic response is triggered to mobilize storage depots of glycogen 
and fat. In the postabsorptive state, hepatic glycogen reserves and 
gluconeogenesis from the liver and kidney directly supply the 
central nervous system with glucose, which is carried across the 
blood-brain barrier by a specific glucose transport system, while 
the mobilization of fatty acids from triglyceride depots provides 
energy for the large mass of skeletal and cardiac muscle, renal 
cortex, liver, and other tissues that utilize fatty acids as their basic 
fuel, thus sparing glucose for use by the tissues of the central ner-
vous system. 
 The normal lower limit of fasting plasma glucose is typically 
70 mg/dL (3.9 mmol/L). Lower values may occur during pro-
longed fasting, strenuous exercise, or pregnancy or may occur as 
a laboratory artifact. In normal men, plasma glucose does not fall 
below 55 mg/dL (3 mmol/L) during a 72-hour fast. However, for 
reasons that are not clear, normal women may experience a fall to 
levels as low as 30 mg/dL (1.7 mmol/L) despite a marked sup-
pression of circulating insulin to less than 5 µU/mL. They remain 
asymptomatic in spite of this degree of hypoglycemia, presum-
ably because ketogenesis is able to satisfy the energy needs of the 
central nervous system. Basal plasma glucose declines progres-
sively during normal pregnancy, and hypoglycemic levels may be 
reached during prolonged fasting. This may be a consequence of 
a continuous fetal consumption of glucose and diminished avail-
ability of the gluconeogenic substrate alanine. The cause of these 
diminished alanine levels in pregnancy is unclear. The greatly 
increased glucose consumption by skeletal muscle that occurs 
during prolonged strenuous exercise may lead to hypoglycemia 
(blood glucose <45 mg/dL) despite increases in hepatic glucose 
production. Whether the hypoglycemia in this circumstance con-
tributes to fatigue or other symptoms in distance runners is 
unknown. 
 In vitro consumption of glucose by blood cell elements may 
give rise to laboratory values in the hypoglycemic range. This can 
be avoided by adding a small amount of the metabolic inhibitor 
sodium fluoride to collection tubes used for specimens containing 
increased numbers of blood cells (as in leukemia, leukemoid reac-
tions, or polycythemia)  and keep samples on ice until separated. 
658    CHAPTER 18 Hypoglycemic Disorders
 PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF THE 
COUNTERREGULATORY RESPONSE 
TO NEUROGLYCOPENIA 
 The plasma concentration of glucose that signals the need by the 
central nervous system to mobilize energy reserves depends on a 
number of factors, such as the status of blood flow to the brain, 
the integrity of cerebral tissue, the prevailing arterial level of 
plasma glucose, the rapidity with which plasma glucose concentra-
tion falls, and the availability of alternative metabolic fuels. 
 A hierarchy of responses has been shown to occur as plasma 
glucose falls in healthy young volunteers, with hormonal counter-
regulatory responses being triggered at glucose levels slightly higher 
(∼67 mg/dL [3.7 mmol/L]) than those that induce symptoms of 
hypoglycemia ( Figure 18–1 ). The first symptoms to appear in 
healthy people are mediated by autonomic neurotransmitters and 
occur at plasma glucose levels below 60 mg/dL (3.3 mmol/L). The 
symptoms consist of tremor, anxiety, palpitations, and sweating, 
which result from sympathetic discharge; and hunger, which is a 
consequence of parasympathetic vagal response. Ganglionic block-
ade and cervical cord section or sympathectomy—but not 
 adrenalectomy—ameliorates these symptoms, indicating that they 
are due to the release of autonomic neurotransmitters and not 
dependent on adrenal hormones. As plasma glucose falls below 
50 mg/dL (2.8 mmol/L), cerebral neuroglycopenia ensues, consisting 
of impaired cognition, along with weakness, lethargy, confusion, 
incoordination, and blurred vision. If counterregulatory responses 
are inadequate to reverse this degree of profound hypoglycemia, 
convulsions or coma may occur. This can result in brain damage or 
death, particularly in those who have not adapted to repeated epi-
sodes of hypoglycemia. 
mg/dL
–75–
–70–
–65–
–60–
–55–
–50–
–45–
–40–
–35–
–30–
mmol/L
–4.0–
–3.9–
–3.6–
–3.3–
–3.1–
–2.8–
–2.5–
–2.2–
–1.9–
–1.6–
Neurotransmitters
(norepinephrine)(acetylcholine)
Hormonal responses
(glucagon, epinephrine, growth hormone)
Autonomic counterregulation
Autonomic symptoms
(ACTH, cortisol)
Impaired cognition:
Coma, convulsions
Neuroglycopenic symptoms
Weakness, lethargy,
confusion, incoordination,
blurred vision
Sweating,
hunger
Tremor, anxiety,
palpitations
Plasma glucose
 FIGURE 18–1  Hierarchy of autonomic responses to progressive stepwise reduction in plasma glucose concentration in healthy volunteers. 
 (Adapted with permission from Gerich JE, et al. Hypoglycemia unawareness.  Endocr Rev . 1991;12:356; and from Service FJ. Hypoglycemia 
disorders.  N Engl J Med . 1995;332:1144.) 
CHAPTER 18 Hypoglycemic Disorders     659
 In elderly people, however, with compromised cerebral blood 
supply, neuroglycopenic manifestations may be provoked at 
slightly higher plasma glucose levels. Patients with chronic hyper-
glycemia (eg, those with poorly controlled, insulin-treated diabe-
tes mellitus) may experience symptoms of neuroglycopenia at 
considerably higher plasma glucose concentrations than persons 
without diabetes. This has been attributed to a downregulated 
glucose transport system across the blood–brain barrier. Conversely, 
in patients exposed to chronic hypoglycemia (eg, those with an 
insulin-secreting tumor or those with diabetes who are receiving 
excessively tight glycemic control with an insulin pump), adapta-
tion to recurrent hypoglycemia occurs by upregulation of the 
glucose transporters, which results in hypoglycemic unawareness, 
whereby they show greater tolerance to hypoglycemia without 
manifesting symptoms. Restoring and maintaining an adequate 
supply of glucose for cerebral function proceeds by a series of 
neurogenic events that act directly to raise the plasma glucose 
concentration and to stimulate hormonal responses that augment 
the adrenergic mobilization of energy stores ( Table 18–1 ). 
 Counterregulatory Response 
to Hypoglycemia 
 Insulin: Endogenous insulin secretion is lowered both by reduced 
glucose stimulation to the pancreatic β cell and by sympathetic 
nervous system inhibition from a combination of alpha-adrenergic 
neural effects and increased circulating catecholamine levels. This 
reactive insulinopenia appears to be essential for glucose recovery, 
because it facilitates the mobilization of energy from existing 
energy stores (glycogenolysis and lipolysis); increases hepatic 
enzymes involved in gluconeogenesis and ketogenesis; increases 
enzymes of the renal cortex, promoting gluconeogenesis; and at 
the same time prevents muscle tissue from consuming the blood 
glucose being released from the liver (Chapter 17). 
 Catecholamines: Circulating catecholamines—and norepineph-
rine produced at sympathetic nerve endings—provide muscle tissue 
with alternative sources of fuel by activating beta-adrenergic recep-
tors, resulting in mobilization of muscle glycogen, and by providing 
increased plasma-free fatty acids from lipolysis of adipocyte triglycer-
ide. Metabolism of these free fatty acids provides energy to promote 
gluconeogenesis in the liver and kidney, thereby adding to plasma 
glucose levels already raised by the glycogenolytic effect of cate-
cholamines on the liver. Their cardiovascular and other side effects 
provide a signal that diabetic patients learn to recognize as a warning 
of their need to rapidly ingest absorbable carbohydrate. 
 Glucagon: Plasma glucagon is released by the beta-adrenergic 
effects of both sympathetic innervation and circulating cate-
cholamines on pancreatic α cells as well as by the direct stimula-
tion of α cells by the low plasma glucose concentration itself. Data 
are available suggesting that a falling-off of intra-islet insulin con-
centration in subjects with functioning pancreatic β cells can 
release pancreatic α cells from insulin inhibition and thus aug-
ment glucagon release during hypoglycemia. This glucagon release 
increases hepatic output of glucose by direct glycogenolysis as well 
as by facilitating the activity of gluconeogenic enzymes in the liver 
but not in the kidney. As shown in  Figure 18–2 , plasma glucagon 
TABLE 18–1  Autonomic nervous system response to 
hypoglycemia.
Alpha-Adrenergic Effects
Inhibition of endogenous insulin release
Increase in cerebral blood flow (peripheral vasoconstriction)
Beta-Adrenergic Effects
Hepatic and muscle glycogenolysis
Stimulation of plasma glucagon release
Lipolysis to raise plasma-free fatty acids
Impairment of glucose uptake by muscle tissue
Increase in cerebral blood flow (increase in cardiac output)
Adrenomedullary Discharge of Catecholamines
Augmentation of all of the above alpha- and beta-adrenergic effects
Cholinergic Effects
Raises level of pancreatic polypeptide
Increases motility of stomach
Produces hunger
Increases sweating
100
80
60
40
20
100
80
60
40
20
100
80
60
40
20
100
80
60
40
20
0
60
120
0
60
120
0
60
120
Glucagon
+ GH
deficiency
Glucagon
deficiency
GH
deficiency
Epinephrine
deficiency or
α/β blockade
Glucagon
deficiency +
α/β blockade
Glucagon +
epinephrine
deficiency
Time (min)
Plasma glucose (mg/dL)
A
D
E
F
B
C
 FIGURE 18–2  Solid lines show changes in plasma glucose that 
occur in normal subjects in response to acute intravenous insulin 
administration. Note the rapid recovery of glucose levels mediated 
by intact counterregulatory mechanisms. The dashed lines show the 
response to insulin-induced hypoglycemia in patients with deficien-
cies of the counterregulatory mechanisms induced as follows:  A: 
Somatostatin infusion (inhibits both glucagon and growth hormone 
[GH] release).  B: Somatostatin infusion plus GH infusion (now with 
functional isolated glucagon deficiency).  C: Somatostatin infusion 
plus glucagon infusion (isolated GH deficiency). Note return of glu-
cose response to normal, implying that glucagon is the main coun-
terregulatory hormone.  D: Bilateral adrenalectomy, leading to 
epinephrine deficiency, or infusion of phentolamine plus propranolol 
(alpha and beta blockers, respectively). Note that such deficiencies 
cause no major abnormality in response to induced hypoglycemia 
when glucagon is present.  E and F: Sympathetic modulation (by 
phentolamine plus propranolol in  E and by bilateral adrenalectomy 
in  F ), which seriously impairs the ability to respond to hypoglycemia 
in the patient made glucagon-deficient by somatostatin infusion. 
 (Reproduced, with permission, from Cryer PE. Glucose counterregula-
tion in man.  Diabetes . 1981;30:261.) 
660    CHAPTER 18 Hypoglycemic Disorders
appears to be the key counterregulatory hormone affecting recov-
ery from  acute hypoglycemia in nondiabetic humans, with the 
adrenergic-catecholamine response representing a major backup 
system. However, in most clinical situations, where hypoglycemia 
develops  more gradually , as with inappropriate dosage of insulin or 
sulfonylureas, or in cases of insulinoma, the role of glucagon may 
be less influential. When normal volunteers received a prolonged 
low-dose insulin infusion to produce a gradual decline in plasma 
glucose levels without waning of insulin levels, the rise of endog-
enous glucagon contributed much less to counterregulation than 
after acute hypoglycemia induced by intravenous insulin, which is 
followed by rapid waning of insulin levels. This finding suggests 
that glucagon’s role in glucose recovery occurs primarily when the 
level of insulin wanes. 
 Cortisol: Pituitary corticotrophin (ACTH) is released in asso-
ciation with the sympathetic nervous system stimulation by neu-
roglycopenia. This results in elevation of plasma cortisol levels, 
which in turn permissively facilitates lipolysis and actively pro-
motes protein catabolism and conversion of amino acids to glu-
cose by the liver and kidney. 
 Growth hormone: Pituitary growth hormone is also released 
in response to falling plasma glucose levels. Its role in counteract-
ing hypoglycemia is less well defined, but it is known to antago-
nize the action of insulin on glucose utilization in muscle cells and 
to directly activate lipolysis by adipocytes. This increased lipolysis 
provides fatty acid substrate to the liver and renal cortex which 
facilitates gluconeogenesis. 
 Cholinergic neurotransmitters: Acetylcholine is released at 
parasympathetic nerve endings, and its vagal effects induce the 
sensation of hunger that signals the need for food to counteract 
the hypoglycemia. In addition, postsynaptic fibers of the sympa-
thetic nervous system that innervate the sweat glands to signal 
hypoglycemia also release acetylcholine—in contrast to all other 
sympathetic postsynaptic fibers, which without exception release 
norepinephrine. 
 Maintenance of Euglycemia in the 
Postabsorptive State 
 Glucose absorption from the gastrointestinal tract ceases by 4 to 
6 hours after a meal. During the postabsorptive state which 
immediately follows, glucose must be produced endogenously 
from previously stored nutrients to meet the requirements of 
the central nervous system and other glucose-dependent tissues. 
These include 125 mg/min of glucose required by the brain and 
spinal cord as well as an additional 25 mg/min by red blood 
cells and the renal medulla. It was previously thought that 
the liver is the only organ involved in glucose production dur-
ing an overnight fast, but recent data indicate that the renal 
cortex also has the requisite enzymes for production and release 
of glucose. 
 Liver: The liver initially provides glucose by the breakdown 
of stored hepatic glycogen. However, because these reserves are 
limited to 80 to 100 g, they begin to be depleted several hours 
into the postabsorptive state. Thereafter, hepatic glucose produc-
tion is augmented by gluconeogenesis—the formation of glucose 
from amino acids, lactate, and glycerol. These substrates are 
delivered to the liver and kidney from peripheral stores. Muscle 
and other structural tissues supply amino acids, mainly alanine; 
blood cell elements supply lactate, the end product of glycolytic 
metabolism; and adipose tissue supplies glycerol from lipolysis of 
triglyceride. In addition, oxidation of the free fatty acids released 
from adipose cells during lipolysis supplies the energy required 
for gluconeogenesis and provides ketone bodies, acetoacetate, 
and β-hydroxybutyrate, which can serve as alternative metabolic 
fuels for the central nervous system during periods of prolonged 
fasting. Studies have shown that an insulin infusion does not 
reduce hepatic glucose production if elevated levels of fatty acids 
are maintained by intravenous administration of a fat emulsion 
and heparin, suggesting that fatty acids may be the major medi-
ator of gluconeogenesis. 
 The principal mechanisms regulating hepatic glucose output 
are the availability of gluconeogenic substrates and the regulation 
of transcription of key regulatory enzymes such as phosphoe-
nolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) and glucose-6-phosphatase 
(G-6-Pase). Glucagon and glucocorticoids through signaling 
intermediates induce the expression of PEPCK and G-6-Pase. 
Insulin on the other hand suppresses the expression of these 
enzymes. 
 Kidney: Although it is generally acknowledged that after fast-
ing for 60 hours the kidney contributes up to 20% to 25% of 
endogenous glucose production, its role after an overnight fast 
remains controversial. One group has found that it produces as 
much as 25% of the postabsorptive glucose requirement, yet a 
second group using different methodology found a contribution 
of no more than 5% in the postabsorptive state. Despite these 
conflicting findings, it is clear that because the renal medulla 
removes almost as much glucose as the renal cortex produces, the 
net renal contribution is minimal in the short-term postabsorptive 
state as compared to the liver. 
 The kidney does not have glycogen stores and is dependent on 
gluconeogenesis as its only source of glucose production. 
Glutamine—rather than alanine—is the predominant amino 
acid substrate for renal gluconeogenesis. In addition to its contri-
bution to glucose homeostasis after an overnight fast, the kidney 
also has been shown to be an important contributor to glucose 
counterregulation in the event of hypoglycemia. Although gluca-
gon does not affect the kidney, the counterregulatory rise in cat-
echolamines has been shown to stimulate gluconeogenesis in the 
renal cortex. As with the liver, insulin inhibits renal gluconeogen-
esis and glucose release. Hormonal changes that begin early in the 
postabsorptive state regulate the enzymatic steps necessary for 
hepatic glycogenolysis and hepatic and renal gluconeogenesis and 
ensure the delivery of the necessary substrate ( Table 18–2 ). 
An appropriate fall in circulating insulin levels with a correspond-
ing rise in glucagon is most important; elevations in the counter-
regulatory hormones, namely cortisol and growth hormone, 
contribute to it but are less critical. Thus, numerous endocrine 
and metabolic events interact to provide a continuous source of 
fuel for proper functioning of the central nervous system. 
Malfunction of any of these mechanisms can lead to symptomatic 
hypoglycemia. 
CHAPTER 18 Hypoglycemic Disorders     661
 CLASSIFICATION OF 
HYPOGLYCEMIC DISORDERS 
 A clinical classification of the more common causes of symptom-
atic hypoglycemia in adults is presented in  Table 18–3 . This clas-
sification is useful in directing diagnostic considerations. 
Symptomatic fasting hypoglycemia is a serious and potentially 
life-threatening problem warranting thorough evaluation. 
Conditions that produce inappropriate fasting hyperinsulinism 
are the most common cause of fasting hypoglycemia in otherwise 
healthy adults. These include insulin-secreting pancreatic β cell 
tumors and iatrogenic or surreptitious administration of insulin or 
sulfonylureas. In patients with illnesses that produce symptomatic 
fasting hypoglycemia despite appropriately suppressed insulin 
levels, the clinical picture is generally dominated by the signs and 
symptoms of the primary disease, with hypoglycemia often only a 
late or associated manifestation. Hypoglycemia, sometimes severe, 
can also occur postprandially. In patients with gastric surgery, 
overrapid gastric emptying and accelerated glucose absorption 
may result in excess insulin secretion, rapid disposal of glucose, 
and hypoglycemia. An uncommon condition of islet hyperplasia 
or adult nesidioblastosis called noninsulinoma pancreatogenous 
hypoglycemia syndrome can result in hypoglycemia 4 to 6 hours 
after meals. 
 SPECIFIC HYPOGLYCEMIC DISORDERS 
 1. DIABETES (SEE ALSO CHAPTER 17) 
 Iatrogenic hypoglycemia is common in type 1 patients and also in 
insulin treated type 2 patients. Most type 1 patients aiming for 
HbA 1c levels below 7% have on average one to two symptomatic 
hypoglycemic episodes per year. Severe hypoglycemia is defined as 
an episode requiring assistance, and in one study, incidence rates 
were about 12 per 100 patient years for both type 1 and insulin-
treated type 2 patients. Sulfonylureas, repaglinide, and nateglinide 
can also cause hypoglycemia. Increased risk factors include age 
(70 years and older), renal failure, hepatic failure, and use of the 
long-acting sulfonylureas. A number of other drug-drug interac-
tions (clarithromycin, salicylates, sulfonamides) can also potenti-
ate the hypoglycemic effects of sulfonylureas. The annual incidence 
of sulfonylurea-induced hypoglycemia is approximately 0.2 per 
1000 patient years. 
 As β cell failure progresses (early in type 1 and late in type 
2 diabetes), patients lose their glucagon response to hypoglycemia. 
This combination of insulin deficiency and impaired glucagon 
response makes it harder for patients to achieve HbA 1c levels below 
7% without occasional hypoglycemia. These hypoglycemic epi-
sodes attenuate the sympathoadrenal response to hypoglycemia, 
with decreased epinephrine release from the adrenal and decreased 
sympathetic neural responses (hypoglycemic unawareness). The 
hypoglycemia unawareness in turn increases the risk for recurrent 
hypoglycemia. About 20% to 25% of type 1 patients have hypo-
glycemic unawareness. Other factors that increase the risk for 
hypoglycemia include poor self-management skills. Patients may 
take too much insulin for the carbohydrates or take the wrong 
insulin or do not appropriately time insulin administration with 
food ingestion. They also may not adjust the insulin for acute 
exercise or take extra carbohydrates for unexpected exercise or 
reduce insulin doses for improved insulin sensitivity with exercise 
training. Alcohol can decrease endogenous glucose production 
and can cause hypoglycemia, especially if it is consumed on an 
empty stomach. Diabetes complications—gastroparesis, auto-
nomic neuropathy, and renal failure also increase the risk for 
hypoglycemia. 
 There are other consequences of hypoglycemia apart from the 
autonomic and neurogenic symptoms of acute hypoglycemia. In 
severe cases, hypoglycemia can cause convulsions and coma. 
Permanent neurological damage is rare. Although cross-sectional 
studies and case reports have reported intellectual decline 
with recurrent hypoglycemia, longitudinal studies have not shown 
TABLE 18–2  Hormonal changes to maintain 
euglycemia in the postabsorptive state.
Decreased Insulin Secretion
Increases hepatic glycogenolysis
Increases lipolysis
Increases hepatic gluconeogenesis
Decreases muscle uptake of glucose
Increased Glucagon Secretion
Increases hepatic glycogenolysis
Facilitates hepatic gluconeogenesis
Increased Cortisol Secretion
Facilitates lipolysis
Increases protein catabolism
Augments hepatic gluconeogenesis
TABLE 18–3  Common causes of symptomatic 
hypoglycemia in adults.
Fasting
 With hyperinsulinism
Insulin reaction
Sulfonylurea overdose
Surreptitious insulin or sulfonylurea self-administration
Autoimmune hypoglycemia (idiopathic insulin antibodies, insulin 
receptor autoantibodies)
Pentamidine-induced hypoglycemia
Pancreatic β cell tumors
 Without hyperinsulinism
Severe hepatic dysfunction
Chronic renal insufficiency
Inanition
Hypocortisolism
Alcohol use
Nonpancreatic tumors
Nonfasting
Alimentary
Functional
Noninsulinoma pancreatogenous hypoglycemic syndrome (NIPHS)
Occult diabetes
Ethanol ingestion with sugar mixers
662    CHAPTER 18 Hypoglycemic Disorders
significant cognitive dysfunction in adults. In the Diabetes 
Control and Complications Trial, there was no evidence for cogni-
tive decline related to hypoglycemia in 18 years of follow-up. 
Young children however may be more vulnerable to the effects of 
hypoglycemia on the brain. Hypoglycemia via its autonomic 
stimulation and catecholamine release increases cardiac output. In 
patients with cardiac disease it can also precipitate cardiac arrhyth-
mias, angina, myocardial infarction, and congestive heart failure. 
 Hypoglycemia can also exert a psychological toll. Acute hypo-
glycemia induces mood changes including fatigue, pessimism, 
anger, and behavior changes. Nocturnal hypoglycemia can lead to 
fatigue and decreased sense of well being the following day. 
Patients who have had severe hypoglycemia may develop a phobia 
about hypoglycemia and keep their sugars unreasonably high. 
Some patients develop an anxiety syndrome. Hypoglycemia can 
also impact personal relationships, occupation, driving, and lei-
sure activities. Surveys show that type 1 patients have increased 
risk of driving mishaps (crashes, moving violations) when com-
pared to nondiabetic spouses; and that these are related to hypo-
glycemia. 
 The goal of therapy is to restore levels of plasma glucose to 
normal as rapidly as possible. If the patient is conscious and able 
to swallow, glucose-containing foods such as candy, orange juice 
with added sugar, and cookies should be quickly ingested. 
Fructose, found in many nutrient low-calorie sweeteners for dia-
betics, should not be used. While it can be metabolized by neu-
rons, fructose is not transported across the blood–brain barrier. 
 If the patient is unconscious, rapid restoration of plasma glu-
cose must be accomplished by giving 20 to 50 mL of 50% dex-
trose intravenously over 1 to 3 minutes (the treatment of choice) 
or, when intravenous glucose is not available, 1 mg of glucagon 
intramuscularly or intravenously. Families or friends of insulin-
treated diabetics should be instructed in the administration of 
glucagon intramuscularly for emergency treatment at home. 
Glucagon should not be given if the hypoglycemia is due to sulfo-
nylurea use. Under these circumstances, glucagon can stimulate 
insulin secretion and worsen the hypoglycemia. Attempts to feed 
the patient or to apply glucose-containing jelly to the oral mucosa 
should be avoided because of the danger of aspiration. When 
consciousness is restored, oral feedings should be started immedi-
ately. In patients who have taken massive overdoses of sulfonylu-
reas, the response to intravenous dextrose may be poor. For these 
patients, intravenous boluses of diazoxide (150-300 mg) may be 
tried but can result in hypotension. Intravenous octreotide (100 μg) 
has also been reported to be of benefit. 
 Patients on insulin or sulfonylureas should be instructed on 
how to recognize and treat hypoglycemia and what measures they 
can take to prevent such episodes. Type 1 patients and insulin-
treated type 2 patients should monitor their blood glucose fre-
quently. Hypoglycemia not infrequently occurs at night and 
patients should avoid taking large doses of short-acting insulin just 
before going to bed. Patients should from time to time also 
monitor blood glucose levels in the middle of the night. 
Hypoglycemia can also occur many hours after strenuous exercise, 
and patients should be advised to monitor at these times and cut 
back their insulin doses and/or eat more carbohydrate. Continuous 
glucose monitoring systems are increasingly used by type 
1 patients to alert them to falling glucose levels and prevent hypo-
glycemia. Finally, it is important to individualize glycemic goals. 
Early in the course of both type 1 and type 2 diabetes when there 
is still some endogenous β cell function, it is easier to achieve 
HbA 1c levels close to normal with low risk of hypoglycemia. As 
β cell failure progresses, however, aiming for normality may lead 
to unacceptably high rates of hypoglycemia. Patients who have 
had frequent hypoglycemia and have hypoglycemia unawareness 
should be encouraged to temporarily raise their glycemic tar-
gets—as little as 2 to 3 weeks of scrupulous avoidance of hypogly-
cemia reverses hypoglycemia unawareness and improves the 
attenuated epinephrine response. Diabetes complications, previ-
ous incidence of hypoglycemia, and life expectancy should all be 
considered in the establishment of glycemic goals. 
 2. FACTITIOUS HYPOGLYCEMIA 
 Factitious hypoglycemia should be suspected in any patient with 
access to insulin or sulfonylurea drugs. It is most commonly seen 
in health professionals and diabetic patients or their relatives. The 
reasons for self-induced hypoglycemia vary, with many patients 
having severe psychiatric disturbances or a pathological need for 
attention. Inadvertent ingestion of sulfonylureas resulting in clini-
cal hypoglycemia has also been reported, due either to patient 
error or to a prescription mishap on the part of a pharmacist. 
Patients with diabetes and factitious hypoglycemia have a presen-
tation similar to brittle diabetes. 
 When insulin is used to induce hypoglycemia, an elevated 
serum insulin level often raises suspicion of an insulin-producing 
pancreatic β cell tumor. It may be difficult to prove that the insu-
lin is of exogenous origin. The combination of hypoglycemia, 
high immunoreactive insulin levels, suppressed plasma C peptide, 
and suppressed proinsulin level is pathognomonic of exogenous 
insulin administration in nondiabetic patients. Patients with renal 
failure may have normal or even high plasma C-peptide levels, but 
plasma proinsulin levels are suppressed. 
 When sulfonylurea abuse is suspected, plasma or urine should 
be screened for its presence. Hypoglycemia with inappropriately 
elevated levels of serum insulin  and C peptide along with detect-
able sulfonylureas in blood or urine is diagnostic of inadvertent or 
factitious sulfonylurea overdose. It is important to use assays 
which measure not only all the sulfonylureas but also repaglinide 
and nateglinide. 
 Treatment of factitious hypoglycemia involves psychiatric 
therapy and social counseling. 
 3. DRUGS 
 Numerous pharmacologic agents may potentiate the effects of 
insulin and predispose to hypoglycemia. Common offenders 
include fluoroquinolones such as gatifloxacin and levofloxacin, 
pentamidine, quinine, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) 
inhibitors, ethanol, salicylates, and beta-adrenergic–blocking 
drugs. The fluoroquinolones, especially gatifloxacillin, have been 
CHAPTER 18 Hypoglycemic Disorders     663
associated with both hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia. 
Hypoglycemia is an early event; hyperglycemia occurs after several 
days into therapy. It is thought that the drugs act on ATP-sensitive 
potassium channels in the β cell. Intravenous pentamidine is cyto-
toxic to pancreatic β cells, resulting in acute insulin release and 
hypoglycemia. This occurs in about 10% to 20% of patients 
receiving the drug and may be followed later by persistent insu-
linopenia and hyperglycemia. Fasting patients taking noncardiose-
lective beta blockade can have an exaggerated hypoglycemic 
response to starvation. Beta blockade inhibits fatty acid and glu-
coneogenic substrate release and reduces plasma glucagon levels 
resulting in hypoglycemia. Also the symptomatic response to 
hypoglycemia is altered—tachycardia is blocked while hazardous 
elevations of blood pressure may result during hypoglycemia in 
response to the unopposed alpha-adrenergic stimulation from 
circulating catecholamines and neurogenic sympathetic discharge. 
However, symptoms of sweating, hunger, and uneasiness are not 
masked by beta-blocking drugs and remain indicators of hypogly-
cemia in the aware patient. 
 Therapy with ACE inhibitors increases the risk of hypoglyce-
mia in diabetic patients who are taking insulin or sulfonylureas, 
presumably because these drugs increase sensitivity to circulating 
insulin by increasing blood flow to muscle. 
 Ethanol-associated hypoglycemia has been proposed to occur 
as a consequence of hepatic alcohol dehydrogenase activity deplet-
ing NADH. The resultant change in the redox state (NADH-to-
NAD + ratio) limits the conversion of lactate to pyruvate, the main 
substrate for hepatic gluconeogenesis. In the patient who is imbib-
ing ethanol but not eating, fasting hypoglycemia may occur after 
hepatic glycogen stores have been depleted (within 8-12 hours of 
a fast). No correlation exists between the blood ethanol levels and 
the degree of hypoglycemia, which may occur while blood ethanol 
levels are declining. It should be noted that ethanol-induced fast-
ing hypoglycemia may occur at ethanol levels as low as 45 mg/dL 
(10 mmol/L)—considerably below most states’ legal standards 
(80 mg/dL [17.4 mmol/L]) for being  under the influence . Most 
patients present with neuroglycopenic symptoms, which may be 
difficult to differentiate from the neurotoxic effects of the alcohol. 
These symptoms in a patient whose breath smells of alcohol may 
be mistaken for alcoholic stupor. Intravenous dextrose should be 
administered promptly to all such stuporous or comatose patients. 
Because hepatic glycogen stores have been depleted by the 
time hypoglycemia occurs, parenteral glucagon is not effective. 
Adequate food intake during alcohol ingestion prevents this type 
of hypoglycemia. 
 4. AUTOIMMUNE HYPOGLYCEMIA 
 In recent years, a rare autoimmune disorder has been reported in 
which patients have circulating insulin antibodies and the para-
doxic feature of hypoglycemia. More than 200 cases of insulin-
antibody-associated hypoglycemia have been reported since 1970, 
with 90% of cases reported in Japanese patients. HLA class II 
alleles (DRB1 ∗ 0406, DQA1∗0301, and DQB1∗0302) are associ-
ated with this syndrome, and these alleles are 10 to 30 times more 
prevalent in Japanese and Koreans, which may explain the higher 
prevalence of this syndrome in these populations. Hypoglycemia 
generally occurs 3 to 4 hours after a meal and follows an early 
postprandial hyperglycemia. It is attributed to a dissociation of 
insulin-antibody immune complexes, releasing free insulin. This 
autoimmune hypoglycemia, which is due to accumulation of high 
titers of antibodies capable of reacting with endogenous insulin, 
has been most commonly reported in methimazole-treated 
patients with Graves disease from Japan as well as in patients with 
various other sulfhydryl-containing medications (captopril, pen-
icillamine) and other drugs such as hydralazine, isoniazid, and 
procainamide. In addition, it has been reported in patients with 
autoimmune disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis, systemic 
lupus erythematosus, and polymyositis, as well as in multiple 
myeloma and other plasma cell dyscrasias where paraproteins or 
antibodies cross-react with insulin. 
 High titers of insulin autoantibodies, usually IgG class, can be 
detected. Insulin, proinsulin, and C-peptide levels may be elevated 
but the results may be erroneous because of the interference of the 
insulin antibodies with the immunoassays for these peptides. 
 In most cases the hypoglycemia is transient and usually resolves 
spontaneously within 3 to 6 months of diagnosis, particularly 
when the offending medications are stopped. The most consistent 
therapeutic benefit in management of this syndrome has been 
achieved by dietary treatment with frequent, low-carbohydrate, 
small meals. Prednisone therapy (30-60 mg/d) has been used to 
lower the titer of insulin antibodies. 
 Hypoglycemia due to insulin receptor autoantibodies is also an 
extremely rare syndrome; most cases have occurred in women 
often with a history of autoimmune disease. Almost all of these 
patients have also had episodes of insulin-resistant diabetes and 
acanthosis nigricans. Their hypoglycemia may be either fasting or 
postprandial and is often severe and is attributed to an agonistic 
action of the antibody on the insulin receptor. Balance between 
the antagonistic and agonistic effects of the antibodies determines 
whether insulin-resistant diabetes or hypoglycemia occurs. 
Hypoglycemia was found to respond to glucocorticoid therapy 
but not to plasmapheresis or immunosuppression. 
 5. PANCREATIC a CELL TUMORS 
 Spontaneous fasting hypoglycemia in an otherwise healthy adult is 
most commonly due to insulinoma, an insulin-secreting tumor of 
the islets of Langerhans. Eighty percent of these tumors are single 
and benign; 10% are malignant (if metastases are identified); and 
the remainder are multiple, with scattered micro- or macroade-
nomas interspersed within normal islet tissue. (As with some other 
endocrine tumors, histologic differentiation between benign and 
malignant cells is difficult, and close follow-up is necessary to 
ensure the absence of metastases.) 
 These adenomas may be familial and have been found in con-
junction with tumors of the parathyroid glands and the pituitary 
(multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1; see Chapter 22). Over 99% 
of them are located within the pancreas and less than 1% in ecto-
pic pancreatic tissue. 
664    CHAPTER 18 Hypoglycemic Disorders
 These tumors may appear at any age, although they are most 
common in the fourth to sixth decades. A slight predominance in 
women has been reported in some studies. However, others sug-
gest that there is no gender predilection. 
 Clinical Findings 
 The signs and symptoms are chiefly those of subacute or chronic 
neuroglycopenia rather than adrenergic discharge. The typical 
picture is that of recurrent central nervous system dysfunction at 
times of exercise or fasting. Symptoms include episodic disorienta-
tion, somnolence, personality changes, amnesia, and loss of con-
sciousness. The preponderance of neuroglycopenic symptoms, 
rather than those more commonly associated with hypoglycemia 
(adrenergic symptoms), often leads to delayed diagnosis following 
prolonged psychiatric care, or treatment for seizure disorders or 
transient ischemic attacks. Some patients learn to relieve or pre-
vent their symptoms by taking frequent feedings. Obesity may be 
the result; however, obesity is seen in less than 30% of patients 
with insulin-secreting tumors. 
 Diagnosis of Insulinoma 
 Experts in this field emphasize that the most important prerequi-
site to diagnosing an insulinoma is simply to consider it, particu-
larly when facing a clinical presentation of fasting hypoglycemia 
with symptoms of central nervous system dysfunction such as 
confusion or abnormal behavior. Whipple triad consists of history 
of symptoms consistent with hypoglycemia, associated low plasma 
glucose and relief of symptoms upon raising the plasma glucose. β cell 
tumors do not demonstrate suppression of insulin secretion in the 
presence of hypoglycemia, and a serum insulin level of 6 µU/mL or 
more with concomitant plasma glucose values below 45 mg/dL 
(2.5 mmol/L) suggests an insulinoma. Other causes of hyperinsu-
linemic hypoglycemia must be considered, however, such as 
 surreptitious administration of insulin or sulfonylureas. 
 One of the most important steps is to carefully review the 
patient’s history. Attention should be paid to the nature of the 
symptoms and factors that precipitate and resolve the symptoms. 
Patients typically complain of feeling tired, experiencing blurred 
vision, and not thinking clearly. Eating or drinking readily absorb-
able carbohydrates improves the symptoms within approximately 
15 minutes. Timing of the symptoms in relation to meals and 
exercise should be noted. In insulinoma patients, the symptoms are 
most likely to occur early in the morning before breakfast or if a 
meal is missed during the day. Patients occasionally present when 
they attempt to go on a diet to lose weight. Exercise may precipitate 
the symptoms especially if the activity occurs while fasting or some 
hours after a meal. Some patients develop symptoms in the mid-
dle of the night and may have to eat. Partners of patients often pro-
vide useful information, especially if the patient requires assistance in 
treating the hypoglycemic symptoms. Occasionally the emergency 
services are called when the patient gets severely confused, presents 
with focal weakness, loses consciousness, or has a seizure. There 
may be documentation of low fingerstick glucose at the time when 
symptoms are present with recovery following administration of 
intravenous glucose. With the ready availability of home blood 
glucose–monitoring systems, patients sometimes present with 
documented fingerstick blood glucose levels in 40s and 50s at time 
of symptoms. Access to diabetic medications (sulfonylureas or 
insulin) should be explored—does a family member have diabetes 
or does the patient or family member work in the medical field? 
Medication-dispensing errors should be excluded—has the patient’s 
prescription medication changed in shape or color? Other illnesses 
that cause hypoglycemia such as renal failure, hepatic failure, 
Addison disease, or nonislet tumor should be considered. Patients 
with insulinoma or factitious hypoglycemia usually have a normal 
physical examination. 
 If the history is consistent with episodic spontaneous hypogly-
cemia, patients should be given a home blood glucose monitor 
and advised to monitor blood glucose levels at the time of symp-
toms if it is safe and before consumption of carbohydrates. 
Patients with insulinomas frequently will report fingerstick blood 
glucose levels in the 40s at the time of symptoms. The diagnosis, 
however, cannot be made based on a fingerstick blood glucose. It 
is necessary to have a low laboratory glucose concomitantly with 
elevated plasma insulin, proinsulin and C-peptide levels, and a 
negative sulfonylurea screen. When patients give a history of 
symptoms after only a short period of food withdrawal or with 
exercise, then an outpatient assessment can be attempted. The 
patient should be brought by a family member to the office after 
an overnight fast and observed in the office. Activity such as walk-
ing should be encouraged and fingerstick blood glucose measured 
repeatedly during observation. If symptoms occur or fingerstick 
blood glucose is below 50 then samples for plasma glucose, insu-
lin, C peptide, proinsulin, sulfonylurea screen, serum ketones, and 
antibodies to insulin should be sent. If outpatient observation 
does not result in symptoms or hypoglycemia and if the clinical 
suspicion remains high, then the patient should undergo an inpa-
tient, supervised, 72-hour fast. 
 A suggested protocol for the supervised fast is set forth in 
 Table 18–4 . In normal men, the blood glucose value does not fall 
below 55 mg/dL (3.1 mmol/L) during a 72-hour fast, whereas 
insulin levels fall below 10 µU/mL; in some normal women, how-
ever, plasma glucose may fall below 30 mg/dL (1.7 mmol/L) 
(lower limits have not been established), but serum insulin levels 
also fall appropriately to less than 5 µU/mL. These women remain 
asymptomatic despite this degree of hypoglycemia, presumably 
because ketogenesis is able to provide sufficient fuel for mainte-
nance of central nervous system function. The fast is timed from 
the last intake of calories. The term  72-hour fast is actually a mis-
nomer in most cases, because the fast should be immediately ter-
minated as soon as symptoms and laboratory confirmation of 
hypoglycemia are evident. About 43% of patients with insulino-
mas are symptomatic within the first 12 hours, 67% by 24 hours 
and 93% to 95% by 48 hours. Since a minority of patients 
(∼5%-7%) may not demonstrate hypoglycemia after 48 hours of 
fasting, it is preferable to continue the fast for up to 72 hours. 
Patients can drink water and decaffeinated, noncaloric drinks. It is 
important that patients are active (walking) during the fast since 
exercise may help precipitate hypoglycemia. An intravenous cannula 
CHAPTER 18 Hypoglycemic Disorders     665
should be placed to allow for blood draws and as a safety precaution, 
should intravenous dextrose infusion be required. Fingerstick 
blood glucose levels should be measured at intervals and blood 
sent to the laboratory if the patient is symptomatic or when fin-
gerstick blood glucose levels are below 50 mg/dL. The decision to 
stop the fast is not always easy. Patients should be carefully moni-
tored for symptoms of hypoglycemia. If the patient is symptom-
atic and the laboratory glucose is less than 45 mg/dL then the test 
can be stopped. If the symptoms are equivocal and the laboratory 
glucose is in the mid 50s or higher, then the fast should be contin-
ued, if the patient is agreeable. At the time of termination of the 
fast, blood should be sent to the laboratory for plasma glucose, 
insulin, proinsulin, C peptide, and serum β-hydoxybutyrate levels 
and a sulfonylurea screen. 
 Virtually all patients with insulin-secreting islet cell tumors fail 
to suppress their insulin secretion appropriately when the plasma 
glucose is less than 45 mg/dL ( Table 18–5 ). It is important to be 
aware of limitations of the particular insulin assay that is used. 
When radioimmunoassays (RIAs) with a sensitivity of 5 μU/mL 
are used, patients with insulinomas have plasma insulin concen-
trations of 6 μU/mL or more. Immunochemiluminometric assays 
(ICMA) have sensitivities of less than 1 μU/mL, and with these 
assays, the cutoff for insulinomas is 3 μU/mL or higher. Previous 
treatment with insulin may lead to development of autoantibodies 
to insulin that interfere with the assays, leading to falsely low or 
elevated values depending on the method used. Proper collection 
of samples is also important. If serum is not separated and frozen 
within 1 to 2 hours, falsely low values result because the insulin 
molecule undergoes proteolytic degradation. Plasma insulin levels 
measured by ICMA may be lower in hemolyzed samples. 
Calculation of ratios of insulin (µU/mL) to plasma glucose (mg/dL) is 
not helpful in making the diagnosis. 
 Factitious use of insulin will result in suppression of endoge-
nous insulin secretion and low C-peptide levels. Elevated circulat-
ing proinsulin levels in the presence of fasting hypoglycemia is 
characteristic of most β cell tumors and does not occur in facti-
tious hyperinsulinism. Thus, C-peptide and proinsulin levels (by 
ICMA) of ≥200 pmol/L and ≥5 pmol/L, respectively, are charac-
teristic of insulinomas. C peptide is renally cleared and caution 
should be used in interpreting elevated levels in the setting of renal 
failure. Proinsulin normally represents less than 10% of total 
immunoreactive insulin. Insulinoma cells are poorly differenti-
ated, which affects their ability to process proinsulin to insulin. 
Thus, most patients with insulinoma have elevated levels of pro-
insulin, representing as much as 30% to 90% of total immunore-
active insulin. Hyperinsulinemia suppresses ketone production. 
Plasma β-hydroxybutyrate levels in patients with insulinoma are 
2.7 nmol/L or less. A progressive increase in β-hydroxybutyrate 
levels after 18 hours of fasting is strongly predictive that the fast 
will be negative. 
 A variety of stimulation tests with intravenous tolbutamide, 
glucagon, or calcium have been devised to demonstrate exagger-
ated and prolonged insulin secretion in the presence of insulino-
mas. However, because insulin-secreting tumors have a wide range 
of granule content and degrees of differentiation, they are variably 
responsive to these secretagogues. Thus, absence of an excessive 
insulin-secretory response during any of these stimulation tests 
does not rule out the presence of an insulinoma. In addition, the 
tolbutamide stimulation test is extremely hazardous to patients 
with responsive tumors because it induces prolonged and refrac-
tory hypoglycemia. For that reason, it is no longer included in the 
diagnostic workup of insulinoma. 
 The hyperinsulinism associated with insulinoma impairs gly-
cogenolysis. Thus, when patients with insulinoma are given 1 mg 
IV glucagon at the end of the 72-hour fast, there is an increase in 
plasma glucose within the first 30 minutes. The glucose rise is 
25 mg/dL or more at 20 to 30 minutes, whereas normal subjects 
TABLE 18–4 Suggested hospital protocol for supervised rapid diagnosis of insulinoma.
(1) Obtain baseline serum glucose, insulin, proinsulin, and C-peptide measurements at onset of fast and place intravenous cannula.
(2) Permit only calorie-free and caffeine-free fluids and encourage supervised activity (such as walking).
(3) Measure urine for ketones at the beginning and every 12 hours and at end of fast.
(4) Obtain capillary glucose measurements with a reflectance meter every 4 hours until values <60 mg/dL are obtained. Then increase the frequency 
  of fingersticks to each hour, and when capillary glucose value is <49 mg/dL, send a venous blood sample to the laboratory for serum glucose, 
  insulin, proinsulin, and C-peptide measurements. Check frequently for manifestations of neuroglycopenia.
(5) If symptoms of hypoglycemia occur or if a laboratory value of serum glucose is <45 mg/dL or if 72 hours have elapsed, then conclude the fast with 
  a final blood sample for serum glucose, insulin, proinsulin, C-peptide, β-hydroxybutyrate or acetone, and sulfonylurea measurements. Then give 
  oral fast-acting carbohydrate followed by a meal. If the patient is confused or unable to take oral agents, administer 50 mL of 50% dextrose 
  intravenously over 3-5 minutes. Do not conclude a fast based simply on basis of a capillary blood glucose measurement—wait for the laboratory 
  glucose value unless the patient is symptomatic and it would be dangerous to wait.
TABLE 18–5  Diagnostic criteria for insulinoma after 
a 72-hour fast.
Plasma glucose   
Plasma insulin (RIA)   
Plasma insulin (ICMA)  
Plasma C peptide 
Plasma proinsulin  
β-Hydroxybutyrate  
Sulfonylurea screen 
 (including repaglinide
 and nateglidine)
<45mg/dL
≥6 uU/mL
≥3 uU/mL
≥200 pmol/L
≥5 pmol/L
≤2.7 nmol/L
Negative
Conversion factors: insulin uU/mL × 7.175 = pmol/L; C-peptide ng/mL × 0.33 = 
nmol/L.
666    CHAPTER 18 Hypoglycemic Disorders
have a lower increment. Intravenous glucagon can also cause an 
exaggerated release of insulin from insulinomas. Patients are tested 
after an overnight fast, and serum insulin levels measured 
every 5 minutes for 15 minutes after 1 mg IV glucagon. An 
increase in insulin level exceeding 130 μU/mL (twice upper limit 
of normal) suggests an insulin-secreting tumor. However, only 
about half of patients with insulinomas have insulin levels above 
130 µU/mL and so the test is not so helpful. Also, in some 
patients the exaggerated insulin secretion can lead to severe hypo-
glycemia. Nausea is an unpleasant side effect, often occurring 
several minutes after administration of intravenous glucagon. 
 The oral glucose tolerance test is of no value in the diagnosis of 
insulin-secreting tumors. A common misconception is that 
patients with insulinomas have flat glucose tolerance curves 
because the tumors discharge insulin in response to oral glucose. 
In fact, most insulinomas respond poorly, and curves typical of 
diabetes are more common. In those rare tumors that do release 
insulin in response to glucose, a flat curve may result; however, 
this also can be seen occasionally in normal subjects. 
 Low HbA 1c values have been reported in patients with insuli-
noma, reflecting the presence of chronic hypoglycemia. There is 
however considerable overlap with normal patients and no HbA 1c 
value is diagnostic. 
 Tumor localization studies 
 After the diagnosis of insuli-
noma has been unequivocally made by clinical and laboratory 
findings, studies to localize the tumor should be initiated. The 
focus of attention should be directed at the pancreas only, because 
virtually all insulinomas originate from this tissue; ectopic cancers 
secreting insulin are unknown to all major centers, with only one 
published report describing an atypical insulin-producing tumor 
believed to have originated from a small cell carcinoma of the 
cervix. 
 Because of the small size of these tumors (average diameter of 
1.5 cm in one large series), imaging studies do not necessarily 
identify all tumors. A pancreatic dual phase, thin section, helical 
CT scan can identify 82% to 94% of the lesions. MRI scans with 
gadolinium can be helpful in detecting a tumor in 85% of cases. 
One case report suggests that diffusion-weighted MRI can be use-
ful for detecting and localizing small insulinomas, especially those 
with no hypervascular pattern. The imaging study used will 
depend upon local availability and local radiologic skill. If the 
imaging study is negative, then an endoscopic ultrasound should 
be performed. In experienced hands, about 80% to 90% of 
tumors can be detected. Finally, needle aspiration of the identified 
lesion can be attempted to confirm the presence of a neuroendo-
crine tumor. If the tumor is not identified or imaging results are 
equivocal, then the patient should undergo selective calcium-
stimulated angiography which has been reported to localize the 
tumor to particular regions of the pancreas approximately 90% of 
the time. In this test, angiography is combined with injections of 
calcium gluconate into the gastroduodenal, splenic, and superior 
mesenteric arteries and insulin levels are measured in the hepatic 
vein effluent. The procedure is performed after an overnight fast. 
Ten percent of calcium gluconate, diluted to a volume of 5 mL 
normal saline, is bolused into selected arteries at a dose of 0.0125 
mmol Ca 2+ /kg (0.005 mmol/kg for obese patients). Five milliliter 
blood samples are taken from the hepatic effluent at times 0, 30, 
60, 90, 120, and 180 seconds after calcium injection. Fingerstick 
blood glucose levels are measured at intervals and a dextrose infu-
sion is maintained throughout the procedure. Calcium stimulates 
insulin release from insulinomas but not normal islets. A step-up 
in insulin levels at 30 or 60 seconds (twofold or greater) regional-
izes the source of the hyperinsulinism to the head of the pancreas 
for the gastroduodenal artery, the uncinate process for the superior 
mesenteric artery, and the body and tail of the pancreas for the 
splenic artery. A less than twofold elevation of insulin in the 
120 second sample may represent effects of recirculating calcium 
and is not considered a positive localization. In a single insuli-
noma, the response is in one artery alone ( Figure 18–3 ) unless the 
0
50
100
200
300
150
250
0
30
60
90
120
150
Time (seconds)
Insulin level uU/mL
Distal splenic
Proximal splenic
Gastroduodenal
Proximal hepatic
Superior mesenteric
 FIGURE 18–3  Responses of serum insulin to selective intra-arterial calcium stimulation in a patient with biochemical confirmation of 
inappropriate hyperinsulinism. An islet cell tumor was removed from the tail of the pancreas. 
CHAPTER 18 Hypoglycemic Disorders     667
tumor resides in an area fed by two arteries or if there are multiple 
insulinomas as in multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 1. Patients 
who have diffuse islet hyperplasia (the noninsulinoma pancreatog-
enous hypoglycemia syndrome [NIPHS]) will have positive 
responses in multiple arteries. Because diazoxide may interfere 
with this test, it should be discontinued for at least 48 to 72 hours 
before sampling. Patients should be closely monitored during the 
procedure to avoid hypoglycemia (as well as hyperglycemia), 
which could affect insulin gradients. These studies combined with 
careful intraoperative ultrasonography and palpation by a surgeon 
experienced in insulinoma surgery correctly identify up to 98% of 
tumors. 
 Treatment of Insulinoma 
 The treatment of choice for insulin-secreting tumors is surgical resec-
tion. While waiting for surgery, patients should be given diazoxide, 
a potent inhibitor of insulin secretion. It acts by opening the ATP-
sensitive potassium channel of the pancreatic β cell and hyperpo-
larizing the cell membrane. This reduces calcium influx through 
the voltage-gated calcium channel, thereby reducing insulin 
release. Divided doses of 300 to 400 mg/d usually suffice, but 
occasionally a patient may require up to 800 mg/d. A liquid 
preparation of diazoxide (50 mg/mL) is available in the United 
States. Side effects include edema due to sodium retention (which 
generally necessitates concomitant thiazide administration), gas-
tric irritation, and mild hirsutism. 
 Tumor resection should be performed only by surgeons with 
extensive experience with removal of islet cell tumors, because 
these tumors may be small and difficult to recognize. The tumors 
are enucleated whenever possible unless they have malignant fea-
tures (eg, hardness or an appearance of infiltration). Preoperative 
imaging studies, including endoscopic ultrasound, can identify 
tumors amenable to laparoscopic surgery. Laparoscopic surgery is 
associated with faster postoperative recovery. Laparoscopic intra-
operative ultrasound should be used to confirm the location and 
depth of the tumor within the gland and also note its relationship 
to the pancreatic duct and splenic vessels. Open surgery is still 
necessary for some tumors such as those in the head of the pan-
creas close to the main pancreatic duct. In the very occasional case 
where the tumor cannot be found at operation despite the use of 
intraoperative ultrasound, it is no longer advisable to blindly 
resect the body and tail of the pancreas since a nonpalpable tumor, 
missed by ultrasound, is most likely embedded within the fleshy 
head of the pancreas that is left behind with subtotal resections. 
Most surgeons prefer to close the incision and treat the patient 
medically and/or repeat the localization studies. 
 Diazoxide should be administered on the day of surgery in 
patients who are responsive to it, because the drug greatly reduces 
the need for glucose supplements and the risk of hypoglycemia 
during surgery. Typically, it does not mask the glycemic rise 
indicative of surgical cure. Blood glucose levels should be moni-
tored frequently during the operation and a 5% or 10% dextrose 
infusion should be used to maintain euglycemia. Hyperglycemia 
occurs for a few days postoperatively most likely due to edema and 
inflammation of the pancreas secondary to its mobilization and 
manipulation during surgical resection of the insulinoma. 
However, other possible contributing factors include high levels of 
counterregulatory hormones induced by the procedure, chronic 
downregulation of insulin receptors by the previously high circu-
lating insulin levels from the tumor, and, perhaps, suppression of 
normal pancreatic β cells by long-standing hypoglycemia. Small 
subcutaneous doses of regular insulin may be prescribed every 4 to 
6 hours if plasma glucose exceeds 300 mg/dL (16.7 mmol/L), 
but in most cases pancreatic insulin secretion recovers after 48 to 
72 hours, and very little insulin replacement is required. 
 Diazoxide therapy is the treatment of choice in patients with 
inoperable functioning islet cell carcinomas and in those who are 
poor candidates for operation. A few patients have been main-
tained on long-term (>10 years) diazoxide therapy with no appar-
ent ill effects. Hydrochlorothiazide, 25 to 50 mg daily, should also 
be prescribed to counteract the edema and hyperkalemia second-
ary to diazoxide therapy as well as to potentiate its hyperglycemic 
effect. Frequent carbohydrate feedings (every 2-3 hours) can also 
be helpful in maintaining euglycemia, although obesity may 
become a problem. 
 When patients are unable to tolerate diazoxide because of side 
effects such as gastrointestinal upset, hirsutism, or edema, a cal-
cium channel blocker such as verapamil (80 mg given orally every 
8 hours) may be tried. This is based, in part, on verapamil’s 
inhibitory effect on insulin release from insulinoma cells in vitro. 
 A potent long-acting synthetic octapeptide analog of soma-
tostatin (octreotide) has been used to inhibit release of hormones 
from a number of endocrine tumors, including inoperable insuli-
nomas, but it has had limited success with the latter. Of the five 
somatostatin receptors (SSTRs) that have been identified in 
humans, SSTR2, which predominates in the anterior pituitary, 
has a much greater affinity for octreotide than SSTR5, which 
predominates in the pancreas. This explains why octreotide is 
much more effective in treating acromegaly than in treating insu-
linoma, except in the occasional cases where insulinoma cells hap-
pen also to express SSTR2. When hypoglycemia persists after 
attempted surgical removal of the insulinoma and if diazoxide or 
verapamil is poorly tolerated or ineffective, a trial of 50 µg of 
octreotide injected subcutaneously twice daily may control the 
hypoglycemic episodes in conjunction with multiple small carbo-
hydrate feedings. 
 Streptozocin has proved to be beneficial in patients with islet 
cell carcinomas. With selective arterial administration, effective 
cytotoxic doses have been achieved without the undue renal toxic-
ity that characterized early experience. Benign tumors appear to 
respond poorly, if at all. 
 6.  NONISLET CELL TUMOR 
HYPOGLYCEMIA (NICTH)
 A variety of nonislet cell tumors have been found to cause fasting 
hypoglycemia. Most are large and mesenchymal in origin, retro-
peritoneal fibrosarcoma being the classic prototype. However, 
hepatocellular carcinomas, adrenocortical carcinomas, renal cell 
carcinomas, gastrointestinal tumors, lymphomas, leukemias, and a 
variety of other tumors have also been reported. 
668    CHAPTER 18 Hypoglycemic Disorders
 Laboratory diagnosis depends on fasting hypoglycemia associ-
ated with serum insulin levels below 5 µU/mL. In many cases, the 
hypoglycemia is due to the expression and release of an incom-
pletely processed insulin-like growth factor II (IGF-II) by the 
tumor (see also Chapter 21). The primary IGF-II translation 
product is pre-pro-IGF-II consisting of N-terminal signal peptide 
of 24 amino acids, 67 amino acid mature IGF-II, and an 
89 amino acid extension (E-domain) at the C-terminus. 
Posttranslational processing of pre-pro-IGF-II involves removal of 
the N-signal sequence; O-glycosylation of one or more threonine 
residues of the E-domain and sequential proteolysis of the 
E-domain. During this process an IGF-II protein with a 21 amino 
extension of the E-domain (pro-IGF-IIE[68-88]) is relatively sta-
ble intermediate that may be secreted from the cell. Most of the 
mature IGF-II released from the liver is complexed with IGF-
binding protein-3 (IGFBP3) and acid-labile subunit (ALS). This 
ternary protein complex is generally inactive in adults because it is 
unable to bind properly to tissue receptors. It is only the free 
IGF-II (<1%) and that bound in binary complexes (predomi-
nantly IGFBP2 and IGFBP3) that is accessible to tissue compart-
ment and available to bind the IGF and insulin receptors. 
However, in patients with nonpancreatic tumors associated with 
hypoglycemia, incompletely processed mainly nonglycosylated 
forms of IGF-II are released—in particular pro-IGF-IIE (68-88) 
form. These incompletely processed molecules are heterogeneous 
in size and are also referred to as  big IGF-II and have molecular 
mass of 10 to 17 kDa in contrast to mature IGF-II at 7.5 kDa. 
Pro-IGF-II can form binary complexes with IGFBPs but have 
reduced affinity for forming a tertiary complex with ALS. As a 
consequence, more of the pro-IGF-II is available for binding to 
the insulin receptors in the muscle to promote glucose transport 
and to insulin receptors in liver and kidney to reduce glucose 
output. The increased production of pro-IGF-II by the tumor 
may also displace processed IGF-II from IGFBPs, increasing free, 
unbound IGF-II. The IGF-II may bind to receptors for IGF-I in 
the pancreatic β cell to inhibit insulin secretion and in the pitu-
itary to suppress growth hormone release. With the reduction of 
growth hormone, there is a consequent lowering of IGF-I levels as 
well as IGFBP-3 and ALS. 
 Size exclusion acid chromatography has been the standard 
method for detection of Pro-IGF-II in NICTH but the process is 
time consuming. Immunoblot analysis after separating the pro-
teins on 16.5% tricine-sodium dodecyl sulphate-polyacrylamide 
gels is a more rapid and equally sensitive method. The IGF-II 
antibody used recognizes both mature and pro-IGF-II forms. In 
normal subjects, most of the IGF-II migrates at 7.5 kDA and a 
small amount in the 10 to 17 kDA region, whereas with NICTH 
most of the IGF-II migrates in the 10 to 17 kDa region and a 
small amount at 7 kDa. 
 The clinical syndrome of nonislet cell tumor hypoglycemia, 
therefore, is supported by laboratory documentation of serum 
insulin levels below 5 µU/mL with plasma glucose measurements 
of 45 mg/dL or lower. Values for growth hormone and IGF-I are 
also decreased. Levels of IGF-II may be increased but often are 
normal in quantity despite the presence of the immature, higher 
molecular weight form of IGF-II, which can only be detected by 
special laboratory techniques. 
 Not all the patients with NICTH have elevated pro-IGF-II. 
Ectopic insulin production has been described (bronchial carci-
noid, ovarian carcinoma, and a small cell carcinoma of the cervix). 
Hypoglycemia due to IGF-I released from a metastatic large cell 
carcinoma of the lung has also been reported. 
 Treatment is aimed toward the primary tumor, with supportive 
therapy using frequent feedings. Diazoxide is ineffective in revers-
ing the hypoglycemia caused by these tumors. 
 7.  ALIMENTARY (REACTIVE) 
HYPOGLYCEMIA 
 Some disorders cause hypoglycemia in the postprandial state. This 
condition occurs in patients following gastric surgery (including 
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery), in autoimmune hypoglycemia, 
in islet hyperplasia (noninsulinoma pancreatogenous hypoglyce-
mia syndrome), and occasionally in occult diabetes. 
 Late dumping syndrome: After major gastric surgery (gastrec-
tomy, vagotomy, pyloroplasty, gastrojejunostomy, and laparo-
scopic Nissen fundoplication, Billroth II procedure, and Roux-en-Y 
gastric bypass), some patients develop hypoglycemia post meals 
especially when they consume foods containing high levels of 
carbohydrates. This is also referred to as the late dumping syn-
drome. Late dumping occurs 1 to 3 hours after a meal. Rapid 
delivery of a meal to the small intestine results in an initial high 
concentration of carbohydrates in the proximal small bowel and 
rapid absorption of glucose. This is countered by a hyperinsuline-
mic response. The high insulin levels are responsible for the sub-
sequent hypoglycemia. The hypoglycemic symptoms include 
lightheadedness, sweating, confusion, and even loss of conscious-
ness. Gastrointestinal hormones—glucose-dependent insulinotro-
pic polypeptide (GIP) and glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1)—may 
play a role in the hyperinsulinemic response. An increased GLP-1 
response has been noted in patients after total gastrectomy, esoph-
ageal resection, partial gastrectomy, and Roux-en-Y surgery. 
Furthermore, a positive correlation was found between the rise in 
plasma GLP-1 and insulin release. Decrease in requirement for 
gastric surgery for peptic ulcer disease and newer gastric opera-
tions such as proximal gastric vagotomy have reduced the inci-
dence of postgastrectomy syndromes. However, as Roux-en-Y 
gastric bypass surgery has become a popular treatment for morbid 
obesity, there have been a number of reports of severe postprandial 
neuroglycopenia. The prevalence of the syndrome after Roux-en-Y 
procedure is not known. The University of Minnesota surgery 
group identified 14 cases of postprandial hypoglycemia in 3082 
procedures (0.4%), but it is unclear how many patients may have 
eluded detection or failed to maintain follow-up. 
 Patients typically complain of the symptoms more severe after 
consumption of large amounts or readily absorbable carbohydrates. 
The mixed meal test can be used to precipitate the symptoms. The 
composition of the mixed meal has not been standardized, and it 
is reasonable to request the patient to consume a meal that leads 
to symptoms during everyday life. The University of Minnesota 
CHAPTER 18 Hypoglycemic Disorders     669
investigators formalized a high carbohydrate and a low carbohy-
drate test meal ( Table 18–6 ) and showed that in patients with 
postgastric bypass hypoglycemia, the high carbohydrate meal 
resulted in hyperglycemia and concomitant hyperinsulinemia at 
about 30 minutes after a meal. Glucose levels then fell to a nadir 
(range 28-62 mg/dL) at 90 to 120 minutes. Eating the low carbo-
hydrate meal, however, resulted in very little change in plasma 
glucose levels and only a modest increase in plasma insulin. The 
prolonged (5 hour) oral glucose tolerance test is not recommended 
for evaluation because a large number of healthy subjects will have 
a false-positive result. There have been case reports of insulinoma 
and noninsulinoma pancreatogenous hypoglycemia syndrome 
occurring in patients who present with hypoglycemia post-Roux-
en-Y surgery. It is unclear how often this occurs. A careful history 
may identify those patients who have history of hypoglycemia with 
exercise or when meals are missed, and these individuals may 
require a formal 72-hour fast to rule out an insulinoma. Those 
patients with well-documented postprandial hyperinsulinemic 
hypoglycemia, which does not respond to medical treatment, may 
need to have selective calcium-stimulated angiography to identify 
diffuse islet cell hyperplasia (nesidioblastosis). 
 Several different treatments can be tried for the late dumping 
syndrome. Dietary modification is the best option but may be 
difficult to sustain for some patients. More frequent meals with 
smaller portions of less rapidly assimilated carbohydrate and more 
slowly absorbed fat or protein can be tried. Alpha glucosidase 
inhibitors (acarbose and miglitol) can be a useful adjunct to a low 
carbohydrate diet in some patients. Octreotide 50 µg administered 
subcutaneously two or three times a day 30 minutes prior to each 
meal has been reported to improve symptoms in patients with 
severe dumping refractory to other forms of medical interven-
tions. Information regarding long-term octreotide use is however 
limited. Various surgical procedures to slow down gastric empty-
ing have been reported to improve symptoms, but long-term 
efficacy studies are lacking. Recently it has been reported that 
endoscopic gastrojejunal anastomotic reduction to induce delay in 
gastric pouch emptying in patients with Roux-en-Y surgery 
improves the dumping syndrome symptoms. Partial pancreatec-
tomy is also an option for those postgastric bypass patients with 
hypoglycemia who have a positive selective calcium stimulation 
test and in whom medical therapy has failed. 
 Noninsulinoma pancreatogenous hypoglycemia syndrome 
(NIPHS): These are patients with hyperinsulinemic hypoglyce-
mia due to generalized islet hyperplasia and nesidioblastosis. These 
patients predominantly have symptoms 2 to 4 hours after meals 
and only rarely while fasting. The majority of patients are male 
(70%), and all have neuroglycopenic symptoms including diplo-
pia, dysarthria, confusion, disorientation, and even convulsions 
and coma. At the time of hypoglycemia, these patients have ele-
vated insulin; C-peptide and proinsulin levels; and negative sulfo-
nylurea, repaglinide, and nateglinide screens. Typically these 
patients have a negative 72-hour fast. Imaging studies are also 
negative. These patients have a positive selective arterial calcium 
stimulation test—usually positive for multiple arteries. NIPHS 
patients do not have mutations in the  KIR6.2 and  SUR1 genes, 
which have been abnormal in some cases of children with a syn-
drome of familial hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia (see later) 
Gradient-guided partial or subtotal pancreatectomy relieves the 
hypoglycemic symptoms in the majority of patients. 
 Late hypoglycemia of occult diabetes: This condition is 
 characterized by insulin release from pancreatic β cells, resulting in 
initial exaggeration of hyperglycemia during a glucose tolerance 
test. In response to this hyperglycemia, exaggerated delayed insu-
lin release produces late hypoglycemia 4 to 5 hours after ingestion 
of glucose. These patients are often obese, frequently have a family 
history of diabetes mellitus and have impaired glucose tolerance. 
In the obese, treatment is directed at reduction to ideal weight. 
These patients also often respond to reduced intake of refined 
sugars with multiple, spaced, small feedings high in dietary fiber. 
They should be considered to have prediabetes or early diabetes 
(type 1 or 2) and advised to have periodic medical evaluations. 
 Postprandial syndrome (functional alimentary hypoglyce-
mia): Patients present with symptoms suggestive of increased 
sympathetic activity—anxiety, weakness, tremor, sweating, or pal-
pitations after meals. Physical examination and laboratory tests are 
normal. Previously many of these patients underwent a 5-hour 
oral glucose tolerance test and the detection of glucose levels in the 
50s was determined to be responsible for the symptoms, and the 
recommendation was to modify the diet. It is now recognized that 
at least 10% of normal subjects who do not have any symptoms 
have nadir glucose levels less than 50 mg/dL during a 4- to 6-hour 
oral glucose tolerance test. In a study comparing responses to an 
oral glucose tolerance test with the response to a mixed meal test, 
none of the patients who had plasma glucose levels less than 
50 mg/dL on oral glucose testing had low glucose values with the 
mixed meal. Thus, it is not recommended that these patients 
undergo either a prolonged oral glucose tolerance test or a mixed 
meal test. The patients should instead be given home blood glu-
cose monitors (with memories) and instructed to monitor finger-
stick glucose levels at the time of symptoms. Only patients 
who have symptoms when their fingerstick blood glucose is low 
(<50 mg/dL) and who have resolution of symptoms when the 
TABLE 18–6  Test meals for evaluation of 
postprandial hypoglycemia after 
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery.
High Carbohydrate Meal (79% 
Carbohydrate, 11% Fat, and 
10% Protein; 405 kcal)
Low Carbohydrate Meal (2% 
Carbohydrate, 74% Fat, and 
24% Protein; 415 kcal)
8 oz of orange juice
1 slice of toast with 1 tsp of 
 margarine and 2 tsp of jam
Decaffeinated black coffee or tea 
 (without sugar)
1 egg, a 1-oz sausage patty, and 
 a 0.5-oz slice of cheese
After overnight fast (≥8 hours) give high carbohydrate meal on day 1 and low carbo-
hydrate meal on day 2. Measure plasma glucose and serum insulin levels before 
(fasting) and 30, 60, 90, 120, 150, and 180 minutes after the meal.
Adapted from Kellogg TA, et al. Postgastric bypass hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia 
syndrome: characterization and response to a modified diet. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2008 
4:492-499.
670    CHAPTER 18 Hypoglycemic Disorders
glucose is raised by consumption of readily absorbable carbohy-
drate need additional evaluation. Patients who do not have evi-
dence for low glucose levels at the time of symptoms are generally 
reassured by their findings. Counseling and support should be the 
mainstays of therapy in this group, with dietary manipulation 
used only as an adjunctive form of therapy. 
 8. DISORDERS ASSOCIATED WITH LOW 
HEPATIC GLUCOSE OUTPUT 
 Reduced hepatic gluconeogenesis can result from a direct loss of 
hepatic tissue (acute yellow atrophy from fulminant viral hepatitis 
or toxic damage), from disorders that reduce amino acid substrate 
for hepatic gluconeogenesis (severe muscle wasting and inanition 
from anorexia nervosa, chronic starvation, uremia, and glucocor-
ticoid deficit from adrenocortical deficiency), or from inborn 
errors of carbohydrate metabolism affecting glycogenolytic or 
gluconeogenic enzymes. 
 CONGENITAL HYPERINSULINISM 
 Neonatal hypoglycemia is a very common problem and can be due 
to a variety of causes ( Table 18–7 ). In the first day of life, normal 
babies do not tolerate fasting for periods of 8 hours after delivery. 
Hypoglycemia in this setting is attributed to impaired ketogenesis 
and gluconeogenesis. This developmental immaturity in the meta-
bolic response to fasting resolves within the first 2 to 3 days of life. 
Hypoglycemia in the first few days of life may be directly related to 
maternal factors, such as maternal diabetes, intravenous glucose use 
during labor and delivery, and various medications. All of these 
factors induce a transient hyperinsulinism in the newborn. 
Prolonged neonatal hypoglycemia may result from perinatal stress, 
the Beckwith-Wiedeman syndrome, and hypopituitarism. The risk 
for hypoglycemia can persist for weeks to months. Persistent hypo-
glycemia may result from: (1) a deficiency in one or more counter-
regulatory hormones; (2) defects in glycogenolysis, gluconeogenesis, 
or fatty acid oxidation; or (3) congenital hyperinsulinism, the vari-
ous forms of which are discussed further below. 
 As with adults, hyperinsulinism is the most frequent cause of 
persistent hypoglycemia in infants and children. As compared to 
adults, where the most common cause of hyperinsulinism is an 
insulin-secreting adenoma, in infants hyperinsulinism most likely 
stems from an underlying genetic disorder. This condition has 
been referenced in various ways, including persistent hyperinsu-
linemic hypoglycemia of infancy or islet dysregulation syndrome, 
but hereafter will be referred to as congenital hyperinsulinism. 
Transient congenital hyperinsulinism is a common disorder in the 
immediate neonatal period. Persistent disorders are rarer, occur-
ring in approximately 1 in 50,000. This problem was originally 
attributed to an anomaly in islet development, termed  nesidio-
blastosis , a reference to endocrine cell budding from pancreatic 
ducts. However, this budding has since been noted to represent a 
normal developmental process during the first year of life. Recent 
advances in our understanding of the regulation of insulin secre-
tion have begun to elucidate the underlying pathophysiology of 
this complex disease. Congenital hyperinsulinism has now been 
attributed to at least seven different gene defects. However, 
depending on the series cited, no genetic explanation is found in 
50% or more of cases. Timely diagnosis and aggressive treatment 
are essential to prevent long-term neurologic sequelae in the 
affected individual. 
 Transient Hyperinsulinism 
 A. Infants of diabetic mothers 
 The fetuses of mothers 
with poorly regulated diabetes are exposed to sustained hypergly-
cemia, leading to increased fetal insulin secretion, with resultant 
macrosomia. This increased insulin secretion persists postpartum 
and usually resolves after several days. As a result, infants of dia-
betic mothers are at high risk of developing hypoglycemia after 
birth. They can usually be managed with early, frequent feedings 
or intravenous glucose until insulin secretion has normalized, 
often 1 to 2 days after birth. 
 B. Small for gestational age, asphyxiation, and other 
conditions in newborns 
 Various perinatal stresses are known 
to induce hyperinsulinism. Small-for-gestational age and asphyxi-
ated newborns, usually from toxemic mothers, frequently experi-
ence hyperinsulinism and hypoglycemia. Hyperinsulinism is also 
reported in erythroblastosis fetalis, sepsis, cerebral hemorrhage, 
and severely stressed newborns. Hypoglycemia usually resolves 
within a period of several days or weeks but may persist in these 
settings for 6 to 12 months. Some newborns with Beckwith-
Wiedemann syndrome and Soto syndrome (also known as cere-
bral gigantism) show β cell hyperplasia and experience transient 
hypoglycemia from hyperinsulinism. 
 Persistent Hyperinsulinism 
 Persistent hyperinsulinism, continuing for more than several 
weeks, results from a group of heterogeneous disorders, rather 
than a single entity, and the various subtypes are discussed below. 
TABLE 18–7  Types of congenital hyperinsulinism 
and their causes.
Transient
 Infants of diabetic mothers
 Miscellaneous
  Small for gestational age, asphyxia, and stress in infants
  Syndromes (eg, Beckwith-Wiedemann, Soto)
Persistent
 Defects in ATP-dependent potassium channel
  Sulfonylurea receptor (SUR)
  Kir6.2
  Focal vs diffuse disease
 Metabolic defects
  Glutamate dehydrogenase
  Glucokinase
  Short-chain L-3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase (SCHAD)
  Exercise-induced
  Glycosylation disorders
CHAPTER 18 Hypoglycemic Disorders     671
These forms may be classified in a variety of different ways, 
including usual time of presentation (shortly after birth vs after 
months to years of life); mode of genetic transmission (autosomal 
recessive vs dominant); or anatomic (focal vs diffuse). In this sec-
tion, the forms are grouped into defects in the pancreatic β cell 
ATP-sensitive potassium channel, defects affecting intracellular 
metabolism, and several other miscellaneous conditions. 
 A. Channel defects 
 1. Sulfonylurea receptor and Kir6.2— The most common cause 
of congenital hyperinsulinism appears to be related to defects 
in the pancreatic β cell ATP-sensitive potassium channel. This 
channel consists of a multimer of two proteins, the sulfonylu-
rea receptor (SUR), a member of the ATP-binding cassette 
superfamily, and Kir6.2, a member of a family of inwardly 
rectifying potassium channels. With increases in intracellular 
ATP, the channel closes, leading to depolarization and insulin 
secretion (see Chapter 17). Defects in either component of the 
channel result in channel closure, inappropriate β cell depolar-
ization, and secretion of insulin, even in the face of low or 
normal glucose concentrations. 
 The two genes encoding the channel components are 
located in tandem on chromosome 11p15. Numerous muta-
tions have now been described and appear to occur more fre-
quently in the SUR than the  Kir6.2 gene. They are usually 
autosomal recessive defects, but dominant defects have also 
been reported. Sequencing of these molecules is now available 
commercially and may not be merely of academic interest: 
patients harboring  SU R or  Kir6.2 mutations often do not 
respond well to medical therapy. Thus, knowledge of the 
underlying defect may influence treatment decisions for a par-
ticular patient as well as inform the family about risk to future 
children. Relative to other forms of congenital hyperinsulin-
ism, patients with defects in the ATP-sensitive potassium chan-
nel often present early in life, with more marked clinical 
symptomatology, including macrosomia. They experience early 
onset and severe hypoglycemia that requires high rates of glu-
cose infusion to normalize serum glucose concentrations and 
typically require pancreatectomy to restore euglycemia. 
 2. Focal versus diffuse disease— Two histologically distinct forms 
of congenital hyperinsulinism have been described, a diffuse 
form, mentioned above, which constitutes 35% to 70% of cases, 
depending on the series cited, and a focal form (focal adenoma-
tous hyperplasia). Diagnosis of the focal form is made by pancre-
atic venous sampling and by perioperative extemporaneous 
histologic examination. [18F]Fluorodopa positron emission 
tomography may also be of utility in defining focal lesions. 
Histologic examination of the focal form reveals focal hyperpla-
sia, with hypertrophied β cells harboring giant nuclei, in contrast 
to the diffuse form, where all the islets of Langerhans are irregu-
lar in size and contain hypertrophied β cells. The molecular 
explanation for the focal defect is based on a two-hit model, in 
which the child already harbors a mutant allele from a paternally 
derived potassium-ATP channel defect. Subsequent somatic loss 
of heterozygosity for the maternal 11p chromosome is associated 
with focal disease and may result from a decrease in dosage of an 
independent growth-suppressing gene(s) in this region. The 
distinction between these two forms of hyperinsulinism has 
potentially important implications for therapy, because patients 
with focal disease may be cured with more limited partial pan-
createctomy, whereas those with the diffuse form require more 
aggressive near-total resection. Such patients can only be fully 
evaluated and treated at centers equipped with a team of endo-
crinologists, interventional radiologists, pathologists, and sur-
geons with expertise in this disorder. 
 B. Metabolic defects 
 The second most common form of con-
genital hyperinsulinism is the hyperinsulinism-hyperammonemia 
syndrome, which results from activating mutations of the  gluta-
mate dehydrogenase (GDH) gene. This condition is inherited in 
autosomal dominant fashion. This enzyme mediates oxidative 
deamination of glutamate to alpha ketoglutarate. Activating 
mutations impair GDH sensitivity to guanosine triphosphate, 
an allosteric inhibitor, and increase sensitivity to leucine, an 
allosteric activator. With increased GDH activity, increased pro-
duction of alpha ketoglutarate with subsequent oxidation in the 
Krebs cycle generates increased ATP, which in turn activates the 
ATP-sensitive potassium channel and leads to depolarization and 
insulin secretion. GDH is also expressed in hepatocytes, and 
increased activity generates ammonia via glutamate oxidation. 
Thus, one hallmark of this defect is increased ammonia concen-
trations three to five times normal. The patients with GDH 
mutations usually have a milder course than those with defects 
in the ATP-sensitive potassium channel, often presenting out-
side of the neonatal period. They often have postprandial hypo-
glycemia, particularly in response to higher protein loads, but 
may also manifest fasting hypoglycemia. They usually respond 
well to diazoxide, and many are able to eventually discontinue 
treatment. 
 A much rarer form of autosomal dominant hyperinsulinism 
results from mutations in glucokinase, the first and rate-limiting 
step in glycolysis, and an enzyme that is considered to play an 
essential role in glucose sensing by the β cell. Individuals heterozy-
gous for inactivating mutations have a form of maturity onset 
diabetes of the young. On the other hand, activating mutations 
have been described in two families that result in increased rates 
of glycolysis at lower glucose concentrations. The resultant 
increase in the intracellular ATP/ADP ratio increases insulin secre-
tion at any given serum glucose concentration, resulting in hypo-
glycemia. 
 An entity referred to as  exercise-induced hyperinsulinism has 
been described, in which hyperinsulinism is noted following exer-
cise. An underlying genetic cause has not yet been proven, 
although it is suspected that this represents another metabolic 
defect. This problem appears to be milder than the others 
described earlier, and it neither presents in the neonatal period nor 
results in fasting hypoglycemia. A recent report suggested an auto-
somal dominant pattern of inheritance in multiple members of 
two families. Hyperinsulinism was induced by exercise and by 
pyruvate infusion, suggesting that this disorder results from 
abnormal transport or metabolism of pyruvate in β cells. 
 Another autosomal recessive form of congenital hyperinsulin-
ism results from mutations in the gene encoding the short chain 
L-3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase. This enzyme mediates the 
penultimate step in fatty acid beta oxidation and as such repre-
sents the first link between defects in fatty acid metabolism and 
insulin secretion. However, it is not yet clear how this defect 
results in congenital hyperinsulinism. 
672    CHAPTER 18 Hypoglycemic Disorders
 Congenital disorders in glycosylation have also been linked 
with congenital hyperinsulinism. The mechanism is unclear, 
although hypoglycosylation of the SUR with a resultant defect in 
trafficking to the cell membrane has been offered as a possible 
explanation. Nonetheless, these patients appear to be responsive to 
diazoxide, suggesting that at least some functional ATP-sensitive 
potassium channels reach the cell surface. Affected individuals 
have multisystem disorders, including neurologic defects. 
 Despite the evolving elucidation of defects known to be associ-
ated with congenital hyperinsulinism, the underlying diagnosis 
remains unknown in up to one-half of infants diagnosed with this 
condition. 
 Clinical Presentation 
 The cardinal symptoms of hyperinsulinism are recurrent episodes 
of hypoglycemia and can occur any time after birth until several 
years of age, or manifest even later in life, depending on the nature 
and severity of the defect. As in adults, the symptoms of hypogly-
cemia are secondary to adrenergic responses or neuroglycopenia. 
However, in neonates and infants, symptoms are difficult to detect 
and may be less specific. They may include tremors, cyanosis, 
hypothermia, apnea or irregular breathing, lethargy, apathy, limp-
ness, refusal to eat, high-pitched cries, and seizures of any type. 
Even if newborns appear asymptomatic, hypoglycemia can be as 
severe as in symptomatic neonates. 
 Diagnosis 
 The differential diagnosis for hypoglycemia in a neonate is quite 
long and includes deficiencies in counterregulatory hormones 
(eg, growth hormone, ACTH, glucocorticoids); defects in gluco-
neogenesis, glycogen synthesis, and breakdown; and disorders in 
fatty acid metabolism. Hyperinsulinism is suspected in hypogly-
cemic newborns or infants who require unusually high glucose 
infusion rates (12-30 mg/kg/min) to maintain blood glucose 
levels in the target range. Macrosomia may be another clue to 
hyperinsulinism, although it is not always present. The crucial 
diagnostic step is to obtain a  critical blood sample for glucose, 
insulin, growth hormone, cortisol, blood gas, lactate, free fatty 
acids, and ketones (β-hydroxybutyrate) during hypoglycemia. 
Urinary ketones should be measured in the first urine after hypo-
glycemia. Insulin levels must often be measured during several 
episodes of hypoglycemia because insulin levels at times of hypo-
glycemia are not always diagnostically elevated. In fact, insulin 
levels that are inappropriately measurable during episodes of 
hypoglycemia are still consistent with the diagnosis. As in adults, 
the hallmarks of hyperinsulinism include measurable plasma 
insulin in the face of hypoglycemia (glucose <40 mg/dL), low or 
unmeasurable ketones and free fatty acids, and hyperresponsive-
ness to glucagon challenge, with the glycemic response to 0.5 to 
1 mg of parenteral glucagon of more than 30 mg/dL (with glu-
cose monitored every 15 minutes for up to 45 minutes after 
glucagon injection). Low IGF-binding protein (IGFBP) 1 levels 
also suggests this diagnosis, as insulin suppresses IGFBP1 secre-
tion from the liver. 
 Treatment 
 A. Medical therapy 
 Management of children with congeni-
tal hyperinsulinism remains one of the most challenging prob-
lems for pediatric endocrinologists, and affected children should 
be transferred to a tertiary center that has experience in managing 
such children. Patients may require high glucose infusion rates to 
maintain euglycemia, and thus a secure central line is usually 
necessary. They also require frequent glucose monitoring, exten-
sive ongoing laboratory assessment to establish the underlying 
diagnosis, and a series of medical and/or surgical interventions to 
effect a cure. 
 Hypoglycemia in infancy has to be treated aggressively in order 
to prevent long-term neurologic sequelae. Relative to adults, 
younger children (up to age 5 to 6 years) appear to be particularly 
vulnerable to such damage. Those with hyperinsulinism are par-
ticularly at risk, because ketone bodies are not present as an alter-
native fuel source. The therapeutic goal is to achieve glucose levels 
above 60 mg/dL while the infant is on an appropriate feeding 
schedule for age. Infants receiving appropriate therapy must be 
able to support a fast for at least 4 to 6 hours without hypoglyce-
mia. In selected cases in which food refusal or intercurrent illness 
is a problem, hypoglycemia can be prevented by placing a gastros-
tomy tube to administer food on a regular basis. 
 For acute management of hypoglycemia, stabilization of blood 
glucoses may require infusion rates of glucose up to 20 to 30 mg/
kg/min, well above the 4 to 8 mg/kg/min needed to stabilize most 
neonates. Some centers employ aggressive enteral feeding, using 
frequent feeds or continuous feeding via nasogastric or gastros-
tomy tube, with or without cornstarch, as a means to avoid hypo-
glycemia. The following drugs are also used in the medical 
management of hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia. 
 1. Diazoxide— Diazoxide is the drug of choice in neonates who 
cannot be weaned from intravenous glucose. Diazoxide 
increases blood glucose by stabilizing the ATP-sensitive potas-
sium channel in the open state, thereby inhibiting membrane 
depolarization and insulin secretion. Functionally intact SUR 
and Kir6.2 proteins are necessary for the full action of the 
drug, and thus, patients with channel defects often do not 
respond, whereas those with other forms of hyperinsulinism do 
exhibit salutary responses. Diazoxide also increases cate-
cholamine release, which suppresses insulin release and inhibits 
insulin’s actions peripherally. The initial recommended dose is 
10 to 15 mg/kg/d divided every 8 hours, up to a maximal dose 
of 20 mg/kg/d. Positive responses are usually seen within 
48 hours if they are going to occur. Diazoxide has several impor-
tant side effects that should be considered. Fluid retention can 
be managed by simultaneous administration of chlorothiazide. 
Hypertrichosis and coarse facial changes may become quite 
striking and can be reduced only by decreasing the dose or 
discontinuing the diazoxide altogether. Hyperuricemia, leuko-
penia, and thrombocytopenia are rare, but routine serum stud-
ies must be monitored while therapy continues. Diazoxide is 
also an antihypertensive drug, but these effects are rarely 
encountered with oral administration. 
 Depending on the study cited, diazoxide appears to be effica-
cious in only one-fourth to one-half of the patients with hyper-
insulinism and appears to be less likely to work in those patients 
presenting in the immediate newborn period, a population that 
CHAPTER 18 Hypoglycemic Disorders     673
often has more marked defects in ATP-sensitive potassium chan-
nel activity. Thus, in those patients with persistent hyperinsulin-
ism, determining whether mutations are present in  SUR or 
 Kir 6.2 genes may help anticipate the response to medical therapy 
and predict the need for more definitive surgical intervention. 
 2. Somatostatin analogs— This is usually a second-line approach, 
for those unresponsive to diazoxide. Somatostatin acts via a G 
protein–coupled receptor to lower intracellular calcium and to 
hyperpolarize the β cell membrane, thereby inhibiting insulin 
release. Somatostatin has a half-life of only 1 to 3 minutes, but 
the synthetic analog octreotide may be administered at inter-
vals of up to 8 hours or via continuous subcutaneous infusion 
and is efficacious in some patients with congenital hyperinsu-
linism. A starting dose of 5 to 10 µg/kg/d, administered either 
as an intermittent bolus or via continuous subcutaneous infu-
sion in a pump, often produces salutary initial responses, but 
because of tachyphylaxis, the dose sometimes has to be 
increased to as much as 40 µg/kg/d. Some physicians advocate 
octreotide in patients who fail to respond to diazoxide therapy 
alone. However, optimal control of blood glucose often cannot 
be achieved by adding octreotide, and partial pancreatectomy 
is necessary. Nonetheless, the medication may help stabilize 
blood glucose concentrations in the preoperative period and 
may prove efficacious postoperatively in those patients who 
have persistent hyperinsulinism even with reduced β cell mass. 
There are some reports of long-term success (>5 years) with 
octreotide alone. 
 Short-term side effects are mostly self-limited within the 
first several weeks of therapy. Octreotide has nonspecific effects 
on the gastrointestinal tract, including decreased perfusion of 
the splanchnic circulation, gallbladder contractility, and bile 
secretion. Short-term effects may include vomiting, abdominal 
distension, and steatorrhea, with later risk of cholelithiasis. 
Possible inhibitory effects of octreotide on other hormonal 
axes, including effects on the pituitary somatotrope, adrenal, 
and thyroid, raise concerns about its long-term use, although 
some centers report successful and uneventful use for years 
without significant problems. 
 3. Glucagon— Glucagon has a place in the management of 
hyperinsulinism during initial stabilization of the hypoglyce-
mic infant in the intensive care unit or prior to surgery. This 
agent stimulates hepatic glycogenolysis and is very effective in 
these patients because their glycogen stores are replete. A vari-
ety of doses has been shown to be effective, including a bolus 
of 0.2 mg intravenously in cases of severe hypoglycemia fol-
lowed by a continuous infusion at a dose of 2 to 10 mg/kg/h. 
An intramuscular glucagon injection may also be used as an 
emergency treatment of recurrent hypoglycemic episodes at 
home. Attempts have been made to administer glucagon con-
tinuously via subcutaneous infusion with limited success. 
 4. Calcium antagonists— Because calcium influx is required for 
insulin secretion, calcium antagonists could play a potential 
role in the treatment of hyperinsulinism. Calcium channel 
blockers also decrease the transcriptional response of insulin to 
glucose. However, only rare and limited success has been 
achieved with this class of drugs, perhaps because of failure to 
block calcium channels selectively within the β cells. 
 B. Surgical therapy 
 Partial pancreatectomy is undertaken 
when maintenance of euglycemia cannot be achieved with medical 
treatment alone. The initial surgical procedure of choice has tradi-
tionally been a 95% pancreatectomy. However, such procedures 
are now being reconsidered, with the appreciation that some of 
these infants may have a focal rather than diffuse process and may 
require only selective resection of the affected pancreatic tissue in 
order to effect a cure. Unfortunately, only a limited number of 
medical centers around the world are now equipped to conduct 
the pre- and perioperative evaluation to distinguish focal from 
diffuse disease, which includes selective venous sampling and his-
tological analysis. 
 Even with more aggressive resections, β cell mass reduction 
does not always lead to euglycemia, and medical therapy may have 
to be continued following surgery. If this fails to restore euglyce-
mia, a second surgical intervention may be required in which 
near-total pancreatectomy (99%) is performed. Potential surgical 
complications include intraoperative injury to the common bile 
duct and adhesions with intestinal obstruction. Additional com-
plications include exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, often requir-
ing oral supplements at mealtimes, and diabetes mellitus. 
 Outcome 
 Neurologic sequelae are the major concern with severe hypoglyce-
mia during infancy and childhood. Multiple episodes of hypogly-
cemia are more often associated with sequelae than one severe 
hypoglycemic episode with convulsions. At least one-third of 
patients with congenital hyperinsulinism suffer from developmen-
tal delay based on follow-up via a telephone survey. 
 Patients with the familial form of congenital hyperinsulinism 
who harbor mutations in the SUR receptor may be at additional 
neurologic risk. The SUR is expressed in the brain, and defects in 
this molecule could potentially interfere with neural development. 
The role of this receptor in the brain, however, has yet to be elu-
cidated. 
 Affected individuals also appear to be at higher risk for later 
development of diabetes. This problem may be related to reduced 
β cell mass following pancreatectomy or from β cell apoptosis fol-
lowing chronic depolarization in subjects who harbor channel 
defects. 
 REFERENCES 
 Amiel SA. Hypoglycemia: from the laboratory to the clinic.  Diabetes Care . 
2009;32:1364. [PMID: 19638523] 
 Banarer S, McGregor VP, Cryer PE. Intraislet hyperinsulinemia prevents the glu-
cagon response to hyperglycemia despite an intact autonomic response. 
 Diabetes . 2002;51:958. [PMID: 11916913] 
 Bolli GB, Fanelli CG. Physiology of glucose counterregulation to hypoglyce-
mia.  Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am . 1999;28:467. [PMID: 
10500926] 
 Boyle PJ, Kempers SF, O’Connor AM, Nagy RJ. Brain glucose uptake and 
unawareness of hypoglycemia in patients with insulin-dependent diabetes 
mellitus.  N Engl J Med . 1995 Dec 28;333(26):1726-1731. [PMID: 
7491135] 
 Cryer PE. Mechanisms of hypoglycemia-associated autonomic failure and its com-
ponent syndromes in diabetes.  Diabetes . 2005;54:3592. [PMID: 
16306382] 
 Cryer P E, Axelrod L, Grossman A, et al. Evaluation and management of adult 
hypoglycemic disorders: an Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guideline.
 J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2009;94:709. [PMID: 19088155] 
 de Groot JW, Rikhof B, van Doorn J, et al. Non-islet cell tumour-induced hypo-
glycaemia: a review of the literature including two new cases.  Endocr Relat 
Cancer . 2007;14:979. [PMID: 18045950] 
674    CHAPTER 18 Hypoglycemic Disorders
 De Leon DD, Stanley CA. Mechanisms of disease: advances in diagnosis and treat-
ment of hyperinsulinism in neonates.  Nat Clin Pract Endocrinol Metab . 
2007;3:57. [PMID: 17179930] 
 de Lonlay P, Fournet JC, Rahier J, et al. Somatic deletion of the imprinted 11p15 
region in sporadic persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of infancy is 
specific for focal adenomatous hyperplasia and endorses partial pancreatec-
tomy.  J Clin Invest . 1997;100:802. [PMID: 9259578] 
 Diabetes Control and Complications Trial/Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions 
and Complications Study Research Group. Long-term effect of diabetes and 
its treatment on cognitive function.  N Engl J Med . 2007;356:1842. [PMID: 
17476010] 
 Doppman JL, Chang R, Fraker DL, et al. Localization of insulinomas to regions 
of the pancreas by intra-arterial stimulation with calcium.  Ann Intern Med . 
1995;123:269. [PMID: 7611592] 
 Dunne MJ, Cosgrove KE, Shepherd RM, Aynsley-Green A, Lindley KJ. 
Hyperinsulinism in infancy: from basic science to clinical disease.  Physiol 
Rev . 2004;84:239. [PMID: 14715916] 
 Ekberg K, Landau BR, Wajngot A, et al. Contributions by kidney and liver to 
glucose production in the post-absorptive state and after 60 h of fasting. 
 Diabetes . 1999;48:292. [PMID: 10334304] 
 Fanelli C, Pampanelli S, Epifano L, et al. Long-term recovery from unawareness, 
deficient counterregulation and lack of cognitive dysfunction during hypo-
glycemia following institution of rational, intensive insulin therapy in 
IDDM.  Diabetologia . 1994;37:1265. [PMID: 7895957] 
 Glaser B, Hirsch HJ, Landau H. Persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of 
infancy: long-term octreotide treatment without pancreatectomy.  J Pediatr . 
1993;123:644. [PMID: 8410523] 
 Grant CS. Insulinoma.  Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol . 2005 Oct;19(5):783-798. 
[PMID: 16253900] 
 Hardy OT, Hernandez-Pampaloni M, Saffer JR, et al. Accuracy of [18F]fluoro-
dopa positron emission tomography for diagnosing and localizing focal 
congenital hyperinsulinism.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2007;92:4706. [PMID: 
17895314] 
 Hoe FM, Thornton PS, Wanner LA, Steinkrauss L, Simmons RA, Stanley CA. 
Clinical features and insulin regulation in infants with a syndrome of pro-
longed neonatal hyperinsulinism.  J Pediatr . 2006;148:207. [PMID: 
16492430] 
 Hussain K, Cosgrove KE. From congenital hyperinsulinism to diabetes mellitus: 
the role of pancreatic beta-cell KATP channels.  Pediatr Diabetes . 2005;6:103. 
[PMID: 15963039] 
 Kellogg TA, Bantle JP, Leslie DB, et al. Postgastric bypass hyperinsulinemic hypo-
glycemia syndrome: characterization and response to a modified diet.  Surg 
Obes Relat Dis . 2008;4:492. [PMID: 18656831] 
 Kumar U, Sasi R, Suresh S, et al. Subtype selective expression of the five somatostatin 
receptors (hSSTR 1–5) in human pancreatic islet cells.  Diabetes . 1999;48:77. 
[PMID: 9892225] 
 Leibowitz G, Glaser B, Higazi AA, Salameh M, Cerasi E, Landau H. 
Hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of infancy (nesidioblastosis) in clinical 
remission: high incidence of diabetes mellitus and persistent beta-cell dys-
function at long-term follow-up.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 1995;80:386. 
[PMID: 7852494] 
 Lupsa BC, Chong AY, Cochran EK, Soos MA, Semple RK, Gorden P. Autoimmune 
forms of hypoglycemia.  Medicine (Baltimore) . 2009;88:141. [PMID: 
19440117] 
 Marks V, Teale JD. Drug-induced hypoglycemia.  Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am . 
1999;28:555. [PMID: 10500931] 
 Marks V, Teale JD. Hypoglycemia: factitious and felonious.  Endocrinol Metab Clin 
North Am . 1999;28:579. [PMID: 10500932] 
 Mathur A, Gorden P, Libutti SK. Insulinoma.  Surg Clin North Am . 2009 
Oct;89(5):1105-21. [PMID: 19836487] 
 Meier JJ, Butler AE, Galasso R, Butler PC. Hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia after 
gastric bypass surgery is not accompanied by islet hyperplasia or increased 
beta-cell turnover.  Diabetes Care . 2006;29:1554. [PMID: 16801578] 
 Rave K, Flesch S, Kuhn-Velten WN, Hompesch BC, Heinemann  L, Heise T. 
Enhancement of blood glucose lowering effect of a sulfonylurea when coad-
ministered with an ACE inhibitor: results of a glucose-clamp study.  Diab 
Metabol Res Rev . 2005;21:459. [PMID: 15915547] 
 Seckl MJ, Mulholland  PJ, Bishop AE, et al. Hypoglycemia due to an insulin-se-
creting small cell carcinoma of the cervix.  N Engl J Med . 1999;341:733. 
[PMID: 10471459] 
 Service FJ. Diagnostic approach to adults with hypoglycemic disorders.  Endocrinol 
Metab Clin North Am . 1999;28:519. [PMID: 10500929] 
 Service FJ, Natt N. The prolonged fast.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2000;85:3973. 
[PMID: 11095416] 
 Service GJ, Thompson GB, Service FJ, Andrews JC, Collazo-Clavell ML, Lloyd 
RV. Hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia with nesidioblastosis after  gastric-bypass 
surgery.  N Engl J Med . 2005;353:249. [PMID: 16034010] 
 Stumvoll M, Meyer C, Mitrakou A, Nadkarni V, Gerich JE. Renal glucose produc-
tion and utilization: new aspects in humans.  Diabetologia . 1997;40:749. 
[PMID: 9243094] 
 Thompson GB, Service FJ, Andrews JC. Noninsulinoma pancreatogenous hypogly-
cemia syndrome: an update in 10 surgically treated patients.  Surgery . 
2000;128:937. [PMID: 11114627] 
 Thornton PS, Alter CA, Katz LE, Baker L, Stanley CA. Short- and long-term use 
of octreotide in the treatment of congenital hyperinsulinism.  J Pediatr . 
1993;123:637. [PMID: 8410522] 
 Tucker ON, Crotty PL, Conlon KC. The management of insulinoma.  Br J Surg . 
2006;93:264. [PMID: 16498592] 
 Weinzimer SA, Stanley CA, Berry GT, Yudkoff M, Tuchman M, Thornton  PS. A 
syndrome of congenital hyperinsulinism and hyperammonemia.  J Pediatr . 
1997;130:661. [PMID: 9108870] 
 
 
 
675
9
1
 Disorders of Lipoprotein 
Metabolism 
 Mary J. Malloy, MD and  John P. Kane, MD, PhD 
 ABCA1 
ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 
 ABCG1 
ATP-binding cassette transporter G1 
 ACAT 
Acyl-CoA:cholesterol acyltransferase 
 Apo 
Apolipoprotein 
 ARH 
Autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia 
 CETP 
Cholesteryl ester transfer protein 
 CHD 
Coronary heart disease 
 CK 
Creatine kinase 
 FCH 
Familial combined hyperlipidemia 
 FFA 
Free fatty acids 
 FH 
Familial hypercholesterolemia 
 GPIHDLBP 
Glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored 
 
HDL-binding protein 
 HDL 
High-density lipoproteins 
 HMG-CoA 
Hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA 
 IDL 
intermediate density lipoproteins 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 Idol 
Inducible degrader of the LDL receptor 
 LCAT 
Lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase 
 LDL 
Low-density lipoproteins 
 LMF1 
Lipase maturation factor 1 
 Lp(a) 
Lipoprotein(a) 
 LPL 
Lipoprotein lipase 
 LRP-1 
LDL receptor-related protein-1 
 MCP-1 
Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 
 NAFLD 
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease 
 NASH 
Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis 
 PCPE-2 
Procollagen C-proteinase enhancer-2 
 PCSK9 
Proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin 
 
type 9 
 PDGF 
Platelet-derived growth factor 
 SR-BI 
Scavenger receptor, class B, type I 
 VLDL 
Very low density lipoproteins 
 The clinical importance of lipoprotein disorders derives chiefly 
from the role of lipoproteins in atherogenesis and its associated 
risk of coronary and peripheral vascular disease. The greatly 
increased risk of acute pancreatitis associated with severe hyper-
triglyceridemia is an additional indication for intervention. 
Disordered lipid metabolism is also a critical element in nonalco-
holic fatty liver disease. Characterization of dyslipidemia is impor-
tant for selection of appropriate treatment and may provide clues 
to underlying primary clinical disorders. 
 ATHEROSCLEROSIS 
 Atherosclerosis is the leading cause of death in the United States. 
Abundant epidemiologic evidence establishes its multifactorial 
character and indicates that the effects of the multiple risk fac-
tors are at least additive. Risk factors include hyperlipidemia, 
hypertension, smoking, diabetes, physical inactivity, decreased 
levels of high-density lipoproteins (HDL), hyperhomocysteine-
mia, and hypercoagulable states. Atheromas are complex lesions 
containing cellular elements, collagen, and lipids. The progres-
sion of the lesion is chiefly attributable to its content of unest-
erified cholesterol and cholesteryl esters. Cholesterol in the 
atheroma originates in circulating lipoproteins. Atherogenic 
lipoproteins include low-density (LDL), intermediate density 
(IDL), very low density lipoproteins (VLDL), and Lp(a) species, 
all of which contain the B-100 apolipoprotein (Apo B-100). 
Chylomicron remnants containing apoB-48 are also atherogenic. 
All of these are subject to oxidation by reactive oxygen species in 
the tissues and also by lipoxygenases secreted by macrophages in 
atheromas. Oxidized lipoproteins cause impairment of endothe-
lial cell-mediated vasodilation and stimulate endothelium to 
secrete monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) and adhe-
sion molecules that recruit monocytes to the lesion. Tocopherols 
(vitamin E) are natural antioxidants that localize in the surface 
monolayers of lipoproteins, exerting resistance to oxidation. 
676    CHAPTER 19 Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism
Increased oxidative stress such as that induced by smoking 
depletes the tocopherol content. Oxidation of lipoproteins 
stimulates their endocytosis via scavenger receptors on mac-
rophages and smooth muscle cells, leading to the formation of 
foam cells. Recent studies strongly support a role of vitamin D 
in prevention of atherosclerosis, probably by influencing inflam-
matory activity of macrophages. 
 Hypertension increases access of lipoproteins to the subintima. 
Smoking accelerates atherogenesis by reducing HDL and increas-
ing thrombogenesis by platelets—in addition to its pro-oxidant 
effect. Activated platelets release platelet-derived growth factor 
(PDGF), stimulating proliferation and migration of cells of 
smooth muscle origin into the lesion. 
 Activated macrophages secrete cytokines that drive an inflamma-
tory and proliferative process. Metalloproteases secreted by mac-
rophages weaken the atheroma so that fissuring and rupture can 
occur. Exposure of blood to subintimal collagen and tissue factor 
stimulates thrombogenesis, precipitating acute coronary events. The 
inverse relationship between HDL levels and atherogenesis probably 
reflects the role of certain  species of HDL in cholesterol retrieval and 
in protecting  lipoproteins against oxidation. 
 Reversal of Atherosclerosis 
 Angiographic intervention trials have shown that regression of 
atherosclerotic lesions can occur with lipid-lowering therapy. 
Large trials have demonstrated striking reductions in the incidence 
of new coronary events in individuals with hyperlipidemia who 
have had no prior clinical coronary disease (primary prevention) 
as well as in patients with antecedent disease (secondary preven-
tion). Thus, timely hypolipidemic therapy appropriate to the lipid 
disorder decreases the incidence of coronary disease and reduces 
the need for angioplasty, stenting, and bypass surgery. Side-effects 
of treatment have been minimal in comparison with the magni-
tude of this benefit. 
 Average levels of LDL in the United States and northern 
Europe are higher than in many other nations, where the levels 
appear to approach the biologic norm. This probably accounts in 
large part for the higher incidence of coronary disease in industri-
alized Western nations and suggests that dietary changes that 
reduce lipoprotein levels would be beneficial. 
 OVERVIEW OF LIPID TRANSPORT 
 The Plasma Lipoproteins 
 Because lipids are relatively insoluble in water, they are trans-
ported in association with proteins. The simplest complexes are 
those formed between unesterified, or free, fatty acids (FFA) and 
albumin, which serve to carry the FFA from peripheral adipocytes 
to other tissues. 
 The remainder of the lipids are transported in spherical lipopro-
tein complexes (Table 19–1), with core regions containing hydro-
phobic lipids. The principal core lipids are cholesteryl esters and 
triglycerides. Triglycerides predominate in the cores of chylomi-
crons, which transport newly absorbed lipids from the intestine, 
and in VLDL, which originate in liver. The relative content of 
cholesteryl ester is increased in the cores of remnants derived from 
these lipoproteins. Cholesteryl esters are the predominant core 
lipid in LDL and HDL. Surrounding the core in each lipoprotein 
is a monolayer containing amphiphilic phospholipids and unest-
erified (free) cholesterol. Apolipoproteins, noncovalently bound to 
the lipids, are located on this surface monolayer (Figure19–1). 
 B Apolipoproteins 
 Several lipoproteins contain very high molecular weight B pro-
teins that behave like intrinsic proteins of cell membranes. Unlike 
the smaller apolipoproteins, the B proteins do not migrate from 
one lipoprotein particle to another. VLDL contain the B-100 
protein, which is retained in the formation of LDL from VLDL 
remnants by liver. The intestinal B protein, B-48, is found only in 
chylomicrons and their remnants. Apo B-100 has a ligand domain 
for binding to the LDL receptor that is conformed as VLDL are 
transformed into LDL. 
 Other Apolipoproteins 
 In addition to the B proteins, the following proteins are present in 
lipoproteins (see Table 19–1.) 
 C apolipoproteins are lower molecular weight proteins that 
equilibrate rapidly among the lipoproteins. There are four distinct 
species: C-I, C-II, C-III, and C-IV. Apo C-II is a requisite cofactor 
for lipoprotein lipase. 
TABLE 19–1 Lipoproteins of human serum.
Density Interval 
(g/cm3)
Core Lipids
Diameter (nm)
Apolipoproteins in Order of 
Quantitative Importance
High density (HDL)
1.21-1.063
Cholesteryl ester
7.5-10.5
A-I, A-II, C, E
(many others)
Low density (LDL)
1.063-1.019
Cholesteryl ester
21.5
B-100
Intermediate density (IDL)
1.019-1.006
Cholesteryl ester, triglyceride
25-30
B-100, some C and E
Very low density (VLDL)
<1.006
Triglyceride cholesteryl ester
39-100
B-100, C, E
Chylomicrons
<1.006
Triglyceride
60-500
B-48, C, E, A-I, A-II, A-IV
Lp(a)
1.04-1.08
Cholesteryl ester
21-30
B-100, (a)
CHAPTER 19 Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism     677
 Three isoforms of Apo E—E-2, E-3, and E-4—are the prod-
ucts of allelic genes. Unlike Apo E-3 and Apo E-4, Apo E-2 does 
not contain a functional ligand for the LDL receptor. The Apo 
E-4 alleles are associated with early-onset Alzheimer disease and 
increased risk of coronary disease. 
 Apo A-I is the major apolipoprotein of HDL. It is also present 
in chylomicrons and is the most abundant of the apolipoproteins 
of human serum (about 125 mg/dL). It is a cofactor for lecithin-
cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT). 
 Apo A-II is an important constituent of HDL. It contains 
cysteine, which permits the formation of disulfide-bridged dimers 
with Apo E. 
 Apo A-IV is chiefly associated with chylomicrons. 
 Apo A-V plays a significant role in the removal of triglycerides 
from plasma. 
 The (a) protein is a glycoprotein that has a high degree of 
sequence homology with plasminogen, resulting in binding affin-
ity for tissue plasminogen activator. It is found as a disulfide-
bridged dimer with Apo B-100 in LDL-like species of lipoproteins 
(Lp[a] lipoproteins). 
 Absorption of Dietary Fat; 
Secretion of Chylomicrons 
 Dietary triglycerides are hydrolyzed in the intestine to 
β-monoglyceride and fatty acids by pancreatic lipase, which is 
activated by bile acids and a protein cofactor. The partial glycerides 
and fatty acids form micelles that are absorbed by intestinal epithe-
lium. The fatty acids are reesterified with β-monoglycerides to 
form triglycerides, and free cholesterol is esterified with fatty acids 
by acyl-CoA:cholesterol acyltransferase-2 (ACAT-2). Droplets of 
triglyceride with small amounts of cholesteryl esters, associated 
with B-48, acquire a monolayer of phospholipid and free choles-
terol. Apo A-I and Apo A-II are added, and the nascent chylomicron 
emerges into the extracellular lymph space (see Figure 19–1). The 
new chylomicron begins to exchange surface components with 
HDL, acquiring Apo C and Apo E and losing phospholipids. This 
process continues as the chylomicron is carried via the intestinal 
lymphatics to the thoracic duct and thence into the bloodstream. 
 Formation of Very Low 
Density Lipoproteins 
 The liver exports triglycerides to peripheral tissues in the cores of 
VLDL (Figure 19–2). These triglycerides are synthesized in liver 
from free fatty acids abstracted from plasma and from fatty acids 
synthesized de novo. Release of VLDL by liver is augmented by 
any condition that results in increased flux of FFA to liver in the 
absence of compensating ketogenesis. Obesity, increased caloric 
intake, ingestion of ethanol, and estrogens stimulate release of 
VLDL and are important factors in hypertriglyceridemia. 
 Metabolism of Triglyceride-Rich 
Lipoproteins in Plasma 
 A. Hydrolysis by lipoprotein lipase 
 Fatty acids derived 
from the triglycerides of chylomicrons and VLDL are delivered to 
tissues through a common pathway involving hydrolysis by the 
lipoprotein lipase (LPL) system. Members of a family of fatty acid 
transfer proteins facilitate FFA uptake in tissues. LPL is bound to 
capillary endothelium in heart, skeletal muscle, adipose tissue, 
mammary gland, and other tissues. 
 B. Biologic regulation of lipoprotein lipase 
 When glu-
cose levels in plasma are elevated and the release of insulin is 
stimulated, LPL is transcriptionally upregulated in adipose tissue, 
and fatty acids derived from triglycerides of circulating lipopro-
teins are stored. During prolonged fasting, and in diabetic 
CHYLOMICRON
CHYLOMICRON
REMNANT
C proteins
Liver
B-48
B-48
Peripheral tissues
HDL
HDL
FFA
TG
CE
LPL
CE
A-I
A-II
CE
A-II
A-I
TG
CE
A-II
A-II
A-I
A-I
Intestine
Apo-E
 FIGURE 19–1  Metabolism of chylomicrons (A-I, A-II, B-48, and C proteins, apolipoproteins; CE, cholesteryl esters; TG, triglyceride). 
See text for details. 
678    CHAPTER 19 Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism
ketoacidosis, LPL activity of adipose tissue falls, preventing stor-
age of fatty acids. Heparin is a cofactor for LPL. When it is given 
intravenously (0.1-0.2 mg/kg), LPL activity is displaced into 
plasma, permitting its measurement. Apo C-II is an obligatory 
cofactor. 
 C. Formation of lipoprotein remnants 
 Hydrolysis by 
LPL results in depletion of triglycerides in the cores of chylomi-
crons and VLDL, producing progressive decreases in particle 
diameter. Lipids from the surface and C proteins are transferred to 
HDL. The remnant lipoproteins thus formed contain their origi-
nal complement of Apo B, significant amounts of Apo E, and 
little Apo C. They have lost about 70% of their triglycerides and 
are enriched in cholesteryl esters. 
 D. Fate of lipoprotein remnants 
 Chylomicron remnants 
are removed from blood quantitatively by high-affinity, receptor-
mediated endocytosis in the liver. The receptors include the LDL 
(B-100:E) receptors and the LDL receptor-related protein-1 
(LRP-1). Endocytosis of chylomicron remnants by both requires 
the presence of Apo E-3 or Apo E-4. The lipids enter hepatic 
pools, and B-48 protein is degraded. Cholesterol derived from 
chylomicron remnants exerts feedback control of cholesterol bio-
synthesis in liver. Some VLDL remnants are removed from blood 
via the B-100:E receptors (see later) and are degraded. Those that 
escape uptake are transformed into LDL. Thus, the rate of removal 
of VLDL remnants is a determinant of LDL production. 
Formation of LDL involves the removal of residual triglycerides by 
hepatic lipase, facilitated by Apo E. LDL contain cholesteryl esters 
in their cores and retain Apo B-100. In normal individuals, a 
major fraction of VLDL is converted to LDL, and all of the LDL 
Apo B comes from VLDL. In certain hypertriglyceridemic states, 
conversion of VLDL to LDL is decreased. In the absence of 
impaired conversion, increased secretion of VLDL results in 
increased production of LDL. This precursor-product relationship 
explains the clinical phenomenon referred to as the  beta shift , an 
increase of LDL (beta-lipoprotein) as hypertriglyceridemia resolves. 
An example of this occurs temporarily following institution of 
insulin treatment in uncontrolled diabetes with lipemia. Insulin 
induces LPL activity, resulting in rapid conversion of VLDL to 
LDL. Because of its longer half-life, LDL accumulates in plasma. 
Elevated levels of LDL may persist beyond the time when levels of 
triglyceride-rich lipoproteins have returned to normal. A similar 
phenomenon may occur when patients with familial combined 
hyperlipidemia (FCH) are treated with fibric acid derivatives. 
 E. Half-lives of lipoproteins 
 Normally, the half-life of chylo-
microns is 5 to 20 minutes; that of VLDL is 0.5 to 1 hour; and that 
of LDL is about 2½ days. At triglyceride levels of 800 to 1000 mg/ 
dL, LPL is at kinetic saturation. Increased input of triglycerides into 
plasma at those levels rapidly augments the hypertriglyceridemia. 
 F. Effect of dietary fat restriction 
 Individuals consuming a 
typical North American diet transport 75 to 100 g or more of 
 FIGURE 19–2  Metabolism of VLDL (A-I, A-II, B-48, and C proteins, apolipoproteins; CE, cholesteryl esters; TG, triglyceride). See text for details. 
C proteins
C proteins
Liver
Peripheral 
tissues
HDL
HDL
VLDL REMNANT
B-100
B-100
TG
CE
CE
A-I
A-II
CE
A-II
A-II
A-I
A-I
B-100
TG
VLDL
CE
LDL
FFA
L
P
L
Apo-E
CHAPTER 19 Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism     679
triglyceride per day in chylomicrons, whereas the liver exports 
10 to 30 g in VLDL. When LPL is saturated and triglycerides are 
measured in thousands of milligrams per deciliter, acute restriction 
of dietary fat produces a significant reduction in levels. This inter-
vention is especially important in the lipemic patient with 
impending pancreatitis. If symptoms suggest that pancreatitis is 
imminent, oral intake should be eliminated, gastric acid should be 
suppressed with H 2 blockade, and the patient should not be fed by 
mouth until the symptoms subside and triglycerides decrease to 
less than 800 to 1000 mg/dL. 
 Catabolism of Low-Density Lipoproteins 
 LDL catabolism is mediated by high-affinity receptors on the cell 
membranes of virtually all nucleated cells but most importantly 
hepatocytes. Ligands for these LDL receptors exist in Apo B-100 
and Apo E. After endocytosis, Apo B is degraded, and the receptor 
returns to the cell membrane. The cholesteryl esters of LDL are 
hydrolyzed to free cholesterol for production of cell membrane 
bilayers. Free cholesterol down regulates hydroxymethylglutaryl-
CoA (HMG-CoA) reductase and other rate-limiting enzymes in 
the biosynthetic pathway for cholesterol. Cholesterol in excess of 
need for membrane synthesis is esterified by ACAT-2 for storage. 
In addition to suppression of cholesterol biosynthesis, the entry of 
cholesterol via the LDL pathway leads to downregulation of LDL 
receptors, an effect also observed with dietary saturated fat. 
Further regulatory mechanisms involve shortening of the resi-
dence time of LDL receptors in cell membranes The PCSK9 
protein increases the proteolytic degradation of LDL receptors, 
decreasing the ability of cells to endocytose LDL. Another mecha-
nism that leads to receptor degradation involves ubiquitination of 
the receptors by Idol (inducible degrader of the LDL receptor). 
 Metabolism of High-Density Lipoproteins 
 When isolated by ultracentrifugation, HDL appear to comprise 
two major classes: HDL 2 and HDL 3 . Similar quantities of HDL 3 
are isolated from serum of men and women, but about twice as 
much HDL 2 is found in premenopausal women. Immunochemical 
studies indicate that there are as many as 20 discrete species of 
HDL that are obscured by ultracentrifugation. One of these, the 
67-kDa prebeta-1 HDL, is the primary acquisitor of cholesterol in 
the retrieval pathway from peripheral tissues. 
 A. Sources of HDL 
 Both liver and intestine produce HDL 
apolipoproteins, which organize with lipids into the native species 
of HDL in lymph and plasma. Excess free cholesterol and phos-
pholipids liberated from the surface monolayers of chylomicrons 
and VLDL as hydrolysis of triglycerides proceeds are transferred to 
HDL by phospholipid transfer protein. Free cholesterol acquired 
by HDL is esterified by LCAT. This enzyme transfers 1 mol of 
fatty acid from a lecithin molecule to the hydroxyl group of unes-
terified cholesterol, forming cholesteryl esters. LCAT is secreted 
by liver. In severe hepatic parenchymal disease, levels in plasma are 
low and esterification of cholesterol is impeded, leading to the 
accumulation of free cholesterol in lipoproteins and in membranes 
of erythrocytes. This transforms them into the target cells classi-
cally associated with hepatic disease. 
 B. Metabolic roles for HDL 
 HDL serve as carriers for the C 
apolipoproteins, transferring them to nascent VLDL and chylomi-
crons. HDL as well as LDL deliver cholesterol to the adrenal 
cortex and gonads in support of steroidogenesis. HDL play a 
major role in the centripetal transport of cholesterol. Unesterified 
cholesterol, exported by the ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 
(ABCA1), is acquired from the membranes of peripheral tissues by 
prebeta-1 HDL and is esterified by LCAT, passing through other 
HDL species before the cholesteryl esters are incorporated into 
HDL of alpha-electrophoretic mobility. Cholesterol effluxed from 
macrophages by the ATP-binding cassette transporter G1 
(ABCG1) is acquired by larger HDL. The cholesteryl esters are 
then transferred to LDL and to triglyceride-rich lipoproteins 
mediated by cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP). Remnants 
of chylomicrons and a significant fraction of VLDL remnants and 
LDL are taken up by liver. Cholesteryl esters are also transferred 
from HDL to hepatocytes by scavenger receptor, class B, type I 
(SR-BI) receptors. 
 C. Catabolism of HDL 
 The pathways of catabolism of HDL 
are not yet known. Radiochemical studies indicate that Apo A-I 
and Apo A-II are removed from plasma synchronously and that a 
portion of the degradation occurs in liver and in kidney. 
 The Cholesterol Economy 
 Cholesterol is an essential constituent of the plasma membranes 
of cells and of myelin. It is required for adrenal and gonadal 
steroidogenesis and for production of bile acids by liver. Cells 
synthesize cholesterol, commencing with acetyl-CoA. Formation 
of HMG-CoA is the initial step. The first committed step, medi-
ated by HMG-CoA reductase, is the formation of mevalonic 
acid, which is then metabolized via a series of isoprenoid inter-
mediaries to squalene. The latter cyclizes to form a series of ste-
rols leading to cholesterol. A small amount of the mevalonate is 
converted to the isoprenoid substances ubiquinone, dolichol, 
and isopentenyl pyrophosphate. This pathway also yields the 
isoprenoid intermediaries geranyl and farnesyl pyrophosphates 
that are involved in prenylation of proteins. Prenylation provides 
an anchor so that proteins such as the low molecular weight G 
proteins can bind to membranes. Cholesterol synthesis is tightly 
regulated by cholesterol or its metabolites, which down regulate 
HMG-CoA reductase. Thus, cells can produce cholesterol not 
provided by circulating lipoproteins. Hepatocytes and intestinal 
epithelial cells use cholesterol for secretion of lipoproteins. In 
addition, cells constantly transfer cholesterol to circulating lipo-
proteins, chiefly HDL. Cholesterol is converted to bile acids in 
liver via a pathway initiated by cholesterol 7α-hydroxylase. Most 
of the bile acids are reabsorbed from the intestine, but the small 
amount that is lost in stool provides a means of elimination of 
cholesterol. Activity of cholesterol 7α-hydroxylase is decreased 
in hypothyroidism, as are the expression of LDL receptors and 
hepatic lipase. 
680    CHAPTER 19 Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism
 At usual levels of cholesterol intake, about one-third of the 
amount ingested is absorbed. Most is transported to liver in chy-
lomicron remnants, suppressing hepatic cholesterogenesis. 
Individuals may differ substantially in the effect of dietary choles-
terol on levels of serum lipoproteins. 
 DIFFERENTIATION OF DISORDERS OF 
LIPOPROTEIN METABOLISM 
 Laboratory Analyses of Lipids and 
Lipoproteins 
 Because chylomicrons normally may be present in plasma up to 
10 hours after a meal, they contribute as much as 600 mg/dL 
(6.9 mmol/L) to the triglycerides measured during that period. 
This alimentary lipemia can be prolonged if alcohol is consumed 
with the meal. Thus, serum lipids and lipoproteins should be 
measured after a 10-hour fast. If blood glucose is not to be mea-
sured, patients may have fruit and black coffee with sugar (which 
provide no triglyceride) for breakfast. 
 A. Inspection 
 Much useful information is gained from inspec-
tion of the serum, especially before and after overnight refrigeration. 
Opalescence is due to light scattering by large triglyceride-rich 
lipoproteins. Serum begins to appear hazy when the level of triglyc-
erides reaches 200 mg/dL (2.3 mmol/L). Chylomicrons are readily 
detected, because they form a white supernatant layer after refrig-
eration. Uncommon cases in which binding of immunoglobulins to 
lipoproteins takes place can be detected by the formation of a curd-
like lipoprotein aggregate or a snowy precipitate as serum cools. If 
one of these disorders is suspected, blood should be kept at 37°C 
during the formation of the clot and separation of the serum, because 
the critical temperatures for precipitation of the cryoglobulin 
 complex may be higher than room temperature. 
 B. Laboratory techniques 
 Several chemical techniques pro-
vide reliable measures of cholesterol and triglycerides, an essential 
minimum for differentiation of disorders of lipoproteins. 
Unesterified and esterified cholesterol are usually measured 
together, so that the reported value is the total content of choles-
terol in serum. A more complete characterization of lipoproteins 
is achieved by measurement of the cholesterol and triglyceride 
contents of individual lipoprotein fractions, separated by prepara-
tive ultracentrifugation, a technique usually available only in 
research laboratories. An efficient quantitative method employs 
vertical rotor ultracentrifugation, affording assessment of lipopro-
tein concentrations and particle diameters. LDL particle size can 
also be assessed by electrophoresis. The content of HDL can be 
measured using a technique in which they are the only lipopro-
teins that remain in solution after treatment of the serum with 
heparin and manganese. Although rapid, the results of this 
 technique tend to be unacceptably variable unless rigid quality 
control is exercised. Prognostic implications of small changes in 
HDL cholesterol make such controls necessary. An important 
determinant of the content of cholesteryl esters in HDL is the 
amount of triglyceride-rich lipoproteins to which the HDL are 
exposed in plasma. Cholesteryl esters from HDL transfer into 
triglyceride-rich lipoproteins, leading to an inverse dependence of 
HDL cholesterol on plasma triglycerides. HDL cholesterol cannot 
be interpreted without knowledge of the level of serum triglycer-
ides. For example, a level of HDL that would normally contain 
45 mg/dL (1.17 mmol/L) of cholesterol might contain 37 mg/dL 
(0.96 mmol/L) when the triglycerides were 200 mg/dL 
(2.3 mmol/L) and 30 mg/dL (0.78 mmol/L) when they reach 
500 mg/dL (5.7 mmol/L). 
 More sophisticated tests of composition of isolated lipoprotein 
fractions are of use in certain instances, including the ratio of 
cholesterol to triglycerides. Enrichment of VLDL by cholesteryl 
esters is typical of familial dysbetalipoproteinemia that is due to 
homozygosity for Apo E-2. The Apo E genotype can be deter-
mined by PCR analysis. Clinically useful immunoassays are avail-
able for Apo B and Lp(a). 
 Epidemiologic evidence suggests that LDL particles of smaller 
than normal diameter are associated with an increased risk of 
atherosclerosis. Small, dense LDL particles are a constant finding 
when triglyceride levels are elevated even marginally. Laboratory 
measurement of LDL diameters is therefore unnecessary in 
patients with hypertriglyceridemia. 
 Clinical Differentiation of Abnormal 
Patterns of Plasma Lipoproteins 
 A. Preliminary screening 
 Serum cholesterol and triglycer-
ide levels are continuously distributed in the population; there-
fore, some arbitrary levels must be established to define significance. 
Epidemiologic studies in Europe and the United States have 
shown a progressive increase in risk of coronary disease as levels of 
cholesterol increase. Physicians should at least encourage patients 
at risk to eat diets low in saturated fats, trans fats, and cholesterol 
to minimize the burden of LDL in plasma. 
 The National Cholesterol Education Program has developed 
guidelines for treatment of hypercholesterolemia in adults. Since 
this 2001 report, the results of major clinical trials have suggested 
that more aggressive lipid management is justified. For patients at 
high risk (coronary heart disease [CHD] or CHD risk equivalents, 
including diabetes), a suggested LDL-cholesterol goal is less than 
70 mg/dL (1.8 mmol/L). Triglyceride levels above 150 mg/dL 
(1.7 mmol/L) merit investigation. One abnormality commonly 
associated with increased risk of coronary disease that is not detected 
if screening is limited to hyperlipidemia is hypoalphalipoproteine-
mia, or deficiency of HDL. Many affected individuals have normal 
levels of cholesterol and triglycerides and no clinical features to alert 
the physician. HDL deficiency underscores the importance of con-
trolling other risk factors and avoiding factors that reduce HDL, 
such as smoking, the use of some drugs, and obesity. 
 B. Identification of abnormal patterns 
 The second step 
in investigation of hyperlipidemia is determination of the species 
of lipoproteins involved. In some cases, this may include multiple 
species; in others, qualitative properties of the lipoproteins are 
of diagnostic importance. Secondary hyperlipidemias of similar 
CHAPTER 19 Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism     681
pattern may be the sole cause of the lipoprotein abnormality or 
may aggravate primary disorders of lipoprotein metabolism. The 
differentiation of specific primary disorders usually requires addi-
tional clinical and genetic information. 
 The following diagnostic protocol, based on initial measure-
ment of cholesterol, triglycerides, and HDL in serum after a 
10-hour fast, supplemented by observation of serum and by addi-
tional laboratory measurements where essential, serves as a guide 
in identifying abnormal patterns. The term  hyperlipidemia 
denotes high levels of any class of lipoprotein;  hyperlipemia 
denotes high levels of any of the triglyceride-rich lipoproteins. 
 Case 1: Serum Cholesterol Levels 
Increased; Triglycerides Normal 
 If the serum cholesterol level is modestly elevated (up to 260 mg/
dL [6.72 mmol/L]), elevated levels of HDL may account for the 
observed increase in serum cholesterol. This is usually not associ-
ated with disease processes. The LDL cholesterol (in mg/dL) may 
be estimated by subtracting the HDL cholesterol and the esti-
mated cholesterol contribution of VLDL from the total choles-
terol level. The VLDL cholesterol is approximated as one-fifth of 
the serum triglyceride level. 
 
LDL cholesterol
total cholesterol
TG
5
HDL c
=
−
+
holesterol
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
 Very high levels of HDL measured by the precipitation tech-
nique can signal the presence of the abnormal lipoprotein of 
cholestasis (Lp-X). This disorder is characterized by elevated alka-
line phosphatase activity. Rarely, deficiency of CETP or hepatic 
lipase can cause high levels of HDL. 
 Case 2: Predominant Increase of 
Triglycerides; Moderate Increase in 
Cholesterol May Be Present 
 Here it is apparent that the primary abnormality is an increase in 
triglyceride-rich VLDL (hyperprebetalipoproteinemia) or chylo-
microns (chylomicronemia), or both (mixed lipemia). Because 
both contain free cholesterol in their surface monolayers and a 
small amount of cholesteryl ester in their cores, the total choles-
terol may be increased, although to a much smaller extent than 
triglycerides. Low levels of LDL often seen in hypertriglyceridemia 
may offset the increase in cholesterol due to the triglyceride-rich 
lipoproteins, especially in primary chylomicronemia. Because 
VLDL and chylomicrons compete as substrates in a common 
removal pathway, chylomicrons are nearly always present when 
triglyceride levels exceed 1000 mg/dL (11.5 mmol/L). 
 Case 3: Cholesterol and Triglyceride 
Levels Both Elevated 
 This pattern can be the result of either of two abnormal pheno-
types. One is a combined increase of VLDL and LDL. This pattern 
is termed combined hyperlipidemia and is one of the three pheno-
typic patterns encountered in kindreds with the disorder FCH. 
The second phenotype is an increase of remnant lipoproteins 
derived from VLDL and chylomicrons. These particles have been 
partially depleted of triglyceride by LPL and enriched with choles-
teryl esters by the LCAT system, such that the total content of 
cholesterol in serum is similar to that of triglycerides. This pattern 
is almost always an expression of familial dysbetalipoproteinemia. 
Diagnosis of this disorder is confirmed by a genotype demonstrat-
ing absence of the normal E-3 and E-4 alleles. 
 CLINICAL DESCRIPTIONS OF 
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY 
DISORDERS OF LIPOPROTEIN 
METABOLISM 
 THE HYPERTRIGLYCERIDEMIAS 
 Atherogenicity 
 Epidemiologic evidence supports the atherogenicity of VLDL and 
their remnants. They have been demonstrated in atherosclerotic 
plaques from humans. Impaired capacity of the VLDL of some 
individuals to accept cholesteryl esters from the LCAT reaction 
may also contribute to atherogenesis by impeding centripetal 
transport of cholesterol. 
 Cause of Pancreatitis 
 Very high levels of triglycerides in plasma are associated with a 
risk of acute pancreatitis, probably from the local release of FFA 
and lysolecithin from lipoprotein substrates in the pancreatic 
capillary bed. When the concentrations of these lipids exceed the 
binding capacity of albumin, they could lyse membranes of 
parenchymal cells, initiating a chemical pancreatitis. Many 
patients with lipemia have intermittent episodes of epigastric 
pain during which serum amylase does not reach levels com-
monly considered diagnostic for pancreatitis. This is especially 
true in patients who have had previous attacks. The observation 
that these episodes frequently evolve into classic pancreatitis sug-
gests that they represent incipient pancreatic inflammation. 
The progression of pancreatitis can be prevented by rapid reduc-
tion of triglycerides, usually accomplished by restriction of all 
dietary fat. In some cases, parenteral feeding, excluding fat emul-
sions, may be required for a few days. The clinical course of 
pancreatitis in patients with lipemia is typical of the general 
experience with this disease. 
 Clinical Signs (Figure 19–3) 
 When triglyceride levels in serum exceed 3000 to 4000 mg/dL 
(34.5-46 mmol/L), light scattering by these particles in the blood 
lends a whitish cast to the venous vascular bed of the retina, a sign 
known as  lipemia retinalis . Markedly elevated levels of VLDL or 
682    CHAPTER 19 Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism
chylomicrons may be associated with the appearance of eruptive 
cutaneous xanthomas (see Figure 19–3E). These lesions, filled with 
foam cells, appear as yellow morbilliform eruptions 2 to 5 mm in 
diameter, often with erythematous areolae. They usually occur in 
clusters on extensor surfaces such as the elbows, knees, and 
buttocks. They are transient and disappear within a few weeks 
after triglyceride levels are reduced. 
 Effects of Hypertriglyceridemia on 
Laboratory Measurements 
 Light scattering from high levels of triglyceride-rich lipoproteins 
can cause erroneous results in most chemical determinations 
involving photometric measurements. Amylase activity in serum 
may be inhibited; therefore, lipemic specimens should be diluted 
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
 FIGURE 19–3  Clinical manifestations of hyperlipidemias.  A. Xanthelasma involving medial and lateral canthi.  B. Severe xanthelasma and 
arcus corneae.  C. Tuberous xanthomas.  D. Large tuberous xanthoma of elbow.  E. Eruptive xanthomas, singly and in rosettes.  F. Xanthomas of 
extensor tendons of the hands.  G. Xeroradiogram of Achilles tendon xanthoma.  H. Xanthoma of Achilles tendon. (Normal Achilles tendons 
do not exceed 7 mm in diameter in the region between the calcaneus and the point at which the tendon fibers begin to radiate toward their 
origins.) 
CHAPTER 19 Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism     683
for measurement of this enzyme. Because the lipoproteins are not 
permeable to ionic or polar molecules, their core regions consti-
tute a second phase in plasma. When the volume of this phase 
becomes appreciable, electrolytes and other hydrophilic species are 
underestimated with respect to their true concentration in the 
aqueous phase. A practical rule for correcting these values is as 
follows: For each 1000 mg/dL (11.5 mmol/L) of triglyceride, the 
measured concentrations of all hydrophilic molecules and ions 
should be adjusted upward by 1%. 
 PRIMARY HYPERTRIGLYCERIDEMIA 
 1. DEFICIENCY OF LIPOPROTEIN 
   LIPASE ACTIVITY 
 Clinical Findings 
 A. Symptoms and signs 
 The activity of LPL is dependent 
upon the integrity of the enzyme and its cofactor, Apo C-II. In 
addition, defects in Apo A-V, GPIHDLBP, and LMF1 proteins 
can result in severe impairment of LPL activity. The LMF1 pro-
tein is essential for the secretion of both LPL and hepatic lipase in 
their active conformations. Because the clinical expressions of 
these defects are similar, they are considered together. On a typical 
North American diet, lipemia is usually severe (triglycerides of 
2000-25,000 mg/dL) (23-287.5 mmol/L). Hepatomegaly and 
splenomegaly are frequently present. Foam cells laden with lipid 
are found in liver, spleen, and bone marrow. Splenic infarct has 
been described and may be a source of abdominal pain. 
Hypersplenism with anemia, granulocytopenia, and thrombocy-
topenia can occur. Recurrent epigastric pain and overt pancreatitis 
are frequently encountered. Eruptive xanthomas may be present. 
These disorders may be recognized in early infancy or may go 
unnoticed until an attack of acute pancreatitis occurs or lipemic 
serum is noted on blood sampling as late as middle age. Patients 
with these disorders are usually not obese and have normal carbo-
hydrate metabolism unless pancreatitis impairs insulinogenic 
capacity. Estrogens intensify the lipemia by stimulating hepatic 
production of VLDL. Therefore, in pregnancy and lactation or 
during the administration of estrogenic steroids, the risk of pan-
creatitis increases. 
 B. Laboratory findings 
 There is a preponderance of chylo-
microns in serum such that the infranatant layer of serum refrig-
erated overnight may be nearly clear with a supernatant 
chylomicron layer. Many patients have a moderate increase in 
VLDL, however, and in pregnant women or those receiving 
estrogens, a pattern of mixed lipemia is usually present. Levels 
of LDL in serum are decreased, probably representing the 
predominant catabolism of VLDL by pathways that do not 
involve the production of LDL. Levels of HDL cholesterol are 
also decreased. 
 A presumptive diagnosis of these disorders can be made by 
restricting oral intake of fat to 10 to 15 g/d. Triglycerides drop 
precipitously, usually reaching 200 to 600 mg/dL (2.3-6.9 mmol/L) 
within 3 to 4 days. Confirmation of deficiency of LPL is obtained 
by measurement of the lipolytic activity of plasma 10 minutes after 
injection of heparin (0.2 mg/kg) intravenously. Analysis of 
lipolysis is done with and without 0.5 mol/L sodium chloride, 
which inhibits LPL but does not suppress the activity of hepatic 
lipase. Absence of the Apo C-II cofactor can be demonstrated 
most readily by electrophoresis or isoelectric focusing of the 
proteins of VLDL. 
 Treatment 
 Treatment of primary chylomicronemia is entirely dietary. 
Intake of fat should be reduced to 10% or less of total calories. 
In an adult, this represents 15 to 30 g/d. Because the defect 
involves lipolysis, both saturated and unsaturated fats must be 
curtailed. The diet should contain at least 5 g of polyunsaturated 
fat as a source of essential fatty acids, and fat-soluble vitamins 
must be provided. Administration of 500 mg daily of marine 
omega-3 fatty acids is also recommended. Adherence to this 
diet invariably maintains triglycerides below 1000 mg/dL 
(11.2 mmol/L) in the absence of pregnancy, lactation, or the 
administration of exogenous estrogens. Because this is below the 
level at which pancreatitis usually occurs, compliant patients are at 
low risk. Pregnant women with these disorders require particularly 
close monitoring. 
 2. ENDOGENOUS AND MIXED LIPEMIAS 
 Etiology and Pathogenesis 
 Endogenous lipemia (elevated VLDL) and mixed lipemia probably 
both result from several genetically determined disorders. Because 
VLDL and chylomicrons are competing substrates in the intravas-
cular lipolytic pathway, saturating levels of VLDL impede the 
removal of chylomicrons. Therefore, as the severity of endogenous 
lipemia increases, a pattern of mixed lipemia may supervene. In 
other cases, the pattern of mixed lipemia appears to be present 
continuously. Although specific pathophysiologic mechanisms 
remain obscure, certain familial patterns are known. In all forms, 
factors that increase the rate of secretion of VLDL aggravate the 
hypertriglyceridemia (ie, obesity with insulin resistance, appear-
ance of fully developed type 2 diabetes mellitus, alcohol, and exog-
enous estrogens). Studies of VLDL turnover indicate that either 
increased production or impaired removal of VLDL may be opera-
tive in different individuals. A substantial number of patients with 
mixed lipemia have partial defects in catabolism of triglyceride-rich 
lipoproteins, often due to heterozygosity for mutations in LPL. 
Most patients with significant endogenous or mixed lipemia have 
centripetal obesity. 
 Clinical Findings 
 Clinical features of these forms of hypertriglyceridemia depend on 
their severity and include eruptive xanthomas, lipemia retinalis, 
recurrent epigastric pain, and acute pancreatitis. 
 Endogenous lipemia is frequently an element in a constellation 
of metabolic abnormalities termed the  metabolic syndrome . 
Insulin resistance, usually associated with central obesity, is a core 
684    CHAPTER 19 Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism
feature of this syndrome. Patients may or may not have hypergly-
cemia. Low levels of HDL cholesterol largely reflect increased 
transfer of CE into circulating VLDL. Hypertension and hyperu-
ricemia are frequently present. 
 Treatment 
 The first element of treatment is severe restriction of total fat 
intake. The objective of long-term dietary management is reduc-
tion to ideal body weight. Because alcohol causes significant aug-
mentation of VLDL production, abstinence is important. If 
weight loss is achieved, the triglycerides almost always show a 
marked response, often approaching normal values. When the fall 
in triglycerides is not satisfactory, a fibrate or nicotinic acid (in the 
absence of insulin resistance), singly or in combination, usually 
produces further reductions. When insulin resistance is present, 
metformin—with or without a thiazolidinedione—may be a use-
ful adjunct. Pioglitazone is the drug of choice in this class because 
it is more effective in reducing triglycerides and, unlike rosiglita-
zone, it does not increase LDL cholesterol. 
 3. FAMILIAL COMBINED HYPERLIPIDEMIA 
 Etiology 
 This inherited disorder, which is the most common form of 
hyperlipidemia, occurs in 1% to 2% of the population. The 
underlying process involves overproduction of VLDL. Some 
affected individuals have increased levels of both VLDL and LDL 
(combined hyperlipidemia); some have predominantly increased 
levels of either VLDL or LDL. The level of Apo B-100 is 
increased. Patterns in the serum of an individual may change with 
time. It is known that the offspring of an individual having any 
one of the three phenotypic patterns and a normal individual can 
have one of the other patterns. Affected children often have 
hyperlipidemia. If the child is obese, hypertriglyceridemia is 
likely present, whereas a child of normal weight may have only an 
elevated LDL. 
 Clinical Findings 
 Neither tendinous nor cutaneous xanthomas other than xan-
thelasma occur. This disorder appears to be inherited as a Mendelian 
dominant trait involving alternative loci. Modifying genes have 
been published but major loci have not been identified. Factors that 
increase the severity of hypertriglyceridemia in other disorders 
aggravate the lipemia in this syndrome as well. 
 Treatment 
 The risk of coronary disease is significantly increased, and patients 
should be treated aggressively with diet and drugs. Because LDL 
levels often increase with fibrate therapy in these patients and 
because resins increase triglycerides, the recommended treatment 
is an HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor. The addition of niacin or 
fenofibrate may be required if triglycerides remain elevated or if 
HDL deficiency is also present. Fenofibrate may be used cau-
tiously with rosuvastatin. 
 4. FAMILIAL DYSBETALIPOPROTEINEMIA 
   (TYPE III HYPERLIPOPROTEINEMIA) 
 Etiology and Pathogenesis 
 A permissive genetic constitution for this disease (homozygosity 
for Apo E-2) occurs in about 2% of the US population but the 
expression of hyperlipidemia apparently requires environmental 
and possibly additional genetic determinants. The molecular basis 
is the presence of isoforms of Apo E that are poor ligands for high-
affinity receptors. In its fully expressed form, the lipoprotein pat-
tern is dominated by the accumulation of remnants of VLDL and 
chylomicrons. Two populations of VLDL are usually present: 
normal prebetalipoproteins and remnants with beta-electropho-
retic mobility. Remnant particles of intermediate density are also 
present. Levels of LDL are decreased, reflecting interruption of the 
transformation of VLDL remnants to LDL. The primary defect is 
impaired hepatic uptake of remnants of triglyceride-rich lipopro-
teins. The remnant particles are enriched in cholesteryl esters such 
that the level of cholesterol in serum is often as high as that of 
triglycerides. Absence of the E-3 and E-4 alleles in genomic DNA 
confirms the diagnosis. Additional mutations of Apo E are now 
known to result in dysbetalipoproteinemia. Some of these cause 
hyperlipidemia in the heterozygous state, a disorder termed 
 dominant dysbetalipoproteinemia . 
 Clinical Findings 
 Hyperlipidemia and clinical signs are not usually evident before 
age 20. In younger patients with hyperlipidemia, hypothyroidism 
or obesity is likely to be present. Adults frequently have tuberous 
or tuberoeruptive xanthomas (Figure 19–3C). Both tend to occur 
on extensor surfaces, especially elbows and knees. Tuberoeruptive 
xanthomas are pink or yellowish skin nodules 3 to 8 mm in diam-
eter that often become confluent. Tuberous xanthomas—shiny 
reddish or orange nodules up to 3 cm or more in diameter—are 
usually moveable and nontender. Another type, planar xanthomas 
of the palmar creases, strongly suggests dysbetalipoproteinemia. 
The skin creases assume an orange color from deposition of caro-
tenoids. They occasionally are raised above the level of adjacent 
skin and are not tender. (Planar xanthomas are also seen in 
cholestasis.) 
 Some patients have impaired glucose tolerance, which is usu-
ally associated with higher levels of blood lipids. Obesity is com-
monly present and tends to aggravate the lipemia. Patients with 
the genetic constitution for dysbetalipoproteinemia often develop 
severe hyperlipidemia if they are hypothyroid. Atherosclerosis of 
the coronary and peripheral vessels occurs with increased fre-
quency, and the prevalence of disease of the iliac and femoral ves-
sels is especially high. 
 Treatment 
 Management includes a weight reduction diet providing a reduced 
intake of cholesterol, fat, and alcohol. When the hyperlipidemia 
does not respond satisfactorily to diet, a fibrate or niacin in low 
doses (if the patient does not have insulin resistance) is usually 
CHAPTER 19 Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism     685
effective. These agents can be used together in resistant cases. Some 
patients respond to the more potent reductase inhibitors alone, and 
the addition of niacin normalizes the lipid levels in most. 
 SECONDARY HYPERTRIGLYCERIDEMIA 
 1. DIABETES MELLITUS 
 In patients with diabetes, levels of VLDL in plasma are frequently 
elevated. The severe lipemia associated with absence or marked 
insufficiency of insulin is attributable to decreased transcription of 
the  LPL gene. The administration of insulin usually restores trig-
lyceride levels to normal within a few days. However, if massive 
fatty liver is present, weeks may be required for the VLDL to 
return to normal while the liver secretes its triglycerides. Conversion 
of massive amounts of VLDL to LDL as the impedance of VLDL 
catabolism is relieved leads to marked accumulation of LDL that 
may persist for weeks, leading to a spurious diagnosis of primary 
hypercholesterolemia. 
 The moderately elevated VLDL seen in type 2 diabetes under 
average control probably reflects chiefly an increased flux of FFA 
to liver that stimulates production of triglycerides and their secre-
tion in VLDL. In addition to VLDL, LDL levels are also some-
what increased in diabetic individuals under poor control, 
probably accounting in part for their increased risk of CHD. 
Some have much higher levels of VLDL, suggesting that an addi-
tional genetic factor predisposing to lipemia is present. Still 
another cause of lipemic diabetes is the compromised insulino-
genic capacity that can result from acute pancreatitis. The defi-
ciency may be severe enough to require exogenous insulin, often 
only in small doses. In diabetic individuals who develop nephrosis, 
the secondary lipemia of nephrosis compounds their hypertriglyc-
eridemia. In hyperglycemia, lipoproteins become glycosylated, 
leading to their uptake by macrophages. 
 Lipemia may be very severe, with elevated levels of both VLDL 
and chylomicrons when control is poor. Lipemic patients usually 
have ketoacidosis when they are insulin-deficient, but lipemia can 
occur in its absence. Patients with type 1 diabetes who have been 
chronically undertreated with insulin may have mobilized most of 
the triglyceride from peripheral adipose tissue, so that they no 
longer have sufficient substrate for significant ketogenesis. These 
emaciated individuals may have severe lipemia and striking 
hepatomegaly. 
 In type 1 diabetes, the rigid control of blood glucose levels, 
which can be attained with continuous subcutaneous insulin infu-
sion, is associated with sustained normalization of levels of both 
LDL and VLDL. The lipemia of type 2 diabetes usually responds 
well to control of the underlying disorder. In obese insulin-resistant 
individuals, weight loss is essential. Diets containing slowly absorbed 
carbohydrates are well tolerated, allowing a decrease in the burden 
of chylomicron triglycerides in plasma (see Chapter 17). 
 2. UREMIA 
 Uremia is associated with modest isolated increases in VLDL. 
The most important underlying mechanisms are probably insulin 
resistance and impairment of catabolism of VLDL. Many uremic 
patients are also nephrotic. The additional effects of nephrosis on 
lipoprotein metabolism may produce a combined hyperlipidemia. 
Patients who have had renal transplants may be receiving gluco-
corticoids, which induce elevation of LDL. 
 3. HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY 
   VIRUS INFECTION 
 HIV infection per se is associated with hypertriglyceridemia (see 
Chapter 25). A syndrome of partial lipodystrophy and insulin 
resistance, often with marked lipemia, occurs with multidrug 
treatment that includes certain inhibitors of viral proteases. Acute 
pancreatitis can ensue. Limited clinical experience suggests that 
fibric acid derivatives are of some value. Alcohol must be 
avoided. 
 4. CORTICOSTEROID EXCESS 
 In endogenous Cushing syndrome, and with corticosteroid treat-
ment, insulin resistance is present and levels of LDL are increased. 
It appears that the hyperlipidemia is primarily due to increased 
secretion of VLDL, which is then catabolized to LDL. More severe 
lipemia ensues when steroidogenic diabetes appears, reducing 
catabolism of triglyceride-rich lipoproteins via the LPL pathway. 
 5. EXOGENOUS ESTROGENS 
 When estrogens are administered to normal women, triglyceride 
levels may increase by as much as 15%, reflecting increased pro-
duction of VLDL. Paradoxically, estrogens increase the efficiency 
of catabolism of triglyceride-rich lipoproteins. Whereas estrogens 
tend to induce insulin resistance, it is not clear that this is an 
important mechanism, because certain nortestosterone derivatives 
decrease plasma triglycerides despite the induction of appreciable 
insulin resistance. 
 Certain individuals, usually those with preexisting mild lipemia, 
develop marked hypertriglyceridemia when receiving estrogens 
even in relatively small doses. Thus, triglycerides should be moni-
tored during estrogen therapy. Contraceptive combinations with 
predominantly progestational effects produce less hypertriglyceri-
demia than purely estrogenic compounds. Transdermal delivery of 
estrogen probably results in lesser increases in VLDL secretion 
because it avoids the hepatic first-pass effect. 
 6. ALCOHOL INGESTION 
 Ingestion of appreciable amounts of alcohol does not necessarily 
result in significantly elevated levels of triglycerides, but many 
alcoholics are lipemic. Alcohol profoundly increases triglycerides 
in patients with primary or secondary hyperlipemias. In Zieve 
syndrome, the alcohol-induced lipemia is associated with hemo-
lytic anemia and hyperbilirubinemia. Because LCAT originates in 
liver, severe hepatic parenchymal dysfunction may lead to defi-
ciency in the activity of this enzyme. A resultant accumulation of 
unesterified cholesterol in erythrocyte membranes may account 
for the hemolysis seen in Zieve syndrome. 
686    CHAPTER 19 Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism
 Alcohol is converted to acetate, exerting a sparing effect on the 
oxidation of fatty acids that are then incorporated into triglycer-
ides. This results in hepatomegaly due to fatty infiltration and in 
marked enhancement of secretion of VLDL. In many individuals, 
there is sufficient adaptive increase in the removal capacity for 
triglycerides so that plasma levels are normal. 
 7. NONALCOHOLIC FATTY LIVER 
   DISEASE AND NONALCOHOLIC 
   STEATOHEPATITIS 
 These conditions are characterized by hepatic steatosis and abnor-
malities of liver enzymes in the absence of alcohol ingestion. The 
cause is not yet understood, but it is likely that misdirection of fatty 
acids from oxidative pathways to hepatic triglyceride synthesis is 
involved. Five to ten percent of patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease (NAFLD) progress to more severe liver disease, including 
cirrhosis, end-stage liver disease, and hepatocellular carcinoma. In 
NAFLD, spontaneous improvement can occur, but liver disease is 
the third most common cause of death. About 80% of patients with 
NAFLD or nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) have features of the 
metabolic syndrome, including abdominal obesity, hypertension, 
insulin resistance/glucose intolerance, and hypertriglyceridemia. 
They are at increased risk for atherosclerosis. Weight reduction with 
exercise and diet in overweight or obese patients is a central element 
in treatment. Bariatric surgery has proven effective in a large percent-
age of morbidly obese patients with NASH. Studies to date reveal 
only marginal benefit attributable to metformin and thiazolidine-
diones, although pioglitazone shows some promise. Treatment of 
coexisting dyslipidemia, diabetes, and hypertension is important. 
Statins, fenofibrate, and marine omega-3 fatty acids do not appear to 
increase the risk of further hepatic injury in most patients. Mixed 
tocopherols are beneficial.
 8. NEPHROSIS 
 The hyperlipidemia of nephrosis is biphasic. Before serum albu-
min levels fall below 2 g/dL, LDL increases selectively. The syn-
thesis and secretion of VLDL appear to be coupled to that of 
albumin. The increased flux of VLDL from liver increases produc-
tion of LDL. As albumin falls below 1 to 2 g/dL, lipemia ensues. 
Impaired hydrolysis of triglycerides by LPL is due to lack of albu-
min as an FFA receptor. FFA bind to lipoproteins when albumin 
levels are low, impairing their ability to undergo lipolysis. 
 Because coronary disease is prevalent in patients with long-
standing nephrotic syndrome, treatment of the hyperlipidemia is 
indicated, although few studies of the effect of treatment have 
been reported. The hyperlipidemia is resistant to diet. Fibrates 
may precipitate myopathy even in small doses. Bile acid–binding 
resins, niacin, and reductase inhibitors are useful. 
 9. GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE 
 In type I glycogenosis, insulin secretion is decreased, leading to 
increased flux of FFA to liver and increased secretion of VLDL. 
The low levels of insulin in plasma are the probable cause of 
reduced activity of LPL. The fatty liver in these patients tends to 
progress to cirrhosis. 
 Frequent small feedings help maintain blood glucose levels and 
ameliorate the lipemia. Nocturnal nasogastric drip feeding is of 
considerable benefit. Other forms of hepatic glycogen storage 
disease may be associated with elevated levels of VLDL and LDL 
in serum. 
 10. HYPOPITUITARISM AND 
    ACROMEGALY 
 Part of the hyperlipidemia of hypopituitarism is attributable to 
secondary hypothyroidism, but hypertriglyceridemia persists after 
thyroxine replacement. Deficiency of growth hormone is associ-
ated with elevated levels of both LDL and VLDL. Decreased 
insulin levels may be the major underlying defect; however, defi-
ciency of growth hormone may impair the disposal of FFA by 
oxidation and ketogenesis in the liver, favoring synthesis of triglyc-
erides. Mild hypertriglyceridemia is often associated with acro-
megaly, probably resulting from insulin resistance. Although 
growth hormone acutely stimulates lipolysis in adipose tissue, FFA 
levels are normal in acromegaly. 
 11. HYPOTHYROIDISM 
 Whereas significant hypothyroidism produces elevated levels of 
LDL in nearly all individuals, only a few develop hypertriglyceri-
demia. The increase in LDL results in part from decreased conver-
sion of cholesterol to bile acids and downregulation of LDL 
receptors. Lipemia, when present, is usually mild, although serum 
triglycerides in excess of 3000 mg/dL (34.5 mmol/L) can occur in 
myxedema reflecting decreased activity of hepatic lipase. Increased 
content of cholesteryl esters and Apo E in the triglyceride-rich 
lipoproteins suggests accumulation of remnant particles. 
Hypothyroidism often causes expression of hyperlipidemia in 
individuals with dysbetalipoproteinemia. 
 12. IMMUNOGLOBULIN-LIPOPROTEIN 
    COMPLEX DISORDERS 
 Both polyclonal and monoclonal hypergammaglobulinemias may 
cause hypertriglyceridemia. IgG, IgM, and IgA have each been 
involved. Monoclonal antibodies associated with myeloma, mac-
roglobulinemia, lymphomas, and lymphocytic leukemias have 
been implicated. Lupus erythematosus and other autoimmune 
disorders have been associated with the polyclonal type. Binding 
of heparin by immunoglobulin, with resulting inhibition of LPL, 
can cause severe mixed lipemia. More commonly, the triglyceride-
rich lipoproteins have an abnormally high density, probably as a 
result of bound immunoglobulin, although some may be 
 remnant-like particles. These complexes usually have gamma 
mobility on electrophoresis. 
 Xanthomatosis associated with immunoglobulin complex dis-
ease includes tuberous and eruptive xanthomas, xanthelasma, and 
planar xanthomas of large areas of skin. The latter are otherwise 
seen only in patients with cholestasis. Deposits of lipid-rich 
CHAPTER 19 Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism     687
 hyaline material can occur in the lamina propria of the intestine, 
causing malabsorption and protein-losing enteropathy. Circulating 
immunoglobulin-lipoprotein complexes can fix complement, 
leading to hypocomplementemia. In such patients, administration 
of whole blood or plasma can cause anaphylaxis. Hence, washed 
red cells or albumin are recommended when blood volume 
replacement is required. 
 Treatment is directed at the underlying disorder. The critical 
temperature of cryoprecipitation of some of these complexes is 
close to body temperature. Therefore, if plasmapheresis is indi-
cated to remove offending immunoglobulins, it should be done at 
a temperature above the critical temperature measured in serum. 
 THE PRIMARY 
HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIAS 
 FAMILIAL HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA 
 Etiology and Pathogenesis 
 Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH), which in its heterozygous 
form occurs in approximately 1 in 500 individuals, is a codomi-
nant trait with high penetrance. Because half of first-degree rela-
tives are affected, all members of a family should be screened. A 
selective increase in LDL exists from birth and tends to increase 
during childhood and adolescence such that cholesterol in adult 
heterozygotes usually varies from about 260 to 400 mg/dL (6.7-
10.4 mmol/L). Some individuals—especially those in kindreds in 
which hypertriglyceridemia is present—may have higher than 
normal levels of VLDL and IDL. In a few patients with FH, the 
expression is blunted by independent genetic determinants. 
 The underlying defect is a deficiency of normal LDL receptors 
on cell membranes. A number of genetic defects affecting the 
structure, translation, modification, or transport of the receptor 
protein have been identified. 
 Some individuals have combined heterozygosity. In cases in 
which a kinetic mutant is combined with an ablative mutant, the 
hypercholesterolemia is greater than that seen in simple heterozy-
gosity, usually in the range of 500 to 800 mg/dL (13-20.8 
mmol/L). Those patients who are homozygous for null alleles have 
extremely severe hypercholesterolemia (approaching 1000 mg/dL 
[26 mmol/L] or greater) and fulminant atherosclerosis. 
 Production rates for LDL are moderately increased in heterozy-
gotes and are higher in homozygotes because of increased conver-
sion of VLDL to LDL. In the heterozygote, a greater fraction of 
LDL is removed by nonreceptor-dependent mechanisms than in 
normal subjects. In homozygotes, all removal of LDL proceeds 
through such pathways. 
 Clinical Findings 
 Tendon xanthomas are frequently present, causing a broadening or 
fusiform mass in the tendon. They can occur in almost any tendon 
but are most readily detected in the Achilles and patellar tendons 
and in the extensor tendons of the hands (Figure 19–3F, 19–3G, 
and 19–3H). Patients who are physically active may complain of 
achillodynia. Arcus corneae (Figure 19–3B) may occur as early as 
the third decade. Xanthelasma (Figure 19–3A) may also be present. 
Both arcus and xanthelasma are seen in some individuals who do 
not have hyperlipidemia, however. Coronary atherosclerosis tends 
to occur prematurely in heterozygotes. It is particularly prominent 
in individuals who are relatively deficient in HDL. It is probable 
that this represents a coincident inheritance of both traits. 
Homozygous FH is catastrophic. Xanthomatosis progresses rap-
idly. Patients may have tuberous xanthomas (Figure19–3C and 
19–3D) and elevated plaque-like xanthomas of the extremities, 
buttocks, interdigital webs, and aortic valves. Coronary disease may 
be evident in the first decade of life. 
 Serum cholesterol in excess of 300 mg/dL (7.8 mmol/L) in 
the absence of significant hypertriglyceridemia and conditions 
known to cause secondary hypercholesterolemia makes the diag-
nosis of heterozygous FH likely. The presence of affected first-
degree relatives is supportive of this diagnosis, especially if no 
other phenotypes of hyperlipidemia are present in the family 
that would suggest FCH. The finding of tendon xanthomas is 
nearly pathognomonic—beta-sitosterolemia, cerebrotendinous 
xanthomatosis (cholestanolosis), ligand-defective Apo B, and 
autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia (ARH) are exceptions. 
Although the cholesterol content of umbilical cord blood is 
 usually elevated, the diagnosis is most easily established by mea-
suring serum cholesterol after the first year of life. 
 Treatment 
 Treatment of heterozygotes with HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors 
may normalize LDL levels. However, achieving optimal levels may 
require one of the binary or ternary combinations involving 
reductase inhibitors, niacin, bile acid sequestrants, or ezetimibe. 
Levels of LDL cholesterol less than 100 mg/dL (2.6 mmol/L) can 
be obtained with combinations of these drugs in most patients. 
Treatment of homozygotes is extremely difficult. Partial control 
may be achieved with LDL apheresis in conjunction with niacin, 
ezetimibe, and a potent statin. Striking reduction of LDL levels is 
observed after liver transplantation, illustrating the important role 
of hepatic receptors in LDL clearance. 
 FAMILIAL COMBINED HYPERLIPIDEMIA 
 In some individuals in kindreds with FCH (see “Primary 
Hypertriglyceridemia,” earlier), LDL and IDL are the only lipo-
proteins that are elevated. This pattern may vary in an individual 
over time. Predominant elevation of VLDL or combined eleva-
tions of LDL and VLDL may be observed in the patient or the 
patient’s relatives. Some affected children express hyperlipidemia. 
In contrast to most cases of FH, the cholesterol level may be as low 
as 250 mg/dL (6.5 mmol/L) and xanthomas are absent in FCH. 
Studies of kindreds with the FCH phenotype suggest codominant 
transmission. Coronary atherosclerosis is accelerated, accounting 
for about 15% of all coronary events in the United States. The 
underlying mechanism involves increased secretion of VLDL. 
688    CHAPTER 19 Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism
 Treatment of the hypercholesterolemia should begin with diet 
and either niacin or a reductase inhibitor. It may be necessary to 
use a combination of these agents, or fenofibrate with a statin, to 
normalize levels of LDL and triglyceride. 
 Lp(a) HYPERLIPOPROTEINEMIA 
 Lp(a) normally comprises a very minor fraction of circulating 
lipoproteins, but it may be present in high concentrations in some 
individuals. It contains Apo B-100 and the (a) protein, a homolog 
of plasminogen that can inhibit fibrinolysis. It has been demon-
strated in atherosclerotic plaques, and several large studies impli-
cate it as an independent risk factor for coronary disease. The 
Ile4399Met polymorphism is particularly associated with increased 
risk. Plasma levels of Lp(a) can be measured by immunoassay. 
Levels above the stated normal range of a given method present an 
independent risk of coronary disease and stroke. Levels of Lp(a) 
primarily reflect genetic determinants but can also be elevated in 
disorders such as nephrosis because the (a) gene contains an 
inflammatory response element in its promoter. Niacin is cur-
rently the only effective treatment, although not all patients 
respond. Decreasing plasma levels of LDL appears to reduce the 
risk attributed to the elevated Lp(a), at least to some extent. 
 FAMILIAL LIGAND-DEFECTIVE 
Apo B-100 
 Mutations involving the ligand domain in Apo B-100 impair the 
ability of LDL to bind to its receptor. Two prevalent mutations at 
codon 3500 or 3531 occur in about one in 500 individuals and 
may be found in compound states with familial hypercholester-
olemia. The hypercholesterolemia with ligand defects alone is 
generally less severe than in FH because the removal of VLDL 
remnants is normal, resulting in a lower production of LDL. 
Patients may have tendon xanthomas and are at increased risk of 
coronary disease. Response to reductase inhibitors varies, but 
many show some resistance because upregulation of receptors can-
not correct the defect completely although it can decrease LDL 
production because IDL particles are endocytosed by liver via 
interaction of the LDL receptor with Apo E. 
 CHOLESTEROL 7`-HYDROXYLASE 
DEFICIENCY 
 Loss of function mutations in cholesterol 7α-hydroxylase result in 
diminished catabolism of cholesterol to bile acids and accumula-
tion of cholesterol in hepatocytes. Downregulation of LDL recep-
tors causes elevated LDL in plasma. VLDL may also be increased. 
Homozygous patients have early coronary disease and marked 
resistance to reductase inhibitors as single agents and may have 
premature cholesterol gallstone disease. Heterozygous patients 
have moderately elevated LDL. The hyperlipidemia responds well 
to niacin with a reductase inhibitor. 
 SECONDARY HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA 
 HYPOTHYROIDISM 
 In hypothyroidism, LDL and IDL are elevated. Some patients 
may have lipemia, as described in the section on secondary hyper-
lipemia. Hyperlipidemia may occur with no overt signs or symp-
toms of decreased thyroid function. Biliary excretion of cholesterol 
and bile acids is depressed. Cholesterol stores in tissues appear to 
be increased, although the number of LDL receptors on cells is 
decreased. Activity of hepatic lipase is markedly decreased, and 
atherogenesis is accelerated by myxedema. The hyperlipidemia 
responds dramatically to treatment with thyroxine. 
 NEPHROSIS 
 As described in the section on secondary hypertriglyceridemias, 
nephrosis produces a biphasic hyperlipoproteinemia. The earliest 
alteration of lipoproteins in nephrosis is elevation of LDL. 
Increased secretion of VLDL by liver is probably involved. Because 
the lipids of the lipoprotein surfaces are altered by enrichment 
with sphingomyelin, lysolecithin, and FFA, the catabolism of 
LDL could be impaired. Perhaps the low metabolic rate in affected 
patients introduces metabolic changes similar to those associated 
with hypothyroidism. The hyperlipidemia may be an important 
element in the markedly increased risk of atherosclerosis in these 
patients. The treatment of choice is a reductase inhibitor or bile 
acid–binding resin with niacin. 
 IMMUNOGLOBULIN DISORDERS 
 One of the lipoprotein abnormalities that can be associated with 
monoclonal gammopathy is elevation of LDL. A gamma lipoprotein 
that is a stable complex of immunoglobulin and lipoprotein may be 
observed on electrophoresis. Cryoprecipitation, often in the tempera-
ture range encountered in peripheral tissues when the environmental 
temperature is low, may occur. Patients may have symptoms from the 
vascular effect of complement fixation resulting from complex for-
mation and may have hyperviscosity syndrome from the elevated 
immunoglobulins per se. Planar xanthomas may be present. 
 Treatment is directed at the underlying process. Plasmapheresis 
is often effective. If cryoprecipitation occurs at critical tempera-
tures near or above room temperature, the procedure must be 
carried out in a special warm environment. Transfusion of whole 
blood or serum may be dangerous in these patients because of 
rapid production of anaphylatoxins from fresh complement in the 
serum, resulting from interaction with circulating antibody-anti-
gen complexes. This risk can be minimized by the use of packed 
red blood cells and albumin in place of whole blood. 
 ANOREXIA NERVOSA 
 About 40% of patients with anorexia nervosa have elevated 
LDL, and levels of cholesterol may reach 400 to 600 mg/dL 
(10.4-15.6 mmol/L). The hyperlipidemia, which persists despite 
CHAPTER 19 Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism     689
correction of hypothyroidism, is probably a result of decreased 
fecal excretion of bile acids and cholesterol. Serum lipoproteins 
return to normal when proper nutrition is restored. 
 CHOLESTASIS 
 The hyperlipidemia associated with obstruction of biliary flow is 
complex. Levels of cholesterol in these patients exceeding 400 mg/
dL (10.4 mmol/L) usually are associated with extrahepatic 
obstruction or with intrahepatic tumor. Several types of abnormal 
lipoproteins are present. The most abundant, termed Lp-X, is a 
bilayer vesicle composed of unesterified cholesterol and lecithin, 
with associated apolipoproteins but no Apo B. Lp-X is apparent 
on electrophoresis as a band of zero to gamma mobility that shows 
metachromatic staining with Sudan black. It is these vesicular 
particles that cause the serum phospholipid and unesterified cho-
lesterol content to be extremely high. Another abnormal species, 
called Lp-Y, contains appreciable amounts of triglycerides and 
Apo B. The LDL in cholestasis also contains an unusually large 
amount of triglycerides. 
 Patients may have planar xanthomas, especially at sites of 
minor trauma, and xanthomas of the palmar creases. Occasionally, 
eruptive xanthomas are present. Xanthomatous involvement of 
nerves may lead to symptoms of peripheral neuropathy, and the 
abnormal lipoproteins may be atherogenic. Whereas bilirubin 
levels are nearly normal in some patients with chronic cholestasis, 
all have elevated serum alkaline phosphatase activity. 
 Neuropathy or evidence of atherosclerosis is the chief indication 
for treatment of the hyperlipidemia. Bile acid–binding resins are of 
some value, whereas fibric acid derivatives may cause an increase in 
cholesterol. Plasmapheresis is the most effective treatment. Large 
doses of vitamin E are indicated to overcome severe impairment of 
absorption. Deficiency of other fat-soluble vitamins also occurs. 
 THE PRIMARY HYPOLIPIDEMIAS 
 Although the clinician is confronted less frequently by the prob-
lem of a striking deficiency in plasma lipids, it is important to 
recognize the primary and secondary hypolipidemias. A serum 
cholesterol less than 110 mg/dL (2.9 mmol/L) is noteworthy. 
Because levels of triglycerides in normal fasting serum may be as 
low as 25 mg/dL (0.29 mmol/L), significance is limited to cases in 
which they are virtually absent. 
 PRIMARY HYPOLIPIDEMIA DUE TO 
DEFICIENCY OF HIGH-DENSITY 
LIPOPROTEINS 
 1. TANGIER DISEASE 
 Etiology and Pathogenesis 
 Severe deficiency of HDL occurs in Tangier disease. Heterozygotes 
lack clinical signs but have about one-half or less of the normal 
complement of HDL and Apo A-I in plasma. Homozygotes lack 
normal HDL, and Apo A-I and Apo A-II are present at extremely 
low levels. Serum cholesterol is usually below 120 mg/dL 
(3.12 mmol/L) and may be half this value. Mild hypertriglyceri-
demia is usually present, and LDL is greatly enriched in triglycer-
ides. Mutations in the ATP-dependent transporter ABCA1 
underlie this disorder, causing defective efflux of cholesterol from 
peripheral cells. 
 Clinical Findings 
 The clinical features of this rare autosomal recessive disease 
include large, orange-colored, lipid-filled tonsils, accumulation of 
cholesteryl esters in the reticuloendothelial system, and an epi-
sodic and recurrent peripheral neuropathy with predominant 
motor weakness in the later stages. The course of the disease is 
benign in early childhood, but the neuropathy may appear as early 
as age 8 years. Cholesteryl ester accumulates most prominently in 
peripheral nerve sheaths. Carotenoid pigment may be apparent in 
pharyngeal and rectal mucous membranes. Splenomegaly and 
corneal infiltration may also be present. There is some increase in 
risk of coronary atherosclerosis. 
 Treatment 
 Because some of the lamellar lipoprotein material in plasma is 
believed to originate in chylomicrons, restriction of dietary fats 
and cholesterol is suggested. 
 2. FAMILIAL 
   HYPOALPHALIPOPROTEINEMIA 
 Etiology and Pathogenesis 
 This phenotypic pattern is a partial deficiency of HDL that may 
involve heterogeneous mechanisms. These presumed constitu-
tional disorders must be differentiated from the condition in 
which moderately low levels of HDL are seen in individuals con-
suming a diet very low in fat. White and Asian men on such diets 
usually have HDL cholesterol levels of 38 to 42 mg/dL (1-1.1 
mmol/L) by ultracentrifugal analysis, in contrast to a median 
value of 49 mg/dL (1.3 mmol/L) when consuming a typical North 
American diet. Such levels are common in Asiatic populations and 
among vegetarians, where the risk of coronary disease is usually 
small. HDL cholesterol must also be interpreted in the light of the 
amount of triglyceride-rich lipoproteins in plasma. Because cho-
lesteryl esters are progressively transferred to the cores of triglycer-
ide-rich lipoproteins as triglyceride levels rise, HDL cholesterol 
decreases as an inverse function of the triglyceride level. 
 Etiologic Factor in Coronary Disease 
 Familial hypoalphalipoproteinemia is fairly common and is an 
important risk factor in atherosclerosis. This abnormality may be 
the only apparent risk factor in many cases of premature coronary 
or peripheral vascular disease and accelerates the appearance of 
coronary disease in patients with FH or other hyperlipidemias. 
690    CHAPTER 19 Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism
Hypoalphalipoproteinemia shows a strong familial incidence. 
Mutations in several genes have been associated, including  Apo A-I 
(the principal protein of HDL),  PCPE-2 (a protease involved in 
the maturation of Apo A-1), and the WW domain oxidoreductase 
(a transcriptional regulator involved in HDL metabolism). 
Although several mechanisms and modes of transmission may be 
involved, many kindreds show distributions consistent with auto-
somal dominance. HDL cholesterol levels are usually below 
35 mg/dL (0.9 mmol/L). 
 Treatment 
 Increases in HDL cholesterol in several coronary intervention tri-
als have been independently associated with plaque regression. 
Only limited means of raising HDL levels are at hand. Findings 
that HDL is composed of as many as 20 discrete species further 
complicate this problem. It is not yet known which of these spe-
cies may be involved in protecting against atherosclerosis or 
whether their levels can be increased. Although alcohol ingestion 
may increase total HDL, it appears that the effect is primarily on 
the HDL 3 ultracentrifugal fraction, which correlates poorly with 
decreased risk. No recommendation for increased alcohol con-
sumption should be made. 
 Heavy exercise is associated with increases in HDL in some 
individuals but must be approached with caution in patients who 
may have coronary disease. Niacin increases total HDL in many 
subjects, chiefly the HDL 2 ultracentrifugal fraction. Smaller incre-
ments in HDL occur with reductase inhibitors and fibric acid 
derivatives. 
 The most important reason for measuring HDL cholesterol is 
to identify patients who are at increased risk. Thus, just as with 
patients who have premature vascular disease or a family history of 
early arteriosclerosis, patients with low HDL should be treated 
more aggressively for elevated levels of the atherogenic lipopro-
teins. Furthermore, vigorous efforts should be directed at the 
control of other risk factors such as hypertension. Smoking and 
obesity are known to decrease HDL significantly. 
 3. DEFICIENCY OF LECITHIN-
   CHOLESTEROL ACYLTRANSFERASE 
 This rare autosomal recessive disorder is not expressed in clinical 
or biochemical form in the heterozygote. In the homozygote, 
clinical characteristics are variable. The diagnosis is usually made 
in adults, although corneal opacities may begin in childhood. 
Proteinuria may be an early sign. Deposits of unesterified choles-
terol and phospholipid in the renal microvasculature lead to pro-
gressive loss of nephrons and ultimate renal failure. Many patients 
have mild to moderate normochromic anemia with target cells. 
Hyperbilirubinemia or peripheral neuropathy may be present. 
Red blood cell lipid composition is abnormal, with increased con-
tent of unesterified cholesterol and lecithin. Most have elevated 
plasma triglycerides (200-1000 mg/dL [2.3-11.2 mmol/L]), and 
levels of serum cholesterol vary from low normal to about 500 
mg/dL (13 mmol/L), only a small fraction of which is esterified. 
The large triglyceride-containing lipoproteins are unusually rich 
in unesterified cholesterol and appear to have abnormal surface 
monolayers. LDL are rich in triglycerides, and abnormal vesicular 
lipoproteins are present in the LDL density interval. Two abnor-
mal HDL species are present: bilayer disks and small spherical 
particles. Marked restriction of dietary fat and cholesterol delays 
the onset of renal disease. 
 PRIMARY HYPOLIPIDEMIA DUE TO 
DEFICIENCY OF Apo B–CONTAINING 
LIPOPROTEINS 
 1. RECESSIVE ABETALIPOPROTEINEMIA 
 Etiology and Pathogenesis 
 This disorder could represent a number of mutations involving 
the processing of Apo B or the secretion of Apo B–containing 
lipoproteins. The predominant cause is mutations involving the 
microsomal triglyceride transfer protein. Patients heterozygous for 
mutations have no abnormalities of lipoproteins or clinical signs. 
In homozygotes, all forms of Apo B are essentially absent. No 
chylomicrons, VLDL, or LDL are found in plasma, leaving only 
HDL. Plasma triglycerides are usually less than 10 mg/dL 
(0.12 mmol/L) and fail to rise after a fat load. Total cholesterol is 
usually less than 90 mg/dL (2.3 mmol/L). There is a defect in the 
incorporation of newly synthesized triglycerides into chylomi-
crons. However, at low levels of fat intake, about 80% of the 
ingested triglycerides are absorbed, probably by direct absorption 
of fatty acids via the portal vein. 
 Clinical Findings 
 Clinical features include a paucity of adipose tissue associated with 
malabsorption of long-chain fatty acids due to failure of the intes-
tine to secrete chylomicrons. Red blood cells may be acanthocytic, 
with a high cholesterol-phospholipid ratio. There may be progres-
sive degeneration of the central nervous system, including cerebellar 
degeneration and posterior and lateral spinal tract disease. Retinal 
degeneration may be severe. Levels of fat-soluble vitamins in plasma 
may be very low. The neurologic and opthalmologic defects are due 
to deficiency of vitamin E (normally transported largely in LDL). 
Patients are apparently normal at birth and develop steatorrhea with 
impaired growth in infancy. The neuromuscular disorder often 
appears in late childhood with ataxia, night blindness, decreased 
visual acuity, and nystagmus. Cardiomyopathy with arrhythmias 
has been reported and may be a cause of death. 
 Treatment 
 Treatment includes administration of fat-soluble vitamins and 
essential fatty acids. Very large doses of mixed tocopherols (vita-
min E; 1000-10,000 IU/d) limit the progressive central nervous 
system degeneration. Although vitamin A seems to correct the 
night blindness, it does not alter the course of retinitis pigmen-
tosa. Vitamins D and K may also be indicated. Restriction of 
dietary fat minimizes steatorrhea. 
CHAPTER 19 Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism     691
 2. FAMILIAL 
   HYPOBETALIPOPROTEINEMIA 
 This disorder is usually attributable to defects at the Apo B locus, 
resulting in decreased production of protein or in the production 
of truncated gene products. LDL and Apo B in heterozygotes are 
often present at about half of normal levels. If a mutant allele 
resulting in the complete interdiction of Apo B synthesis is present 
in the homozygous state, the clinical and biochemical features 
may be indistinguishable from those of recessive abetalipopro-
teinemia, and treatment is the same as for that disorder. Very short 
truncations of Apo B-100 only allow the formation of abnormally 
dense, small LDL. Longer truncations permit the formation of 
larger lipoproteins, even including VLDL-like particles. Mutations 
in the ANGPTL3 gene can cause deficiency of LDL, HDL, and 
triglycerides. 
 Clinical features may be absent in patients who produce at least 
low levels of LDL-like particles. However, signs and symptoms of 
tocopherol deficiency may be present. Treatment with mixed 
tocopherols (800 IU/d) is recommended for all patients. 
 3. CHYLOMICRON RETENTION DISEASE 
 This disorder presents in the neonate and appears to be based on the 
selective inability of intestinal epithelial cells to secrete chylomi-
crons. Affected individuals have severe malabsorption of triglycer-
ides with steatorrhea. Levels of LDL and VLDL are about half of 
normal, presumably secondary to malnutrition. Tocopherol levels 
may be very low and may be associated with neurologic abnormali-
ties. Clinical symptoms diminish somewhat with time if the patient 
is managed with a low-fat diet and tocopherol supplementation. 
 SECONDARY HYPOLIPIDEMIA 
 Hypolipidemia may be secondary to a number of diseases character-
ized by chronic cachexia (eg, advanced cancer). Myeloproliferative 
disorders can lead to extremely low levels of LDL, probably owing to 
increased uptake related to rapid proliferation and membrane syn-
thesis. A wide variety of conditions leading to intestinal malabsorp-
tion produce hypolipidemia. In these situations, levels of 
chylomicrons, VLDL, and LDL in serum are low but never absent. 
Because most of the lipoprotein mass of fasting serum is of hepatic 
origin, massive parenchymal liver failure (eg, in Reye syndrome) can 
cause severe hypolipidemia. A precipitous fall in lipoprotein levels 
during drug treatment of hyperlipidemia can signal hepatic toxicity. 
Secondary hypobetalipoproteinemia occurs in oroticaciduria. 
 The hypolipidemias associated with immunoglobulin disorders 
result from diverse mechanisms. Affected patients usually have 
myeloma or macroglobulinemia but may have lymphomas or 
lymphocytic leukemia. Any of the major classes of immunoglobu-
lins may be involved. In many cases, the immunoglobulins are 
cryoprecipitins; thus, the diagnosis may be missed if blood is not 
drawn and serum prepared at 37°C and observed for cryoprecipi-
tation. Immunoglobulin-lipoprotein complexes may precipitate in 
various tissues. When this occurs in the lamina propria of the 
intestine, a syndrome of malabsorption and protein-losing 
enteropathy may result. Monoclonal IgA in myeloma may pre-
cipitate with lipoproteins, causing xanthomas of the gingiva and 
cervix. Xanthomas in the skin are usually planar and may involve 
intracutaneous hemorrhage, producing a classic purple xanthoma. 
Planar xanthomas occurring in cholestasis may be confused with 
this condition because the abnormal lipoprotein of cholestasis 
(Lp-X), like the circulating lipoprotein complex of immunoglobu-
lin and lipoprotein, has gamma mobility on electrophoresis. 
 OTHER DISORDERS OF 
LIPOPROTEIN METABOLISM 
 THE LIPODYSTROPHIES 
 Classification 
 Classification of the lipodystrophies is based on their familial or 
acquired origin and the regional or generalized nature of the fat 
loss. To date, mutations in eight gene loci have been associated 
with phenotypes of lipodystrophy. Insulin resistance is a common 
feature. 
 Familial generalized lipodystrophy (Seip-Berardinelli syn-
drome) is a rare recessive trait associated with mutations in the 
gene for seipin. It may be diagnosed at birth and is associated with 
macrosomia. Genital hypertrophy, hypertrichosis, acanthosis nig-
ricans, hepatomegaly, insulin resistance, hypertriglyceridemia, and 
glucose intolerance are regularly observed. 
 Familial lipodystrophy of limbs and trunk (Köbberling-
Dunnigan syndrome) appears to be transmitted as a dominant 
trait associated with mutations in the  lamin A gene. Because 
sequence anomalies in other regions of the gene are associated 
with muscular dystrophy, cardiac conduction defects, cardiomyo-
pathy, or axonal neuropathies, overlapping phenotypes may occur. 
It affects women predominantly and is not evident until puberty. 
The face, neck, and upper trunk are usually spared. Growth is 
normal, but otherwise this syndrome shares features of the gener-
alized form noted earlier. It is frequently associated with Stein-
Leventhal syndrome and often progresses to fatal cirrhosis. 
 Acquired forms of lipodystrophy, generalized (Lawrence syn-
drome) and partial (Barraquer-Simmons syndrome), usually begin 
in childhood, affect females predominantly, and often follow an 
acute febrile illness. The generalized type commonly shares the 
features described earlier, invariably involving the trunk and 
extremities but sometimes sparing the face. A sclerosing panniculi-
tis, as seen in Weber-Christian syndrome, may appear at the outset. 
The partial type usually begins in the face and then involves the 
neck, upper limbs, and trunk. In this disorder, reduced levels of C3 
complement are frequently encountered. Most patients have pro-
teinuria, and some develop overt vascular nephritis. 
 Associated Disorders 
 Because a number of patients with disorders resembling both 
familial and acquired types of lipodystrophy have tumors or 
other lesions of the hypothalamus, appropriate neurologic 
692    CHAPTER 19 Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism
evaluation should be obtained. Similarly, the physician should 
be alert to the association of HIV disease and collagen-vascular 
disorders, including scleroderma and dermatomyositis, with 
some cases of acquired lipodystrophy. 
 RARE DISORDERS 
 Autosomal Recessive 
Hypercholesterolemia 
 In autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia (ARH), LDL levels 
are markedly elevated, resulting in total cholesterol levels between 
400 and 700 mg/dL (10.4 and 18.1 mmol/L). It is attributed to 
mutations in the gene for the ARH protein that is involved in 
endocytosis of the LDL receptor. Very large xanthomas (tuberous, 
tendinous, and planar) are frequently present. Arcus and xan-
thelasma are also common. Statins and bile acid sequestrants 
appear to be effective. 
 PCSK9 Variants 
 The protease, PCSK9, plays a role in processing the LDL receptor. 
Gain of function mutations in this gene are associated with hyper-
cholesterolemia, presumably due to reduction in the number of 
effective receptors. More commonly, loss of function mutations 
that result in longer residence time of the LDL receptor are associ-
ated with low levels of LDL cholesterol. 
 Werner Syndrome, Progeria, Infantile 
Hypercalcemia, Sphingolipidoses, and 
Niemann-Pick Disease 
 These disorders may be associated with hypercholesterolemia, but 
levels of triglycerides may be normal. Among the sphingolipi-
doses, HDL deficiency is typical of Gaucher disease, in which 
hypertriglyceridemia may also occur. Niemann-Pick disease is 
attributable in most cases to mutations in the  NCP1 gene and may 
be associated with hypercholesterolemia or hypertriglyceridemia. 
However, a similar disorder results from mutations in the  NCP2 
locus. The  NCP1 gene product is involved in the postlysosomal 
transport of lipids. The neurological manifestations of Niemann-
Pick disease type C are mitigated by an inhibitor of glycosphingo-
lipid synthesis, miglustat. 
 Wolman Disease and Cholesteryl 
Ester Storage Disease 
 These recessive lipid storage disorders involve the absence and 
partial deficiency, respectively, of lysosomal acid lipase, resulting 
in abnormal cholesteryl ester and triglyceride stores in liver, 
spleen, adrenals, small intestine, and bone marrow. Most patients 
have elevated levels of both LDL and VLDL. Wolman disease may 
be fatal in infancy but appears to respond to hematopoietic cell 
transplant. Cholesteryl ester storage disease responds at least par-
tially to combined statin-ezetimibe therapy. 
 Cerebrotendinous Xanthomatosis 
 In this recessive disorder, impaired synthesis of bile acids due 
to mutations in the  sterol 27-hydroxylase gene results in 
increased production of cholesterol and cholestanol that accu-
mulate in tissues. Plasma levels of cholesterol and cholestanol 
are normal or elevated. Cataracts, tendinous xanthomas, pro-
gressive neurologic dysfunction, and premature coronary athero-
sclerosis are hallmarks of this disease. Its central nervous system 
effects include dementia, spasticity, and ataxia. Death usually 
ensues before age 50 from neurologic degeneration or coronary 
disease. Treatment with chenodeoxycholic acid appears useful. 
Resins must be avoided because they aggravate the underlying 
defect. 
 Phytosterolemia 
 Mutations in the cassette half transporters ABCG5 or ABCG8 
underlie this disorder, which is characterized by normal or ele-
vated plasma cholesterol levels; high concentrations of plant 
sterol in serum, adipose tissue, and skin; and prominent tendi-
nous and tuberous xanthomas. Substantially larger fractions of 
phytosterols and cholesterol are absorbed from the intestine than 
in normal individuals. Serum cholesterol levels may be as high as 
700 mg/dL (18.2 mmol/L), reflecting an increase in LDL that 
contain phytosterol esters in addition to cholesteryl esters. 
Diagnosis is established by quantitation of phytosterols in 
plasma by gas-liquid chromatography. Premature coronary dis-
ease is common, as is polyarthritis and leukocytoclastic vascul-
opathy. Treatment consists of a diet restricted in plant sterols and 
cholesterol and the use of bile acid–binding resins, reductase 
inhibitors, and ezetimibe. 
 Cholesteryl Ester Transfer 
Protein Deficiency 
 Mutations have been identified that impair the function of CETP, 
resulting in the retention of cholesteryl esters in HDL. Total HDL 
cholesterol is increased by 30% to 50% in heterozygotes and by as 
much as 200 mg/dL in homozygotes. The risk of atherosclerosis 
may be moderately increased in homozygotes. 
 TREATMENT OF HYPERLIPIDEMIA 
 Initial therapy in all forms of hyperlipidemia is an appropriate 
diet. In most cases, a universal diet (see later) is indicated. In many 
subjects with lipemia or with mild hypercholesterolemia, compli-
ance with diet is sufficient to control lipoprotein levels. Most 
patients with severe hypercholesterolemia or lipemia require drug 
therapy. Diet must be continued to achieve the full potential of 
the medications. LDL cholesterol and triglycerides should be 
below 70 mg/dL (1.8 mmol/L) and 130 mg/dL (1.5 mmol/L), 
respectively, in patients with known atherosclerosis. C-reactive 
protein, lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2, and other 
emerging biomarkers are useful in predicting risk. 
CHAPTER 19 Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism     693
 Caution Regarding Drug Therapy 
 Women of childbearing age should be advised of the potential risk 
of teratogenicity of statins and possibly other hypolipidemic 
agents. Treatment should be given only if pregnancy is being 
actively avoided. Nursing mothers should not be treated. Estrogen-
containing contraceptives should be avoided or used with caution 
in patients with hypertriglyceridemia. 
 In children, hyperlipidemias other than FH and severe cases of 
the metabolic syndrome usually do not require medication before 
age 16 years. Factors in the decision to start drug treatment 
include: the child’s age and levels of lipoproteins; the severity and 
age at onset of symptomatic coronary disease in the child’s family; 
and the presence in the child of other risk factors, especially dia-
betes or compound dyslipidemias [including hypoalphalipopro-
teinemia, hyper-Lp(a)lipoproteinemia, FH, and FCH]. Dietary 
treatment is indicated for all children with hyperlipidemia and 
should be started after the second year. The exception is primary 
chylomicronemia, in which an appropriate diet should be insti-
tuted as soon as the disease is detected. 
 DIETARY FACTORS IN THE MANAGEMENT 
OF LIPOPROTEIN DISORDERS 
 Restriction of Caloric Intake 
 The secretion of VLDL by liver is greatly stimulated by caloric 
intake in excess of requirements for physical activity and basal 
metabolism. Therefore, the total caloric content of the diet is of 
greater importance than its specific composition in treating 
endogenous hyperlipemia. There is a positive correlation between 
serum levels of VLDL triglyceride and various measures of obesity, 
but many obese patients have normal serum lipids. On the other 
hand, most patients with hypertriglyceridemia—except those with 
lipoprotein lipase deficiency—are obese. As obese patients lose 
weight, VLDL stabilize at lower levels. There is a modest correla-
tion of LDL levels with body weight in the general population. 
 Restriction of Fat Intake 
 In primary chylomicronemia, all types of fats must be restricted 
rigidly. In the acute management of mixed lipemia with impend-
ing pancreatitis, elimination of dietary fat leads to a rapid decrease 
in triglycerides. 
 The cholesterol-lowering effect of a significant reduction in 
total fat is well known. It has also been shown that a 10% to 15% 
fall in cholesterol is achieved when individuals who have been 
consuming a typical North American diet restrict their intake of 
saturated fats to 8% of total calories. Most saturated and trans 
fatty acids cause increased levels of LDL cholesterol by downregu-
lating hepatic LDL receptors. Whereas polyunsaturated fatty acids 
do not have this effect, they may reduce levels of HDL and are 
potentially carcinogenic. Monounsaturated fatty acids increase 
HDL but do not increase LDL. Moderate use of monounsatu-
rated fats such as olive oil, oleic acid–rich safflower oil, or canola 
oil is indicated. 
 Marine Omega-3 Fatty Acids 
 The omega-3 fatty acids are ligands for peroxisome proliferator–
activated receptor alpha. Those found in fish oils have special 
properties relevant to the treatment of hypertriglyceridemia and 
may protect against fatal arrhythmias in ischemic myocardium. 
Substantial decreases in triglyceride levels can be induced in some 
patients with severe endogenous or mixed lipemia at doses of 3 to 
4 g/d of eicosapentaenoic (EPA) and docosahexaenoic (DHA) 
acids, combined. This should be given in divided doses with 
meals. EPA and DHA are potent inhibitors of platelet reactivity. 
 Reduction of Cholesterol Intake 
 The amount of cholesterol in the diet affects serum cholesterol 
levels, but individual responses vary. Restriction of dietary choles-
terol to less than 200 mg/d (5.2 mmol/d) in normal individuals 
can result in a decrease of up to 10% to 15% in serum cholesterol, 
primarily reflecting a decrease in LDL. Dietary cholesterol and 
saturated or trans fat content have independent effects. 
 Role of Carbohydrate in Diet 
 When a high-carbohydrate diet is consumed, hypertriglyceridemia 
often develops within 48 to 72 hours, and levels of triglycerides rise 
to a maximum in 1 to 5 weeks. Persons with higher basal triglycer-
ides and those consuming hypercaloric diets show the greatest 
effect. In persons with type 2 diabetes, a high-carbohydrate diet 
tends to increase insulin resistance. Substitution of monounsatu-
rated fats for the carbohydrate improves insulin resistance and 
lipoprotein levels. 
 Alcohol Ingestion 
 Ingestion of alcohol is a common cause of secondary hypertriglyc-
eridemia owing to overproduction of VLDL. Some individuals with 
familial hypertriglyceridemia are particularly sensitive to the effects 
of alcohol, and abstinence may normalize their triglycerides. 
Occasionally, chronic alcohol intake may also be associated with 
hypercholesterolemia. Increased cholesterol synthesis and decreased 
conversion to bile acids have been observed. Alcohol may account for 
alimentary lipemia persisting beyond 12 to 14 hours. This possibility 
should be excluded by the history or a repeat lipid analysis. A positive 
correlation has been found between alcohol intake and HDL choles-
terol levels in some individuals. Because alcohol-induced changes in 
HDL appear primarily to involve the HDL 3 subfraction, there is no 
justification for the use of alcohol to increase the protective effect of 
HDL against atherosclerosis. If the low HDL cholesterol is second-
ary to hypertriglyceridemia, alcohol must be avoided. 
 Antioxidants 
 Both alpha and gamma tocopherols (vitamin E) have recognized 
roles in the elimination of free radicals. Vitamin C assists this 
activity by restoring the tocopheroxyl radical to active tocopherol. 
These vitamins have been shown to restore normal vascular 
reactivity in hyperlipidemic patients, and some epidemiologic 
evidence suggests that they have an antiatherogenic effect. It is 
694    CHAPTER 19 Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism
therefore reasonable to include at least 50 IU of mixed tocopherols 
and 250 mg of vitamin C in the diet each day. Larger doses may 
partially vitiate the effects of certain hypolipidemic drug regimens 
and have not been shown to have antiatherogenic potential. 
Selenium may also be important because it is a cofactor for one 
species of superoxide dismutase. Diets rich in fruits and vegetables 
appear to be important, providing isoflavones, quinols, and a 
number of carotenoid species. 
 B Vitamins 
 A significant percentage of Americans carry at least one allele for 
mutations in the methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase gene that 
diminishes its efficiency by reducing its affinity for folic acid. This, 
and certain other mutations, may lead to significantly elevated 
levels of a metabolite of methionine—homocysteine—that has 
toxic effects on endothelium. Supplementation with 0.4 to 2 mg 
of folic acid mitigates this problem. Vitamins B 6 and B 12 partici-
pate in the metabolism of homocysteine. Thus, a B complex sup-
plement should be used. Dietary protein should be restricted to 
the amount required for replacement of essential amino acids 
(about 0.5-1 g/kg) in patients with hyperhomocysteinemia. Oral 
administration of betaine, a methyl donor, can mitigate homo-
cysteine levels in severely affected patients (2 g 3 times daily). 
 Other Dietary Substances 
 Several other nutrients have been studied in relation to atheroscle-
rosis. Caffeine and sucrose have negligible effects on serum lipids, 
and their statistical relationship to CHD is generally unimpressive 
when data are corrected for cigarette smoking. However, when 
coffee is prepared by protracted boiling of the grounds, a lipid 
substance (cafestol) is extracted that contributes to hypercholester-
olemia. Lecithin has no effect on plasma lipoproteins. A minor 
reduction in LDL cholesterol is associated with the addition of oat 
bran and certain other brans to the diet. 
 The Universal Diet 
 Dietary treatment is an important aspect of the management of all 
forms of lipoprotein disorders and may in some cases be all that is 
required. Knowledge of the dietary factors mentioned earlier 
allows selection of appropriate modifications for an individual. 
However, a basic diet is useful in the treatment of most patients, 
the elements of which are as follows: 
 (1) A normal BMI should be achieved and maintained. 
 (2)  Fat should provide less than 35% and saturated fat less than 
7% of total calories. Monounsaturated oils should predomi-
nate and be used for all high-temperature cooking. 
 (3) Cholesterol should be reduced to less than 200 mg/d. 
 (4)  Complex carbohydrates should predominate among total 
carbohydrates. 
 (5)  Alcohol should be avoided in patients with hypertriglyceri-
demia or those requiring weight loss. 
 (6) Intake of trans fatty acids should be avoided. 
 (7)  Peroxidized fats resulting from protracted heating should be 
avoided. 
 Caloric restriction and reduction of adipose tissue mass are 
particularly important for patients with increased levels of VLDL 
and IDL. During periods of substantial weight loss, levels of 
VLDL and LDL tend to be lower than they would be under iso-
caloric conditions, even at ideal body weight. 
 DRUGS USED IN TREATMENT OF 
HYPERLIPOPROTEINEMIA 
 BILE ACID SEQUESTRANTS 
 Mechanism of Action and Efficacy 
 Cholestyramine, colestipol, and colesevelam are cationic resins 
that bind bile acids in the intestinal lumen. They are not absorbed 
and, therefore, increase the excretion of bile acids in the stool up 
to 10-fold. LDL levels decrease as a consequence of increased 
expression of high-affinity receptors on hepatic cell membranes. 
These agents are useful only in disorders involving elevated LDL. 
Patients who have increased levels of VLDL may have further 
increases in triglycerides during treatment with resins. In com-
bined hyperlipidemia, where the resins may be given to reduce 
LDL, a second agent such as niacin may be required to control the 
hypertriglyceridemia. Levels of LDL fall 15% to 30% in compli-
ant patients with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia who 
are receiving maximal doses of the resins. These agents can con-
tribute an incremental effect in the management of insulin resis-
tance by an incretin-mediated mechanism. When given as a single 
agent, a modest reduction in new coronary events can result. 
When given in combined regimens with a statin and/or niacin, 
regression of coronary artery plaques has been demonstrated by 
quantitative angiography. 
 Drug Dosage 
 In disorders involving moderately high levels of LDL, 20 g of 
cholestyramine or colestipol daily may reduce cholesterol levels effec-
tively. Treatment should commence at one-half this dosage to mini-
mize gastrointestinal side effects. Maximum doses (30 g colestipol, 
32 g cholestyramine, 3.75 g colesevelam daily) are required in more 
severe cases. These agents are only effective if taken with meals. 
 Side-Effects 
 Because the resins are not absorbed, systemic side-effects are 
absent. Patients frequently complain of a bloated sensation and 
constipation, both of which may be relieved by the addition of 
psyllium to the resin mixture. Malabsorption of fat or fat-solu-
ble vitamins with a daily dose of resin up to 30 g occurs only in 
individuals with preexisting bowel disease or cholestasis. 
Hypoprothrombinemia has been observed in patients with mal-
absorption due to these causes. Cholestyramine and colestipol 
bind thyroxine, digitalis glycosides, and warfarin and impair the 
absorption of iron, thiazides, beta-blockers, ezetimibe, and 
other drugs. Absorption of all these (except ezetimibe) is 
CHAPTER 19 Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism     695
ensured if they are administered 1 hour before the resin. 
Colesevelam does not bind digoxin, warfarin, or reductase 
inhibitors. Because they change the composition of bile micelles, 
bile acid sequestrants theoretically may increase the risk of 
cholelithiasis, particularly in obese subjects. In practice, this risk 
appears to be very small. The resins should not be used as single 
agents in patients with hypertriglyceridemia and should be 
avoided in those with diverticulitis. 
 NIACIN (NICOTINIC ACID) 
 Mechanism of Action and Efficacy 
 Niacin (but not its amide) is able to effect major reductions in 
triglyceride-rich lipoproteins and, to a lesser extent, in LDL. It 
inhibits secretion of VLDL. It increases sterol excretion acutely, 
mobilizes cholesterol from tissue pools until a new steady-state is 
established, and decreases cholesterol biosynthesis. That it can 
cause a continued decrease in hepatic cholesterol production even 
when given with bile acid–binding resins is probably an important 
feature of the complementary action of these agents. Levels of 
HDL, particularly HDL 2 , are usually significantly increased, 
reflecting a decrease in their fractional catabolic rate. Niacin stimu-
lates production of tissue plasminogen activator, an effect that may 
be of value in preventing thrombotic events. Small, dense LDL are 
converted to particles of larger diameter during treatment. Niacin 
is the only available agent that can reduce levels of Lp(a) signifi-
cantly. Niacin, as a single agent, was given in only one large inter-
vention study which found a significant decrease in nonfatal, 
recurrent coronary events. In four angiographic studies in which 
niacin was given with a resin, a statin, or both, significant regres-
sion or decreased progression of coronary lesions was reported. 
 Drug Dosage 
 The dose of crystalline niacin required varies with the diagnosis. 
Optimal effect on LDL in heterozygous FH is usually achieved 
only when 4.5 to 6 g of niacin daily is combined with a resin or 
reductase inhibitor. For other forms of hypercholesterolemia, 
dysbetalipoproteinemia, hypertriglyceridemia, and hypoalphali-
poproteinemia, 1.5 to 3.5 g/d often has a dramatic effect. Because 
niacin causes cutaneous flushing, it is usually started at a dosage 
of 100 mg 3 times daily with meals, increasing to the desired dose 
within 7 to 10 days. Many patients have no or only occasional 
flushing when stabilized on a given dose, but most must reach 
about 3 g/d before flushing ceases. Because the flush is prosta-
glandin mediated, 0.3 g of aspirin given 20 to 30 minutes before 
each dose when treatment is initiated or the dose increased (or 
equivalent doses of other cyclooxygenase inhibitors) may mitigate 
this symptom. It is important to counsel the patient that the 
flushing is a harmless cutaneous vasodilation and that the drug 
should be taken with meals 2 or 3 times daily. A daily dose of 6.5 
g is the maximum under any circumstances. Niaspan, a prescrip-
tion extended-release niacin, appears to be safe in doses up to 2 g 
daily. 
 Side-Effects 
 Some patients have reversible elevations of serum glutamic amin-
otransferase or alkaline phosphatase activities up to 3 times the 
upper limit of normal that do not appear to be clinically signifi-
cant. In a group of patients treated continuously for up to 
15 years, no significant liver disease developed despite such 
enzyme abnormalities. Rarely, patients develop a chemical hepati-
tis signaled by malaise, anorexia, and nausea. Aminotransferase 
levels are significantly elevated, and levels of lipoproteins may fall 
precipitously. Treatment should be stopped immediately. About 
one-fifth of patients have mild hyperuricemia that tends to be 
asymptomatic unless the patient has had gout. In such cases, 
allopurinol can be added to the regimen. A few patients have 
moderate elevations of blood glucose during treatment. Again, 
this is reversible except in some patients who have latent type 2 
diabetes. The use of niacin should be considered carefully in 
patients with insulin resistance. Diabetic patients receiving insulin 
can often be treated successfully. A more common side-effect is 
gastric irritation, which responds well to H 2 blockers and antacids. 
Antacids that contain aluminum should be avoided. Rarely, 
patients develop acanthosis nigricans, which usually clears if the 
drug is discontinued. Some patients can have cardiac arrhythmias, 
mostly atrial, while taking niacin. Reversible macular edema has 
been described rarely. 
 Niacin should be avoided in patients with peptic ulcer or 
hepatic parenchymal disease. Liver function, uric acid, and blood 
glucose should be evaluated before commencing treatment and 
periodically thereafter. 
 Most over-the-counter sustained-release preparations should 
be avoided because of the risk of fulminant hepatic failure. 
However, if the daily dose is limited to 2 g or less, this rare conse-
quence is probably unlikely. 
 FIBRIC ACID DERIVATIVES 
 Mechanism of Action and Efficacy 
 Gemfibrozil and fenofibrate, which are ligands for peroxisome 
proliferator–activated receptor alpha, decrease lipolysis in adipose 
tissue, reduce levels of circulating triglycerides, and cause modest 
reductions in LDL. However, in some patients, reductions in 
VLDL levels are attended by increased LDL levels. They cause 
moderate increases in levels of HDL, including the protein moi-
ety. One primary prevention, and one secondary prevention trial 
using gemfibrozil as monotherapy showed reduction in new coro-
nary events. 
 Drug Dosage 
 The fibrates may be useful in the treatment of patients with severe 
endogenous lipemia, familial dysbetalipoproteinemia, and some 
patients with combined hyperlipidemia who are intolerant of 
niacin. The usual dose of gemfibrozil is 600 mg twice daily. That 
of fenofibrate varies with the preparation. 
696    CHAPTER 19 Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism
 Side-Effects 
 Skin eruptions, gastrointestinal symptoms, and muscle symptoms 
have been described as well as blood dyscrasias and elevated levels 
of aminotransferases and alkaline phosphatase. These drugs 
enhance the effects of the coumarin and indanedione anticoagu-
lants and increase lithogenicity of bile. Concomitant use of 
fibrates with certain reductase inhibitors increases the risk of myo-
pathy. Fenofibrate is most compatible with pravastatin or rosuvas-
tatin with respect to cytochrome metabolism. Fibrates should be 
avoided during pregnancy and lactation and are contraindicated if 
hepatic or renal disease is present. 
 HMG-CoA REDUCTASE INHIBITORS 
(TABLE 19–2) 
 Mechanism of Action and Efficacy 
 Several closely related structural analogs of HMG-CoA act as com-
petitive inhibitors of HMG-CoA reductase, a key enzyme in the 
cholesterol biosynthetic pathway. Of these, lovastatin, pravastatin, 
simvastatin, fluvastatin, atorvastatin, pitavastatin, and rosuvastatin 
are approved for use in the United States. Inhibition of cholesterol 
biosynthesis induces an increase in high-affinity LDL receptors in 
the liver, increasing removal of LDL from plasma and decreasing 
production of LDL. The latter results from increased uptake of 
lipoprotein precursors of LDL by hepatic receptors. Modest 
increases in HDL cholesterol and limited decreases in VLDL levels 
can be achieved. These drugs have no appreciable effect in patients 
with severe hypertriglyceridemia. Some of the cholesterol-indepen-
dent effects of reductase inhibitors appear to involve enhanced 
stability of atherosclerotic lesions and decreased oxidative stress and 
vascular inflammation, with improved endothelial function. 
Institution of treatment with a reductase inhibitor should begin 
immediately in all patients with acute coronary syndromes regard-
less of cholesterol level. One angiographic trial with statin mono-
therapy and three with combined regimens including statins 
yielded significant reduction in the size of coronary atheromas. A 
number of primary and secondary trials with statins as monother-
apy have demonstrated significant reduction in endpoints includ-
ing primary or recurrent myocardial infarction, coronary 
revascularization, atherosclerotic stroke, or cardiac death. In these 
trials, reduction of LDL cholesterol levels to or below currently 
accepted goals produced an approximate 35% reduction in new 
coronary events over the 3 to 5 year duration of the trials. Longer 
term follow-up suggests that the impact on new coronary events 
will deepen over time, consistent with observations on individuals 
with familial hypobetalipoproteinemia or loss of function variants 
in the  PCSK9 gene. 
 Drug Dosage 
 These drugs are the most effective individual agents for treatment 
of hypercholesterolemia. Their effects are amplified significantly 
when combined with niacin, ezetimibe, or resin. Daily dosage 
ranges are presented in Table 19–2. Patients with heterozygous FH 
usually require higher doses. Because information on long-term 
safety is lacking, use of these agents in children should be restricted 
to those with homozygous FH and selected heterozygotes that are 
at particularly high risk. Women who are lactating, pregnant, or 
likely to become pregnant should not be given these drugs. 
 Side-Effects 
 These agents are generally well tolerated. Side-effects, often transient, 
include rashes and changes in bowel function. Myopathy with mark-
edly elevated creatine kinase (CK) levels occurs infrequently. Rarely, 
myopathy can progress to rhabdomyolysis with myoglobinuria and 
renal shutdown. There is an increased incidence of myopathy in 
patients receiving certain reductase inhibitors with cyclosporine, 
fibric acid derivatives, macrolides, HIV protease inhibitors, nefa-
zodone, verapamil, and ketoconazole. Other drugs that compete for 
metabolism by cytochrome P450 3A4 can be expected to have the 
same effect. Because pravastatin and rosuvastatin do not compete 
with these agents for metabolism by cytochrome P450 enzymes, they 
appear to be compatible with them. Fluvastatin is chiefly metabo-
lized by cytochrome P450 2C9. Thus, competitors for that pathway 
may cause accumulation of this reductase inhibitor. The myopathy is 
rapidly reversible on cessation of therapy. Minor elevations of CK 
activity in plasma are noted more frequently, especially with unusual 
physical activity. CK levels should be measured before starting ther-
apy and monitored at regular intervals in selected patients. Older 
patients, those taking higher doses and multiple other drugs, those 
who have diabetes, those with renal insufficiency, and those with 
baseline elevated CK levels should be observed more frequently. A 
form of statin-associated myopathy can occur in the absence of CK 
elevations. 
 Moderate, often intermittent elevations of serum aminotrans-
ferases (up to 3 times normal) occur in some patients. If the 
patient is asymptomatic, therapy may be continued if activity is 
measured frequently (at 1- to 2-month intervals) and the levels are 
stable. In about 2% of patients, some of whom have underlying 
liver disease or a history of alcohol use, aminotransferase activity 
may exceed 3 times the normal limit. This usually occurs after 3 
to 16 months of continuous therapy and may portend more severe 
hepatic toxicity such as that described in the section on niacin. 
The reductase inhibitor should be discontinued promptly in these 
TABLE19–2 Reductase inhibitors.
Drugs (in Increasing 
Order of Potency)
Dose Range
Fluvastatin
20-80 mg
Pravastatin
10-80 mg
Lovastatin
10-80 mg
Simvastatin
 5-80 mg
Atorvastatin
 5-80 mg
Resuvastatin
 5-40 mg
Pitavastatin               
 1-4 mg
CHAPTER 19 Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism     697
patients. These agents are contraindicated in the presence of active 
liver disease and should be used with caution in patients with a 
history of liver disease. They should be discontinued temporarily 
during hospitalization for major surgery. 
 CHOLESTEROL ABSORPTION INHIBITORS 
 Mechanism of Action and Efficacy 
 Ezetimibe, the first of this class, inhibits the absorption of choles-
terol and phytosterols by enterocytes. By interrupting the entero-
hepatic circulation of sterols secreted in bile, it increases sterol 
elimination. No outcome studies with this agent as monotherapy 
have been reported. 
 Drug Dosage 
 Ezetimibe is useful in treating primary hypercholesterolemias and 
phytosterolemia. Concomitant use of fibric acid derivatives can 
increase the blood concentration of this drug. Resins can decrease 
its absorption. It should be avoided in pregnant or lactating 
women and in patients with liver disease, and used with caution 
in patients receiving cyclosporine. A single dose of 10 mg daily 
reduces cholesterol by 15% to 20%. 
 Side-Effects 
 Very few side-effects have been reported. The prevalence of ele-
vated liver enzymes may be modestly increased when ezetimibe is 
given with a reductase inhibitor. Biopsy-proven myopathy has 
been described rarely. 
 COMBINED DRUG THERAPY 
(TABLE 19–3) 
 Combinations of drugs may be useful (1) when LDL and VLDL 
levels are both elevated; (2) in cases of hypercholesterolemia in 
which significant increases of VLDL occur during treatment with 
a bile acid–binding resin; (3) where a complementary effect is 
required to normalize LDL levels, as in familial hypercholester-
olemia or familial combined hyperlipidemia; and (4) when a 
hyperlipidemia is accompanied by primary HDL deficiency or an 
elevated level of Lp(a). 
 Niacin with Other Agents 
 The combination of a fibrate with niacin may be more effective 
than either drug alone in managing marked hypertriglyceridemia. 
Niacin usually normalizes triglycerides in individuals who have 
increased levels of VLDL while taking resins. The combination of 
niacin and resins is more effective than either agent alone in 
decreasing LDL levels in FH. The combination is also very useful 
in the treatment of FCH. The absorption of niacin from the intes-
tine is unimpeded by the resin. Niacin is complementary with 
ezetimibe in treating combined hyperlipidemia. 
 HMG-CoA Reductase Inhibitors 
with Other Agents 
 The addition of resin or niacin to a reductase inhibitor further 
decreases plasma levels of LDL in patients with primary hypercho-
lesterolemias. Liver function and plasma CK activity should be 
monitored frequently when the combination includes niacin. 
TABLE19–3 The primary hyperlipoproteinemias and their drug treatment.
Single Druga
Drug Combination
Primary Chylomicronemia
Chylomicrons (VLDL may be increased)
Niacin, fibrateb if VLDL increased
Niacin plus fibrateb if VLDL increased
Familial Hypertriglyceridemia
VLDL and perhaps chylomicrons increased
Niacin, fibrate
Niacin plus fibrate
Familial Combined Hyperlipoproteinemia
VLDL increased
LDL increased
VLDL, LDL increased
Niacin, fibrate, reductase inhibitor
Reductase inhibitor, niacin, ezetimibe
Reductase inhibitor, niacin, fibrate
Two or three of the single drugs
Familial Dysbetalipoproteinemia
VLDL remnants, chylomicron remnants increased
Niacin, fibrate, reductase inhibitor
Fibrate plus niacin or niacin plus reductase 
inhibitor
Familial Hypercholesterolemia
LDL increased
Reductase inhibitor, ezetimibe, niacin, resin
Two or three of the single drugs
Familial Ligand-Defective Apo B
LDL increased
Reductase inhibitor, niacin, ezetimibe
Niacin plus reductase inhibitor or ezetimibe
Lp(a) Hyperlipoproteinemia
Lp(a) increased
Niacin
aSingle-drug therapy should be tried before drug combinations are used.
bFibric acid derivative.
698    CHAPTER 19 Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism
These three drugs used together are more effective, frequently at 
lower doses, than any of their binary combinations in reducing 
LDL. Ezetimibe is synergistic with reductase inhibitors. The com-
patibility of rosuvastatin or pravastatin with fenofibrate makes 
these combinations useful in combined hyperlipidemia. 
 REFERENCES 
 Atherosclerosis
Libby P, Ridker PM, Hansson GK; Leducq Transatlantic Network on 
Atherothrombosis. Inflammation in atherosclerosis: from pathophysiology 
to practice. J Am Coll Cardiol 2009; 54:2129-38. [PMID: 19942084]
Packard CJ. Lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2 as a biomarker of coronary 
heart disease and a therapeutic target. Curr Opin Cardiol 2009;24:358-62. 
[PMID: 19417639]
Shao B, Heinecke JW. HDL, lipid peroxidation, and atherosclerosis. J Lipid Res 
2009; 50:599-601. [PMID: 19141435]
Lipoproteins
Adiels M, Olofsson S-O, Taskinen M-R, Boren J. Overproduction of very low-
density lipoproteins is the hallmark of the dyslipidemia in the metabolic 
syndrome. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2008; 28:1225-36. [PMID: 
18565848]
Benn M, Nordestgaard BG, Grande P, Schnohr P, Tybjaerg-Hansen A. PCSK9 
R46L, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels, and risk of ischemic heart 
disease: 3 independent studies and meta-analyses. J Am Coll Cardiol 2010; 
55:2843-5. [PMID: 20579540]
de la Llera-Moya M, Drazul-Schrader D, Asztalos BF, Cuchel M, Raeder DJ, 
Rothblat GH. The ability to promote efflux via ABCA1 determines the 
capacity of serum specimens with similar high-density lipoprotein choles-
terol to remove cholesterol from macrophages. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 
2010; 30:796-801. [PMID: 20075420]
Erqou S, Thompson A, Di Angelantonio E, et al. Apolipoprotein(a) isoforms and 
the risk of vascular disease: systematic review of 40 studies involving 58,000 
participants. J Am Coll Cardiol 2010; 55:2168-70. [PMID: 20447543]
Kruit JK, Brunham LR, Verchere CB, Hayden MR. HDL and LDL cholesterol 
significantly influence beta-cell function in type 2 diabetes mellitus. Curr 
Opin Lipidol 2010; 21:178-85. [PMID: 20463468]
Rothblat GH, Phillips MC. High-density lipoprotein heterogeneity and function 
in reverse cholesterol transport. Curr Opin Lipidol 2010; 21:229-38. [PMID: 
20480549
Vaisar T, Pennathur S, Green PS, et al. Shotgun proteomics implicates protease 
inhibition and complement activation in the antiinflammatory properties of 
HDL. J Clin Invest 2007; 117:746-56. [PMID: 17332893]
Treatment
Ballantyne CM, Raichlen JS, Nicholls SJ, et al. Asteroid Investigators. Effect of 
rosuvastatin therapy on coronary artery stenoses assessed by quantitative 
coronary angiography: a study to evaluate the effect of rosuvastatin on intra-
vascular ultrasound-derived coronary atheroma burden. Circulation 2008; 
117:2458-66. [PMID: 18378607]
Brunzell JD, Davidson M, Furberg CD, et al. Lipoprotein management in patients 
with cardiometabolic risk: consensus conference report from the ADA and 
the American College of Cardiology Foundation. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2008;51:1512-1524. [PMID: 18402913]
Forrester JS. Redefining normal low-density lipoprotein cholesterol: a strategy to 
unseat coronary disease as the nation’s leading killer. J Am Coll Cardiol 2010; 
56:630-6. [PMID: 20705220]
Grundy SM, Cleeman JI, Merz CM, et al for the Coordinating Committee of the 
National Cholesterol Education Program. Implications of recent clinical tri-
als for the National Cholesterol Education Program Adult Treatment Panel 
III guidelines. Circulation 2004;110:227-39. [PMID: 15358046]
Sanyal AJ, Chalasani N, Kowdley KV, et al. NASH CRN. Pioglitazone, vitamin E, 
or placebo for nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. N Engl J Med 2010;362:1675-85.
[PMID: 20427778]
Steinberg D, Glass CK, Witztum JL. Evidence mandating earlier and more aggres-
sive treatment of hypercholesterolemia. Circulation 2008;118:672-9. [PMID: 
18678783] 
 
 
 
699
0
2
 Obesity 
 Alka M. Kanaya, MD and  Christian Vaisse, MD, PhD 
 α-MSH 
α-Melanocyte–stimulating hormone 
 ACTH 
Adrenocorticotropic hormone 
 AGRP 
Agouti-related peptide 
 ARC 
Arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus 
 BDNF 
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor 
 BMI 
Body mass index 
 CCK 
Cholecystokinin 
 CCK-1R 
CCK 1 receptor 
 CSF 
Colony-stimulating factor 
 FFA 
Free fatty acid 
 FTO 
Fat mass- and obesity-associated gene 
 GI 
Gastrointestinal 
 GLP1 
Glucagon-like peptide 1 
 IL-6 
Interleukin 6 
 LepR 
Leptin receptor 
 LHA 
Lateral hypothalamic area 
 MC4R 
Melanocortin-4 receptor 
 MCP-1 
Monocyte-chemoattractant protein-1 
 NAFLD 
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease 
 NCEP 
National Cholesterol Education Program 
 NEGR1 
Neuronal growth regulator 1 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 NHANES 
National Health and Nutrition Examination 
 
Survey 
 NHLBI 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute 
 NTRK2 
Neurotrophic tyrosine kinase, receptor, 
 
type 2 
 NPY 
Neuropeptide Y 
 OSA 
Obstructive sleep apnea 
 PAI-1 
Plasminogen-activated inhibitor 
 PC-1 
Proconvertase 1 
 PCOS 
Polycystic ovarian syndrome 
 POMC 
Pro-opiomelanocortin 
 PVN 
Paraventricular nucleus 
 PYY 
Peptide YY 
 RYGB 
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass 
 SH2B1 
Adapter protein 1 
 SOS 
Swedish Obese Subjects 
 SIM1 
Single minded 1 
 STAT 
Signal transducer and activator of transcription 
 T2DM 
Type 2 diabetes mellitus 
 TMEM18 
Transmembrane protein 18 
 TNF` 
Tumor necrosis factor-α 
 WHO 
World Health Organization 
 DEFINITION AND EPIDEMIOLOGY 
 Definition 
 Obesity and overweight categories have been defined by examin-
ing longitudinal study data that associate a given weight with 
future adverse health effects. The currently accepted surrogate 
measure of body fatness is body mass index (BMI) which is mea-
sured as weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared. 
For adults, a BMI <18.5 kg/m 2 is underweight, 18.5 to 24.9 kg/m 2 
is healthy weight, 25.0 to 29.9 kg/m 2 is overweight, and ≥30 kg/m 2 
is obese. For children and adolescents, a BMI between the 85th 
and 95th percentile for age and sex is considered at risk of over-
weight, and BMI at or above the 95th percentile is considered 
overweight or obese. 
 However, BMI does not account for ethnic differences in skel-
etal structure or musculature. Body frame size varies dramatically 
by race/ethnicity from small-framed East Asian adults to larger 
framed Pacific Islanders. Moreover, conventional cut-points for 
adult overweight (BMI ≥25 kg/m 2 ) and obesity (BMI ≥30 kg/m 2 ) 
do not correspond to similar absolute or relative metabolic risk in 
all ethnic group. As a result, the World Health Organization 
(WHO) and International Obesity Task Force proposed a lower 
BMI cut-point to define obesity in South and East Asian adults: 
23 kg/m 2 for overweight and 25 kg/m 2 for obesity. 
 Prevalence and Projections 
 National surveys performed by the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention in the United States have found a significant 
700    CHAPTER 20 Obesity
increase in the prevalence of overweight and obesity over the past 
30 years. In 2003 to 2004, according to data from the National 
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), 32.2% of 
adults were obese. Trends among adults have been tracked by 
repeat NHANES surveys, showing that the percent of overweight 
or obese have climbed from 47.0% in 1976 to 1980 to 66.2% in 
2003 to 2004, and the prevalence of obesity alone has more than 
doubled from 15.0% to 32.9% overall. The prevalence of obesity 
was 45.0% among non-Hispanic blacks, 36.8% among Mexican 
Americans, and 30.6% among non-Hispanic whites. 
 The trends in obesity have been most striking among children 
and adolescents with two- to threefold increases in rates over the 
past three decades in all age groups. In the NHANES 2003 to 
2004 survey, a total of 17.1% of US children and adolescents were 
overweight (BMI ≥95th percentile). Among children aged 2 to 
5 years, the obesity prevalence increased from 5% in the 1976 to 
1980 NHANES to 12.4% in 2003 to 2006 NHANES. Similarly, 
the prevalence in age 6 to 11 years increased from 6.5% to 17.0%, 
and for ages 12 to 19 years increased from 5% to 17.6% in the 
most recent national survey. 
 While the United States leads most of the world with high 
prevalence of overweight and obesity, these conditions are becom-
ing more prevalent worldwide even in developing countries. In 
China, overweight prevalence in adults increased from 14.6% to 
21.8% between 1992 and 2002, with greatest increases seen 
among men, urban residents, and high-income groups. In India, 
the prevalence of overweight ranged from 9.4% in rural men to 
38.8% in urban women in 2003 to 2005. 
 Globally, according to a pooled analysis, in 2005 there were an 
estimated 937 million (95% CI, 922-951 million) overweight 
adults and 396 million (388-405 million) obese adults. Using 
conservative projections, by 2030 the number of overweight 
adults was estimated to be 1.35 billion and 573 million obese 
individuals without adjusting for secular trends. The authors 
warned that if recent secular trends continue unabated, the abso-
lute numbers may total 2.16 billion overweight and 1.12 billion 
obese adult individuals. Among US residents, projections forecast 
that by 2030, 86.3% adults will be overweight or obese (51.1%) 
with black women (96.9%) and Mexican American men (91.1%) 
being most affected. Wang et al estimate that by 2048, all 
American adults would become overweight or obese, and in chil-
dren, the prevalence of overweight (BMI ≥95th percentile) would 
almost double to 30%. 
 Possible Explanations for the 
Increased Obesity Rates 
 Several hypotheses have been proposed to explain the rapid rise in 
overweight/obesity in developed and developing countries. The 
simple explanations start with changes in lifestyle behaviors, pri-
marily the lack of regular physical activity and increased caloric 
intake that tip the energy balance equilibrium. The reality of the 
factors promoting the obesity epidemic is clearly more complex 
and involves multiple layers of determinants including social 
norms and values, several sectors of influence from governmental 
to media to the food/entertainment industries, behavioral settings 
including the work/home/neighborhood environment, to indi-
vidual factors that include genetic, socioeconomic, cultural, and 
psychosocial factors. In a novel social network analysis of the 
Framingham cohort, investigators found that weight status (gain, 
loss, or stability of weight) for an individual was highly influenced 
by his/her friends and family extending out to three degrees of 
separation. A multifaceted approach will be required to meaning-
fully curb the obesity epidemic globally. 
 PATHOPHYSIOLOGY AND 
GENETICS OF OBESITY 
 Regulation of Food Intake and Energy 
Expenditure 
 Obesity is an increase of energy stored as fat that occurs when 
caloric intake exceeds caloric expenditure. What causes this 
imbalance is less clear, but recent advances in our understanding 
of the physiological systems responsible for the maintenance of 
energy stores in response to variable access to nutrition and 
demands for energy expenditure have provided some insights into 
the pathophysiology of obesity. The physiological system control-
ling food intake and energy expenditure is composed of (1) long-
term and short-term afferent signals that allow for sensing the 
energy status of the individual; (2) integrating brain centers, most 
importantly within the hypothalamus, where the level of the 
efferent response is determined; and (3) efferent signals including 
those regulating the intensity of hunger and the level of energy 
expenditure. 
 One common misconception is that this physiological system 
is dedicated to the prevention of obesity. Instead this system’s 
essential role is in the prevention of starvation (ie, ensuring ade-
quate energy intake to compensate for the energy requirements of 
basal metabolism, physical activity, growth, and reproduction). As 
a result, this physiological system is more strongly biased toward 
prevention of energy deficiency rather than excess storage. 
 Informing the Brain of the Energy 
Status: Leptin and Short-Term 
Gastrointestinal Signals 
 Leptin. 
 The major afferent signal allowing the brain to sense the 
level of energy stores is the hormone leptin. Discovered in 1994, this 
cytokine-like 167 amino acid protein is released by adipocytes. 
Under basal conditions the circulating levels of serum leptin are 
correlated with fat mass (r = 0.8) and decrease after weight loss. 
Decreasing leptin levels inform the brain of diminishing fat storage 
resulting from negative energy balance. This results in compensa-
tory effects on appetite and energy expenditure, aimed at replenish-
ing the stores and reestablishing energy balance. The role of leptin 
is best understood from the phenotype of rare cases of humans with 
complete leptin deficiency. Despite early-onset, extremely severe 
obesity, these patients show behaviors and physiological signs of 
starvation. This includes hyperphagia, decreased immune function, 
and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. The latter reflects deficiency 
CHAPTER 20 Obesity     701
of the leptin signal informing the brain that sufficient energy stores 
are available for reproduction. Hormonal replacement of leptin-
deficient patients corrects all these abnormalities, abolishing the 
hyperphagia leading to normalization of weight and maturation of 
the reproductive axis. 
 Leptin’s action is mediated by the leptin receptor (LepR). This 
receptor is a member of the class I cytokine receptor family which 
also includes the growth hormone, prolactin and erythropoietin 
receptors (see Chapter 1). These receptors have a single transmem-
brane domain and homodimerize upon binding of the ligand. 
Leptin binding to LepR leads to phosphorylation of the JAK2 
receptor-associated kinase followed by recruitment and phospho-
rylation of the signal transducer and activator of transcription 
STAT3. Upon activation STAT3 dimerizes and translocates to the 
nucleus, where it activates transcription of target genes. The LepR 
is expressed in almost every tissue but only one of five isoforms, 
LepRb, contains the STAT3 recruitment domain. This isoform is 
expressed specifically in leptin-responsive brain regions. 
 In summary, leptin functions as a long-term signal of energy 
balance by informing the brain of changes in the level of energy 
stored as fat. A perceived decrease in leptin levels increases the 
amount of food consumed and minimizes energy expenditure. 
Leptin levels do not change with meals, and leptin does not 
acutely change meal size. 
 Signals from the gastrointestinal tract. 
 In addition to lep-
tin, which represents a long-term adiposity signal, a number of 
other hormones, most of which are secreted by the gastrointestinal 
(GI) system, regulate appetite on a short-term basis (ie, in response 
to a meal) (Table 20–1). These hormones act on  satiation (the 
feeling of fullness that contributes to the decision to stop eating) 
rather than on  satiety (the prolongation of the interval until hun-
ger or a drive to eat reappears). Some of these hormones have been 
shown to act on the same brain centers as leptin does. Altered secre-
tion of or response to these GI hormones may directly contribute 
to the pathogenesis or the maintenance of obesity. Cholecystokinin 
(CCK) is secreted by duodenal I cells into the bloodstream. Its 
secretion is stimulated by the presence of fat and protein in the 
duodenum. CCK stimulates gut motility, contraction of the gall-
bladder, pancreatic enzyme secretion, gastric emptying, and acid 
secretion. CCK acts locally, stimulating vagal sensory nerves 
through the CCK 1 receptor (CCK-1R) and informs the brain that 
fat and proteins are being processed and will soon be absorbed. 
This message is conveyed to the hypothalamus via the hindbrain. 
Circulating CCK levels increase after meals and infusion of a 
CCK-1R agonist (CCK33), to postprandial levels, suppresses food 
intake. Conversely, infusion of a CCK-1R antagonist increases 
calorie intake. CCK is also a proximal mediator of the broader 
satiation process, attenuating meal-induced changes of more distal 
GI hormones, such as ghrelin and peptide YY (PYY). 
 Glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP1) is a 30 amino acid peptide 
derived from the proglucagon gene. GLP1 is secreted into the 
bloodstream by the intestinal L-cells of the ileum and colon in 
response to the presence of nutrients in the lumen. GLP1 has a 
very short half-life (2 minutes), and is degraded by dipeptidyl 
peptidase-4. It increases insulin secretion in a glucose-dependent 
manner, decreases glucagon secretion, increases beta cell mass, 
inhibits gastric emptying, and decreases food intake. GLP1 is 
thought to signal through the hindbrain via stimulation of the 
GLP1 receptor (GLP1R) on the vagus nerve. 
 PYY, a 36 amino acid peptide is released into the bloodstream by 
intestinal endocrine L-cells of the distal gut (ileum and colon) after 
food ingestion and in response to the presence of fat in the lumen. 
PYY3-36, the major form of circulating PYY, binds to the hypotha-
lamic NPY-Y2 receptor and reduces food intake. Obese individuals 
have lower PYY levels after a test meal than nonobese controls. 
 Ghrelin, a 28 amino acid octanoylated peptide, is secreted into 
the bloodstream by endocrine cells lining the fundus of the stom-
ach. Ghrelin secretion is stimulated by fasting, increases prepran-
dially, and is suppressed by food intake. Ghrelin is orexigenic, 
increasing food intake when administered peripherally, and acts in 
part by directly modulating the activity of the NPY (neuropeptide 
Y)/AGRP (agouti-related peptide) neurons in the arcuate nucleus 
of the hypothalamus. 
 Central Integration of Energy 
Homeostasis Signals 
 The major challenge of adapting food intake to energy expenditure 
lies in the discontinuous availability of the first and the continuous 
TABLE 20–1 Selected GI and pancreatic peptides that regulate food intake.
Main Site of Synthesis
Secretion Pattern
Effect on Food Intake
Ghrelin
Gastric X/A-like cells
Increases prior to meal; decreased 
by food intake
Stimulates food intake
Cholecystokinin (CCK)
Proximal intestinal I cells
Stimulated by duodenal presence 
of fat and protein
Promotes meal termination and 
reduces meal size
Peptide YY3-36 (PYY)
Distal-intestinal L cells
Stimulated by presence of fat in the 
lumen
Reduces appetite and food intake
Glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1)
Distal-intestinal L cells
Stimulated by presence of nutrients 
in the lumen
Short-term inhibition of food intake
Pancreatic polypeptide (PP)
Pancreatic F cells
Released in proportion to calories 
ingested
Reduces appetite and food intake
702    CHAPTER 20 Obesity
and variable levels of the second required for survival, growth, and 
reproduction. The current prevailing model is that the concentra-
tion of circulating adiposity signals, primarily leptin, influences the 
response to short-term satiation signals thereby allowing for suffi-
cient energy intake to maintain a constant level of stored energy. 
Genetic studies in mice and humans have outlined several critical 
neuronal populations and circuits that translate information pro-
vided by afferent circulating hormonal signals into neural responses 
that regulate appetite and energy expenditure. The primary locus 
for the integration of peripheral signals that influence energy bal-
ance is the hypothalamus ( Figure 20–1 ). Specifically, two adjacent 
groups of neurons in the arcuate nucleus (ARC) of the hypothala-
mus, characterized by their production of specific neuromediators, 
act as the primary site in the brain for receiving the humoral signals 
that reflect body energy status. The AGRP/NPY neurons are 
orexigenic. They are inhibited by leptin and their activity is also 
modulated by GI hormones, such as ghrelin and PYY. The pro-
opiomelanocortin (POMC) neurons are anorexigenic and are 
activated by leptin. In these neurons, POMC is processed by the 
specific proteases proconvertase-1 and proconvertase-2 to the 
anorexigenic neuropeptide α-melanocyte–stimulating hormone 
(α-MSH). Interactions between these neurons within the ARC 
allows for cross talk and modulation of the neuronal output. 
 These first-order neurons send projections to second-order 
neurons in other regions of the hypothalamus, specifically the 
paraventricular nucleus (PVN) and the lateral hypothalamic area 
(LHA), as well as to the hindbrain. Both α-MSH and AGRP act 
on a common receptor, the melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) 
expressed on PVN neurons. α-MSH binds to and activates the 
melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) and by competing with α-MSH 
for the MC4R, AGRP inhibits MC4R-bearing neurons. The 
MC4R neurons then innervate neurons in other areas of the hypo-
thalamus and brain stem to produce an integrated inhibition of 
appetite and increase in energy expenditure. 
 Leptin Resistance in Obesity 
 While recombinant leptin can correct the exceptionally rare cases 
of obesity due to genetic leptin deficiency, all other obese patients 
have leptin levels that are proportional to their fat mass. In addi-
tion, recombinant leptin injections in obese patients do not lead 
to weight loss. Therefore, despite the presence of elevated leptin 
concentrations, which should reduce food intake and body fat, 
obese patients appear to be insensitive or resistant to leptin. Both 
genetic and environmental factors have been shown to contribute 
to this leptin resistance, and a number of specific alterations in the 
downstream leptin effector pathways have been suggested to par-
ticipate in this obesity-associated leptin resistance. Understanding 
the nature of this leptin resistance may allow for the development 
of novel obesity treatments but its molecular basis is probably 
heterogenous and different in each patient. 
 Genetics of Obesity 
 Excess caloric intake and the tendency toward a more sedentary 
lifestyle are certainly to blame for the increased prevalence of obesity, 
but individuals exposed to the same environmental pressures have 
different levels of vulnerability. Indeed, genetic epidemiologic 
studies, such as twin studies and adoption studies have implicated 
genetic factors in the susceptibility to obesity. These studies have 
shown that genetic factors account for 40% to 70% of the popula-
tion variation in BMI and that the heritability of obesity increases 
MC4R
AGRP
AGRP
NPY
POMC
LepR
LepR
α-MSH
Paraventricular
nucleus
↓Food intake
↑Energy expenditure
Arcuate
nucleus
Third
ventricle
Adipose tissue
Leptin
 FIGURE 20–1  Leptin-melanocortin system of energy balance. 
Information about the body’s energy stores is conveyed to the brain by 
hormones such as leptin. Leptin is secreted by adipocytes in proportion 
to the body’s fat mass. Leptin binds to its receptors on two populations 
of neurons in the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus: the orexigenic 
AGRP/NPY–expressing neurons, and the anorexigenic POMC-expressing 
neurons. These two groups of neurons have projections to the paraven-
tricular nucleus of the hypothalamus, as well as to other regions of the 
brain. The PVN has a dense neuronal population that expresses MC4R. 
When leptin binds its receptors on POMC neurons., α-MSH, a cleavage 
product of POMC, is released. Activation of MC4R in the PVN by α-MSH 
relays a satiety signal and causes a decrease in food intake. AGRP is an 
antagonist of MC4R, and competes with α-MSH for binding to MC4R. 
Binding of AGRP to MC4R leads to increased food intake. Leptin acti-
vates POMC neurons and inhibits AGRP neurons. Therefore, by activat-
ing its receptors on these two neuronal populations, leptin acts in a 
concerted way to increase MC4R activation by α-MSH and decrease its 
antagonism by AGRP resulting in a net decrease in food intake.  (α-MSH, 
α-melanocyte–stimulating hormone; AGRP, agouti-related peptide; 
ARC, arcuate nucleus;  MC4R, melanocortin 4 receptor; NPY, neuropep-
tide Y; POMC, pro-opiomelanocortin; PVN, paraventricular nucleus; 
LepR, leptin receptor). 
CHAPTER 20 Obesity     703
with its severity. Emphasis has, therefore, now shifted from the 
 question of whether human obesity has a genetic component to how 
many and which genetic variants underlie this susceptibility. While 
the majority of genes that contribute to the predisposition to obesity 
are still unknown, both common genetic variants, with small effects 
on the BMI at the level of the population, and single gene defects, 
causing Mendelian forms of obesity, have been described. 
 Large and comprehensive genome-wide association studies find 
that a number of common genetic variants are associated with obe-
sity (Table 20–2). These variants are near genes that are expressed in 
the central nervous system further suggesting a role for an alteration 
of central regulatory pathways in the pathogenesis of obesity. 
However, since these variants are not located within the protein-
coding regions of these genes, the exact mechanism by which they 
predispose to obesity remains to be elucidated. More importantly, 
the individual as well as the combined effects of these common vari-
ants only explain a small fraction of the inherited variability in 
obesity (10%-20%), suggesting that rare variants may contribute 
more significantly to the genetic predisposition to this condition. 
 Indeed a number of single gene defects that cause human obesity 
have been uncovered. These defects have provided more insight into 
the genetic predisposition and pathophysiology of obesity. Certain 
mutations can cause obesity as part of a complex syndrome, in 
which developmental phenotypes are prominent (Table 20–3). 
However, most single gene defects causing Mendelian forms of 
obesity are in genes of the leptin-melanocortin system (Table 20–4). 
The description of patients with these mutations has both provided 
insight into the genetic predisposition to obesity and has confirmed 
that the hypothalamic leptin-melanocortin system is critical for 
energy balance in humans. Mutations in leptin and the LepR cause 
severe obesity associated with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. 
Mutations in POMC cause severe obesity, due to absent synthesis of 
α-MSH in the hypothalamus, and neonatal adrenal insufficiency, 
due to lack of ACTH production in the anterior pituitary gland. 
These recessive syndromes are extremely rare. In contrast, mutations 
in MC4R represent the most common genetic cause of severe obe-
sity accounting for 2.5% of all cases. Patients who carry such muta-
tions do not have specific clinical or biological characteristics that 
differentiate them from other patients with severe obesity; genetic 
testing is the only reliable method to identify these patients. At pres-
ent, such testing is not recommended since the presence or absence 
of one of these mutations carries no specific implications for the 
clinical management of these patients. 
 HEALTH CONSEQUENCES OF OBESITY 
 Mechanism Underlying Obesity 
Complications: Adipose Tissue as an 
Endocrine Organ 
 The massive public health burden of obesity is due to the psycho-
logical, behavioral, and medical consequences of this chronic 
increase in adipose tissue mass. Pathophysiological mechanisms 
TABLE 20–2  Common variants increasing the risk of 
obesity.a
Chromosomal 
Localization
Nearby Genes
Odds Ratio of 
Obesity in Adults
16q12
FTO
1.25
18q21
MC4R
1.14
2
TMEM18
1.20
16p11
SH2B1
1.10
1p31
NEGR1
1.06
11p14
BDNF
1.05
aOnly variants replicated in multiple studies and with odds ratios of obesity above 
1.05 are indicated.
TABLE 20–3 Syndromes that cause human obesity.
Name/OMIM
Clinical Features
Prevalence
Genetics
Prader-Willi
OMIM#176270
Diminished fetal activity, obesity, muscular hypotonia, mental 
retardation, short stature, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, 
small hands and feet
1/25000
Imprinting +
Deletion 15q12
Bardet-Biedl
OMIM#209900
Hypogonadism, pigmentary retinopathy, polydactyly, mental 
retardation, obesity
1/100,000
Recessive
>12 genes involved in function of the 
primary cilium
Alström
OMIM#203800
Myocardiopathy, sensory deficit (retinopathy, 
deafness), obesity dyslipidemia, diabetes
Rare
Recessive
ALMS1, 2p13
Börjeson-Forssman-
Lehman
OMIM#301900
Severe mental defect, epilepsy, morbid obesity, hypogonadism, 
facial dysmorphy
Very rare
X-linked recessive
PHF6, Xq26.3
Cohen
OMIM#216550
Mental retardation, characteristic facies, obesity
Very rare
Recessive
COH1, 8q22
Carpenter
OMIM#201000
Acrocephalosyndactyly, polydactyly, obesity, mental retardation 
Very rare
Recessive
RAB23, 6p11
704    CHAPTER 20 Obesity
underlying the complications of obesity include the psychological 
and behavioral responses to the image projected in a society in 
which obesity is considered cosmetically unattractive, the mechan-
ical effects of increased adipose mass on weight-bearing joints as 
well as other organs, and the metabolic consequences of increased 
circulating free fatty acids (FFAs). 
 It is also now clear that the adipose cell is not simply dedicated 
to inertly storing energy as triglycerides and releasing free fatty 
acids and glycerol during periods of increased energy needs. In 
addition to leptin, described earlier, which informs the brain of 
the level of energy stores, adipose cells secrete a number of factors, 
known as adipokines, which can play a role in the pathophysiol-
ogy of obesity and its complications (Figure 20–2). For example, 
adiponectin is an abundant plasma protein, structurally related to 
the complement 1q family, that is secreted exclusively from adi-
pose tissue. Adiponectin circulates in serum as a range of multim-
ers from low-molecular-weight trimers to high-molecular-weight 
(HMW) dodecamers. Circulating levels of adiponectin are nega-
tively correlated with fat mass and are reduced in obesity. Adiponectin 
improves whole-body insulin sensitivity through its receptor-medi-
ated actions on the muscle and the liver. Specifically, adiponectin 
stimulates fatty acid oxidation and glucose uptake in skeletal 
muscle and suppresses glucose output in the liver. 
 In addition, a number of factors secreted by adipose tissue, 
particularly in the context of obesity, are proinflammatory cytok-
ines. It is now generally accepted that obesity is a state of chronic, 
low-grade inflammation. These inflammatory molecules exert 
their effects through both paracrine and endocrine pathways. 
Initially thought to be secreted by adipocytes, most of these factors 
are actually produced by other cells such as macrophages, which 
infiltrate the adipose tissue in obesity. Tumor necrosis factor-α 
(TNF-α) was the first adipose-derived factor suggested to repre-
sent a link between adiposity and the insulin resistance associated 
with type 2 diabetes. Released by activated macrophages, which 
infiltrate expanding adipose tissue in obesity, this cytokine has 
been strongly implicated in the pathogenesis of insulin resistance, 
directly impairing insulin signaling in hepatocytes and adipocytes. 
Other adipokines involved in obesity-associated inflammation 
include interleukin 6 (IL-6), monocyte-chemoattractant protein-1 
(MCP-1), plasminogen-activated inhibitor (PAI-1), and colony-
stimulating factor (CSF). 
 Metabolic Complications of Obesity: 
Insulin Resistance and Type 2 Diabetes 
 Hyperinsulinemia is characteristically associated with obesity. This 
hyperinsulinemia is linked to insulin resistance (ie, the decrease in 
insulin-stimulated glucose utilization, which increases proportion-
ally with fat mass). One of the major consequences of this obesity-
associated insulin resistance is the requirement for increased 
insulin secretion. While the majority of obese individuals can 
secrete sufficient insulin to accommodate the insulin-resistant 
TABLE 20–4 Monogenic obesity due to mutations in genes related to the leptin-melanocortin system.
Gene
N = Families
Transmission
Obesity
Other Phenotypes
Leptin
5(2)
Recessive
Very severe,
early onset
Hyponadotropic hypogonadism
Leptin receptor
3(1)
Recessive
Very severe,
early onset
Hyponadotropic hypogonadism
POMC
5(5)
Recessive
Very severe,
early onset
ACTH deficiency
PC-1
2(2)
Recessive
Severe,
early onset
Hyperproinsulinemia,
hypercortisolism,
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
NTRK2
1 
Dominant
Very severe,
early onset
Mental retardation
SIM1
3 (3)
Dominant 
Very severe,
early onset
+/− Mental retardation
MC4R
2.5% of severely 
obese patients
Dominant
Severe,
variable onset
None
Leptin
• Appetite & energy balance
• Reproduction
• Insulin sensitivity
• Immunity
PAI-1
Haemostasis
Angiotensinogen
Blood pressure
Pro-inflammatory cytokines
Insulin sensitivity
Adiponectin
Insulin sensitivity
 FIGURE 20–2  Adipose tissue secretions influencing metabolism. 
CHAPTER 20 Obesity     705
state, this increased burden on the insulin-producing pancreatic 
beta cells increases the susceptibility to failure, resulting in type 2 
diabetes (T2DM) in genetically predisposed individuals. Indeed, 
over 80% of T2DM patients are obese. In comparison with a 
normal-weight individual, BMI greater than 40 (obesity class 3) in 
a person under 55 years of age increases the risk of T2DM by 
18.1-fold in men and 12.9-fold in women. Classification as over-
weight (BMI 25-30) increases the prevalence of T2DM three- to 
fourfold in both men and women under 55 years of age. The rela-
tive risks associated with excess body weight are weaker in older 
individuals but are still present (eg, about twofold for overweight 
and three- to sixfold for obesity class 3). 
 The increased rate of T2DM is the most worrisome public 
health issue linked to the increased rates of obesity. The antici-
pated health outcomes such as premature heart disease, peripheral 
vascular disease, renal failure, blindness, are deeply concerning 
and place this among our highest contemporary public health 
priorities. Some recent studies have estimated that the current 
generation of American youth will be the first to exhibit shorter 
life spans than their parents, because of the impact of obesity on 
T2DM. 
 Dyslipidemia 
 Obesity is associated with dyslipidemia characterized by increased 
levels of very low density lipoprotein (VLDL) cholesterol, triglyc-
erides, and total cholesterol as well as a decrease in HDL choles-
terol and an increase in small dense LDL particles. The difference 
in serum triglyceride concentrations between individuals with 
BMI less than 21 and those with BMI greater than 30 is about 
65 mg/dL (in women) and 62 to 118 mg/dL (in men, depending 
on age). For HDL cholesterol, each 1-unit BMI change is associ-
ated with an HDL-cholesterol decrease of 1.1 mg/dL for young 
men and 0.7 mg/dL for young women. All of the components of 
this obesity-associated dyslipidemia have been shown to be athero-
genic and play a major role in the development of atherosclerosis 
and cardiovascular disease in obese individuals. 
 Weight loss and exercise, even if they do not result in normal-
ization of body weight, can improve this dyslipidemia and thus 
reduce CVD risk. In addition, obese individuals should be tar-
geted for intense lipid-lowering therapy, when necessary. 
 The Metabolic Syndrome 
 The concept of the  metabolic syndrome was first introduced in 
1923 by Kylin who described the clustering of hypertension, 
hyperglycemia, and gout as a syndrome. Reaven and others rede-
fined this concept as the insulin resistance syndrome, a clustering 
of glucose intolerance, high triglycerides, low HDL cholesterol, 
and hypertension. The two most consistent characteristics of per-
sons with the syndrome are insulin resistance and central abdomi-
nal obesity. There is strong epidemiologic and pathophysiologic 
evidence linking visceral adiposity with insulin resistance and 
diabetes, with dyslipidemia, hyperinsulinemia, and decreased 
fibrinolysis as possible mediators of the relationship between vis-
ceral fat and type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease risk. 
 The earliest attempt to create a definition for this constellation 
of metabolic disorders was by the WHO wherein an individual 
with glucose intolerance or insulin resistance was required to have 
two or more criteria (elevated triglycerides, low HDL cholesterol, 
high BMI or waist-hip ratio, hypertension, or microalbuminuria) 
in order to be categorized as having metabolic syndrome. The next 
attempt at a clinical definition was by the National Cholesterol 
Education Program (NCEP)-Adult Treatment Panel III in 2001 
that required three or more of the following criteria for the meta-
bolic syndrome definition: high fasting glucose, high triglycerides, 
low HDL, high blood pressure or waist circumference. More 
recently, the International Diabetes Federation (IDF) proposed 
further refined criteria that require central abdominal obesity, and 
two more criteria as proposed by the NCEP. The IDF criteria were 
the first ones to account for the heterogeneity of body size among 
different ethnic groups, and the committee recommended different 
waist circumference cut-points based on ethnicity with a revised 
definition for South Asians, Chinese, and Japanese recommending 
similar waist circumference cut-points in men (≥90 cm) and in 
women (≥80 cm) compared to the European cut-points of ≥94 cm 
in men and ≥80 cm in women. More recently, the utility of the 
metabolic syndrome has been questioned, given that there are no 
treatment options available, and rather each cardiometabolic risk 
factor (eg, blood pressure control) is treated individually. 
 Cardiovascular Complications 
 Higher cardiovascular disease risk has been linked to visceral adi-
posity with several distinct mechanisms including inflammation, 
thrombosis, hyperglycemia, atherogenic dyslipidemia, and adipo-
cytokines (hormones and proteins exclusively secreted by adipose 
tissue). Obesity has been implicated as one of the major risk fac-
tors for hypertension, heart failure, and coronary heart disease. 
Other cardiovascular conditions associated with obesity include 
peripheral arterial disease and atrial fibrillation. 
 Altered hemodynamics of obesity due to increases in total 
blood volume, systemic arterial pressure, and cardiac output 
increase the workload of the heart and can lead to adverse effects 
on cardiovascular structure and function. Overweight individuals 
develop left ventricular dilation and hypertrophy and left atrial 
enlargement. These structural abnormalities increase the risk of 
heart failure and of atrial fibrillation. In the Framingham Heart 
Study, every 1-unit increase in BMI increased the risk of heart 
failure by 5% in men and 7% in women. However, several recent 
studies have also found an obesity-cardiovascular disease paradox 
where overweight and obese individuals with existing heart failure 
or heart disease have a lower risk of mortality than those who are 
underweight or normal weight. These findings suggest that obese 
individuals may have the metabolic reserve to withstand high 
catabolic needs as exist in heart failure. 
 Pulmonary Complications 
 Obesity can cause alveolar hypoventilation, increased pulmonary 
blood volume, and mechanical effects on the respiratory system. 
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is associated with obesity and 
706    CHAPTER 20 Obesity
other features of the metabolic syndrome, with the most closely 
correlated factor being hypertension. Intermittent upper airway 
obstruction results in hypoxia, sympathetic nervous system surges, 
and airway inflammation. Patients with sleep apnea have higher 
risk of systemic and pulmonary hypertension, heart failure, dys-
rhythmias, myocardial infarction, and overall mortality. 
Mechanisms that have been implicated in the development of 
cardiovascular disease in obstructive sleep apnea include increased 
oxidative stress and inflammation that cause endothelial dysfunc-
tion. While significant weight loss can improve OSA and associ-
ated metabolic features, mechanical therapies used to treat sleep 
apnea with constant positive airway pressure have not been found 
to improve hypertension or other metabolic features. 
 Gastrointestinal Complications 
 Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is commonly seen with 
insulin resistance or obesity and includes a spectrum of liver 
disease from steatosis to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, advanced 
fibrosis, and rarely, cirrhosis. Fat accumulates within the liver with 
recruitment of inflammatory cells and fibrosis. The prevalence of 
NAFLD in obesity is 50% to 85%. Risk factors associated with 
NAFLD besides obesity include advancing age, visceral adiposity, 
atherogenic dyslipidemia, and hypertension. NAFLD is the lead-
ing cause of chronic liver disease in the United States, and given 
the high rates of obesity, approximately one-third of US adults are 
estimated to have NAFLD. 
 NAFLD has been observed in overweight children and adoles-
cents with prevalence estimated at 6% to 23% in population-
based US samples. In children, there seems to be a clear male 
predominance for NAFLD which suggests distinct pathophysio-
logic mechanisms for NAFLD between adults and children. 
Histologic criteria have been proposed to distinguish adult (type 1) 
and pediatric (type 2) NAFLD. In a large study of German chil-
dren, the three main factors that contributed to NAFLD by prin-
cipal components analysis included an insulin resistance/visceral 
adiposity factor, a body fat distribution/CRP factor, and lastly a 
sex steroid hormone factor. 
 Other GI complications of abdominal obesity include gastroe-
sophageal reflux disease and hiatal hernia. Both of these condi-
tions can cause erosive mucosal changes in the lower esophagus 
leading to higher risk of Barrett esophagus. 
 Reproduction and Gynecologic 
Complications 
 Obesity has been associated with both female and male infertility. 
In women, polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) is the main cause 
of female infertility associated with obesity. Women with PCOS 
have ovulatory dysfunction and hyperandrogenemia. PCOS is 
reviewed in more detail in Chapter 13. In men, obesity can cause 
reduced sperm counts and motility. Hormonal changes with obe-
sity and associated metabolic disorders may lead to poor sperm 
production. Obesity is also associated with erectile dysfunction 
through proinflammatory mechanisms and decreased testosterone 
levels. 
 Cancer 
 Several cancers have been linked to obesity, including breast, 
endometrial, colorectal, prostate, and renal cell carcinomas. 
Putative mechanisms for breast and endometrial cancer include 
higher circulating levels of unopposed estrogen and ovarian hyper-
androgenism, causing higher levels of testosterone and lower levels 
of luteinizing hormone. The relationship between obesity and 
colon cancer is stronger in men than women. 
 MANAGEMENT OF THE OBESE PATIENT 
 Screening and Prevention of 
Complications 
 Periodic health screening with a measurement of both height and 
weight to calculate BMI is recommended by many organizations 
including the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI), 
the US Preventive Services Task Force, and the WHO. Furthermore, 
the NHLBI also recommends waist circumference measurement 
routinely to find persons at risk of metabolic complications of 
overweight. Patients who are found to be in the overweight or 
obese categories of BMI are recommended to have other risk fac-
tors checked as well, including blood pressure, fasting glucose, and 
lipoprotein levels. 
 Therapeutic Approaches for Weight Loss 
 Several behavioral, pharmacologic, and surgical therapies for 
weight loss have been studied in randomized controlled trials. In 
general, behavioral interventions with lifestyle change including 
diet and exercise and pharmacologic therapies work to achieve 
modest amounts of weight loss while patients adhere to the inter-
vention. Recommended for more severe levels of obesity, bariatric 
surgery does lead to larger amounts of weight loss, but requires 
lifelong medical supervision and management of the side effects 
associated with the surgery. 
 A. Behavior, diet, and exercise therapies 
 While many 
believe that long-term weight loss with lifestyle change is not 
achievable by most patients, longitudinal studies have found that 
20% of overweight individuals are successful at weight loss defined 
as losing at least 10% of initial body weight and maintaining the 
loss for at least 1 year. Individuals enrolled in the National Weight 
Control Registry have lost an average of 33 kg and maintained the 
loss for more than 5 years. Behaviors that have been most effective 
for long-term weight loss include high levels of physical activity 
(~1 hour/day), self-monitoring weight, eating a low-calorie, low-
fat diet, eating breakfast regularly, and maintaining a consistent 
eating pattern throughout the week. 
 Dietary interventions. 
 Several commercial, fad, and thera-
peutic dietary interventions exist for weight loss. Recent dietary 
trends have focused on relative changes in macronutrient com-
position of the diet to achieve weight loss, such as low-fat or 
low-carbohydrate diets. Few have been rigorously tested, and no 
CHAPTER 20 Obesity     707
trials have long-term outcome data (defined as the occurrence of 
comorbidities or mortality). A recent randomized trial compar-
ing four popular diets (Atkins, Zone, Weight Watchers, and 
Ornish diet) found that weight change did not significantly dif-
fer between participants assigned to any of the four diets, and 
better dietary adherence predicted higher amount of weight loss. 
The most difficult diets for participants to adhere to were the 
very low-fat diet (Ornish) and the low-carbohydrate diet 
(Atkins). In a recent meta-analysis of five dietary trials for weight 
loss, low-carbohydrate non–energy-restricted diets were found 
to be as effective as low-fat, energy-restricted diets for weight loss 
up to 1 year. The weighted mean difference in weight loss was 
greater in the low-carbohydrate diets (−3.3 kg, 95% CI −5.3 to 
−1.4 kg, p = 0.02) in the first 6 months, but there was no differ-
ence in weight loss after 12 months between the two types of 
diet (−1.0 kg, 95% CI −3.5 to 1.5 kg, p = 0.15). Additionally, 
there was no clear benefit on cardiovascular risk factors with 
either type of diet. 
 Physical activity interventions. 
 The Institute of Medicine 
recommends physical activity of 60 min/d for most days of the 
week for weight loss and/or control of weight. The recommen-
dations for heart disease prevention are 30 min/d of moderate-
intensity physical activity on most days per week, or at least 
150 min/wk. 
 In a systematic review of trials of an aerobic physical activity 
intervention in overweight populations, body weight decreased 
significantly in seven of nine trials, but weight increased in two 
trials. The two studies that combined diet with aerobic training 
had the largest amounts of weight loss (>10 kg each). However, 
these trials were uncontrolled and of relatively short duration. It 
remains unclear whether long-term lifestyle change with physical 
activity can decrease risk of cardiovascular disease or mortality in 
obese individuals. 
 Pharmacologic intervention/CAM. 
 Weight loss medica-
tions have had mixed results with most delivering modest amounts 
of short-term weight loss, often associated with many undesirable 
side effects. Currently there are four main categories of weight loss 
medications approved by the FDA: adrenergic agents, serotonergic 
agents, combination of both adrenergic/serotonergic agents, and 
lipase inhibitors. Other medications available for off-label use 
include some antidepressants and anticonvulsant agents. A major-
ity of available obesity treatments work by suppressing appetite 
centrally. One approved medication, orlistat, prevents digestion 
and absorption of dietary fat by inhibiting the gut enzyme lipase. 
There are several different sites of action under investigation for 
potential medications including specific neurotransmitter targets 
to decrease appetite and/or promote satiety, endocannabinoid 
system antagonists and opioid receptor targets to reduce food 
intake, and peripheral targets that work at the level of the intes-
tines or pancreas to modulate food intake. 
 Table 20–5 shows specific medications in each category, the 
amount of weight loss reported in trials compared to placebo from 
a recent review and meta-analysis, and the common side effects of 
each agent. The two most frequently studied weight loss medica-
tions, sibutramine and orlistat, have had the best efficacy in longer- 
term trials (52 weeks). However, both of these drugs are associated 
with significant side effects which limit their use. Other antiobe-
sity medications in the drug development pipeline include lorca-
serin, an agonist that targets serotonin 2C receptors to cause 
satiety, and a multiple monoamine reuptake inhibitor, tesofensine, 
that reduces reuptake of norepinephrine, serotonin, and dopamine 
to cause appetite suppression. An endocannabinoid receptor 
TABLE 20–5 Medications for treatment of obesity.
Drug
Category
Recommended 
Dose
Mean Weight Loss
vs Placebo
(Range in kg)
Side Effects
Phentermine
Adrenergic agent
15-37.5 mg daily
3.6 kg
(0.6-6.0 kg)
Dry mouth, headache, insomnia, irritability, 
tachycardia, ↑BP
Diethylpropion
Adrenergic agent
3.0 kg
(−1.6 to 11.5 kg)
Central nervous system stimulation, 
dizziness, headaches, insomnia, 
palpitations, tachycardia, mild ↑BP
Orlistat
Lipase inhibitor
60-120 mg 
3 times daily
2.89 kg
(2.27-3.51 kg)
Diarrhea, flatulence, fecal urgency and 
incontinence, abdominal pain, dyspepsia
Sibutramine
Norepinephrine/serotonin 
reuptake inhibitor
10-15 mg daily
4.45 kg
(3.62-5.29 kg)
Dry mouth, insomnia, constipation, 
tachycardia, ↑BP
Off-Label Drugs Associated with Weight Loss
Buproprion
Antidepressant
300-400 mg daily
2.77 kg 
(1.1-4.5 kg)
Dry mouth, insomnia, diarrhea, constipation
Fluoxetine
Selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitor
60 mg daily
0.90-9.1 kg
Nervousness, sweating, tremors, nausea, 
vomiting, fatigue, somnolence or insomnia, 
diarrhea
Topiramate
Anticonvulsant
96 mg/d or 
192 mg/d
6.5% more than placebo
(4.8%-8.3%)
Paresthesias, difficulty with concentration, 
change in taste, dizziness, fatigue
Zonisamide
Anticonvulsant
100-600 mg daily
5% decrease compared 
to placebo
Dizziness, confusion, difficulty with 
concentration
708    CHAPTER 20 Obesity
antagonist, rimonabant, was successful in producing modest 
weight loss and improving metabolic complications. However, 
adverse central nervous system side effects of rimonabant includ-
ing depression and anxiety precluded introduction of this drug 
into clinical practice. 
 Complementary and alternative medications such as herbs, 
vitamins, nutritional supplements, and meal replacement thera-
pies are commonly used by the general public for weight loss. 
However the efficacy and safety of these herbal remedies has not 
been well studied. A recent meta-analysis of trials found that com-
pounds containing ephedra,  Cissus quadrangularis , ginseng, bitter 
melon, and zingiber had some short-term efficacy with weight loss 
with mostly mild adverse effects. However, longer-term random-
ized controlled trials are needed to prove efficacy and safety. 
 B. Bariatric surgery 
 Surgical treatment for weight loss has 
been performed for the past 50 years, and these procedures are 
increasing in popularity. Approximately 20,000 weight-loss sur-
geries were performed in 1995 and over 140,000 were done in 
2004, a sevenfold increase. There are three main types of bariatric 
surgeries: restrictive, malabsorptive, and those that have both a 
restrictive and a malabsorptive component. Purely restrictive sur-
geries include horizontal gastroplasty, vertical banded gastroplasty, 
silastic ring vertical gastroplasty, and adjustable gastric banding. 
Purely malabsorptive surgeries include the oldest of all bariatric 
procedures, the jejunoileal bypass, biliopancreatic diversion, duo-
denal switch, and long limb gastric bypass. The combination of 
restrictive and malabsorptive surgical procedure is the most com-
monly used bariatric surgery worldwide, the Roux-en-Y gastric 
bypass procedure (RYGB), which involved stapling the upper 
stomach into a small 30-mL pouch and attaching it to the jeju-
num bypassing the lower stomach and duodenum. This procedure 
can be done with an open surgical approach, or now more com-
monly with a laparoscopic approach. 
 Several studies have examined the effects of different types of 
bariatric surgeries on various outcomes including weight loss, 
comorbid disease, complication rates, and mortality. There are 
very few randomized controlled trials comparing different surgical 
procedures, so most of the outcomes data come from case series, 
prospective cohort analyses, or nonrandomized trials. The largest 
and longest double cohort study to date is the Swedish Obese 
Subjects (SOS) study in which obese adults who voluntarily 
underwent bariatric surgery were matched to a control group of 
medically treated patients. After 10 years of follow-up of 1703 
participants, those treated with surgery had a 16% weight loss 
compared to 2% in the controls (p <0.001). They compared the 
different types of bariatric surgery approaches in this study and 
found that those who had gastric bypass lost more weight than 
those who received banding procedures or the vertical banded 
gastroplasty. 
 An earlier meta-analysis determined the effect of bariatric 
surgery on weight loss, mortality, and four comorbid diseases 
including diabetes, hyperlipidemia, hypertension, and sleep 
apnea. The mean excess weight loss was 61.2% (58.1%-64.4%), 
highest in those who had the biliopancreatic diversion or 
duodenal switch (70.1%) and lowest in those who underwent 
gastric banding (47.5%). Operative mortality within 30 days of 
the surgery was 0.1% for purely restrictive procedures and 0.5% 
for gastric bypass, and 1.1% for biliopancreatic diversion or 
duodenal switch procedures. Type 2 diabetes resolved in 
approximately 77% of patients after surgery, hyperlipidemia 
improved in 70%, hypertension resolved in 62%, and obstruc-
tive sleep apnea resolved in 86%. 
 Much attention has focused on determining the mechanisms 
involved in the dramatic weight loss associated with bariatric sur-
gery. Previous hypotheses that restrictive procedures reduce the 
quantity of food ingested at any one time, malabsorptive proce-
dures cause wasting of fat calories, with RYGB employing a com-
bination of both mechanisms, have not been supported by studies. 
More recent thinking attributes weight loss after bariatric proce-
dures to a substantial decline in hunger and increase in satiety that 
is regulated through neuroendocrine mechanisms and gut hor-
mones such as ghrelin and PYY. The effect of RYGB surgery on 
ghrelin levels is controversial since some studies have found 
increased levels, no change, or decreased levels after surgery. These 
inconsistent results may be explained by the timing of ghrelin 
sampling after surgery. After purely restrictive surgeries, ghrelin 
levels increase, which may help explain the more dramatic weight 
loss observed following RYGB vs purely restrictive surgeries. PYY 
levels rise to those of a nonobese person following vertical banded 
gastroplasty. However, with RYGB, there is an early exaggerated 
response in PYY secretion, approximately two- to fourfold greater 
than that observed in lean, obese, or gastric banded patients, 
which may contribute to the sustained weight loss seen with this 
type of procedure. 
 Defining appropriate patient criteria to minimize risks and 
maximize the benefits from bariatric surgery have been debated. 
Some studies have concluded that surgical intervention is more 
effective for weight loss and control of comorbid diseases than 
nonsurgical treatments in patients with a BMI ≥40 kg/m 2 . In 
2004, with extensive scientific input, the National Coverage 
Advisory Committee panel concluded that bariatric surgery could 
be offered to Medicare beneficiaries with BMI ≥35 kg/m 2 who 
have at least one comorbid disease associated with obesity and 
have been unsuccessful previously with medical treatment of obe-
sity. Other criteria for patient selection proposed by leading asso-
ciations include adequate patient commitment with medical 
follow-up and use of dietary supplements, no other reversible 
endocrine disorders causing obesity, no current substance abuse, 
and no severe psychiatric illness. 
 C. Interventions with efficacy in children 
 Several studies 
have investigated behavioral and lifestyle intervention programs 
for pediatric weight loss. Most randomized controlled trials of 
overweight children and adolescents have found positive, but 
small- to -moderate effects, of combined lifestyle interventions on 
BMI. Family-based behavioral weight loss programs have pro-
duced larger effects that persist for several months of follow-up. 
Less is known about the long-term safety and efficacy of pharma-
cologic agents for treatment of pediatric obesity. 
CHAPTER 20 Obesity     709
 REFERENCES 
 Barlow SE, Dietz WH. Obesity evaluation and treatment: expert committee rec-
ommendations. The Maternal and Child Health Bureau, Health Resources 
and Services Administration and the Department of Health and Human 
Services.  Pediatrics . 1998;3:E29. [PMID: 1224658] 
 Berthoud H-R, Morrison C. The brain, appetite, and obesity.  Ann Rev Psychol . 
2008;59:55. [PMID:18154499] 
 Buchwald H, Avidor Y, Braunwald E, et al. Bariatric surgery: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis.  JAMA . 2004;14:1724. [PMID:15479938] 
 The CDC National Diabetes Fact Sheet. http://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/pubs/esti-
mates.htm#prev3. Accessed December 10, 2003. Data from the National 
Health Interview Survey and the Third National Health and Nutrition 
Examination Survey.
 Christakis NA, Fowler JH. The spread of obesity in a large social network over 32 
years.  N Engl J Med . 2007;4:370. [PMID:17652652] 
 Cummings DE, Overduin J. Gastrointestinal regulation of food intake.  J Clin 
Invest . 2007;1:13. [PMID:17200702] 
 Dansinger ML, Gleason JA, Griffith JL, et al. Comparison of the Atkins, Ornish, 
Weight Watchers, and Zone diets for weight loss and heart disease risk reduc-
tion: a randomized trial.  JAMA . 2005;1:43. [PMID:15632335] 
 Dickerson LM, Carek PJ. Pharmacotherapy for the obese patient.  Prim Care . 
2009;2:407. [PMID:19501251] 
 Galic S, Oakhill JS, Steinberg GR. Adipose tissue as an endocrine organ.  Mol Cell 
Endocrinol . 2010;2:129. [PMID:19723556] 
 Grundy SM, Cleeman JI, Daniels SR, et al. Definition of metabolic syndrome: 
report of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute/American Heart 
Association conference on scientific issues related to definition.  Circulation . 
2004;3:433. [PMID:14744958] 
 Hedley AA, Ogden CL, Johnson CL, et al. Prevalence of overweight and obesity 
among US children, adolescents, and adults, 1999-2002.  JAMA . 
2004;23:2847. [PMID:15199035] 
 Kahn SE, Hull RL, Utzschneider KM. Mechanisms linking obesity to insulin 
resistance and type 2 diabetes.  Nature . 2006;7121:840. [PMID:17167471] 
 Kenchaiah S, Evans JC, Levy D, et al. Obesity and the risk of heart failure.  N Engl 
J Med . 2002;5:305. [PMID:12151467] 
 Larsson SC, Wolk A. Obesity and colon and rectal cancer risk: a meta-analysis of 
prospective studies.  Am J Clin Nutr . 2007;3:556. [PMID:17823417] 
 Montague CT, O’Rahilly S. The perils of portliness: causes and consequences of 
visceral adiposity.  Diabetes . 2000;6:883. [PMID: 10866038] 
 Morton GJ, Cummings DE, Baskin DG, Barsh GS, Schwartz MW. Central ner-
vous system control of food intake and body weight.  Nature . 2006;7109: 
289. [PMID:16988703] 
 Nordmann AJ, Nordmann A, Briel M, et al. Effects of low-carbohydrate vs low-fat 
diets on weight loss and cardiovascular risk factors: a meta-analysis of ran-
domized controlled trials.  Arch Intern Med . 2006;3:285. [PMID:16476868] 
 Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Curtin LR, et al. Prevalence of overweight and obesity in 
the United States, 1999-2004.  JAMA . 2006;13:1549. [PMID:16595758] 
 Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Flegal KM. High body mass index for age among US chil-
dren and adolescents, 2003-2006.  JAMA . 2008;20:2401. [PMID:18505949] 
 Reaven GM. Banting lecture 1988. Role of insulin resistance in human disease. 
 Diabetes . 1988;12:1595. [PMID:3056758] 
 Romero-Corral A, Montori VM, Somers VK, et al. Association of bodyweight with 
total mortality and with cardiovascular events in coronary artery disease: a 
systematic 
review 
of 
cohort 
studies. 
 Lancet . 
2006;9536:666. 
[PMID:16920472] 
 Sjostrom L, Narbro K, Sjostrem CD, et al. Effects of bariatric surgery on 
mortality in Swedish obese subjects.  N Engl J Med . 2007;8:741. 
[PMID:17715408] 
 Van Gaal LF, Mertens IL, De Block CE. Mechanisms linking obesity with cardio-
vascular disease.  Nature . 2006;7121:875. [PMID:17167476] 
 WHO. Obesity: preventing and managing the global epidemic. Report of a WHO 
consultation. World Health Organization Technical Report Series. 2000;1. 
 
 
This page intentionally left blank
711
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
  Humoral Manifestations 
of Malignancy 
 Dolores Shoback, MD, and  Janet L. Funk, MD 
 ACTH 
Adrenocorticotropic hormone 
 ANP 
Atrial natriuretic peptide 
 APUD 
Amine precursor uptake and 
 
decarboxylation (cell) 
 CRH 
Corticotropin-releasing hormone 
 CT 
Computed tomography 
 FDG-PET Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission 
 
tomography 
 FGF 
Fibroblast growth factor 
 FSH 
Follicle-stimulating hormone 
 GH 
Growth hormone 
 GHRH 
Growth hormone–releasing hormone 
 hCG 
Human chorionic gonadotropin 
 HTLV-1 
Human T cell leukemia virus-I 
 IGF 
Insulin-like growth factor 
 IGF-BP3 
Insulin-like growth factor binding 
 
protein-3 
 IL 
Interleukin 
 LH 
Luteinizing hormone 
 MEPE 
Matrix extracellular phosphoglycoprotein 
 MRI 
Magnetic resonance imaging 
 POMC 
Proopiomelanocortin 
 PTH 
Parathyroid hormone 
 PTHrP 
Parathyroid hormone-related protein 
 SIADH 
Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic 
 
hormone (secretion) 
 TNF 
Tumor necrosis factor 
 VIP 
Vasoactive intestinal peptide 
21
 ECTOPIC HORMONE AND RECEPTOR 
SYNDROMES 
 Some of the most challenging endocrine problems occur in 
patients with malignancies of diverse cell types, because both 
endocrine and nonendocrine tumors secrete polypeptide hor-
mones. As it became recognized that a polypeptide hormone could 
be produced by tumor cells derived from a tissue that normally did 
not secrete the hormone, the notion of ectopic hormone produc-
tion developed. Most tumors associated with ectopic hormone 
syndromes are derived from cells that are normally capable of 
producing peptide hormones. Initially, it was thought that ectopic 
hormone production by tumor cells was a rare event. Interestingly, 
both the frequency and the original conception of this syndrome 
have been redefined over the last few decades. It has come to be 
appreciated—through the use of modern biochemical and molec-
ular biologic techniques—that the synthesis of peptide hormones 
and the transcription of their genes by tumor cells are in fact quite 
common occurrences. Tumor cells may differ from normal cells in 
their ability or inability to process precursor molecules, which may 
account for the presence or absence of hormone excess states and 
for the profile of peptide hormone forms and fragments present in 
the circulation and in tumor cell extracts. However, tumor pro-
duction of hormone fragments or precursors is much more com-
mon than the clinical syndromes of hormone excess. 
 The classic criteria used to confirm that a tumor is the source 
of a hormone excess state include the following: (1) evidence of an 
endocrinopathy in a patient with a tumor; (2) remission of the 
endocrinopathy after tumor resection; (3) detection of an arterio-
venous gradient across the tumor; and (4) documentation of 
protein and messenger RNA encoding the hormone being pro-
duced by tumor tissue. 
 In addition to classic hormone excess states resulting from the 
ectopic or inappropriate secretion of a hormone by an endocrine or 
nonendocrine tumor, endocrinopathies can result from the ectopic 
expression of a hormone’s receptor. This is well illustrated, for 
example, by the occurrence of Cushing syndrome in pregnancy or 
in relation to meals, due to the ectopic expression of luteinizing 
712    CHAPTER 21 Humoral Manifestations of Malignancy
hormone (LH) or gastric inhibitory polypeptide receptors in adre-
nal tissue, respectively. Several other examples of ectopic receptor 
syndromes have been documented. Some of these will be discussed 
later, particularly as a cause for unusual forms of adrenocorticotro-
pic hormone (ACTH)-independent Cushing syndrome. 
 A variety of peptides are produced by both benign and malig-
nant tumors as listed in  Table 21–1 . The biochemical pathways and 
machinery leading to the synthesis, processing, and secretion into 
the circulation of a peptide hormone are present in all cells. In con-
trast, the multiple enzymatic steps that lead to the production of a 
highly active steroid hormone (eg, cortisol or 1,25- dihydroxyvitamin 
D [1,25-(OH) 2 D]) are restricted, with rare exceptions, to steroid-
producing cells or their precursor cells. Hence, the occurrence of 
1,25-(OH) 2 D excess caused by a tumor is distinctly unusual, being 
observed infrequently in hematologic malignancies and only in 
those with the ability to 1-hydroxylate 25-OH D, the immediate 
precursor of 1,25-(OH) 2 D. Ectopic hormone syndromes—the 
most common of the paraneoplastic syndromes—thus predomi-
nantly reflect peptide hormone excess states. The most common 
ectopic peptide hormone syndromes are described in greater detail 
in subsequent sections of this chapter. 
 APUD Concept of Neuroendocrine 
Cell Tumors 
 Over the years since the initial recognition that nonendocrine 
tumors were the source of the ectopic hormones produced in these 
endocrine syndromes, the notion developed that the hormones 
originated from highly specialized neuroendocrine cells in tumors. 
These cells were thought to derive from the neural crest and were 
postulated to be able to synthesize and store biogenic amines and 
were thus designated as amine precursor uptake and decarboxyla-
tion (APUD) cells. Neuroendocrine cells, like calcitonin-secreting 
C cells and adrenal chromaffin cells, clearly had these properties, 
and tissues giving rise to ectopic hormone syndromes (eg, lung 
and gastrointestinal tract) also had APUD cells scattered through-
out them. It was originally thought that the tumor cells producing 
excessive amounts of polypeptide hormones were derived exclu-
sively from APUD cells in the tissue of origin (eg, ACTH-
producing cells of the lung). 
 Newer insights into tumor cell biology have led to a better under-
standing of the pathogenesis and etiology of the ectopic hormone 
production states. Studies have shown that not all APUD cells are 
derived from the neural crest. Some of these cells are of endodermal 
origin. Furthermore, with careful examination of tumors, it has 
become clear that peptide hormones are often produced by non-
APUD cells. It has, however, been appreciated that the clinically 
evident hormone hypersecretion states are typically caused by tumors 
that are in fact derived from APUD cells. These cells are the ones 
with full capacity to produce and store peptide hormones efficiently 
in dense secretory granules and then release biologically 
significant quantities of active hormones in circulating plasma. 
 HYPERCALCEMIA OF MALIGNANCY 
 Hypercalcemia is the most common paraneoplastic endocrine syn-
drome, occurring in 25% of malignancies. In the great majority of 
patients (98%), the identity of the tumor is apparent at the time of 
presentation, and the prognosis is poor, as most patients with 
hypercalcemia of malignancy do not survive beyond 6 months. 
 Pathogenesis 
 Elevated serum calcium levels result primarily because of excessive 
osteoclast-mediated bone resorption. Ectopic hormones produce 
this effect in bone via two distinct mechanisms: (1) humoral effects 
of systemically elevated tumor-derived factors and/or (2) local 
effects of peptide hormones produced by tumor cells within the 
marrow. When the syndrome of hypercalcemia of malignancy was 
first described, local effects within bone tumors were thought to be 
causative. However, in the 1980s, a humoral basis was identified as 
the most frequent cause (80%), even in settings where focal lytic 
bone metastases were present. Decreased renal calcium excretion 
may also contribute to pathogenesis, either because of the hypocal-
ciuric effects of certain humoral mediators of hypercalcemia, such as 
parathyroid hormone (PTH)-related protein (PTHrP) (discussed 
later), or because of the decreased glomerular filtration that occurs 
with hypercalcemia-induced nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. 
 Humoral Mediators 
 A humoral cause of hypercalcemia of malignancy was first pro-
posed by Fuller Albright in the 1940s when describing a case 
TABLE 21–1  Polypeptide hormones produced 
ectopically by benign and malignant 
tumors and their associated 
endocrinopathies.
Hormone
Syndrome
Parathyroid hormone-related 
 protein (PTHrP)
Hypercalcemia
Parathyroid hormone (rare)
Hypercalcemia
Adrenocorticotropin (ACTH)
Cushing syndrome
Corticotropin-releasing hormone
 (CRH)
Cushing syndrome
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH)
Hyponatremia
Insulin and insulin-like growth 
 factors (IGF)
Hypoglycemia
Growth hormone–releasing 
 hormone (GHRH)
Acromegaly
Calcitonin
No specific syndrome
Human chorionic gonadotropin 
 (hCG)
Children: precocious puberty 
Men: erectile dynsfunction, 
 gynecomastia 
Women: dysfunctional 
 uterine bleeding
Fibroblast growth factor (FGF) 23
Oncogenic osteomalacia
Vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP)
Diarrhea
CHAPTER 21 Humoral Manifestations of Malignancy     713
occurring in the absence of significant bone metastases. It would 
take another 50 years for this humoral factor to be identified. It 
was appreciated early on that the basic biochemical parameters of 
this syndrome (high serum calcium, low serum phosphorus, ele-
vated nephrogenous cAMP) were suggestive of ectopic PTH pro-
duction. However, PTH was not the culprit, as serum PTH levels 
in these cases were actually suppressed. Ultimately, and unlike 
most other paraneoplastic endocrine syndromes that are caused by 
well-described hormones of known function, a novel peptide, 
PTH-related protein (PTHrP), was identified as the humoral 
mediator of this syndrome in a majority of cases. 
 As denoted by its name, PTHrP has much in common with 
PTH. PTHrP was initially so named because of shared biochemi-
cal and metabolic effects with PTH. The amino terminal portion 
of PTHrP bears strong homology to PTH, such that the two 
peptides bind with similar affinity to PTH receptors (now known 
as the PTH/PTHrP-1 receptor subtype) in bone and kidney. 
Therefore, the biochemical markers of PTHrP-mediated hypercal-
cemia in vivo, when it is produced by tumors in an unregulated 
fashion, are similar to those of hyperparathyroidism. Some unex-
plained differences, however, are seen in PTHrP-mediated hyper-
calcemia of malignancy (vs primary hyperparathyroidism), 
including normal or suppressed 1,25-(OH) 2 D levels and an 
uncoupling of bone resorption and formation that results in severe 
bone loss. The reasons for these differences are not understood but 
are speculated to include: (1) the ability of chronic PTHrP (vs 
intermittent PTH) stimulation or profound hypercalcemia per se 
to suppress 1,25-(OH) 2 D levels; and (2) the contributions of 
additional tumor-derived cytokines, such as interleukin (IL)-1α or 
IL-6, to the process of bone resorption. 
 Subsequent study of this previously unknown peptide has 
demonstrated that PTHrP and PTH actually diverge in many 
critical ways, beginning evolutionarily. Both hormones arose from 
ancient duplication of a common gene, but evolved separately 
such that in higher vertebrates, PTH now regulates calcium 
homeostasis, while PTHrP has critical developmental roles, 
including endochondral bone growth, tooth eruption, and devel-
opment of the mammary gland and cardiovascular system. As with 
other developmentally regulated proteins, PTHrP plays less of a 
role in adult homeostasis, but can be reexpressed in response to 
specific changes in gene programming, including pregnancy (cal-
cium regulation by the lactating mammary gland and placenta), 
injury and inflammation (regulation of vascular tone in ischemia, 
sepsis, and inflammation-associated bone resorption), and/or 
tumorigenesis (hypercalcemia of malignancy). 
 When tumor expression of PTHrP results in inappropriately 
high levels of PTHrP that reaches bone cells through the circula-
tion or following synthesis in the bone microenvironment, a 
vicious cycle can ensue. PTHrP stimulates the expression of 
RANKL (receptor activator of NF-κB ligand) by osteoblasts. 
RANKL, the primary gatekeeper modulating bone resorption in 
health and disease, stimulates osteoclast differentiation and func-
tion via binding to its receptor, RANK, on osteoclasts and their 
precursors. Increased numbers of activated osteoclasts are gener-
ated both by the local release of PTHrP, in the case of bone metas-
tases, or by high levels of the hormone produced by tumor cells in 
extraskeletal sites. Both mechanisms cause enhanced bone resorp-
tion. In the case of bone metastases, sequestered growth factors, 
such as transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta, released locally 
from the bone matrix during resorption, further enhance tumor 
cell secretion of PTHrP. 
 Although PTHrP is by far the most common mediator of 
hypercalcemia of malignancy, other calciotropic hormones can 
also cause the syndrome. When hypercalcemia occurs with lym-
phoma, increased circulating levels of 1,25-(OH) 2 D are a com-
mon cause, due to increased 1α-hydroxylase activity in 
lymphoproliferative cells and/or tumor-adjacent macrophages. 
Other tumor-derived bone-resorbing factors, such as prostaglan-
dins, may also contribute to hypercalcemia of malignancy with 
certain tumors, like renal cell carcinoma. In contrast, ectopic pro-
duction of PTH is extremely rare, but has occasionally been 
reported for neuroendocrine tumors and other solid tumors. 
 Solid Tumors Associated with 
Hypercalcemia of Malignancy 
 The majority of cases of hypercalcemia occurring with solid 
tumors (80%) are associated with two common tumor types: 
squamous cell lung carcinoma and breast carcinoma (see  Table 21–1 ). 
Hypercalcemia is also frequently seen in renal cell carcinoma. 
Indeed, PTHrP was first isolated and identified by independent 
research groups each using one of these three tumor types. In 
contrast, hypercalcemia is rarely seen in other commonly occur-
ring cancers (eg, colon, gastric, thyroid, and small cell lung carci-
nomas), including some tumors that are frequently metastatic to 
bone (eg, prostate cancer). 
 A. Squamous cell carcinomas 
 Squamous cell carcinomas 
account for more than one-third of all cases of hypercalcemia of 
malignancy. Humoral effects of tumor-derived PTHrP account 
for most cases of hypercalcemia in this setting, even when bone 
metastases are present. Twenty-five percent of patients with 
squamous cell lung carcinomas develop PTHrP-mediated hyper-
calcemia, and other sites of squamous cell carcinoma (head, neck, 
esophagus, cervix, vulva, and skin) are similarly associated with a 
high incidence of hypercalcemia. 
 B. Breast carcinoma 
 The majority of patients with breast 
cancer bone metastases (ie, 70% of those with advanced disease) 
do not have hypercalcemia. However, hypercalcemia does occur in 
30% of advanced-stage breast carcinoma cases and is only rarely 
seen in the absence of bone metastases. PTHrP is causative, as 
both a local and/or humoral factor to stimulate bone resorption. 
Most breast cancer bone metastases (92%-100%) express PTHrP 
and cause lytic bone destruction. In addition, humoral effects of 
PTHrP, as evidenced by elevated circulating levels of PTHrP asso-
ciated with increased nephrogenous cAMP, have been documented 
in a majority of cases of hypercalcemia occurring in the absence of 
bone metastases and two-thirds of those cases occurring with bone 
metastases. 
 Despite this close association of PTHrP with advanced disease, 
the prognostic significance of PTHrP expression in primary breast 
714    CHAPTER 21 Humoral Manifestations of Malignancy
carcinomas, which has been documented in two-thirds of primary 
tumors in multiple series, is not clear. Reasons for the lack of a 
simple direct correlation are probably multifactorial and may 
include: (1) the ability of tumors to modulate PTHrP expression 
once they metastasize to bone (eg, TGF-beta released from the 
bone matrix by invading tumor cells is thought to enhance 
PTHrP expression in the tumor cells, even when the primary 
tumor is PTHrP-negative); and (2) the tendency for expression of 
PTHrP to correlate with estrogen receptor and progesterone 
receptor status, which influences treatment and response to ther-
apy. Additionally, locally produced bone cytokines such as IL-1α, 
IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha likely act in concert 
with PTHrP at sites of bone metastases to enhance osteoclast-
mediated lytic bone destruction and thus contribute to hypercal-
cemia. Hypercalcemia seen in late stages of breast cancer is usually 
unremitting and associated with a survival time of weeks to 
months. 
 C. Renal cell carcinoma 
 Renal cell carcinoma, while less 
common than squamous cell or breast carcinoma, is also fre-
quently associated with hypercalcemia in advanced cases. While 
bone metastases are common in advanced disease, hypercalcemia 
appears to be due primarily to humoral effects of PTHrP. In some 
series, 100% of renal cell tumors have been reported to stain 
positively for immunoreactive PTHrP. However, hypercalcemia is 
reported in less than 20% of cases. 
 D. Other solid tumors  Hypercalcemia is also associated with 
other solid tumors, although less frequently. In most of these cases, 
humoral effects of PTHrP are causative. Bladder carcinoma, large 
cell and adenocarcinoma of the lung, and endocrine tumors 
(including islet cell tumors, pheochromocytoma, and carcinoid 
tumors) have also been reported to secrete PTHrP. PTHrP-
mediated hypercalcemia has also been reported for ovarian carci-
nomas. A case of ectopic PTH production by an ovarian carcinoma 
has also been reported. 
 Hematologic Malignancies Associated 
with Hypercalcemia of Malignancy 
( Table 21–2 ) 
 A. Multiple myeloma  Hypercalcemia and lytic bone lesions 
are among the diagnostic criteria for multiple myeloma, a hema-
tologic malignancy characterized by infiltration of the bone mar-
row with malignant plasma cells. Lytic bone lesions and active 
bone resorption occur adjacent to tumor cells, which secrete 
multiple factors capable of stimulating osteoclast differentiation 
and activity. A major effect of these factors, which include mac-
rophage inflammatory peptide-1, TNF-alpha, IL-1, and IL-6, is 
to induce RANKL expression in osteoblasts. Evidence of 
RANKL expression by plasma cells also exists. Locally increased 
RANKL causes bone lysis by binding to its cognate receptor on 
osteoclasts (RANK) and stimulating their differentiation and 
activity. More recently, it has been appreciated that defects in 
bone formation, due to suppression of the Wnt signaling 
 pathway by other tumor factors (eg, Dickkopf-1), also accom-
pany lytic bone disease in multiple myeloma. In 30% of cases, 
bone lysis leads to hypercalcemia. Because renal disease occurs 
frequently in myeloma due to the filtration of Bence Jones pro-
teins (light chain fragments of IgG), it is hypothesized that 
patients with renal impairment may be particularly predisposed 
to development of hypercalcemia in this setting of increased 
bone resorption. 
 B. Lymphoma and leukemia 
 Hypercalcemia has been 
reported in up to 15% of patients with lymphoma; is seen pri-
marily in patients with bone involvement; and can occur with a 
variety of cell types. In most cases, the etiology is evenly divided 
between: (1) local lytic effects of tumor-derived factors within 
the marrow, analogous to the mechanisms discussed for myeloma, 
or (2) humoral effects of tumor-derived 1,25-(OH) 2 D. 
1, 25(OH) 2 D-mediated hypercalcemia of malignancy is unique 
to lymphoma. Its underlying pathology is analogous to that seen 
in 
hypercalcemia 
in 
granulomatous 
disorders 
where 
1α-hydroxylase activity in the abnormal hematopoietic cells or 
infiltrating macrophages results in unregulated conversion of 
25-(OH) 2 D to active 1,25-(OH) 2 D. Increased intestinal cal-
cium absorption and increased bone resorption are both thought 
to contribute to hypercalcemia in this setting. In addition, there 
are also numerous case reports of humoral effects of tumor- 
derived PTHrP as a cause of hypercalcemia in non-Hodgkin 
lymphomas (particularly B cell), acute lymphoblastic leukemia, 
and blast crises in chronic myeloid leukemia. So the clinician 
confronting such tumors must be cognizant of the different eti-
ologies for the observed hypercalcemia. 
 Patients diagnosed with adult T cell leukemia or lymphoma 
induced by HTLV-1 (human T cell lymphotrophic virus-1), the 
first identified human retrovirus, must be considered separately 
TABLE 21–2 Hypercalcemia of malignancy.
Incidence of 
Hypercalcemia
Etiology of Hypercalcemia
Solid tumors
Humoral
Local lytic
Squamous cell 
 (lung, 
 head, neck)
 25%
100% (PTHrP)
–
Breast, 
advanced
 30%
65% (PTHrP)
35% 
 (PTHrP)
Renal cell
 15%
50%-100% 
 (PTHrP)
50%
Hematologic malignancies
Multiple 
 myeloma
 30%
–
100%
Lymphoma/
 leukemia 
 (non-HTLV-1)
<15%
50% 
 (1,25[OH]2D, 
 rarely PTHrP)
50%
HTLV-1 
 lymphoma/
 leukemia
 66%
100% 
 (PTHrP)
–
CHAPTER 21 Humoral Manifestations of Malignancy     715
when evaluating possible causes of hypercalcemia. In these patients, 
hypercalcemia occurs in two-thirds of cases, responds poorly to 
treatment, and is due to the humoral effects of tumor-derived 
PTHrP. Tax1, a transcription factor encoded by the HTLV-1 
genome, transforms T cells in these cases by altering the regulation 
of hundreds of host genes, including transactivation of PTHrP. 
 Diagnosis 
 The diagnosis of hypercalcemia is discussed in detail in Chapter 8. 
Primary hyperparathyroidism and hypercalcemia of malignancy 
account for more than 90% of all causes of hypercalcemia. 
Because the incidence of primary hyperparathyroidism is twice 
that of hypercalcemia of malignancy, primary hyperparathyroid-
ism must always be considered as a potential cause of hypercalce-
mia in patients with malignancy and can be screened for by simply 
determining intact PTH levels using a standard two-site immuno-
radiometric assay. In the setting of hypercalcemia of malignancy 
with normal renal function, PTH levels are suppressed. Further 
evaluation can be guided, in part, by the tumor type, which is 
usually known prior to presentation with hypercalcemia. Elevated 
PTHrP is detected in a majority of cases of hypercalcemia of 
malignancy associated with solid tumors, including breast carci-
noma with or without bone metastases, and in HTLV-1–induced 
T cell lymphomas. Measurement of 1,25-(OH) 2 D should be 
considered in all cases of lymphoma-associated hypercalcemia. 
Lytic bone lesions are usually identified during tumor staging. 
 Treatment 
 The treatment of hypercalcemia is discussed in detail in Chapter 8. 
Because bone resorption is central to all causes of hypercalcemia 
of malignancy, bisphosphonates are currently a mainstay of ther-
apy. Glucocorticoids may be efficacious in the treatment of hyper-
calcemia due either to the local lytic effects of neoplastic plasma 
cells in multiple myeloma or to the increased production of 1,25-
(OH) 2 D in lymphoma. Recent and ongoing clinical trials are also 
evaluating the utility of humanized antibodies directed again 
PTHrP or RANKL in preventing hypercalcemia and other adverse 
skeletal events in patients with multiple myeloma, breast cancer, 
and/or other solid tumors. While bisphosphonates are already a 
mainstay of palliative care for patients with hypercalcemia and 
have a demonstrated ability to decrease skeletal-related events 
(metastases and pathologic fractures) and ameliorate bone pain in 
these patients, their possible use as adjuvants in order to delay or 
prevent bone metastases in breast and other cancers is currently a 
very active area of clinical research. 
 ECTOPIC CUSHING SYNDROME 
 Many malignant tumors produce the ACTH precursor proopi-
omelanocortin (POMC) but lack the enzymes necessary to pro-
cess this precursor to biologically active ACTH. Therefore, only 
a  fraction of such tumors release sufficient ACTH to cause 
Cushing syndrome. Initially, the tumors recognized to cause this 
syndrome were of nonpituitary but endocrine origin, such as 
islet cell carcinomas and pheochromocytomas. Subsequently, a 
wide variety of different tumor cell types, both endocrine and 
nonendocrine, have been associated with the ectopic ACTH 
syndrome. 
 The classic description of the ectopic ACTH syndrome was 
made by Grant Liddle and coworkers in the early 1960s and was 
based on a series of patients who mostly had highly malignant 
tumors (eg, small cell carcinoma of the lung). More recently, the 
ectopic ACTH syndrome has been recognized with increasing 
frequency with benign tumors, specifically carcinoids. Benign 
lesions typically present in a more subtle clinical manner, often 
over months to years, before the tumor is identified. The more 
gradual development of the clinical syndrome plus the more subtle 
biochemistry have led to considerable challenges in distinguishing 
this form of the ectopic ACTH syndrome from pituitary tumors 
causing Cushing disease. This subtle variant of tumor-induced 
ACTH excess has been dubbed the  occult ectopic ACTH syn-
drome. In addition, it is now recognized that tumors can cause an 
ectopic ACTH-like syndrome through production of corticotro-
pin-releasing hormone (CRH). Indeed, some of the tumors that 
make the latter cosecrete ACTH as well. Ectopic CRH production 
has been seen in bronchial carcinoids, medullary thyroid carci-
noma, and metastatic prostatic cancer. 
 Differential Diagnosis 
 Cushing syndrome—signs and symptoms resulting from unregu-
lated production of glucocorticoids—is caused by a number of 
underlying disturbances. These must be differentiated to ensure 
successful treatment. Causes include pituitary ACTH-dependent 
Cushing disease, adrenal tumors or ACTH-independent Cushing 
syndrome, and the ectopic ACTH syndrome. In several large 
series, 50% to 80% of patients with Cushing syndrome have a 
pituitary cause. Adrenal adenomas (and very rarely carcinomas) 
account for 5% to 30% of cases of Cushing syndrome. The ecto-
pic ACTH syndrome comprises approximately 10% to 20% of 
cases of Cushing syndrome. 
 A wide variety of tumors cause ectopic ACTH syndrome 
( Table 21–3 ). In the classic and initial descriptions of this syn-
drome, there was a preponderance of malignant tumors, particu-
larly small cell carcinomas of the lung. It is now clear that most 
cases of ectopic ACTH syndrome are due to benign tumors. Most 
recently, microscopic carcinoid  tumorlets , particularly in the lung, 
have been recognized to cause occult ectopic ACTH syndrome. 
These tumors may be exceptionally difficult to diagnose by stan-
dard techniques. 
 The diagnosis of Cushing syndrome requires a rigorous 
approach. Cushing syndrome should be suspected first on solid 
clinical grounds and then established biochemically. This is 
accomplished by demonstrating the presence of hypercorti-
solism—a frankly elevated 24-hour urinary free cortisol level or 
the lack of suppression of plasma cortisol levels after a 1-mg over-
night dexamethasone suppression test (see Chapter 9). In Cushing 
syndrome due to any cause and often in ectopic ACTH syndrome, 
random cortisol levels are elevated. Once hypercortisolism is 
established, plasma ACTH levels are measured. These levels are 
716    CHAPTER 21 Humoral Manifestations of Malignancy
markedly elevated in classic forms of the ectopic ACTH syn-
drome, typically secondary to malignant lung neoplasms. There is, 
however, considerable overlap between the milder cases of the 
ectopic ACTH syndrome, caused by benign and slowly growing 
tumors, and Cushing disease due to a pituitary tumor. In the for-
mer case, the tumors are often small and clinically silent—hence 
the descriptor  occult ectopic ACTH syndrome. For these reasons, 
rigorous biochemical criteria must be applied in appropriate clini-
cal situations to make certain that the correct diagnosis is made. 
Plasma ACTH levels in patients with clinically evident tumors are 
often strikingly elevated (390-2300 pg/mL [87-511 pmol/L] by 
radioimmunoassay). Individuals with ectopic ACTH syndrome 
due to occult tumors have ACTH levels that overlap with pitu-
itary-dependent Cushing disease (42-428 pg/mL [9.3-95 pmol/L]). 
It is said that patients with plasma ACTH levels greater than 
200 pg/mL (44.4 pmol/L) typically have the ectopic ACTH 
 syndrome, although further testing is required to prove this and to 
localize the tumor. 
 After hypercortisolism and ACTH excess are established, the 
degree of suppressibility of ACTH with exogenous glucocorticoid 
is determined. In classic Cushing disease due to a pituitary tumor, 
supraphysiologic doses of dexamethasone usually suppress the 
elevated plasma ACTH and cortisol levels. Tumors responsible for 
the ectopic ACTH syndrome are classically unresponsive to these 
same doses of dexamethasone. High-dose dexamethasone suppres-
sion testing, as this diagnostic maneuver is called, is accomplished 
by (1) administering 2 mg of dexamethasone every 6 hours for 
2 days and measuring urinary free cortisol or plasma cortisol on 
the second day, or (2) administering 8 mg of dexamethasone the 
night before obtaining an 8 AM plasma cortisol level. In both 
tests, the expected suppression of baseline urinary free cortisol and 
plasma cortisol should be 50% or greater if the Cushing syndrome 
is due to a pituitary adenoma (ie, Cushing disease). However, 
between 15% and 33% of patients with ectopic ACTH syndrome 
also meet these suppression criteria (false positives), mimicking 
Cushing disease. In addition, 10% to 25% of patients with 
Cushing disease fail to suppress with high-dose dexamethasone 
(false negatives). The overnight test probably has greater sensitivity 
and accuracy than the classic 2-day test, but neither test is consid-
ered useful any longer (see Chapter 9). 
 Additional provocative tests have been developed to improve 
the diagnostic discrimination between Cushing disease and ecto-
pic ACTH syndrome using ovine CRH. Pituitary corticotrophs 
are normally responsive to CRH in Cushing disease and unre-
sponsive when ectopic ACTH production or an adrenal lesion is 
responsible for the cortisol excess. A positive response to CRH is 
defined as a 50% or greater increase in plasma ACTH and a 20% 
or greater increase in the plasma cortisol concentrations in the 
periphery. An increase in ACTH of 100% and in cortisol of more 
than 50% greatly reduces the likelihood of ectopic ACTH syn-
drome; however, false-positive and false-negative tests (up to 10%) 
have been reported. Moreover, in the rare instance of ectopic pro-
duction of CRH (without concomitant ACTH) by a tumor, a 
false-positive result may be seen, leading to the erroneous diagno-
sis of pituitary-dependent Cushing disease. 
 For these reasons, most centers prefer inferior petrosal sinus 
sampling for ACTH before and after CRH administration, and 
this test is now the gold standard. The inferior petrosal sinuses 
drain the pituitary gland. Concomitant peripheral and petrosal 
sinus samples are obtained and the central: peripheral ACTH ratio 
is calculated. In Cushing disease, the ratio should be greater than 
or equal to 2.0 in the basal state. After CRH administration, this 
ratio should be greater than or equal to 3.0 in pituitary-dependent 
Cushing disease. In the ectopic ACTH syndrome, the basal ratio 
is typically less than 2 and does not rise after the CRH. In rare 
instances of ectopic CRH syndrome, the basal ratio may be 2.0. 
The stimulation by CRH gives close to 100% discrimination 
between ectopic ACTH production and a pituitary tumor secret-
ing ACTH. Generally, a combination of tests is performed to 
reach a biochemical diagnosis before extensive radiologic studies 
are undertaken. 
 The majority of patients (70% or more) with ectopic ACTH 
syndrome also cosecrete other hormones or tumor marker pep-
tides, among them are carcinoembryonic antigen, somatostatin, 
TABLE 21–3  Tumors responsible for the ectopic 
ACTH syndrome in two large 
contemporary series.
Tumor Type
Number of Patients 
(% of total) 
NIH Series (USA) 
(1983-2004)a
Number of Patients 
(% of total) 
St. Bartholomew’s 
Hospital (UK) 
Cushing Disease 
Database 
(1969-2001)b
Carcinoid
 Thymic
5/90 (5.5%)
2/40 (5%)
 Pulmonary
35/90 (39%)
12/40 (30%)
 Appendiceal
1/90 (1%)
–
 Pancreatic
1/90 (1%)
3/40 (7.5%)
 Pulmonary 
  tumorlets
1/90 (1%)
–
Neuroendocrine 
 tumors
13/90 (14%)
2/40 (5%)
Gastrinoma
6/90 (6.7%)
–
Small cell lung 
 cancer
3/90 (3.3%)
7/40 (17.5%)
Pheochromocytoma
5/90 (5.5%)
1/40 (2.5%)
Medullary thyroid 
 cancer
2/90 (2.2%)
3/40 (7.5%)
Small cell colon
–
2/40 (5%)
Miscellaneous
1/90 (1%)
5/40 (12.5%)
Unknown
17/90 (18.9%)
5/40 (12.5%)
aIlias I, Torpy, DJ, Pacak, K, et al. Extensive clinical experience: Cushing’s syndrome due 
to ectopic corticotropin secretion: twenty years’ experience at the National Institute 
of Health. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005;90:4955.
bIsidori AM, Kaltsas GA, Pozza C. Extensive clinical experience: the ectopic adrenocor-
ticotropin syndrome: clinical features, diagnosis, management, and long-term fol-
low-up. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006;91:371.
CHAPTER 21 Humoral Manifestations of Malignancy     717
calcitonin, gastrin, glucagon, vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), 
bombesin, pancreatic polypeptide, alpha-fetoprotein, and many 
others. The presence and secretion of these other hormones (in 
addition to ACTH) suggests that the source of ACTH is nonpitu-
itary in these patients. Given the variety of peptides and the 
expense inherent in any screening paradigm, measuring these 
hormones in patients suspected of ectopic ACTH syndrome is not 
recommended. 
 The path to localize the tumor responsible for ectopic ACTH 
production generally starts with a chest radiograph. Most tumors 
are in the chest or abdomen. Small cell carcinomas of the lung are 
usually visible on chest radiograph, whereas bronchial carcinoids 
are often difficult to detect on plain radiographs. In some situa-
tions, these tumors may require a long period (as many as 4 or 
5 years) of close follow-up before the tumors are detected. Chest 
computed tomography (CT) scanning should be employed in all 
subjects with ectopic ACTH to rule out a chest or mediastinal 
lesion (such as a thymic carcinoid). Abdominal CT scanning is 
also performed in these patients to confirm the presence of bilat-
eral adrenal enlargement, a sine qua non of the ectopic ACTH 
syndrome, and to screen for other possible abdominal tumors 
responsible for the syndrome (eg, pheochromocytoma, islet cell 
tumor). In the radiologic evaluation of Cushing syndrome, it is 
always important to bear in mind that the presence of a pituitary 
microadenoma on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) does very 
little to support the diagnosis of pituitary-dependent Cushing 
disease—as opposed to an ectopic tumor producing ACTH—
because of the great numbers (10%-20%) of normal individuals 
with incidental pituitary microadenomas (see Chapter 4). 
 Octreotide scanning, another important diagnostic technique, 
can successfully localize tumors responsible for ectopic ACTH 
production because up to 80% of such tumors express somatosta-
tin receptors. Iodinated or, more recently, indium-111( 111 In)- 
labeled octreotide scanning has demonstrated medullary 
carcinomas of the thyroid, small cell lung cancers, islet cell tumors, 
pheochromocytomas, and other tumors. 
 The ideal imaging algorithm for occult tumors causing ectopic 
ACTH syndrome is controversial. Functional imaging with higher 
than standard doses of the somatostatin analog [ 111 In]-diethylene 
triamine pentaacetate-D-Phe-pentetreotide (OctreoScan) or with 
[ 18 F] fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-
PET) was prospectively evaluated in 17 patients with the ectopic 
ACTH syndrome (based on inferior petrosal sinus sampling) in 
whom standard imaging studies were inconclusive. Nieman and 
colleagues found that FDG-PET did not uncover tumors that 
were not seen on CT or MRI scans. These investigators, however, 
found OctreoScans to be useful (enhanced sensitivity) in combi-
nation with CT/MRI imaging and advocated this diagnostic 
approach. 
 Clinical Features 
 Cushing syndrome causes truncal obesity, violaceous striae, 
hypertension, fatigue, glucose intolerance, osteopenia, muscle 
weakness, moon facies, easy bruisability, buffalo hump, depres-
sion, hirsutism, and edema. Patients with ectopic ACTH 
 syndrome may show some, all, or none of these features depend-
ing on the underlying tumor. It has been appreciated from the 
initial descriptions of this syndrome that these patients typically 
present with myopathy, weight loss, and electrolyte and meta-
bolic disturbances more commonly than with the classic features 
of slowly developing Cushing disease. Hyperpigmentation is also 
recognized as more common in the ectopic ACTH syndrome 
than in Cushing disease. Cortisol excess in older men, especially 
those at risk for lung tumors, is most commonly due to ectopic 
ACTH production, whereas ACTH-producing pituitary tumors 
predominate in young and middle-aged women. Glucose intol-
erance or frank diabetes and hypokalemic alkalosis are typical 
metabolic disturbances of the ectopic ACTH syndrome. Because 
of the extreme elevation in plasma cortisol levels in many of 
these patients, they are at considerable risk for and often suc-
cumb to overwhelming opportunistic infections, often with 
fungal pathogens. 
 A critical caveat to remember in the clinical evaluation of 
patients with ACTH-dependent Cushing disease is that slowly 
growing and occult tumors producing ACTH may present in 
exactly the same way as classic Cushing disease due to a pituitary 
tumor. Therefore, both the clinical findings and the laboratory 
studies summarized earlier show considerable overlap and may 
engender confusion in distinguishing these occult tumors from 
a pituitary lesion. 
 Increasing numbers of patients who have classic features of 
Cushing syndrome have been shown to have abnormal expression 
of receptors in their adrenal glands as the cause of their 
 hypercortisolism. The pathophysiology of this form of Cushing 
syndrome is ACTH-independent, because other hormones are 
driving the glucocorticoid hypersecretion. This has been likened 
by Lacroix and colleagues to a  gain of function mutation causing 
constitutive activation of a G protein–coupled receptor. Ectopic 
expression of receptors for gastric inhibitory peptide, vasopressin 
(V 2 and V 3 ), serotonin (5-HT 7 ), and β-adrenergic agonists have 
been reported. Altered activity or greater expression of eutopic 
receptors for serotonin (5-HT 4 ), LH, and vasopressin (V 1 ) in adre-
nal tissue can also cause cortisol excess. In the case of gastric 
inhibitory peptide, food-stimulated cortisol hypersecretion has 
been described. In a case report of excessive LH receptor expres-
sion in the adrenals associated with macronodular adrenal hyper-
plasia, the patient had mild Cushingoid features with pregnancy 
and the gradual development of full-blown Cushing syndrome 
with menopause. It is noteworthy that many patients with ectopic 
or eutopic receptor-mediated Cushing syndrome have macronod-
ular adrenal  hyperplasia. 
 SYNDROME OF INAPPROPRIATE 
ANTIDIURETIC HORMONE SECRETION 
 The syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH) 
secretion is characterized by inappropriate retention of water such 
that hypertonic or inappropriately concentrated urine is excreted 
in the presence of hyponatremia. There are many well-recognized 
causes of this syndrome ( Table 21–4 ). 
718    CHAPTER 21 Humoral Manifestations of Malignancy
 Etiology and Pathogenesis 
 Tumors are a common cause of SIADH (see  Table 21–4 ). 
Bronchogenic carcinoma, particularly small cell carcinoma, has 
been associated with this syndrome since its initial description in 
1957. Small cell carcinoma accounts for 80% of lung tumors associ-
ated with SIADH, but only 3% to 15% of patients with this tumor 
have SIADH. Most of these tumors, even from patients without the 
clinical syndrome, contain ADH by immunostaining. Other 
tumors that cause the syndrome include breast, pancreatic, and 
thymic carcinomas in addition to those listed in  Table 21–4 . These 
tumors typically produce vasopressin, oxytocin, and the carrier 
 protein neurophysin. 
 Excessive production of vasopressin by tumors leads to an 
inability to excrete free water. This is due to the fact that tumors 
release vasopressin independent of serum osmolality. In addition 
to the production of vasopressin, many tumors also contain the 
mRNA for the hormone atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP). 
 Clinical and Laboratory Features 
 SIADH is the most common cause of hyponatremia in hospital-
ized patients. It may present with symptoms due to water intoxica-
tion and hyponatremia. Although many patients are asymptomatic, 
depending on the magnitude and chronicity of their hypona-
tremia, symptomatic individuals usually have fatigue, headache, 
nausea, and anorexia initially, which can progress to altered mental 
status, seizures, coma, and even death. Most patients experience 
weight gain due to water retention but do not have edema. 
Significant clinical symptoms usually do not develop unless the 
serum sodium is 125 mEq/L or less, and there is usually a correla-
tion between the level of symptomatology in these patients and 
their serum sodium values. 
 Patients with SIADH exhibit hyponatremia, serum hypoosmo-
lality, a less than maximally dilute urine, and the presence of 
sodium in the urine. Clinically, the diagnosis of SIADH cannot be 
made unless there is euvolemia with intact renal, adrenal, and 
thyroid function. Cirrhosis, nephrosis, and congestive heart failure 
must be excluded. Generally, the diagnosis is made by the presence 
of hyponatremia, low serum osmolality, and urine osmolality that 
is less than maximally dilute. Urinary sodium levels are usually 
high, and urea nitrogen levels are typically low, as are serum uric 
acid levels. Rarely is it necessary or even helpful to measure vaso-
pressin levels to make this diagnosis. Although these determina-
tions are available, they are even sometimes misleading, and 
routine testing is not recommended. It is also rarely, if ever, neces-
sary to perform a water-loading test, which can be dangerous in 
these patients because of their impaired ability to excrete a free 
water load and their propensity to become water intoxicated. 
Once the diagnosis of SIADH is made, all possible causes should 
be considered (see  Table 21–4 ). 
 Water restriction and demeclocycline are the traditional thera-
pies. Several studies support the efficacy of vasopressin antagonists 
in the treatment of SIADH, and this approach may be considered. 
In acutely symptomatic patients or when the serum sodium is 
reduced to dangerously low levels, infusion of hypertonic saline and 
administration of loop diuretics (eg, furosemide) are the treatments 
of choice. Many patients with SIADH due to neoplasms improve 
and even remit with effective therapy for their underlying cancer. 
 NON-ISLET CELL TUMOR-INDUCED 
HYPOGLYCEMIA 
 Tumor-induced hypoglycemia is rare, with the most common 
cause being eutopic insulin production by pancreatic islet cell 
tumors (insulinomas). Ectopic hormone production leading to 
tumor-induced hypoglycemia is estimated to occur in only 20% 
of cases, and is primarily due to overproduction of insulin-like 
growth factor-2 (IGF-2). Ectopic insulin secretion by tumors has 
only rarely been reported. Solid tumors of mesenchymal (meso-
thelioma, leiomyosarcoma, and fibrosarcoma) or epithelial origin 
(hepatoma) in the chest or abdomen are the most common source 
of ectopic IGF-2 (85%). These tumors are usually slow-growing 
and well-differentiated, often weighing over 2 kg at diagnosis. 
TABLE 21–4 Causes of SIADH.
Tumors
 Small cell carcinoma of lung
 Squamous cell carcinoma of lung
 Cancers of the head and neck
 Carcinoma of the duodenum, pancreas, ureter, prostate, uterus, and 
  nasopharynx
 Mesothelioma
 Thymoma
 Hodgkin lymphoma
 Leukemia
Central nervous system disorders
 Brain tumors (primary and metastatic)
 Brain abscess
 Subdural hematoma, subarachnoid hemorrhage
 Meningitis, encephalitis
 Systemic lupus erythematosus
 Demyelinating disorders
 Head trauma
 Acute intermittent porphyria
 Guillian-Barré syndrome
 Spinal cord lesions
 Pituitary stalk lesion
 Transsphenoidal adenectomy
 Hydrocephalus
Drugs
 Nicotine, phenothiazines, tricyclic antidepressants, nonsteroidal 
  anti-inflammatory agents, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, 
  chlorpropamide, colchicine, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
  (sertraline, fluoxetine), azithromycin, thiazide diuretics
Pulmonary disorders 
 Tuberculosis
 Fungal, bacterial, viral, mycoplasmal pneumonia
 Empyema, lung abscess
 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
 Nephrogenic syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis
Modified, with permission, from Verbalis JG. Disorders of body water homeostasis. 
Best Pract Res Clin Endo Metab. 2003;17:471.
CHAPTER 21 Humoral Manifestations of Malignancy     719
Subtle signs of fasting hypoglycemia may be the presenting symp-
tom in these cases, or hypoglycemia may be detected during the 
course of tumor treatment. As discussed fully in Chapter 18, signs 
and symptoms of fasting hypoglycemia include sweating, intense 
hunger, anxiety, altered consciousness, and visual and behavioral 
changes. 
 The first case suggestive of non-islet cell tumor IGF-induced 
hypoglycemia was described in 1929. However, the pathogenesis of 
this condition has been elucidated only in the last few decades in 
parallel with our increased understanding of IGF biology.  IGF-2 
gene expression is increased in these tumors; however, posttransla-
tional processing is disrupted such that the majority of circulating 
IGF-2 is a precursor pro-IGF-2 protein (big IGF-2). Big IGF-2 is 
less likely to form normal ternary complexes with IGF-binding 
proteins (IGF-BP), and therefore is more bioavailable. In addition, 
it is postulated that big IGF-2 may displace normal IGF-1 and 
IGF-2 from IGF-BP, as free levels of these hormones are also 
increased in some patients. In addition, big IGF-2 is thought to 
feedback inhibit growth hormone (GH) secretion, thus resulting in 
even lower levels of IGF-BP. This vicious cycle thus enhances the 
bioavailability of free IGF peptides whose affinity for the insulin 
receptor is only 10-fold lower than that of insulin itself. The typical 
hormonal profile of patients with this syndrome thus includes sup-
pressed levels of insulin, C-peptide, and total IGF-1; and normal 
or only slightly elevated levels of total IGF-2, while levels of free 
IGF-2 are markedly (20-fold) increased. 
 Stimulated glucose disposal in skeletal muscle by IGF binding 
to the insulin receptor is thought to be a major contributor to 
hypoglycemia in this syndrome. Diminished hepatic glucose pro-
duction may also contribute to hypoglycemia, either due to hepatic 
insulin receptor–mediated IGF effects and/or direct infiltration of 
the liver by tumor. While GH levels are suppressed, some acro-
megalic features, thought to be secondary to IGF-2 binding to the 
type 1 IGF receptor, can also be present (skin tags, rhinophyma). 
 Treatment of this paraneoplastic syndrome usually involves 
curative resection or debulking of the tumor. Preoperatively, 
patients often require continuous glucose infusions to control 
their symptoms, and glucagon can be used acutely to raise blood- 
glucose levels. If the lesion is benign, surgery usually brings relief 
of the hypoglycemia or even definitive cure. In the absence of a 
surgical cure, additional palliative measures to control hypoglyce-
mic symptoms have been used with some success, including 
(1) glucocorticoid treatment to suppress tumor production of 
IGF-2 and induce hepatic gluconeogenesis, and/or (2) GH 
treatment to increase serum levels of IGF-BP, as well as to induce 
hepatic gluconeogenesis. 
 OTHER HORMONES SECRETED BY 
TUMORS 
 1. GROWTH HORMONE–RELEASING 
HORMONE AND GROWTH HORMONE 
 Acromegaly, in over 95% of cases, is due to eutopic production of 
GH by pituitary adenomas. Ectopic GH overproduction is 
extremely rare, but has been reported for pancreatic islet cell 
tumors, a bronchial carcinoid tumor, and also by a non-Hodgkin 
lymphoma. In contrast, ectopic production of GHRH is more 
common and accounts for 1% of cases of acromegaly. Ectopic 
secretion of growth hormone–releasing hormone (GHRH) was 
first described in 1974. Indeed, this hypothalamic hormone was 
first isolated a decade later from patients with pancreatic GHRH-
producing tumors. Extrapituitary tumors produce several biologi-
cally active forms of GHRH (37-, 40-, and 44-amino acids) as 
compared to hypothalamic GHRH (1-40) or (1-44) peptides. 
Excessive peripheral production of GHRH causes hyperplasia of 
somatotrophs in the pituitary. Resultant elevated levels of circulat-
ing GH and IGF-1, lack of suppression of GH by an oral glucose 
load, and clinical features of acromegaly in this setting are indis-
tinguishable from those caused by GH-secreting pituitary ade-
nomas (see Chapter 4). Ectopic GHRH as a cause of acromegaly 
can be simply and specifically diagnosed by documentation of 
elevated circulating GHRH levels. However, because ectopic 
GHRH is rarely a cause of acromegaly, this assay is best reserved 
for atypical presentations associated with additional signs 
and symptoms specific to those tumors that are the most freq-
uent source of ectopic GHRH (carcinoid and pancreatic tumors). 
It should also be noted that in rare instances, hypothalamic 
GHRH-secreting 
tumors 
(hamartomas, 
gliomas, 
and 
 gangliocytomas) can also produce excessive GHRH and acro-
megaly. Because the site of GHRH production is within the 
hypothalamus, these cases do not represent ectopic GHRH 
 secretion. Moreover, from a diagnostic standpoint, circulating 
GHRH levels in these cases are not  elevated. 
 Carcinoid tumors of the lung, gastrointestinal tract, and thy-
mus are the most frequent peripheral source of GHRH (66%). 
Interestingly, while 50% of carcinoid tumors are immunoreactive 
for GHRH, a minority of these tumors are associated with ele-
vated circulating levels of bioactive GHRH. Slow-growing 
GHRH-producing carcinoid tumors, the majority of which are 
bronchial in origin, are responsible for an insidious presentation 
of acromegaly that is often associated with additional symptoms 
specific to the tumor (eg, wheezing). These tumors can be easily 
detected by routine imaging. Pancreatic islet cell tumors are the 
second leading cause of ectopic GHRH secretion. Other tumors 
associated with this syndrome include small cell lung cancer, adre-
nal adenoma, pheochromocytoma, medullary thyroid carcinoma, 
endometrial cancer, and breast cancer. Because somatostatin 
receptors are often present in GHRH-secreting tumors, octreotide 
scanning may be helpful in localization of extra-pituitary tumors. 
In addition to surgical resection, the management of ectopic 
GHRH-induced acromegaly can also include treatment with 
somatostatin analogs, particularly those that bind to multiple 
somatostatin receptor subtypes. 
 2. CALCITONIN 
 Calcitonin and its precursor, procalcitonin, are frequently pro-
duced by malignancies (10%-30%). Consistent with our lack of 
knowledge regarding the precise physiologic role of calcitonin, 
there is often no clinical syndrome associated with its ectopic 
720    CHAPTER 21 Humoral Manifestations of Malignancy
production. However, after an initial diagnosis, calcitonin levels 
have been used as a tumor marker to follow responses to treat-
ment. Neuroendocrine tumors are the primary cause of both 
eutopic (medullary thyroid carcinomas, as discussed in Chapters 7 
and 24) or ectopic secretion of calcitonin. While small cell cancer 
is the lung malignancy most frequently (60%) associated with 
calcitonin hypersecretion, at least 20% of all lung malignancies 
may have associated elevated calcitonin levels. This is believed to 
be due either to tumors arising from the pulmonary neuroendo-
crine cells (small cell and carcinoid) or to calcitonin expression by 
neuroendocrine cells within or adjacent to tumor cells, as in large 
cell lung cancer. Calcitonin is also secreted by neuroendocrine 
tumors of the pancreas. In patients with these tumors, other hor-
mones such as somatostatin and VIP are often produced as well. 
Approximately half of the patients with these tumors, in a small 
series by Fleury and colleagues, had diarrhea, presumably due to 
the effects of calcitonin alone or in combination with other gut 
peptides. A significant number of these tumors are malignant with 
liver metastases. In some cases, symptoms of diarrhea may respond 
to primary therapy of the tumor. 
 3. GONADOTROPINS 
 The gonadotropins (luteinizing hormone [LH], follicle-stimulating 
hormone [FSH], and human chorionic gonadotropin [hCG)]) are 
composed of two (alpha and beta) subunits. The alpha subunits of 
these glycoproteins share a common amino acid sequence and dif-
fer only in their carbohydrate moieties, while their beta subunits 
are completely distinct. The first two hormones are pituitary prod-
ucts, and the latter is primarily a product of the trophoblastic cells 
of the placenta during pregnancy. However, hCG is also expressed 
in other normal tissues, including the pituitary, which appears to 
be the primary source of detectable circulating hCG in nonpreg-
nant individuals. While LH and FSH are rarely produced ectopi-
cally, elevated circulating hCG levels can be produced by multiple 
tumor types including those of genitourinary system (ovary, pros-
tate, testes, bladder), lung cancers (particularly small cell cancers), 
gastrointestinal cancers (colon, pancreas, esophagus), breast can-
cer, melanomas, teratomas, and hepatoblastomas. Ectopic hCG 
production must be distinguished from eutopic secretion by tro-
phoblastic tumors (hydatidiform mole, choriocarcinoma). 
However, in both cases, hCG can serve as an important tumor 
marker for initial diagnosis and monitoring for tumor size and/or 
evidence of recurrence. 
 Trophoblastic tumors often secrete excessive amounts of intact 
hCG heterodimers. In contrast, nontrophoblastic tumors primar-
ily secrete lesser amounts of the free beta subunit of hCG. Serum 
hCG levels, which are detectable in 40% of ovarian or bladder 
cancers, often correlate with a less differentiated tumor cell pheno-
type and a poorer prognosis. Depending on the age and gender of 
the patient, the clinical signs and symptoms of hCG excess may 
vary. Importantly, not all patients manifest signs of their hCG 
excess. In susceptible individuals, however, elevated hCG may 
result in clear clinical findings. Children, for example, with malig-
nant hepatoblastoma or pineal teratoma can present with preco-
cious puberty. Women may have dysfunctional uterine bleeding. 
Men with high hCG levels may have signs of hypogonadism with 
impotence and gynecomastia. Because of the thyroid-stimulating 
effects of high hCG levels, these patients occasionally demonstrate 
hyperthyroidism. 
 ONCOGENIC OSTEOMALACIA 
 Etiology and Clinical Features 
 Oncogenic osteomalacia is a syndrome seen in association with 
unusual mesenchymal tumors and rarely with prostate cancer. 
These patients have hypophosphatemia, renal phosphate wasting, 
and typically low or inappropriately normal serum levels of 1,25-
(OH) 2 D. Alkaline phosphatase activity, reflecting bone turnover, 
is often elevated. Levels of calcium are typically normal, although 
in some cases PTH levels are elevated. Hypophosphatemia in this 
syndrome is due to reduced renal phosphate reabsorption. Clinical 
symptoms include bone pain, proximal muscle weakness, frac-
tures, back pain, waddling gait, and progressive debility. The 
syndrome often poses a significant diagnostic dilemma to clini-
cians, because the tumors responsible for it may be very small, 
obscurely situated, and difficult to identify. Phosphate depletion 
and low 1,25-(OH) 2 D levels lead to poor bone mineralization 
and osteomalacia. Typically, the diagnosis of osteomalacia is not 
suspected for years despite the presence of classic symptoms. The 
humoral basis for the syndrome is supported by the observation 
that the biochemical abnormalities remit and the osteomalacia 
heals when the tumor responsible for it is removed. 
 Pathology and Pathogenesis 
 Tumors responsible for this form of acquired osteomalacia are usu-
ally small and grow slowly. Because the histology of these tumors 
is unusual and their locations often unanticipated, this syndrome 
has been dubbed “strange tumours in strange places” by Weiss and 
colleagues. The range of locations for these tumors includes the 
lower extremities (45%), head and neck (27%), and upper 
extremities (17%). In a review of head and neck tumors that cause 
oncogenic osteomalacia, Gonzalez-Compta and coworkers noted 
that in 57% and 20% of cases, respectively, tumors were in the 
sinonasal and mandibular areas. Because these tumors are often 
small and difficult to find, careful physical examination combined 
with cranial, chest, and abdominal CT scanning are usually 
needed for diagnosis. In several instances, MRI skeletal surveys—
and in some instances In-111 pentetreotide scanning and PET/
CT scans—have been instrumental in localizing the tumors at 
skeletal sites. 
 Most tumors causing this syndrome are benign, but malignant 
lesions have also been reported. The histologic spectrum of tumors 
has included hemangiomas, hemangiopericytomas, angiosarco-
mas, chondrosarcomas, prostate cancer, schwannomas, neuroen-
docrine lesions, mesenchymal tumors, and uncommonly multiple 
myeloma. Many of these tumors have been classified pathologi-
cally as mixed connective tissue tumors and are often located in 
bone. Osteoclast-like giant cells and stromal cells as well as highly 
vascular features characterize these tumors. Delays in diagnosis of 
CHAPTER 21 Humoral Manifestations of Malignancy     721
as long as 19 years have been reported, thereby supporting the 
hypothesis of slow growth of these tumors. 
 Many of the tumors responsible for this syndrome overproduce 
fibroblast growth factor (FGF) 23, a protein important in normal 
phosphate homeostasis (see Chapter 8). FGF 23 overexpression 
appears to be responsible for key aspects of oncogenic osteomala-
cia. FGF 23 levels fall in response to tumor resection, and the 
above-described biochemical changes and osteomalacia typically 
resolve after surgery. FGF 23 messenger RNA and protein have 
been shown to be expressed in many of these tumors. Other genes, 
however, have also been implicated in the pathogenesis of oncogenic 
osteomalacia. They include FGF 7, the matrix extracellular phos-
phoglycoprotein (MEPE), and frizzled related protein 4 (FRP 4). 
 Investigators in the field have long noted common features 
between tumor-induced osteomalacia and X-linked hypophos-
phatemic rickets. The latter condition is a dominant disorder 
characterized by rickets or osteomalacia, hypophosphatemia, low 
normal 1,25-(OH) 2 D, and typically elevated FGF 23 levels. 
Despite these similarities, there are several unresolved differences 
between the two syndromes. One is that levels of 1,25-(OH) 2 D 
are inappropriately normal in patients with X-linked hypophos-
phatemic rickets and frankly low in oncogenic osteomalacia. In 
addition, patients with X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets dem-
onstrate osteosclerosis and enthesopathy (calcification of tendons 
and ligaments) which are not seen in oncogenic osteomalacia. 
 X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets is due to defective func-
tioning or synthesis of the  PEX gene product, or PHEX, a protein 
that is homologous to neutral, membrane-bound endopeptidases. 
PHEX is thought to activate or inactivate a circulating factor 
involved in phosphate metabolism, termed  phosphatonin . It has 
long been proposed that the normal function of phosphatonin was 
to block renal phosphate reabsorption. FGF 23 has been shown to 
inhibit phosphate uptake in kidney cells. PHEX, the endopepti-
dase product of the  PEX gene, can degrade FGF 23, but FGF 23 
is not thought to be a substrate in vivo for PHEX. It has also been 
shown that PHEX may stabilize MEPE. Thus, there remain sev-
eral crucial details to establish regarding the pathogenesis of onco-
genic osteomalacia and X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets and 
the varied features of the two disorders. 
 GUT HORMONES 
 Gut hormones, including VIP, somatostatin, gastrin-releasing 
hormone, and pancreatic polypeptide can be produced ectopi-
cally, particularly by neuroendocrine tumors (carcinoid, pancre-
atic islet, and small cell lung cancer). Of these, only ectopic VIP 
is manifest clinically. Excess VIP can cause an impressive syn-
drome of voluminous secretory diarrhea, achlorhydria, and 
hypokalemia. This constellation of symptoms (Verner-Morrison 
syndrome) has been termed  pancreatic cholera when caused by 
a pancreatic VIP-secreting islet cell tumor. A variety of nonendo-
crine and neuroendocrine tumors can express and release VIP, 
including small cell carcinomas of the lung, carcinoids, pheo-
chromocytoma, medullary carcinomas of the thyroid, and some 
colonic adenocarcinomas. 
 REFERENCES 
 Hypercalcemia of Malignancy 
 Bedard PL, Body JJ, Piccart-Gebhart MJ. Sowing the soil for cure? Results of the 
ABCSG-12 trial open a new chapter in the evolving adjuvant bisphospho-
nate story in early breast cancer.  J Clin Oncol . 2009;27:4043. [PMID: 
19652062] 
 Edwards CM, Zhuang J, Mundy GR. The pathogenesis of the bone disease of 
multiple myeloma.  Bone . 2008;42:1007. [PMID: 18406675] 
 Liao J, McCauley LK. Skeletal metastasis: established and emerging roles of para-
thyroid hormone related protein (PTHrP).  Cancer Metastasis Rev . 
2006;25:559. [PMID: 17165129] 
 Syndrome of Inappropriate Antidiuretic Hormone Secretion 
 Decaux G. The syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone 
(SIADH).  Semin Nephrol . 2009;29:239. [PMID: 19523572] 
 Ellison DH, Berl T. Clinical practice. The syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis. 
 N Engl J Med . 2007;356:2064. [PMID: 17507705] 
 Feldman BJ, Rosenthal SM, Vargas GA, et al. Nephrogenic syndrome of inappro-
priate antidiuresis.  N Engl J Med . 2005;352:1884. [PMID:15872203] 
 Kumar S, Berl T. Vasopressin antagonists in the treatment of water-retaining dis-
orders.  Semin Nephrol . 2008;28:379. [PMID: 18519088] 
 Cushing Syndrome 
 Boscaro M, Arnaldi G. Approach to the patient with possible Cushing’s syndrome. 
 J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2009;94:3121. [PMID: 19734443] 
 Ilias I, Torpy DJ, Pacak K, Mullen N, Wesley RA, Nieman LK. Cushing’s syn-
drome due to ectopic corticotropin secretion: twenty years’ experience at the 
National Institutes of Health.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2005;90:4955. 
[PMID: 15914534] 
 Isidori AM, Kaltsas GA, Grossman AB. Ectopic ACTH syndrome.  Front Horm 
Res . 2006;35:143. [PMID: 16809930] 
 Kumar J, Spring M, Carroll PV, Barrington SF, Powrie JK. 18Flurodeoxyglucose 
positron emission tomography in the localization of ectopic ACTH-secreting 
neuroendocrine tumours.  Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) . 2006;64:371. [PMID: 
16584507] 
 Lacroix A, Baldacchino V, Bourdeau I, Hamet P, Tremblay J. Cushing’s syndrome 
variants secondary to aberrant hormone receptors.  Trends Endocrinol Metab . 
2004;15:375. [PMID: 15380809] 
 Salgado LR, Fragoso MC, Knoepfelmacher M, et al. Ectopic ACTH syndrome: 
our experience with 25 cases.  Eur J Endocrinol . 2006;155:725. [PMID: 
17062889] 
 Hypoglycemia 
 de Groot JW, Rikhof B, van Doorn J, et al. Non-islet cell tumour-induced hypo-
glycaemia: a review of the literature including two new cases.  Endo Rel Canc . 
2007;14:979.[ PMID: 18045950] 
 Fukuda I, Hizuka N, Ishikawa Y, et al. Clinical features of insulin-like growth 
factor-II producing non-islet-cell tumor hypoglycemia.  Growth Horm IGF 
Res . 2006;16:211. [PMID: 16860583] 
 Gonadotropins 
 Stenman UH, Alfthan H, Hotakainen K. Human chorionic gonadotropin in 
cancer.  Clin Biochem . 2004;37:549. [PMID: 15234236] 
 Cole LA. New discoveries on the biology and detection of human chorionic 
gonadotropin.  Reproductive Biol Endocrinol . 2009;7:8. [PMID: 19171054] 
 GHRH and Growth Hormone 
 Biermasz NR, Smit JW, Pereira AM, Frölich M, Romijn JA, Roelfsema F. 
Acromegaly caused by growth hormone-releasing hormone-producing 
tumors: long-term observational studies in three patients.  Pituitary . 
2007;10:237. [PMID: 17541749]. 
 Gola M, Doga M, Bonadonna S, Mazziotti G, Vescovi PP, Giustina A. 
Neuroendocrine tumors secreting growth hormone-releasing hormone: 
722    CHAPTER 21 Humoral Manifestations of Malignancy
pathophysiological and clinical aspects.  Pituitary . 2006;9:221. [PMID: 
17036195] 
 van Hoek M, Hofland LJ, de Rijke YB, et al. Effects of somatostatin analogs on a 
growth hormone-releasing hormone secreting bronchial carcinoid, in vivo 
and in vitro studies.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2009;94:428. [PMID: 
19017754] 
 Calcitonin 
 Becker KL, Nylén ES, White JC, Müller B, Snider RH Jr. Clinical review 167: 
procalcitonin and the calcitonin gene family of peptides in inflammation, 
infection, and sepsis: a journey from calcitonin back to its precursors.  J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab . 2004;89:1512. [PMID: 15070906] 
 Fleury A, Fléjou JF, Sauvanet A, et al. Calcitonin-secreting tumors of the pancreas: 
about six cases.  Pancreas . 1998;16:545. [PMID: 9598818] 
 Oncogenic Osteomalacia 
 Berndt T, Kumar R. Phosphatonins and the regulation of phosphate homeostasis. 
 Annu Rev Physiol . 2007;69:341. [PMID: 17002592] 
 Carpenter TO, Ellis BK, Insogna KL, Philbrick WM, Sterpka J, Shimkets R. 
Fibroblast growth factor 7: an inhibitor of phosphate transport derived from 
oncogenic osteomalacia-causing tumors.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2005;90:1012. [PMID: 15562028] 
 Hannan FM,  Athanasou NA, Teh J, Gibbons CL, Shine B, Thakker RV. 
Oncogenic hypophosphataemic osteomalacia: biomarker roles of fibroblast 
growth factor 23, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 and lymphatic vessel endothe-
lial hyaluronan receptor 1.  Eur J Endocrinol . 2008;158:265. [PMID: 
18230836] 
 Hesse E, Moessinger E, Rosenthal H, et al. Oncogenic osteomalacia: exact tumor 
localization by co-registration of positron emission and computed tomogra-
phy.  J Bone Miner Res . 2007;22:158. [PMID: 17014386] 
 Imel EA, Peacock M, Pitukcheewanont P, et al. Sensitivity of fibroblast growth 
factor 23 measurements in tumor-induced osteomalacia.  J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab . 2006;91:2055. [PMID: 16551733] 
 Jan de Beur SM, Streeten EA, Civelek AC, et al. Localisation of mesenchymal 
tumours by somatostatin receptor imaging.  Lancet . 2002;359:761. [PMID: 
11888589] 
 Kenealy H, Holdaway I, Grey A. Occult nasal sinus tumours causing 
 oncogenic osteomalacia.  Eur J Intern Med . 2008;19:516. [PMID: 
19013380] 
 Razzaque MS. FGF23-mediated regulation of systemic phosphate homeostasis: is 
Klotho an essential player?  Am J Physiol Renal Physiol . 2009;296:F470. 
[PMID: 19019915] 
 Weiss D,  Bar RS, Weidner N, Wener M, Lee F. Oncogenic osteomalacia: strange 
tumours in strange places.  Postgrad Med J . 1985;61:349. [PMID: 4022870] 
 Woznowski M,  Quack I, Stegbauer J, Büchner N, Rump LC, Schieren G. 
Oncogenic osteomalacia, a rare paraneoplastic syndrome due to phosphate 
wasting—a case report and review of the literature.  Clin Nephrol . 2008;70:431. 
[PMID: 19000546] 
 Gut Hormones 
 Song S, Shi R, Li B, Liu Y. Diagnosis and treatment of pancreatic vasoactive intes-
tinal peptide endocrine tumors.  Pancreas . 2009;38:811. [PMID: 
19650770] 
 
 
 
 
723
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
  Multiple Endocrine 
Neoplasia 
 David G. Gardner, MD 
 ACTH 
Adrenocorticotropic hormone 
 CT 
Computed tomography 
 GDNF 
Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor 
 GDNFR 
Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor 
 
receptor 
 GNAS 
Gene encoding the alpha subunit of a 
 
stimulatory G protein 
 MCT 
Medullary carcinoma of thyroid 
 MEN 
Multiple endocrine neoplasia 
 MRI 
Magnetic resonance imaging 
 PCR 
Polymerase chain reaction 
 PTH 
Parathyroid hormone 
 RET 
Rearranged during transfection 
 
proto-oncogene 
 VIP 
Vasoactive intestinal peptide 
 ZES 
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome 
22
 A group of heritable syndromes characterized by aberrant growth 
of benign or malignant tumors in a subset of endocrine tissues 
have been given the collective term multiple endocrine neoplasia 
(MEN). The tumors may be functional (ie, capable of elaborating 
hormonal products that result in specific clinical findings charac-
teristic of the hormone excess state) or nonfunctional. There are 
three major syndromes: MEN1 is characterized by tumors involv-
ing the parathyroid glands, the endocrine pancreas, and the pitu-
itary; MEN 2A includes medullary carcinoma of the thyroid 
(MCT), pheochromocytoma, and hyperparathyroidism; and 
MEN 2B, like MEN 2A, includes MCT and pheochromocytoma, 
but hyperparathyroidism is typically absent. 
 MULTIPLE ENDOCRINE NEOPLASIA 
TYPE 1 
 MEN1, also known as Wermer syndrome, is inherited as an auto-
somal dominant trait with an estimated prevalence of 2 to 20 per 
100,000 in the general population. Approximately 10% of MEN1 
mutations arise de novo. The term  sporadic MEN1 has been 
applied to this group. MEN1 has a number of unusual clinical 
manifestations ( Table 22–1 ) that occur with variable frequency 
among individuals within affected kindreds. The earliest age at 
which manifestations of MEN1 have been reported is 5 years; 
penetrance is maximal by the fifth decade of life. 
 Hyperparathyroidism is the most common feature of MEN1, 
with an estimated penetrance of 95% to 100% over the lifetime of 
an individual harboring the  MEN1 gene. The diagnosis of hyper-
parathyroidism is usually made through a combination of clinical 
and laboratory criteria similar to those used in the identification 
of sporadic disease (see Chapter 8). It is typically the first clinical 
manifestation of MEN1, although this varies as a function of the 
patient population being examined. Hyperparathyroidism in 
MEN1 is due to hyperplasia of all four parathyroid glands (or 
more, if supernumerary glands are present). However, involved 
glands may undergo metachronous enlargement, and selective 
resection of these glands often results in sustained clinical remis-
sions. MEN1 is a rare cause of hyperparathyroidism, accounting 
for only 2% to 4% of cases in the general population. 
 Enteropancreatic tumors in MEN1 (∼50% of all MEN1 
patients) can be either functional (ie, capable of producing a 
secreted product with biologic activity) or nonfunctional. 
Gastrinomas, frequently associated with Zollinger-Ellison syn-
drome (ZES), represent approximately 40% to 60% of the 
enteropancreatic tumors associated with this syndrome. Of equal 
importance, roughly 25% of patients with ZES are found in 
MEN1 kindreds. Insulinomas constitute approximately 20% of 
the islet cell tumors, and the remainder represent a collection of 
functional (eg, glucagon- or vasoactive intestinal peptide [VIP]-
producing tumors) and nonfunctional tumors. It is noteworthy 
that the  gastrinomas of MEN1 are often small, multicentric, and 
724    CHAPTER 22 Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia
ectopically located outside the pancreatic bed, most often in the 
duodenal submucosa. This latter feature can have a major impact 
on the therapeutic approach to these patients (discussed later). 
Gastrinomas in MEN1 are frequently malignant, as are their 
sporadic counterparts; however, for reasons that are only poorly 
understood, the biologic behavior of these tumors is less aggres-
sive than those found in sporadic diseases. 
 The diagnosis of gastrinomas is based on demonstration of 
hypergastrinemia in the presence of gastric acid hypersecretion. This 
latter criterion excludes other more common causes of hypergas-
trinemia (eg, achlorhydria). When the diagnosis is in question, the 
secretin stimulation test, which stimulates gastrin secretion from 
gastrinomas but not from normal tissue, may be employed.  Note: 
The availability of secretin for parenteral administration is now quite 
limited. Histamine receptor blockers and proton pump inhibitors 
reflexively increase serum gastrin levels and should be discontinued 
30 hours and 7 days, respectively, prior to testing to exclude gastri-
noma. Others have advocated measurements of multiple gastroin-
testinal hormones following a standardized mixed meal as the most 
efficient means of detecting the presence of neuroendocrine tumors in 
MEN1. 
 Because of their small size, gastrinomas can be difficult to 
localize in MEN1. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) may be useful in identifying larger 
lesions but are typically not helpful in identifying smaller ones. 
These imaging procedures are useful, however, in demonstrating 
hepatic metastases when present. The most promising localization 
techniques studied to date include endoscopic and intraoperative 
ultrasound, selective arterial secretin injection (followed by hepatic 
vein sampling for gastrin), and radiolabeled octreotide scanning. 
Each of these has been employed successfully to identify tumors in 
studies involving small groups of patients. It is important to rec-
ognize, however, that almost half of gastrinomas are not found 
with preoperative localization studies. 
 Insulinomas in MEN1 are detected using conventional bio-
chemical testing (see Chapter 18). They can also be difficult to 
localize given their potential for multicentricity. Endoscopic ultra-
sound and selective arterial infusions of calcium with hepatic vein 
sampling (for insulin) have been used successfully to identify 
lesions in small groups of patients. 
 Glucagonomas, VIPomas, and somatostatinomas are diagnosed 
based on two fold or greater elevations in plasma glucagons, VIP, 
or somatostatin levels, respectively, in the presence of one or more 
pancreatic nodules. Nonfunctional tumors are typically diagnosed 
following imaging studies after exclusion of elevated levels of the 
plasma secretory products described above, or, more rarely, follow-
ing measurement of pancreatic polypeptide levels. 
 Pituitary adenomas occur in approximately 25% of patients 
harboring the  MEN-1 gene. The majority secrete prolactin, with 
or without secretion of excess growth hormone, followed by those 
secreting growth hormone alone, nonfunctional tumors, and 
those secreting excessive amounts of adrenocorticotropic hormone 
(ACTH) (Cushing disease). A prolactinoma variant of MEN1 has 
been described (Burin variant). This variant is characterized by an 
increased frequency of prolactinomas, carcinoids, and hyperpara-
thyroidism and infrequent appearance of gastrinomas in affected 
kindreds. It does not appear to be associated with a specific muta-
tion of the  MEN1 gene. In one instance it has been linked to a 
germline mutation in the gene encoding the cyclin-dependent 
kinase inhibitor p27 Kip1 , but this has not been confirmed in other 
patients. Pituitary tumors in MEN1 are rarely malignant, but 
recent studies suggest that they may be larger and more aggressive 
than their sporadic counterparts. There is a high incidence of 
macroadenoma, they display a propensity for making more than a 
single pituitary hormone, and there is a suggestion that these 
tumors do not respond as well to medical therapy as do their spo-
radic counterparts. Diagnosis and management are similar to that 
of their sporadic counterparts (see Chapter 4). 
 Adrenal adenomas, including cortisol-producing adenomas, 
are seen in MEN1, theoretically making the differential diagnosis 
of Cushing syndrome in this setting complex (ie, adrenal adenoma 
vs basophilic adenoma of the pituitary gland vs ectopic ACTH 
secretion from a carcinoid tumor, which is also commonly associ-
ated with this syndrome). Empirically, most hypercortisolemia in 
this setting is due to pituitary disease. Adrenal adenomas are often 
found together with islet cell tumors in affected patients, and at 
least in some series they appear to lack the MEN1 genetic defect. 
This has led to the suggestion that they represent a secondary 
rather than a primary manifestation of the underlying genetic 
defect. This, however, remains controversial. Pheochromocytomas 
harboring an MEN1 rather than an MEN2 mutation have been 
described in seven patients. Thyroid disease has been said to be 
more common in MEN1; however, with the possible exception of 
thyroid adenomas, this link remains obscure. Subcutaneous lipo-
mas, skin collagenomas, and multiple facial angiofibromas (par-
ticularly on the upper lip and vermillion border of the lip) are seen 
in 30% to 90% of family members in affected kindreds. Although 
clinically of little importance, when present, they may prove useful 
in identifying affected individuals within a kindred and lead to 
more effective screening (discussed later). Carcinoid tumors are 
seen with increased frequency in MEN1. They are almost exclu-
sively foregut carcinoids and may be found in the thymus, in the 
lung (bronchial carcinoids), or in the gastric mucosa. It is likely 
that chronic hypergastrinemia (eg, that resulting from coexistent 
ZES and proton pump inhibitor therapy) contributes to the 
increased incidence of gastric carcinoids in MEN1. For unclear 
TABLE 22–1 Clinical manifestations of MEN1.
Manifestation
(%)
Hyperparathyroidism
95
Enteropancreatic tumors
30-80
Pituitary adenomas
20-25
Carcinoid tumors
10-20
Adrenal adenomas
25-40
Subcutaneous lipomas
30
Facial angiofibromas
85
Collagenomas
70
CHAPTER 22 Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia     725
reasons, thymic carcinoids appear more commonly in males, 
bronchial carcinoids in females. They occasionally secrete hor-
monal products (eg, ectopic ACTH), are often malignant, and 
may behave aggressively. Leiomyomas have rarely been described 
in MEN1. Disease-specific mortality is due to pancreatic islet 
carcinoma and malignant thymic carcinoid. 
 Pathogenesis 
 MEN1 is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. Traditional 
linkage studies localized the defective gene to the long arm of 
chromosome 11q13. Parallel analyses of DNA from endocrine 
tumors taken from MEN1 patients demonstrated allelic loss in 
this area, frequently resulting from large DNA deletions. This 
raised the possibility that the defective gene was a tumor suppres-
sor gene involved in the control of cellular growth. In this para-
digm ( Figure 22–1 ), the inherited defective allele is silent in the 
presence of a normal, functioning allele on the second chromo-
some. A subsequent somatic mutation (often a deletion that 
removes the normal allele) results in a null genotype in which the 
suppressor gene locus is either absent or defective on both alleles. 
The high frequency with which such deletions occur is thought to 
account for the dominant nature of this particular genetic defect. 
Release of the tumor suppressor gene’s growth regulatory activity 
results in a hyperplastic growth response in cells harboring the 
somatic mutation. This promitogenic state probably provides the 
substrate for subsequent somatic mutations that result in acquisi-
tion of a more aggressive, and at times malignant, phenotype, as 
occurs in gastrinomas associated with ZES. Recent studies have 
succeeded in identifying the gene, termed the  menin gene, which 
appears to be responsible for MEN1 ( Figure 22–2 ). Mutations 
have been identified throughout the entire 610-amino-acid length 
of the  menin coding sequence and include nonsense mutations, 
missense mutations, and deletions. Over 400 independent muta-
tions have been described in MEN1 kindreds to date. Nevertheless, 
5% to 10% of presumed MEN1 mutations are not detectable 
using available methodology. Menin is a ubiquitously expressed 
tumor suppressor gene product which has been shown to interact 
with several components of the trithorax family histone methyl-
transferase complex, including the mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) 
proteins. Menin, through this complex, controls expression of the 
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors p27 Kip1 and p18 Ink4c . This 
complex also methylates the lysine 4 residue of histone 3 (H3K4), 
a modification which has been linked to transcriptional activation. 
Loss of function of menin (eg, through those mutations associated 
with MEN1) results in downregulation of p27 Kip1 and p18 Ink4c 
and deregulated cell growth. Menin also suppresses expression of 
the developmentally programmed transcription factor, HLXB9, 
which may also lead to increased growth in menin-deficient cells. 
Mice heterozygous for deletion of the  menin gene locus ( Men1+/− ) 
*
*
7 Kb
3 Kb
10 Kb
10 Kb
Normal
allele
Men1
allele
Men1 allele
Normal allele
Men1
allele
Southern blot
Germ cells and leukocytes
Parathyroid cell
Men1 allele
Normal allelle
10 Kb
3 Kb
Men1 allele
10 Kb
 FIGURE 22–1  An example of allelic loss in Men1 involving large deletion of genetic material. Afflicted patient’s germ cells (shown on left) 
harbor both a normal and defective gene at the Men1 locus. Each of these is detected using selective restriction enzyme digestion and 
Southern blot analysis of the genomic DNA. Affected somatic cells (eg, parathyroid chief cells) undergo a second mutation, typically a deletion 
of the normal allele, resulting in detection of only the mutant allele by Southern analysis. Sporadic disease is thought to follow sequential muta-
tion or deletion of each Men1 allele in the somatic cell. Solid bar (light purple) with asterisk represents radiolabeled probe used in Southern 
analysis; arrows indicate points of restriction enzyme digestion. 
726    CHAPTER 22 Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia
develop parathyroid dysplasia, adenomas, and carcinomas; pancre-
atic islet tumors, anterior pituitary tumors, and adrenal cortical 
tumors, all of which display loss of heterozygosity at the  Men locus. 
 The  Men1 gene is also the gene most frequently mutated in a 
variety of sporadic endocrine tumors. Parathyroid adenomas (20%), 
gastrinomas (40%), insulinomas (15%), VIP-secreting tumors 
(60%), nonfunctioning pancreatic tumors (15%), glucagonoma 
(60%), adrenal cortical tumors (<5%), angiofibromas (10%), lipo-
mas (30%), bronchial carcinoids (35%), and pituitary tumors 
(<5%) often harbor somatic mutations at the  Men1 locus. It 
is important to note that screening for germline mutations at 
the  Men1 locus fails to detect mutations 5% to 10% of the time 
despite evidence for loss of heterozygosity at 11q13. It is thought that 
the relevant mutations may be in regulatory regions surrounding the 
 Men1 gene. Haplotype testing or genetic linkage analysis can 
be useful in these cases to identify relevant Men1 carriers. Unlike 
MEN2 (see later), there is no clear association between specific  Men1 
gene mutations and the nature or extent of endocrine gland involve-
ment, although nonsense mutations at Tyr 312 and Arg 460 have been 
shown to be more common with the Burin variant. 
 Treatment 
 Therapy of hyperparathyroidism in MEN1 is directed toward 
surgical extirpation of hyperplastic parathyroid tissue, typically 
with resection of three and one-half glands. This leaves one-half 
gland in situ in an attempt to preserve residual parathyroid func-
tion and avoid hypoparathyroidism. Alternatively, patients may 
be subjected to total parathyroidectomy with transplantation of 
the most normal appearing tissue to the nondominant forearm. 
There have been no head-to-head comparisons made between 
these approaches. Total parathyroidectomy (with transplant) is 
associated with a higher frequency of hypoparathyroidism, whereas 
subtotal parathyroidectomy has a higher rate of recurrence. 
Prophylactic near-total thymectomy is often performed at the 
time of neck exploration to remove potential intrathymic parathy-
roid glands as well as thymic carcinoid tumors. 
 Both persistence and recurrence of hyperparathyroidism occur 
more frequently in MEN1 than in sporadic disease. Persistence of 
hyperparathyroidism, defined as a failure to normalize serum 
calcium and parathyroid hormone (PTH) levels following the 
initial surgery, with removal of 3 to 3.5 parathyroid glands, 
occurs in 12% of cases of MEN1. Recurrent disease, defined as 
reappearance of hyperparathyroidism following at least 3 months 
of normocalcemia, is seen in as many as 44% of these cases 8 to 
12 years following surgery. The high frequency of persistent 
hyperparathyroidism in MEN1 probably reflects the high fre-
quency of supernumerary glands (prevalence as high as 30%) and 
ectopically located parathyroid tissue in patients carrying the 
Men1 gene. The increased frequency of recurrent disease is 
 FIGURE 22–2  Some of the more common germline menin mutations from 56 MEN1 kindreds and somatic mutations from 24 endocrine 
tumors. Mutations above the bar cause protein truncations through stop codons or frameshifts leading to premature stop codons; two cause 
splice errors. Mutations below the bar cause missense or single-amino-acid codon changes.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Marx S, et al. 
Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1: clinical and genetic topics.  Ann Intern Med . 1998;129:484.) 
1341del13
764 + 3(A → G)
358del4
483delAT
R98X, S84 ins2, S84del4, 185del4
358del25
1461delG
1650insC
545insT
A535V
313delC•
L22R
(2) K119del
H139D, H139Y•
F144V
A160P
P12L
K120X•
416delC (5)
R108X
E26K
F110L
R108X
W183X, W183X
R415X
186F
W126G
F159C
S543L
875insA
1212del7
357del4 (2)
512delC (6)
W198X
Q260X•
W265X•
1202del2•
1280delG•
713delG
S308X
Y312X
Y323X
1132delG
735del4 (2), V211del14
934 + 1(G → A)
D418N
K502M
M561T
1279ins11
1812del5
W436X
R527X, 1699delA etc
1484del8
1509ins2
1650delC, 1650insC (2)
R460X (2)
A242V
L286P
A309P
T334R
(3) E363del
D418del
A176P
W183S
W436R
F447S•
Germline Europe
Germline NIH
Parathyroid
Gastrinoma
Insulinoma
Pituitary
Lung carcinoid
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Truncation
Codon change
100 bp
CHAPTER 22 Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia     727
thought to result from the continued presence of the underlying 
mitogenic stimulus that drives parathyroid gland growth in this 
syndrome. Reoperation for recurrent disease in the neck is suc-
cessful about 90% of the time, whereas autograft removal is suc-
cessful in about 60% of patients. 
 Therapy of gastrinomas in MEN1 remains controversial. 
Suppression of gastric acid production with proton pump inhibi-
tors (eg, omeprazole) remains a mainstay of therapy. Conservative 
medical management of these tumors has been predicated on their 
assumed low-grade malignant behavior, the dominance of compli-
cations related to gastric acid hypersecretion in contributing to 
morbidity and mortality, and the failure of most attempts at surgi-
cal resection to alter the natural course of the disease. More 
recently, recognition of the potential for more aggressive behavior 
in some of these tumors—in a recent study, 14% of these tumors 
demonstrated aggressive growth—and the fact that many of these 
tumors are ectopically located in duodenal submucosa and peri-
pancreatic lymph nodes rather than the pancreatic bed has 
renewed interest in the possibility of surgical cure. A number of 
small studies have reported encouraging results when measures to 
both localize and remove gastrinoma tissue in the pancreas, duo-
denum, and regional lymph nodes have been used. Although the 
nature of the underlying genetic lesion and the multicentricity of 
these tumors may place limits on the prospects for cure of this 
disease in most patients, the slow growth characteristics of these 
tumors permit long periods of symptom-free survival following 
reduction of the tumor burden. For patients with liver or other 
metastatic disease, symptoms related to hypergastrinemia may be 
controlled with the proton pump antagonists, as described earlier. 
More conventional cancer therapy (eg, systemic chemotherapy, 
radiation therapy, or selective chemoembolization of hepatic 
metastases) is palliative and reserved for advanced stages of the 
disease. Islet tumors more than 3 cm carry an increased risk of 
malignancy and are usually resected regardless of functional 
 status. 
 It is important to remember that calcium stimulates gastric 
acid secretion. This may occur through gastrin-dependent and 
gastrin-independent pathways. In MEN1 patients with both 
hyperparathyroidism and ZES, correction of the hyperparathy-
roidism and attendant hypercalcemia frequently results in a reduc-
tion in both basal and maximal acid output and a decline in serum 
gastrin levels. Secretin stimulation tests often normalize following 
parathyroidectomy. More importantly, there is a reduction in the 
dose of medication (eg, proton pump inhibitor) required to con-
trol symptoms of ZES following parathyroid surgery in approxi-
mately 60% of patients. 
 Unlike gastrinomas, insulinomas are rarely localized outside 
the pancreatic bed. Therefore, a more aggressive approach can be 
directed toward the pancreas in planning surgical resection. 
Enucleation of the identifiable lesions in the pancreatic head and 
blind resection of the pancreatic body and tail are often more suc-
cessful in correcting hyperinsulinemia than in restoring normal 
gastrin levels in patients with ZES. Nonsurgical candidates (eg, 
those with serious coexisting disease or those in whom candidate 
tumors cannot be identified) can be managed with conventional 
medical therapy (eg, diazoxide or verapamil). (See Chapter 18.) 
 Nonfunctional tumors, the most common pancreatoduodenal 
neuroendocrine tumors in MEN1, are managed somewhat differ-
ently than the functional tumors. Surgical efforts to minimize 
spread of metastases are weighed against the need to avoid incur-
ring surgical complications, including mortality, with little clinical 
benefit. In general, surgery is not recommended for tumors less 
than 2 cm in diameter. Life expectancy of MEN1 patients with 
nonfunctional tumors (∼43 years) is similar to that of those with 
gastrinomas and considerably shorter than those with other types 
of functional tumors (∼61 years). 
 Screening 
 MEN1 accounts for less than 1% of all pituitary tumors, 2% to 
4% of cases of primary hyperparathyroidism, and about 25% of 
all gastrinomas. Thus, although routine screening for  Men1 gene 
mutations is not indicated for sporadic cases of hyperparathyroid-
ism or patients with pituitary tumors, screening of all cases of ZES 
is likely to be cost-effective in identifying carriers. The frequency 
of germline mutations in the  Men1 gene in patients with tumors 
thought to be sporadic based on family analysis is about 5% for 
gastrinomas and 1% to 2% for other manifestations (eg, hyper-
parathyroidism, prolactinomas). Excluding those patients with 
ZES, screening for MEN1 outside affected MEN1 kindreds 
should be limited to those individuals for whom the index of 
suspicion for the syndrome is high (eg, familial history of endo-
crine tumors or hypersecretory states; history of multiple endo-
crine tumors or multigland involvement with hyperparathyroidism 
in the propositus). Identification of the carrier state should be 
performed with the intent of acquiring information that allows 
the clinician to focus screening on the relevant patient population 
(eg, members of an affected kindred who do not share the  Men1 
gene mutation need not be subjected to follow-up screening). 
Unlike the situation in MEN2 (see later), carrier analysis should 
not be used to support a major therapeutic intervention. Such 
interventions (eg, pancreatic exploration) may be associated with 
significant morbidity, and there is no evidence that they prolong 
patient survival. Patients with hyperparathyroidism should be 
screened for MEN1—even in the absence of a positive family his-
tory or any history of multiple endocrine tumors—if parathyroid 
hyperplasia is identified at the time of parathyroidectomy or if 
there is a history of recurrent hyperparathyroidism following para-
thyroidectomy. Patients with ZES should be screened for MEN1 
given its high frequency (∼25%) in such individuals. Patients with 
isolated pituitary lesions have a low probability of having coexis-
tent MEN1 and probably do not require screening unless there are 
other clinical features suggesting the syndrome. Genetic screening 
is available commercially at a number of locations (see www.
genetests.org). 
 Although most clinicians agree that screening for MEN1 in 
high-risk groups is worthwhile, details of the individual screening 
protocols vary considerably—from more focused, cost-effective 
approaches to broad-based screening designed to detect occult 
disease. One example of a moderately cost-effective protocol is 
presented in  Figure 22–3 . A complete examination and full family 
history should be obtained on all patients. In individuals within 
728    CHAPTER 22 Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia
affected kindreds, ionized (or albumin-corrected) calcium and 
PTH levels should be checked at yearly intervals. Fasting serum 
gastrin levels should also be determined annually—or more fre-
quently if ZES is a prominent component of the phenotype in the 
affected kindred. In kindreds in whom the disease is particularly 
aggressive, the secretin stimulation test (if available) can lend  to 
additional diagnostic sensitivity. Determination of fasting glucose, 
insulin, and proinsulin levels may prove useful, particularly if 
symptoms of hypoglycemia are present. Pancreatic polypeptide 
measurements may identify an unsuspected pancreatic neuroen-
docrine tumor. Levels of chromogranin A, a secretory product of 
parathyroid glands and other neuroendocrine tissues, can also be 
Individuals at risk for MEN1
Serum gastrin
Abnormal
Confirm
gastric acid
hypersecretion
? Secretin
stimulation
test
Normal
Proton pump
inhibitor
CT scan
abdomen
Normal
Continue
annual
screening
Annual Ca2+ and PTH
Abnormal
 Subtotal
parathyroidectomy
Continue
annual
screening 
to age 45
(less frequently
thereafter)
Normal
Annual
follow-up
Serum prolactin
Abnormal
Rule out
drug-induced
hyperprolactinemia
Normal
MRI of
sella
Bromocriptine
? Transsphenoidal
resection
Normal
Continue
annual
screening
Fasting insulin and
glucose
Abnormal
Normal
Endoscopic
ultrasound and 
CT or MRI of abdomen
Continue
annual
screening
Surgical
exploration
IGF-1
Abnormal
Normal
Confirm
growth hormone
hypersecretion
Continue
annual
screening
MRI of sella
Transsphenoidal resection
versus
radiation therapy
versus
octreotide
 FIGURE 22–3  Screening for MEN1. Testing is targeted to individuals with a high probability of harboring the  MEN1 gene (eg, first-degree rel-
atives of affected kindred members). If genetic testing is available and the specific mutation has been confirmed, screening would be limited to 
those individuals harboring the defective gene. Screening for other pancreatic (eg, insulinomas) or pituitary tumors (eg, somatotroph adenomas) 
is based on the prevalence of the specific lesion in the affected kindred or the presence of signs or symptoms suggesting a particular lesion (IGF, 
insulin-like growth factor). 
CHAPTER 22 Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia     729
helpful in assessing nonspecific endocrine gland hypersecretion. 
Routine screening for other functional or nonfunctional islet cell 
tumors is probably not justified without clinical findings (eg, 
watery diarrhea, hypokalemia). As noted earlier, these lesions are 
typically multifocal and may be very small, which makes detection 
difficult even with sophisticated imaging studies. The same holds 
true for the pituitary lesions. In the absence of obvious clinical 
findings (eg, evidence of a hyper- or hyposecretory state or symp-
toms referable to a mass lesion in the sella turcica), routine screen-
ing should be confined to periodic measurements of serum 
prolactin and perhaps insulin-like growth factor-I. The former has 
been found to be useful in identifying pituitary disease in females 
harboring the  Men1 gene defect. Imaging studies (eg, MRI of the 
pituitary and anterior mediastinum, CT of the abdomen) should 
be performed at presentation and repeated at 3-year intervals. A 
thorough family history that excludes pituitary disease in the kin-
dred may mitigate the need for pituitary imaging studies over the 
long term. 
 Follow-up screening in patients known to have MEN1 
should include yearly fasting gastrin, calcium, albumin, PTH, 
chromogranin A, and pancreatic polypeptide levels from age 
10 on. Some clinicians have argued that these patients should 
have annual CT or MRI studies of the abdomen and prolactin 
measurements plus MRI of the sella every other year; in addi-
tion, consideration should be given to performing an annual CT 
of the chest (see Glascock and Carty). Others have argued for 
imaging studies on presentation and every 3 years thereafter (see 
Schussheim et al). 
 Penetrance of MEN1 is greater than 95% by age 45. Screening 
should be continued at periodic intervals at least to age 45. If there 
is no evidence of typical endocrine organ involvement by that age, 
screening frequency might be reduced. It is important to note, 
however, that the risk is not reduced to zero at age 45. A minority 
of patients presents with their first manifestation of the syndrome 
well after age 45. Surgical resection of diseased tissue (eg, parathy-
roidectomy) should be followed with continued screening looking 
both for recurrent disease and involvement of other organ 
 systems. 
 MULTIPLE ENDOCRINE NEOPLASIA 
TYPE 2 
 MEN2 is an autosomal dominant disorder with an estimated 
prevalence of 1 to 10 per 100,000 in the general population. It can 
be subdivided into two independent syndromes: MEN 2A (Sipple 
syndrome) and MEN 2B. Manifestations of MEN 2A include 
MCT, pheochromocytoma, and hyperparathyroidism. MEN 2B 
includes MCT, pheochromocytoma, and a number of somatic 
manifestations ( Table 22–2 ;  Figure 22–4 ), but hyperparathyroid-
ism is rare. Penetrance of MEN2 is greater than 80% in individu-
als harboring the defective gene. 
 Medullary carcinoma of the thyroid is the most common 
manifestation of MEN2 and often represents the first clinical 
presentation in individuals with multiorgan involvement. It also 
dominates the clinical course of patients affected with the disease. 
Eighty percent to 100% of individuals at risk develop MCT at 
some point during their lifetime. The classic thyroid lesion of 
MEN2 is hyperplasia of the calcitonin-producing parafollicular 
cells, which typically serves as the precursor of MCT. These tumors 
in MEN2 patients tend to be multicentric and concentrated in the 
upper third of the thyroid gland, reflecting the normal distribu-
tion of parafollicular cells. 
 As much as one-fourth of all MCT is genetic in origin. 
Roughly 30% of the heritable fraction is attributable to  MEN 2A ; 
65% occurs as an isolated entity (isolated familial MCT), and 5% 
is found in  MEN 2B kindreds. Isolated familial MCT is defined 
as MCT presenting as the only clinical manifestation in more than 
10 carriers in a kindred and multiple carriers or affected members 
over the age of 50 with adequate history and laboratory support 
 FIGURE 22–4  Patient with MEN 2B syndrome. Note the multiple 
neuromas on the lips and tongue and the marfanoid facies. 
TABLE 22–2 Clinical manifestations of MEN2.
Manifestation
(%)
MEN 2A
Medullary carcinoma of thyroid
80-100
Pheochromocytoma
40
Hyperparathyroidism
25
MEN 2B
Medullary carcinoma of thyroid
100
Pheochromocytoma
50
Marfanoid habitus
75
Mucosal neuromas
100
Ganglioneuromatosis of bowel
>40
730    CHAPTER 22 Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia
to rule out the presence of pheochromocytoma or hyperparathy-
roidism. The disease tends to behave more aggressively in MEN 
2B than with either MEN 2A or familial MCT, with earlier pre-
sentation (often before age 5) and more rapid progression. 
 Biochemical diagnosis depends heavily on the calcitonin- 
producing properties of the hyperplastic parafollicular cells or 
MCT. These lesions respond to pentagastrin or calcium infusions 
with significant increments in plasma calcitonin levels (see 
Chapter 8). Occasionally, immunohistochemical staining of 
poorly differentiated thyroid tumors for calcitonin reveals the 
identity of the malignancy. The presence of extracellular amyloid 
is also one of the identifying features of these tumors. This mate-
rial reacts with anticalcitonin antisera, suggesting that it includes 
aggregated hormone released from neighboring tumor cells. MCT 
spreads initially within the thyroid bed and to regional lymph 
nodes. Distant metastases to liver, lung, and bone occur late in the 
course of the disease. 
 Pheochromocytomas develop in approximately 50% of indi-
viduals harboring the  MEN2 gene. They are usually located in 
the adrenal bed, often are bilateral, and are rarely malignant. 
Diagnosis is based on standard clinical criteria (eg, hypertension, 
presence of headaches, palpitations, diaphoresis), elevations in 
plasma or urine catecholamines or catecholamine metabolites 
(eg, urinary or plasma metanephrine or normetanephrine), and 
demonstration of an adrenal mass on conventional abdominal 
imaging. As noted above for MCT, pheochromocytomas in 
MEN2 are preceded by a hyperplastic phase (adrenal medullary 
hyperplasia), although, unlike parafollicular cell hyperplasia, the 
adrenal precursor lesion can be difficult to detect with conven-
tional biochemical testing. 
 As in MEN1, hyperparathyroidism in MEN2 is due to hyper-
plasia of the parathyroid glands. It is seen in about 25% of 
patients harboring the  MEN2A gene and is reported, but rarely 
seen, as part of MEN 2B. The disease is usually less aggressive 
than its counterpart in MEN1 and approximates more closely 
the behavior of sporadic disease. It responds well to surgical 
management. 
 A number of other phenotypic features are associated with the 
MEN2 syndromes. Cutaneous lichen amyloidosis is a pruritic 
erythematous skin lesion that is seen coincident with or often 
preceding the development of MCT in MEN2. Amyloid in these 
lesions is composed of keratin rather than calcitonin, as seen in 
MCT. Cutaneous lichen amyloidosis is thought to result from an 
abnormality in cutaneous innervation that leads to hyperesthesia 
and pruritis. Repeated scratching of the pruritic area results in 
epidermal thickening and increased pigmentation. It has been 
noted more frequently in association with specific mutations of 
the  MEN2 gene (specifically Cys 634 to Tyr 634 ). In a second variant, 
MEN 2A or familial MCT is associated with Hirschsprung disease 
(congenital megacolon). This is most frequently found with  RET 
gene mutations involving Cys 609 , Cys 615 , and Cys 620 (see below). 
The intestinal ganglioneuromatosis, mucosal neuromas, mar-
fanoid habitus, and medullated corneal nerves seen in MEN 2B 
appear to be related to the underlying genetic defect The intestinal 
lesions can disrupt gut motility, resulting in periods of severe 
 constipation or diarrhea. 
 Pathogenesis 
 The pathogenesis of the MEN2 syndromes has been worked out 
in elegant detail. Traditional genetic linkage studies localized the 
defective genes in  MEN 2A ,  MEN 2B , and familial  MCT to the 
pericentromeric region of chromosome 10. Subsequent refine-
ment in these analyses indicated that the defective gene was 
either closely linked to or identical with the  ret proto-oncogene. 
RET is a single transmembrane domain, tyrosine kinase-linked 
protein that forms part of the receptor for the glial cell line– 
derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) ( see Figure 22–5 ). This 
receptor, GDNFR (glial cell line–derived neurotrophic factor 
receptor), is a glycosyl phosphatidyl inositol-linked cell-surface 
protein. Additional ligands, neurturin, persephin, and artemin 
have been shown to associate with and activate RET through 
their cognate receptors GDNFRα1-4. As depicted schematically 
in  Figure 22–6 , its most striking structural feature is a series of 
cysteine residues clustered just outside the membrane-spanning 
segment. These cysteine residues are thought to exert a tonic 
inhibitory control on RET activity in the normal cell. RET also 
has a cadherin-like domain in that portion of the molecule pro-
jecting into the extracellular space and a tyrosine kinase-like 
domain in the intracellular portion of the molecule. RET is 
expressed endogenously in a variety of cells of neural crest origin, 
and it appears to play an important role in development. 
Knockout of the  RET gene locus in mice results in the absence 
of myenteric ganglia in the submucosa of the small and large 
intestine and a variety of genitourinary anomalies, implying an 
important role in renal development. 
 Characterization of the  RET gene in patients with MEN 2A 
demonstrated a number of mutations in affected kindred mem-
bers that were not present in their normal counterparts. The 
mutations were clustered in the cysteines located in RET’s extra-
cellular, juxtamembrane domain ( see Figure 22–6 ). Structurally, 
GD NF
GD NF
GD NF
TKD
TKD
GDNFR-α
GDNFR-α
GDNFR-α
GDNFR-α
GDNFR-α
RET
RET
+
 FIGURE 22–5  Structure of GDNFR-α/RET receptor complex. 
GDNF identifies the ligand, glial cell line–derived neurotrophic factor, 
and GDNFR-α the GDNF receptor (TKD, tyrosine kinase domain). 
CHAPTER 22 Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia     731
these cysteines are encoded by nucleotides in exons 10 and 11 of 
the  RET gene. A number of these mutations were simple missense 
mutations, whereas others involved deletion or insertion of small 
segments of DNA, but in each case one of the aforementioned 
cysteines proved to be involved. Selective mutation of one of these 
six cysteines has now been shown to account for more than 97% 
of all  RET mutations associated with MEN 2A. The most fre-
quently mutated residue is Cys 634 . This amino acid is mutated to 
arginine (Arg), phenylalanine (Phe), serine (Ser), glycine (Gly), 
tyrosine (Tyr), or tryptophan (Trp) in approximately 84% of 
affected MEN 2A kindreds. It has been suggested that mutation 
of Cys 634 to Arg 634 is associated with the phenotypic expression of 
hyperparathyroidism, whereas mutation of Cys 634 to any of the 
amino acids indicated above is linked to pheochromocytoma. It 
should be noted that the Cys-to-Arg mutation at position 634 is 
also the most common mutation at this position, accounting for 
about 64% of all codon changes at this location. Interestingly, a 
rare but unique mutation involving a four-amino-acid insertion 
between Cys 634 and Arg 635 has been described that results in MCT 
and a high incidence of hyperparathyroidism but not pheochro-
mocytoma. 
 Ironically, patients with familial MCT display many of the 
same cysteine mutations identified in MEN 2A. This implies the 
existence of independent modulatory genomic factors that restrict 
the effects of the  RET mutation to the parafollicular cells of the 
thyroid in familial MCT. The exception is the mutation of Cys 634 
to Arg 634 , which is almost uniformly associated with MEN 2A. 
Several additional mutations have been identified that may be 
more specific for familial MCT ( Figure 22–6 ). The observation 
that mutations of Cys 634 have higher transforming potential than 
mutations at these other residues has led to the suggestion that 
MEN 2A represents the more severe phenotype (vs familial MCT) 
along a spectrum of disease resulting from RET activation. In fact, 
the noncysteine mutations, which are more common in familial 
MCT (as high as 60% of familial MCT in one series), are associ-
ated with delayed onset of parafollicular C cell disease, but other 
clinical features (tumor size, bilaterality, the presence of nodal 
metastases) were not different in patients harboring cysteine versus 
noncysteine mutations. 
 Interestingly, patients with MEN 2B do not harbor mutations 
in the cysteine residues affected in MEN 2A and familial MCT. 
Instead, the majority possess a single-point mutation involving 
conversion of Met 918 to Thr 918 . This mutation is found in more 
than 95% of cases of MEN 2B. A minority of patients have been 
shown to harbor an independent mutation of Ala 883 to Phe 883 , 
Ser 922 to Tyr 922 , or a mono-allelic combination of Val 804 to Met 804 
plus Ser 904 to Cys 904 . MEN 2B arises from spontaneous de novo 
mutations in as many as 50% of affected individuals. For unknown 
reasons, these mutations are found almost exclusively on the 
 paternal allele. 
 A number of the germline mutations identified in MEN 2A 
and familial MCT and the Met 918 mutation in MEN 2B have 
been demonstrated as somatic mutations in sporadic MCT 
(∼30%-40%) and pheochromocytoma (<10%). Sporadic parathy-
roid disease due to these mutations is not known to occur. The 
presence of the Met 918 mutation, in particular, is associated with a 
less favorable clinical outcome in sporadic MCT. 
 Independent studies have shown a close linkage between the 
 RET gene locus and Hirschsprung disease, a disorder characterized 
by failure of myenteric ganglia to develop normally in the hindgut 
of affected individuals. This leads to impaired gut motility and, in 
severe cases, megacolon (a phenotype similar to that reported for 
the  RET knockout mice). Examination of  RET coding sequence 
in Hirschsprung kindreds revealed a variety of mutations in both 
the intracellular and extracellular domains, some of which (eg, 
deletions) would be predicted to eliminate normal expression of 
the  RET gene. This, together with findings from the  RET , GDNF, 
and GDNFRα-1 knockout mice, suggests that Hirschsprung dis-
ease represents the null phenotype for the  RET locus. Interestingly, 
several patients have been described who possess features of both 
MEN2 and Hirschsprung disease. The  RET mutations in these 
cases have involved conversion of Cys 609 , Cys 618 , or Cys 620 to Arg. 
These mutations, while promoting dimerization and increasing 
tyrosine kinase activity in the RET protein (see below), also appear 
to have difficulty trafficking to and accumulating in the plasma 
membrane. It is conceivable that predominance of one or the 
other of these mechanisms in different cell types could result in a 
Cell membrane
Cadherin-like
domain
Cysteine-rich
domain
Tyrosine
kinase
domain
Cys609
Cys611
Cys618
Cys620
Cys630
Cys634
Glu768
Leu790
Tyr791
Val804
Ala883
Ser891
Ser904
Met918
Ser922
 FIGURE 22–6  Structural schematic of wild-type RET, including 
amino acids that have been shown to be mutated in different disease 
states. MEN 2A is associated with mutations of Cys 609 , Cys 611 , Cys 618 , 
Cys 620 , Cys 630 , Cys 634 , and, rarely, Leu 790 and Tyr 791 . Familial MCT of the 
thyroid is frequently associated with mutations at the same Cys resi-
dues with the exception of Cys 634 , as well as mutations at Glu 768 , 
Leu 790 , Tyr 791 , Val 804 , and Ser 891 . MEN 2B mutations typically involve 
Met 918 or, more rarely, Ala 883 , Ser 922 , or Val 804 /Ser 904 . Hirschsprung dis-
ease is associated with multiple mutations or deletions extending 
over the full length of the RET molecule. 
732    CHAPTER 22 Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia
phenotype characterized by both activation (eg, MEN2) and sup-
pression (eg, Hirschsprung disease) of RET activity in the same 
individual. 
 By inference, the defect in RET function in MEN2 or familial 
MCT arises from increased or altered activity of the RET tyrosine 
kinase. In the case of RET MEN2A , the increase in activity appears to 
arise from interference with the tonic inhibition of RET tyrosine 
kinase activity by the clustered cysteine residues in the extracellu-
lar domain. This leads to increased dimer formation, autophos-
phorylation, and tyrosine kinase activity in the mutant RET 
molecules. In the case of RET MEN2B , there appears to be a change 
in substrate specificity of the tyrosine kinase that contributes to 
the phenotype. The activity of RET MEN2B —rather than being 
restricted to conventional RET substrates (RET substrates are 
similar to those recognized by the epidermal growth factor 
receptor)—is capable of phosphorylating substrates normally rec-
ognized by members of the Src and Abl families of cytoplasmic 
tyrosine kinases, signaling pathways which are closely identified 
with the regulation of cell growth. Thus, it appears that RET MEN2B 
has acquired the capacity for activation of a potent mitogenic 
pathway in the expressing endocrine cells merely by altering its 
selection of substrates for phosphorylation. RET MEN2B also poten-
tiates phosphorylation of Tyr 1062 more effectively than RET MEN2A . 
This tyrosine serves as a docking site for multiple effector proteins, 
including Shc and phosphatidyl inositol 3′-kinase, implying that 
RET MEN2B may be more effective in triggering downstream signal-
ing pathways. 
 Treatment 
 Treatment of heritable MCT should include total thyroidectomy 
with at least central lymph node dissection. Given the multi-
centric nature of the disease, subtotal thyroidectomy predictably 
results in recurrent disease. Basal or stimulated calcitonin levels are 
used in the postoperative setting to evaluate the presence of 
residual disease. The precise timing of surgery in patients with 
subclinical disease (ie, positive by genetic testing but without 
clinical or laboratory abnormalities) is controversial (see later), but 
most clinicians would agree that in kindreds with MEN 2B or 
clinically aggressive MCT, patients should undergo surgery as 
soon as the genetic defect is demonstrated. Typically, this is before 
age 6 months in MEN 2B (eg, mutation at Ala 883 or Met 918 ) and 
before age 5 years in MEN 2A (eg, mutation at Cys 611 , Cys  618 , 
Cys 620 , or Cys  634 ). Foci of microscopic MCT are common, and 
metastatic disease has been described in the first year of life in 
patients with MEN 2B. The presence of a thyroid nodule or 
lymph node metastases at the time of diagnosis is strongly associ-
ated with persistent or recurrent disease. Mutations associated 
with familial MCT (eg, Cys 609 , Glu 768 , Leu 790 , Tyr 791 , Val 804 , or 
Ser 891 ) tend to be associated with more indolent disease. Some 
have suggested that surgery in these patients can be deferred until 
plasma calcitonin levels (basal or stimulated) are elevated. Patients 
should always be screened for the presence of pheochromocytoma 
before undergoing neck exploration. Surgery for metastatic disease 
is palliative and targeted at reducing tumor burden rather than 
cure. Localization techniques (eg, MRI or selective venous 
 sampling for calcitonin) can be helpful in identifying foci of 
malignant tissue. Recent clinical trials have used a tyrosine kinase 
inhibitor D6474 (Zactima) to inhibit the RET kinase with an 
objective remission rate of approximately 30%. Radiation and 
chemotherapy are of limited utility and are largely confined to 
later stages of the disease. 
 Treatment of pheochromocytomas in MEN2 is similar to that 
for sporadic pheochromocytomas (see Chapter 11). Alpha- and 
(occasionally) beta-adrenergic blockade is used to control blood 
pressure and associated hyperadrenergic symptoms and to restore 
normal intravascular volume in preparation for surgical resection 
of the tumor. Given the propensity for bilaterality of pheochromo-
cytomas in this disorder, some have favored bilateral adrenalec-
tomy at the time of initial surgery. However, because the incidence 
of bilaterality is well under 100% and because these tumors are 
rarely malignant, the most prudent strategy in the face of unilat-
eral adrenal enlargement would appear to be unilateral adrenalec-
tomy at the initial surgery with careful attention at follow-up, 
looking for the presence of disease in the contralateral adrenal 
gland. This vigilant approach has the advantage of minimizing 
morbidity from recurrent pheochromocytoma while sparing the 
patient the risks associated with lifelong adrenal insufficiency. 
 Screening 
 Genetic screening for MEN 2A, MEN 2B, or familial MCT is 
routinely carried out using polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-
based tests designed to identify specific mutations in the  RET 
coding sequence ( Figure 22–7 ; see www.genetests.org for labora-
tories performing these tests). Known  RET mutations account for 
more than 95% of all instances of MEN2, and selected mutations 
(eg, Cys 634 to Arg 634 in MEN 2A) account for a disproportionate 
number of affected individuals. Individuals lacking any of the 
known  RET mutations can be tested using conventional haplo-
type analysis if informative genetic markers and affected family 
members are available. Biochemical testing using basal or stimu-
lated plasma calcitonin levels has been largely supplanted by 
genetic screens. The biochemical tests remain useful, however, in 
identifying residual disease after thyroidectomy. 
 In view of the fact that a high proportion of cases of MCT are 
familial to begin with and as much as 6% of patients with appar-
ently sporadic MCT harbor germline  RET mutations, genetic 
testing for  RET germline mutations is probably indicated for all 
patients presenting with MCT. Controversy persists, however, in 
terms of what should be done for patients once the mutation has 
been identified. Some investigators citing incomplete clinical pen-
etrance (according to published data, 40% of gene carriers do not 
present symptomatically prior to age 70) have argued that employ-
ing solely genetic criteria in making the decision for operative 
intervention subjects a small minority of patients to premature 
thyroidectomy. They argue that genetic testing should be used to 
identify those patients who require close clinical and biochemical 
surveillance to assist with the timing of surgery. Ideally, such bio-
chemical testing (eg, pentagastrin stimulation) should be per-
formed on an annual basis. Exceptions to this general approach 
might include patients with MEN 2B or a particularly aggressive 
CHAPTER 22 Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia     733
form of familial MCT where the potential for significant morbid-
ity and mortality would justify operation in any patient harboring 
the genetic defect regardless of the physical or biochemical mani-
festations of the disease. 
 The more widely shared view is that the true penetrance of 
MCT—combined clinical and preclinical disease—in MEN 2A is 
closer to 100%. This, when coupled with the high degree of sen-
sitivity and specificity of the PCR-based genetic screens, difficul-
ties encountered in obtaining adequate long-term patient follow-up 
and biochemical screening, and the potential for false-positive 
pentagastrin stimulation tests—even within MEN2 kindreds—
has led to the recommendation that total thyroidectomy should be 
performed in all individuals harboring an MEN2–associated  RET 
mutation. This argument has now been supported by several 
clinical studies in which parafollicular cell hyperplasia as well as 
early MCT have been identified in operative specimens taken 
from genetically affected individuals despite normal pentagastrin 
stimulation tests. False-positive biochemical tests are also a con-
cern. There are several reports in the literature of patients in 
affected kindreds who have undergone total thyroidectomy fol-
lowing positive pentagastrin stimulation tests but did not, in fact, 
harbor the  MEN2 gene mutation. Histologic examination of 
excised tissues revealed parafollicular cell hyperplasia, presumably 
unrelated to MEN2, but no MCT. Collectively, these findings 
point out the relative deficiencies of biochemical versus genetic 
testing and offer a compelling argument for early operation as a 
means of reliably eradicating the disease. 
 OTHER DISORDERS CHARACTERIZED BY 
MULTIPLE ENDOCRINE ORGAN 
INVOLVEMENT 
 Carney Complex 
 Carney complex is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized 
by cardiac, endocrine, cutaneous, and neural tumors. Myxomas of 
the heart, breast, and skin are seen frequently in this disorder, as is 
Individuals at risk for MEN 2
Screen for kindred-specific RET mutation
Positive
Negative
Measure plasma
or urine
catecholamines
or metabolites
Measure basal
stimulated calcitonin
Continue
annual
screeing
Positive
MRI or MIBG
scan to localize
tumors
Unilateral
adrenalectomy
Annual
follow-up
Annual biochemical and
imaging studies to
evaluate contralateral
adrenal gland
Bilateral
adrenalectomy
Normal
Ca2+ and PTH
Continue
annual
screening
Abnormal
Resection single gland 
versus subtotal
parathyroidectomy
Serial
calcitonin
measurements
Total
thyroidectomy
Unilateral
disease
Bilateral
disease
Negative
Discontinue screening
 FIGURE 22–7  Screening for MEN 2A. Genetic screening has largely supplanted biochemical testing in identifying individuals at risk. Details 
of decisions regarding treatment are discussed in the text. Preoperative plasma calcitonin levels are potentially useful for follow-up but 
should not supplant genetic testing in assessing the need for surgery (MIBG, metaiodobenzylguanidine; RET, rearranged during transfection 
proto-oncogene). (See also Figure 7–48.) 
734    CHAPTER 22 Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia
spotty pigmentation of the skin (lentiginosis) and ear canal 
trichofolliculo-epitheliomas. Additional rare manifestations 
include psammomatous melanotic schwannoma, breast ductal 
adenoma, and osteochondromyxoma. Endocrine tumors include 
primary pigmented micronodular adrenocortical hyperplasia (an 
ACTH-independent form of Cushing syndrome), follicular thy-
roid carcinomas, adrenocortical carcinoma, somatotroph (growth 
hormone–secreting) adenomas of the pituitary gland, large-cell 
calcifying Sertoli cell tumors of the testes, and ovarian cysts. In 
approximately half of the known Carney complex kindreds, the 
genetic lesion maps to 17q22-24, a locus that harbors the type 1 
regulatory subunit of protein kinase A. This gene functions as a 
classic tumor suppressor, and loss of heterozygosity at this locus is 
associated with the Carney phenotype. A second locus, presum-
ably accounting for the remaining approximately half of Carney 
complex kindreds, is located at 2p16. The nature of the genetic 
lesion at this locus remains unknown at present; however, the 
phenotype is indistinguishable from that found with the 17q22-24 
mutations alluded to above. 
 McCune-Albright Syndrome 
 The central findings in McCune-Albright syndrome include bony 
fibrous dysplasia (either monostotic or polyostotic, café au lait 
spots, and gonadotropin-independent precocious puberty). 
However, affected individuals also develop tumors or nodular 
hyperplasia of a number of endocrine glands with associated hyper-
secretory syndromes. One may see involvement of the pituitary 
somatotrophs (acromegaly), thyroid gland (hyperthyroidism), or 
the 
adrenal 
cortex 
(hypercortisolemia). 
Patients 
with 
 McCune-Albright syndrome frequently demonstrate hypophos-
phatemic rickets. This is thought to result from secretion of fibro-
blast growth factor-23 that is produced in the mesenchymal cells 
associated with the dysplastic bone lesions. They also have nonen-
docrine organ involvement that leads to cardiomyopathy with 
sudden death and liver function abnormalities. The molecular 
lesion in McCune-Albright syndrome involves a somatic activating 
mutation of  GNAS at the Arg 201 position, converting the Arg to 
either Cys or His (see Chapter 1), that leads to ligand-independent 
activation of adenylyl cyclase and increased intracellular concentra-
tions of cyclic AMP. This somatic mutation is thought to occur 
early in development, leading to genetic mosaicism for the mutant 
allele. The phenotype of an individual patient is determined by the 
tissue distribution of the mutation-bearing cells and the percentage 
of cells within a given tissue that harbor the mutation. Interestingly, 
 GNAS mutations have been described in a subset of patients har-
boring intramuscular myxomas (Mazabraud syndrome) with or 
without associated fibrous dysplasia, a feature that is reminiscent of 
the Carney complex (see above), another genetic disease which 
seems to target the cyclic AMP-signaling pathway. 
 Neurofibromatosis Type 1 
 Neurofibromatosis type 1 (von Recklinghausen disease) is an auto-
somal dominant genetic disorder characterized by a variety of 
skin manifestations, including caféaulait spots, subcutaneous 
 neurofibromas, and axillary and inguinal freckles as well as neural 
gliomas (eg, optic nerve) and hamartomas of the iris (Lisch nod-
ules). In addition, patients may have a number of endocrine neo-
plasias, including pheochromocytoma, hyperparathyroidism, 
MCT, and somatostatin-producing carcinoid tumors of the duo-
denal wall. The genetic lesion in neurofibromatosis type 1 is 
located at 17q11.2, a locus that harbors the neurofibromin gene. 
Neurofibromin is a homolog of the p21 Ras-dependent GTPase-
activating proteins and is thought to function in a tumor suppres-
sor mode through regulation of Ras-dependent signaling activity. 
 Von Hippel-Lindau Disease 
 Von Hippel-Lindau disease is a heritable autosomal dominant dis-
order characterized by retinal and cerebellar hemangioblastomas, 
renal cell carcinoma, islet cell tumors, pheochromocytomas, and 
renal, pancreatic, and epididymal cysts. The presence of pheochro-
mocytomas and most of the islet cell tumors is confined to the type 
2 variant of the disease, which accounts for 25% to 35% of affected 
kindreds. The genetic lesion has been localized to 3p25. The von 
Hippel-Lindau protein, which is normally encoded by this locus, 
participates in the formation of a multiprotein complex involved in 
the regulation of hypoxia-induced gene transcriptional activity, 
fibronectin matrix assembly, and ubiquitin ligases. 
 MEN X 
 This is a rare syndrome, inherited in autosomal recessive fashion, 
in which affected patients display a tumor spectrum that overlaps 
those of MEN1 and MEN2. This syndrome has been linked to a 
germ line nonsense mutation in the human  CDN1B gene encod-
ing the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27 Kip1 . 
 REFERENCES 
 MEN1 
 Doherty GM. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1: duodenopancreatic tumors. 
 Surg Oncol . 2003;12:135. [PMID: 12946484] 
 Gibril F, Schumann M, Pace A, Jensen RT. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 
and Zollinger Ellison syndrome.  Medicine . 2004;83:43. [PMID: 12946484
Glascock MJ, Carty SE. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type1: fresh perspective on 
clinical features and penetrance. Surg Oncol 2002;11:143. [PMID: 
12356510] 
 Hughes CM, Rozenblatt-Rosen O, Milne TA, et al. Menin associates with a tritho-
rax family histone methyltransferase complex and with the Hoxc8 locus.  Mol 
Cell . 2004;13:567. [PMID: 14992727] 
 Kivlen MH, Bartlett DL, Libutti SK, et al. Reoperation for hyperparathyroidism in 
multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1.  Surgery . 2001;130:991. [PMID: 11742328] 
 Lakhani VT, You YN, Wells SA. The multiple endocrine neoplasia syndromes.  Ann 
Rev Med . 2007;58:253. [PMID: 17037976] 
 Lemos MC, Thakker RV. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1): analysis 
of 1336 mutations reported in the first decade following identification of the 
gene.  Hum Mut . 2008;29:22. [PMID: 17879353] 
 Milne TA, Hughes CM, Lloyd R, et al. Menin and MLL cooperatively regulate 
expression of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors.  Proc Natl Acad Sci (USA) . 
2005;102:749. [PMID: 15640349
Schussheim DH, Skarulis MC, Agarwal SK, et al. Multiple endocrine neoplasia 
type 1: new clinical and basic findings. Trends Endocrinol Metab 2001;12:173. 
[PMID: 11295574] 
 Triponez, Dosseh D, Goudet P, et al. Epidemiology data on 108 MEN1 patients 
from the the GTE with isolated non-functioning tumors of the pancreas. 
 Ann Surg . 2006;243:265. [PMID: 16432361] 
CHAPTER 22 Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia     735
 Trouillas J, Labat-Moleur F, Sturm N, et al. Pituitary tumors and hyperplasia in 
multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 syndrome (MEN1): a case control study 
in a series of 77 patients versus 2509 non-MEN1 patients.  Am J Surg Path . 
2008;32:534. [PMID: 18300794] 
 MEN2 
 Brandi ML, Gagel RF, Angeli A, et al. Consensus guidelines for diagnosis and 
therapy of MEN type 1 and type 2.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2001;86:5658. 
[PMID: 11739416] 
 Elisei R, Romei C, Cosci B, et al. RET genetic screening in patients with medullary 
thyroid cancer and their relatives: experience with 807 individuals at one 
center.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2007;92:4725. [PMID: 17895320] 
 Machens A, Holzhausen HJ, Thanh PN, et al. Malignant progression from C-cell 
hyperplasia to medullary thyroid carcinoma in 167 carriers of the Ret ger-
mline mutations.  Surgery . 2003;134:425. [PMID: 14555929] 
 Punales MKC, daRocha AP, Meotti C, Gross JL, Maia AL. Clinical and oncologi-
cal features of children and young adults with multiple endocrine neoplasia 
type 2A.  Thyroid . 2008;18:1. [PMID: 18991485] 
 Runeberg-Roos P, Saarma M. Neurotrophic factor receptor RET: structure, cell 
biology and inherited disease.  Ann Med . 2007;39:572. [PMID: 
17934909
Verga U, Fugazzola L, Cambiaghi S, et al.  Frequent association between MEN 2A 
and cutaneous lichen amyloidosis. Clin Endocrinol 2003;59:156. [PMID: 
12864791] 
 Other Disorders 
 Riminucci M, Collins MT, Fedarko NS, et al. FGF-23 in fibrous dysplasia of bone 
and its relationship to renal phosphate wasting.  J Clin Invest . 2003;112:642. 
[PMID: 12952917] 
 Spiegel AM, Weinstein LS. Inherited diseases involving G proteins and G 
protein-coupled receptors.  Annu Rev Med . 2004;55:27. [PMID: 
14746508] 
 Stratakis CA, Kirschner LS, Carney JA. Clinical and molecular features of the 
Carney complex: diagnostic criteria and recommendations for patient 
evaluation.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2001;86:4041. [PMID: 
11549623] 
This page intentionally left blank
737
3
2
 Geriatric Endocrinology 
 Susan L. Greenspan, MD,  Mary Korytkowski, MD, and 
 Neil M. Resnick, MD 
 ADA 
American Diabetes Association 
 BG 
Blood glucose 
 BMD 
Bone mineral density 
 BMI 
Body mass index 
 CHF 
Congestive heart failure 
 CRH 
Corticotropin-releasing hormone 
 CVD 
Cardiovascular disease 
 DHEA 
Dehydroepiandrosterone 
 DPP IV 
Dipeptidyl peptidase IV 
 FFA 
Free fatty acids 
 GFR 
Glomerular filtration rate 
 GIP 
Glucose insulinotropic peptide 
 GLP1 
Glucagon-like peptide 1 
 GLUT 
Glucose transporter 
 HHNS 
Hyperglycemic hyperosmolar nonketotic 
 
syndrome 
 IGT 
Impaired glucose tolerance 
 LH 
Luteinizing hormone 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 LHRH 
Luteinizing hormone–releasing hormone 
 NHANES 
National Health and Nutrition Examination 
 
Survey 
 NPH 
Neutral protamine Hagedorn 
 NSAIDS 
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
 
drugs 
 OGTT 
Oral glucose tolerance test 
 PTH 
Parathyroid hormone 
 RANK-L 
Receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa 
 
B ligand 
 SERM 
Selective estrogen receptor modulator 
 SIADH 
Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic 
 
hormone 
 T 3 
Triiodothyronine 
 T 4 
Thyroxine 
 TLI 
Therapeutic lifestyle intervention 
 TSH 
Thyroid-stimulating hormone 
 UKPDS 
United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes 
 
Study 
 Individuals over age 65 comprise the fastest-growing segment 
of the United States population; each day this group increases 
by more than 1000 people. This increase has led to a remark-
able situation—of all the people who have ever lived to the 
age of 65, more than two-thirds are still alive. Thus, it is 
becoming increasingly important for the endocrinologist to 
understand how endocrine physiology and disease may differ in 
the elderly. 
 Before considering specific endocrinologic conditions in the 
elderly, however, it is worthwhile to review some general princi-
ples that account for many of the age-related changes in disease 
presentation in the elderly. First, aging itself—in the absence of 
disease—is associated with only a gradual and linear decline in 
the physiologic reserve of each organ system ( Figure 23–1 ). 
Because the reserve capacity of each system is substantial, age-
related declines have little effect on baseline function and do not 
 significantly interfere with the individual’s response to stress 
until the eighth or ninth decade. Second, because each organ 
system’s function declines at a different physiologic rate and 
because 75% of the elderly have at least one disease, endocrine 
dysfunction in the elderly often presents disparately, with initial 
symptoms derived from the most compromised organ system. 
For example, hyperthyroidism in an elderly patient with preex-
isting coronary and conduction system disease may present with 
atrial fibrillation and a slow ventricular response, whereas in 
another equally hyperthyroid patient with a prior stroke, it may 
present with confusion or depression; neither patient may toler-
ate hyperthyroidism long enough for the classic thyroid-related 
manifestations (eg, goiter) to become apparent. Third, elderly 
patients often have multiple diseases and take many medications 
that may mimic or mask the usual presentation of endocrine 
disease. 
738    CHAPTER 23 Geriatric Endocrinology
 THYROID FUNCTION AND DISEASE 
 The prevalence of thyroid disease in the elderly is approximately 
twice that in younger individuals, with hypothyroidism ranging 
from 2% to 7% and hyperthyroidism affecting up to 2% of older 
individuals. The Whickham Survey of 21,000 adults in Great 
Britain and its follow-up study, conducted between 1972 and 
1993, reported that the incidence of overt hypothyroidism was 
increased 10-fold in women age 75 and older when compared to 
women in their twenties. In the NHANES 1999 to 2002 survey 
(N=4392) the overall prevalence of hypothyroidism was 3.7% 
(includes overt and mild) including a prevalence of 5.5% for indi-
viduals age 50 to 79 years and 12.1% for those age 80 and older. 
Individuals age 80 and older had five times greater probability for 
developing hypothyroidism (OR=5.0, p  =0.0002) compared to 
those 12 to 49 years of age. In addition, some studies suggest that 
up to 9% of hospitalized elderly patients have overt thyroid disease. 
 Subclinical hypothyroidism —normal serum levels of thyroid 
hormones (thyroxine, T 4 ; triiodothyronine, T 3 ) with an elevated 
level of thyroid-stimulating hormone (thyrotropin) (TSH)—is more 
prevalent, with estimates of 6% to 13% in the elderly ( Figure 23–2 ), 
and is higher in women than in men. The NHANES III data 
(N=16,533) suggests that the distribution of TSH shifts to a higher 
concentration with age and therefore the prevalence of subclinical 
hypothyroidism may be overshadowed (see  Figure 23–3 ). In the 
elderly, the progression from subclinical to overt hypothyroidism is 
roughly 2% to 5% per year. Subclinical hyperthyroidism—normal 
serum thyroxine with suppressed serum TSH levels—may be 
found in approximately 2% of elderly subjects ( Figure 23–2 ). The 
rate of progression to overt hyperthyroidism is less clear. Finally, the 
overall prevalence of thyroid hormone use in older adults is approx-
imately 7% (10% in women and 2% in men). 
 There are few major age-related changes in the physiology of 
the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis (Chapters 4 and 7). There are 
slight age-related increases in serum TSH levels (see  Figure 23–3 ) 
and decreases in total T 4 . TSH release remains pulsatile, 
although the nocturnal rise in serum TSH appears to be blunted 
with age. There is a slight age-related decline in serum T 3 , but 
values usually remain within normal limits. The effect of age on 
the release of TSH by thyrotropin-releasing hormone is less 
clear, but most recent studies show little clinically relevant 
change in either sex. The 24-hour radioiodine uptake is also not 
significantly altered with age. Thyroid antibodies are common 
in older women (prevalence up to 25%,  Figure 23–4 ), but their 
presence does not serve as a specific screening test for thyroid 
disease. The presence of thyroid antibodies (occult thyroid dys-
function) may skew the upper limit of TSH in the African 
American, Caucasian, and Mexican American ethnic groups 
(see  Figure 23–4 ). 
 DISORDERS OF THE THYROID GLAND 
 The United States Preventive Services Task Force concluded that 
there was insufficient evidence to recommend routine screening for 
thyroid disease in adults. Furthermore, there is no consensus regard-
ing screening in the elderly. A scientific review panel suggests case 
finding for screening older patients at high risk (eg, family history, 
personal history, radiation, and other risk factors). The American 
Thyroid Association recommends that adults be screened by serum 
TSH determination every 5 years. A consensus statement from the 
American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists, the American 
Thyroid Association, and the Endocrine Society recommends rou-
tine screening for subclinical thyroid dysfunction in adults. However, 
it is reasonable to measure TSH at any time in older individuals who 
present with atypical symptoms of thyroid disease such as exacerba-
tion of cardiac symptoms, change in mental status, falling, or onset 
of depression. Despite the sensitivity of the TSH assay, further 
evaluation with a free T 4 or total T 4 is often required because up to 
98% of elderly subjects with mildly suppressed TSH levels do not 
have thyrotoxicosis. 
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
00
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Age (years)
Conduction velocity
Basal metabolic rate
Standard cell water
Cardiac index
Standard glomerular
  filtration rate (inulin)
Vital capacity
Standard renal plasma
  flow (diodrast)
Standard renal plasma
  flow (PAH)
Maximal breathing
  capacity
Percent property remaining
(average)
 FIGURE 23–1  Influence of age on physiologic function in humans. (Reproduced, with permission, from Shock NW. Discussion on mortality 
and measurement. In: Strehler BL, et al, eds.  The Biology of Aging: A Symposium . American Institute of Biological Sciences; 1960.) 
CHAPTER 23 Geriatric Endocrinology     739
 1. HYPERTHYROIDISM 
 Clinical Features 
 With age, the prevalence of Graves disease decreases (although it 
remains the most common cause of hyperthyroidism), and the 
prevalence of multinodular goiter and toxic nodules increases. 
Elderly hyperthyroid patients tend to present with symptoms or 
complications related to the most vulnerable organ system—usually 
the cardiovascular system (atrial fibrillation, congestive heart fail-
ure, angina, and acute myocardial infarction) or the central nervous 
system (apathy, depression, confusion, or lassitude). The hyper-
catabolic state also causes muscle wasting, particularly of the quad-
riceps, thereby increasing the risk of falls. Occasionally, hyperthyroid 
elderly patients present with gastrointestinal symptoms, but these 
differ from those seen in younger patients because they include 
constipation, failure to thrive, anorexia, and weight loss. Because of 
degeneration of the sinus node and fibrotic changes in the cardiac 
conduction system, older patients are less likely than younger ones 
to present with palpitations (Table 23–1). However, a very low 
serum TSH concentration is associated with a threefold higher risk 
of atrial fibrillation in the subsequent decade. Hyperthyroidism is 
also associated with bone loss and fractures. 
 The physical signs of hyperthyroidism also differ in the elderly 
(see Table 23–1). Sinus tachycardia is less frequent; the thyroid 
feels normal in size or is not palpable in two-thirds of patients; and 
lid lag is uncommon. Ophthalmopathy is less common, not only 
because Graves disease occurs less often, but also because, even 
with Graves disease, ophthalmopathy occurs less frequently in the 
elderly. However, although they are less common in the elderly, 
some findings appear to be highly suggestive of hyperthyroidism. 
These include increased frequency of bowel movements, weight 
loss despite increased appetite, fine finger tremor, eyelid retrac-
tion, and increased perspiration. Lid lag is uncommon but if 
found, it is highly suggestive of hyperthyroidism (specific). 
 Diagnosis 
 As in younger patients (Chapter 7), the diagnosis is usually con-
firmed by standard thyroid function tests, beginning with a 
depressed TSH level as measured by a sensitive immunoradiomet-
ric or chemiluminescent assay. There are potential pitfalls, however. 
Hospitalized elderly patients who are acutely ill (but euthyroid) 
may have a suppressed serum TSH. Further, other thyroid function 
tests should help rule out hyperthyroidism. T 3 toxicosis may be 
Total population
12-19
Age group
A. Percentage with high serum TSH (> 4.5 mIU/L)
Percent of age group with TSH > 4.5 mIU/L
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Disease-free population*
Reference population**
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60-69
70-79
80+
Total population
12-19
Age group
B. Percentage with low serum TSH (< 0.4 mIU/L)
Percent of age group with TSH < 0.4 mIU/L
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Disease-free population*
Reference population**
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60-69
70-79
80+
 FIGURE 23–2  Percentage with high or low serum thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) in the total US population, the disease-free (excludes 
those people who have reported having thyroid disease, goiter, or taking thyroid medications * ) and reference population (excludes those peo-
ple who reported having thyroid disease, goiter, or taking thyroid medications and those who do not have risk factors such as pregnancy or tak-
ing estrogen, androgens, or lithium and who are without the presence of thyroid antibodies or biochemical evidence of hypothyroidism or 
hyperthyroidism ** ) by age.  A: High serum TSH. In the disease-free population, the percentage of people with high serum TSH concentration 
(>4.5 μIU/mL) is slightly lower than that of the total population but significantly higher than the percentage in the reference population.  B: Low 
serum TSH. The percentage of people with low serum TSH in the disease-free population, on the other hand, is significantly lower than the per-
centage in the total population and similar to the pattern seen in the reference population. Note the elevated prevalence of low TSH in the pop-
ulations without thyroid disease or risk factors at ages 20 to 39 years and again after age 79 years. The higher prevalence of individuals with low 
TSH or high TSH in the total population is related directly to the people reporting thyroid disease, goiter, or taking thyroid medication and prob-
ably reflects inadequate management of clinical thyroid disease. (Reproduced, with permission, from Hollowell JG, et al. Serum TSH, T 4 , and thy-
roid antibodies in the US population [1988 to 1994]: National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey [NHANES III].  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2002;87:489. Copyright 2002 by The Endocrine Society.) 
740    CHAPTER 23 Geriatric Endocrinology
Age 20-29
Age 50-59
Age 80+
0.1
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.6
0.9
1.4
2.1
3.1
4.7
7.1 10.7 16.1 24.2 36.5 55.1
Percent 
A
0.1
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0.2
0.3
0.4
Upper TSH concentration in bin
0.6
0.9
1.4
2.1
3.1
4.7
7.1 10.7 16.1 24.2 36.5 55.1
Percent 
B
Age 20-29
Age 50-59
Age 80+
 FIGURE 23–3  TSH distribution by age groups in the United States.  A: Disease-free population.  B: Reference population, NHANES III (1988-1994). 
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Age groups (y)
1 = 12-19
2 = 20-29
3 = 30-39
4 = 40-49
5 = 50-59
6 = 60-69
7 = 70-79
8 =    >39
2
3
4
5
Black (age groups)
TSH mIU/L
0
5
10
15
20
25
% TPOAb and/or TgAb
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
White (age groups)
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
Mexican American (age groups)
6
7
8
FIGURE 23–4 The panels show TSH percentiles (5th, triangles; 50th, circles; and 97.5th, squares) for the eight age groups for each ethnicity: 
left, B; middle, W; right, M. Solid symbols represent the TSH percentiles for antibody-positive subjects, and open symbols represent the TSH per-
centiles for antibody-negative subjects. In each panel, the solid line links the prevalence of TPOAb and/or TgAb of each age group.
CHAPTER 23 Geriatric Endocrinology     741
more difficult evaluation to diagnose because concomitant nonthy-
roidal illness is common and can depress serum T 3 . 
 Furthermore, iodide-induced hyperthyroidism, reflecting the 
Jod-Basedow phenomenon (see Chapter 7), is becoming more 
common in elderly patients with multinodular goiter because of 
increased exposure to radiocontrast studies; the resultant hyper-
thyroidism is generally transient. 
 Finally, because of screening tests with sensitive TSH assays, sub-
clinical hyperthyroidism (normal T 4 , T 3 , free T 4 with a suppressed 
TSH) is being recognized more commonly. This is often found in 
older subjects with autonomous function of a multinodular goiter or 
nodule. Osteoporosis and atrial fibrillation are complications of sub-
clinical hyperthyroidism that may be an indication for treatment. 
Recent studies suggest a possible increase in all-cause mortality in 
patients with subclinical hyperthyroidism with an increase beyond 
the age of 60, especially in aging men ( Figure 23–5 ). If patients are 
not treated, careful follow-up is recommended. 
 Treatment 
 Beta-blocking agents are useful in alleviating symptoms, but 
radioactive iodine is the therapy of choice in elderly patients 
because it is efficient, uncomplicated, and inexpensive. Antithyroid 
drugs can be used prior to radioactive iodine treatment to render 
the patient euthyroid and to avoid radiation-induced thyroiditis, 
but they are not definitive treatment and are more toxic in this age 
group. Surgery has a more limited role because of its increased 
morbidity. 
 Following radioactive iodine treatment, patients become euthy-
roid over a period of 6 to 12 weeks. They should receive careful 
follow-up, because hypothyroidism develops in 80% or more of 
patients who have been adequately treated. Once hyperthyroidism 
has abated, the metabolic clearance rate of other medications may 
decrease, and doses may require readjustment. Older patients with 
subclinical hyperthyroidism require follow-up, especially if pre-
sented with an iodine load. 
 2. HYPOTHYROIDISM 
 Hypothyroidism in the elderly is most often due to Hashimoto 
thyroiditis, prior thyroid surgery, or radioactive iodine ablative 
therapy. Medications, including amiodarone, lithium, and 
interferon-α, can lead to hypothyroidism. The risk of developing 
hypothyroidism is significantly increased in older women when 
serum antithyroid antibodies or serum TSH are elevated. 
 Clinical Features 
 It is easy to overlook hypothyroidism in an older person, because 
many euthyroid elderly patients have the same symptoms. 
Moreover, elderly patients with hypothyroidism are more likely 
than younger patients to present with cardiovascular symptoms 
(eg, congestive heart failure or angina) or neurologic findings (eg, 
cognitive impairment, confusion, depression, paresthesias, deaf-
ness, psychosis, or coma). Finally, in the older hypothyroid 
patient, the physical findings are frequently nonspecific, although 
puffy face, delayed deep tendon reflexes, and myoedema support 
the diagnosis. 
 Diagnosis 
 Serum TSH is the most sensitive indicator of primary hypothy-
roidism and should be checked first. The diagnosis should then be 
confirmed with a low serum T 4 or free T 4 . Measurement of serum 
T 3 is unnecessary and potentially misleading, because T 3 is the 
thyroid hormone most likely to decrease in nonthyroidal illness. 
Serum TSH should not be used alone to diagnose hypothyroidism 
because it does not always differentiate symptomatic from 
TABLE 23–1  Percentages of patients with  symptoms 
and physical findings attributable to 
thyrotoxicosis.
Old1 
Old2 
Young 
Number 
Mean age 
 Range 
Symptoms (%) 
 
Weight loss 
 Palpitations 
 Weakness 
 Dizziness, syncope 
 Nervousness 
 No symptoms 
 Memory loss 
 Tremor 
 Local symptomsb 
 Pruritus 
 Heat intolerance 
Physical Findings 
 
Pulse >100/min 
 Atrial fibrillation 
 New-onset atrial 
  fibrillation 
 Lid lag 
 Exophthalmos 
 Fine skin 
 Tremor 
 Myopathy 
 Hyperactive reflexes 
 Gynecomastia 
 None 
Thyroid Examination (%) 
 
Impalpable or normal 
 Diffusely enlarged 
 Multinodular goiter 
 Isolated nodule 
25 
81.5 
75-95 
44 
36 
32 
20 
20 
8 
8 
8 
8 
4 
4 
28c 
32 
20d 
12 
8 
40 
36 
8 
24 
(1 male) 
8 
68 
12 
12 
8 
85 
68.6 
60-82 
35 
42 
28 
. . . 
38 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
11 
4 
63 
58 
39 
. . . 
35 
8 
81 
89 
39 
26 
1 
. . . 
37 
22 
20 
21 
247 
40a 
5-73 
85 
89 
70 
. . . 
99 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
89 
100 
10 
. . . 
71 
. . . 
97 
97 
. . . 
. . . 
10 
. . . 
. . . 
100 
. . . 
. . . 
Modified and reproduced, with permission, from Tibaldi JM, et al. 
Thyrotoxicosis in the very old. Am J Med. 1986;81:619. 
aApproximated from graph of patients’ ages. 
bDysphagia, enlarging neck mass, etc. 
cIncludes five patients with normal sinus rhythm and two who had atrial fibrillation. 
dThis was transient in four of five patients with conversion to normal sinus rhythm. 
Note: 
Old1= Tibaldi JM, et al. Thyrotoxicosis in the very old. Am J Med. 1986;81:619. 
Old2= Davis PJ, Davis FB. Hyperthyroidism in patients over the age of 60 years. Clinical 
features in 85 patients. Medicine (Balti-more). 1974;53:161. 
Young = Ingbar SH, et al. The thyroid gland. In: Williams RH, ed. Williams Textbook of 
Endocrinology. Saunders; 1981. 
742    CHAPTER 23 Geriatric Endocrinology
 subclinical hypothyroidism. Furthermore, levels of TSH may be 
higher at night as a result of the nocturnal rise in serum TSH. 
Moreover, the pulsatile nature of TSH, resulting in serum TSH 
slightly above the normal ranges, may lead to a diagnosis of sub-
clinical hypothyroidism in a euthyroid subject. Finally, in hypo-
thyroid patients, serum TSH levels can be reduced to within the 
normal range by treatment with dopaminergic drugs and corticos-
teroids. In such patients, determination of free T 4 may help dif-
ferentiate those with true hypothyroidism from those with 
nonthyroidal illness (Chapter 7). 
 Treatment 
 The doses of thyroid hormone required for adequate replacement 
decrease with age. Elderly patients should be started on approxi-
mately 25 to 50 µg of levothyroxine, and the dose should be 
increased by approximately 25 µg every 4 to 6 weeks until the 
serum TSH comes into the normal range. In patients with cardio-
vascular disease, even lower initial doses can be used (12.5 µg) and 
increased at a slower rate. Desiccated thyroid hormone and prepa-
rations containing T 3 should be avoided, because T 3 is rapidly 
absorbed and cleared and may be cardiotoxic. The metabolic clear-
ance of other drugs changes as hypothyroidism is corrected, and 
their dosages may require readjustment. On average, the dose of 
levothyroxine in the elderly is roughly 1 µg/kg/d compared with 
1.7 µg/kg/d in young adults. Overtreatment documented by a 
suppressed serum TSH should be avoided because of the potential 
adverse effects to the skeleton and cardiovascular system. 
 It is still not known whether treating subclinical hypothyroid-
ism is beneficial. A Cochrane review of 12 small trials that 
included treatment of subclinical hypothyroidism with thyroid 
hormone did not find improved survival, decreased cardiac mor-
bidity, or differences in quality of life or symptoms. Two-thirds of 
patients with subclinical hypothyroidism were chemically euthy-
roid for at least 4 years, and the absence of antimicrosomal anti-
bodies may identify patients at lowest risk of progression. The 
presence of antithyroperoxidase antibodies is associated with a 
higher risk of progression to overt hypothyroidism of 4.3%/year 
versus 2.6%/year in antibody-negative patients. 
 If patients are not treated, they need to be followed closely for 
progression of disease. Elderly patients previously treated with 
radioactive iodine are more likely to progress to overt hypothy-
roidism. 
 3. MULTINODULAR GOITER 
 The prevalence of multinodular goiter increases with age. However, 
if swallowing and breathing are not compromised and thyroid 
0
0
5
10
15
A
B
2
4
Years after the diagnosis of subclinical
hyperthyroidism
Excess mortality (%)
6
8
10
Diagnosis at age 80
Diagnosis at age 70
Diagnosis at age 60
Diagnosis at age 50
Diagnosis at age 40
Diagnosis at age 30
Diagnosis at age 20
0
0
5
10
15
2
4
Years after the diagnosis of subclinical
hyperthyroidism
Excess mortality (%)
6
8
10
Diagnosis at age 80
Diagnosis at age 70
Diagnosis at age 60
Diagnosis at age 50
Diagnosis at age 40
Diagnosis at age 30
Diagnosis at age 20
FIGURE 23–5 A: Excess mortality from all causes after the diagnosis of subclinical hyperthyroidism for US women and B: US men with sub-
clinical hyperthyroidism. These data are based on a hypothetical approach using mathematical modeling, that is, these data are not based on 
individual patient data, but derive from aggregated data reported in original cohort studies and life tables.
CHAPTER 23 Geriatric Endocrinology     743
function tests are normal, the goiter can be observed without 
treatment. Levothyroxine therapy rarely shrinks the gland, and 
although it may prevent further enlargement, the risk of inducing 
iatrogenic hyperthyroidism is significant. This is compounded by 
the fact that multinodular goiters may independently develop 
areas of autonomous function. 
 4. THYROID NODULES AND CANCER 
 Thyroid nodules are more common in the elderly. The prevalence 
of nodules increases with age and is generally higher in women 
than in men. Furthermore, the prevalence of thyroid nodules 
detected by ultrasound may be as high as 40% in older women. 
Ninety percent of these nodules are benign, but the prognosis for 
elderly patients with malignant nodules may be worse than that 
for younger patients with malignant nodules. The approach is 
similar to the workup in a younger patient. The prognosis corre-
lates with the size of the tumor. The outcome in elderly patients 
may therefore be substantially improved by early evaluation of 
nodules in patients who are good surgical candidates. 
 Papillary carcinoma is more common in young and middle-
aged patients. However, it has a poorer prognosis in the elderly, 
possibly because it is detected at a more advanced stage. Follicular 
carcinoma accounts for 15% of thyroid cancers and usually occurs 
in middle-aged and older patients. Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma 
is found almost exclusively in middle-aged and older patients. It 
presents as a rapidly growing hard mass that is locally invasive, 
often associated with metastatic lesions, and has a very poor prog-
nosis (Chapter 7). 
 CARBOHYDRATE INTOLERANCE 
AND DIABETES MELLITUS 
 Introduction 
 Diabetes is an important health condition for the aging popula-
tion. More than 20% of individuals over the age of 60 years have 
diabetes, and another 14% have impaired glucose tolerance 
(IGT). It is anticipated that these numbers will continue to 
increase in the coming decades. It is therefore almost certain that 
those involved in the care of patients in this age group will 
encounter those with some disorder of glucose tolerance. 
 Both IGT and diabetes are associated with enhanced morbidity 
and mortality due to macrovascular and cardiovascular disease 
(CVD); an increase in risk for microvascular complications (retin-
opathy, neuropathy) that impair the ability to maintain indepen-
dence; changes in cognitive function; and depression. Older 
individuals with diabetes have more functional disability and 
coexisting illnesses such as hypertension, coronary heart disease 
(CHD), and stroke than those without diabetes. Older adults with 
diabetes are also at greater risk for urinary incontinence, injurious 
falls, and issues related to polypharmacy. 
 Early diagnosis and appropriate intervention can help to avoid 
some of the adverse consequences of hyperglycemia, while also 
improving health-related quality of life (HRQL) in this age group. 
In 2003, the American Geriatric Society published guidelines that 
are useful in guiding the care of the older person with diabetes. 
These recommendations are now included as part of the standards 
of care published annually by the American Diabetes Association. 
 Aging and the Physiology of 
Carbohydrate Intolerance 
 Normal aging is associated with a gradual increase in both fasting 
(1 mg/dL [0.6 mmol/L] per decade) and glucose-stimulated blood 
glucose (BG) (5 mg/dL [0.28 mmol/L] per decade) levels, even in 
lean, physically active individuals with normal body weight. 
Normoglycemic elderly subjects have higher glucose and insulin 
levels during an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) than body 
mass index (BMI)-matched young subjects. These changes in BG 
are more profound in those who have risk factors for abnormal 
glucose tolerance. 
 Type 2 diabetes is characterized by defects in both insulin 
secretion and sensitivity. Although the majority of people with 
type 2 diabetes are insulin-resistant, insulin resistance by itself is 
not sufficient to lead to hyperglycemia. Age-related impairments 
in beta cell function that include reduced conversion of proinsulin 
to insulin and abnormal insulin secretion are important contribu-
tors to the development of hyperglycemia in elderly individuals. 
Lean elderly patients with type 2 diabetes have a greater impair-
ment in insulin secretion than insulin sensitivity while obese 
patients have both impaired insulin secretion and sensitivity in 
muscle and liver ( Figure 23–6 ). 
 Several abnormalities of beta cell function contribute to the 
decline in insulin secretory capacity with advancing age. These 
include an accumulation of intracellular lipid within the beta cell; 
a decrease in glucose transporter (GLUT) 2 number; and a 
reduced sensitivity to the incretin hormones, glucagon-like pep-
tide 1 (GLP1), and glucose insulinotropic peptide (GIP) that acts 
to augment the postprandial insulin response. Genetic susceptibil-
ity also plays a role. In individuals without diabetes who carry five 
or more risk alleles that are associated with development of diabe-
tes, impairments in insulin secretion are observed at an earlier age 
than those with fewer alleles. Evidence of autoimmunity with 
antibodies directed against beta cell proteins has been demon-
strated as a cause of impaired insulin secretion in up to 12% of 
elderly individuals. 
 These impairments in beta cell function can be unmasked by 
an increase in insulin resistance that occurs with normal aging. 
The insulin resistance that accompanies aging is associated with 
the accumulation of intracellular fat and a progressive decline in 
the number and function of mitochondria resulting in reduced 
oxidative glucose metabolism and phosphorylation activity. Insulin 
resistance is augmented by weight gain; reductions in lean body 
mass and increases in fat mass; physical inactivity; and use of some 
medications (ie, glucocorticoids and atypical antipsychotics). 
Insulin resistance occurs in muscle, where there is a reduction in 
insulin-mediated glucose uptake following a meal; in adipose tis-
sue where impaired regulation of hormone-sensitive lipase results 
in increases in circulating levels of free fatty acids (FFA); and liver 
where there is overproduction of glucose in the fasting state and 
failure to adequately suppress glucose production after a meal. 
744    CHAPTER 23 Geriatric Endocrinology
 Metabolic Syndrome 
 The metabolic syndrome refers to a clustering of metabolic abnor-
malities outlined in Table 23–2 that are associated with an increase 
in risk for type 2 diabetes and CVD. This syndrome is more com-
mon in the elderly, increasing from approximately 7% of the 
population in the third decade to 44% in the seventh decade. 
Lifestyle interventions targeting modifications in dietary intake, 
regular exercise, and weight reduction are effective in reducing the 
progression to overt type 2 diabetes among individuals above age 
60 years. 
 Establishing the Diagnosis of 
Diabetes Mellitus 
 A. Diagnostic criteria 
 The majority of elderly individuals 
with diabetes will have type 2 diabetes. The typical symptoms 
usually associated with hyperglycemia may either not be present 
or may have developed so gradually that they may not be per-
ceived as being abnormal. The use of diuretics can mask polyuria 
and polydipsia as manifestations of hyperglycemia. An age- 
related decrease in thirst may blunt these usual symptoms. It is 
therefore important that laboratory measurement of BG be per-
formed on at least an annual basis in individuals above the age 
of 60. 
 A diagnosis of diabetes can be established by one of three estab-
lished criteria outlined in Table 23–3. Oral glucose tolerance test-
ing is performed infrequently in clinical practice and is not 
required to establish the diagnosis, particularly in elderly individu-
als. Measurement of an A1c is now accepted as an alternative tool 
in establishing a diagnosis of diabetes, with values ≥6.5% consis-
tent with a diagnosis of diabetes. A1c values of 6.0% to 6.4% 
identify those at high risk for development of type 2 diabetes. A 
reasonable approach would be to measure an A1c in any elderly 
person with abnormal glucose values. 
 B. Glycemic goals 
 Both the ADA and the American Geriatrics 
Society recommend that functional, cognitively intact older adults 
who have significant anticipated life expectancy be treated to simi-
lar glycemic goals as younger adults. This means guiding therapy to 
achieve HbA1c of <7% for the majority of people with diabetes. 
FIGURE 23–6 The pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes mellitus in obese elderly and lean elderly.
Liver
Impaired insulin
secretion
Muscle
Decreased muscle
glucose uptake
More profound in
obese elderly with
type 2 diabetes
More profound in
lean elderly with
type 2 diabetes
HYPERGLYCEMIA
Increased
hepatic
glucose
production
Pancreas
TABLE 23–2  National Cholesterol Education 
Program criteria for diagnosis of 
metabolic syndrome.
Diagnosis requires three of the following:
 Abdominal obesity
  Waist circumference >40 in (>102 cm) men
  Waist circumference > 35 in (>88 cm) women
 Triglycerides ≥150 mg/dL or drug treatment
 HDL-C <40 men or <50 women or drug treatment
 Blood pressure ≥130/85 mm Hg or drug treatment
 Fasting glucose ≥ 110 mg/dL or drug treatment
Modified with permission from Alberti KG, Zimmet PZ. Diabet Med. 1998 Jul;15(7):
539-553.
TABLE 23–3 Criteria for diagnosis of type 2 diabetes.
• Fasting glucose ≥126 mg/dL (7.0 mmol/L)
• Any glucose ≥200 mg/dL (11.1 mmol/L) with symptoms
• 2-h PG ≥200 mg/dL (11.1 mmol/L) during a 75-g OGTT
Newly proposed criterion: 
A1c ≥6.5%
Note: Any single abnormal measure requires confirmation with a second test.
CHAPTER 23 Geriatric Endocrinology     745
Achieving this level requires that fasting glucose levels be main-
tained between 80 and 130 mg/dL, and 2-hour postprandial BG at 
<180 mg/dL. These recommendations are not absolute. While the 
goal is to maintain an A1c values as close to normal (<6%) as pos-
sible, this goal can be modified in patients who are at high risk for 
hypoglycemia, who are older, who have comorbid conditions that 
limit life expectancies. These contingencies have particular rele-
vance to the elderly population who may experience variability in 
appetite or food intake, or often have other medical problems 
requiring medications (eg, beta blockers, anxiolytics) that can 
increase vulnerability to hypoglycemia. On the other hand, uncon-
trolled diabetes is also associated with undesirable effects in elderly 
individuals, including fluid and electrolyte abnormalities, problems 
with urinary incontinence and cognitive function, indicating the 
need for a reasonable degree of glycemic control even with advanced 
age. Efforts to achieve A1c levels of <7% are reasonable in some 
elderly patients, provided that the risk for weight gain and hypo-
glycemia is minimized. Therapy can be modified to achieve A1c 
targets of 8% in others as a way of minimizing risk for treatment-
associated concerns. However, symptomatic hyperglycemia that 
can increase risk for an acute hyperglycemic crisis should be 
avoided in all patients. 
 C. Glycemic control and complications 
 Because the com-
plications of diabetes mellitus are related to the duration of dis-
ease, elderly patients who live long enough suffer the same 
complications of nephropathy, neuropathy, and retinopathy as 
their younger counterparts. The United Kingdom Prospective 
Diabetes Study (UKPDS) examined the relationship between 
improved glycemic control and the prevention of complications in 
3067 patients with type 2 diabetes (mean age 54 years) assigned to 
intensive (goal of fasting blood glucose <108 mg/dL) or conven-
tional therapy. After a median follow-up of 10 years, the incidence 
of microvascular complications (retinopathy, neuropathy, and 
nephropathy) was reduced by 25% with intensive treatment. 
There was no difference in the incidence of macrovascular compli-
cations, but there was a tendency for fewer myocardial infarctions 
in the intensive therapy group. A 10-year follow-up report from 
the UKPDS demonstrated a significant favorable legacy effect of 
early intensive therapy in preventing both microvascular and mac-
rovascular complications. 
 Elderly diabetic patients have an impaired counterregulatory 
response to hypoglycemia which can interfere with recovery from 
a hypoglycemic event. In addition, the ability to sense hypoglyce-
mia declines, as does the ability to take corrective action. Coupled 
with the diminished cortical reserve due to the higher prevalence 
of age-associated conditions such as stroke, lacunar infarction, 
amyloid angiopathy, and Alzheimer disease, the older brain is less 
able to recover fully from hypoglycemic insult. 
 Cardiovascular Disease 
 CVD is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in elderly people 
with diabetes. For this reason, interventions recommended for the 
secondary prevention of recurrent coronary events in individuals 
without diabetes are recommended for all individuals with diabetes 
independent of known heart disease. This includes control of 
blood pressure, treatment of hyperlipidemia, and use of low-dose 
aspirin therapy in those without contraindications. While tight 
glycemic control has been demonstrated to reduce the risk for 
microvascular and neuropathic complications, the role of tight 
glycemic control for prevention of macrovascular disease and CVD 
has been addressed in several recent clinical trials. 
 Three recent large, randomized, prospective clinical trials with 
relevance to an elderly population were conducted in an effort to 
define the effect of lowering A1c to levels lower than those cur-
rently recommended by the ADA on cardiovascular outcomes in 
patients with type 2 diabetes. The average age of these subjects, all 
of whom had a history of a CVD event or were at high risk for an 
event, ranged from 60 to 66 years. 
 In the Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes 
(ACCORD) study, the goal of intensive glycemic therapy was to 
achieve an A1c <6% versus <8% with conventional treatment. 
The glycemic control study was stopped 18 months early due to 
the observation of a 22% increase in the relative risk for CVD 
death with intensive therapy. In the Action in Diabetes and 
Vascular Disease (ADVANCE) study, the goal of intensive therapy 
was to achieve an A1c <6.5% using the sulfonylurea, gliclazide 
(not available in the United States). A reduction in microvascular 
complications, primarily risk for proteinuria, was observed with 
intensive therapy, but there were no group differences for CVD 
events. In the Veterans Affairs Diabetes Trial (VADT), the goal of 
intensive therapy was to achieve an A1c <6%. There were no sig-
nificant group differences in the composite outcome of CVD 
events; however, there were more CVD deaths (36 vs 29) and 
more sudden deaths in intensively treated subjects (11 vs 4) (p = 
NS). Severe hypoglycemia within the preceding 90 days was a 
predictor of CVD events and mortality. 
 What do these results mean to the practicing physician? It is 
important to note that all three trials included participants with 
long-standing type 2 diabetes and varying degrees of established 
atherosclerosis at time of study entry. In addition, the glycemic 
targets in these trials were well below what is recommended by the 
ADA (7%) and may not be appropriate in elderly individuals 
where the risk for hypoglycemia and related adverse sequellae is 
greater. Other CVD risk factors (eg, hypertension and hyperlipi-
demia) were treated to a moderate or high degree, resulting in 
rates of CVD events that were lower than predicted with standard 
therapy. This places emphasis on the importance of treating non-
glycemic CVD risk factors in patients with diabetes. 
 Treatment Strategies for Achieving 
Glycemic Goals in The Elderly 
 The therapeutic goals for any patient with diabetes, including the 
elderly, are to avoid symptoms of hyperglycemia and hypoglyce-
mia, to minimize risk for acute and chronic diabetes-related com-
plications, and to achieve an optimal health-related quality of life. 
While the majority of newly diagnosed elderly individuals will have 
type 2 diabetes, many individuals with type 1 diabetes are enjoying 
longer survival, making it likely that these patients will require 
care during advancing years. Insulin therapy, either alone or in 
746    CHAPTER 23 Geriatric Endocrinology
combination with oral agents, is often required to maintain desired 
glycemic control in the face of progressive beta cell dysfunction in 
those with type 2 diabetes. For these reasons, knowledge of insulin 
and noninsulin injectable medications is as important as that of the 
five different classes or oral hypoglycemic agents (Table 23–4) 
indicated for the treatment of type 2 diabetes. 
 A. Therapeutic lifestyle intervention 
 The essential com-
ponents of therapeutic lifestyle intervention (TLI) include dietary 
modifications and exercise. Weight reduction is recommended for 
overweight and obese individuals. Recommendations to obtain an 
adequate amount of sleep as either one uninterrupted sleep cycle 
or with daily naps may help reduce risk for progression to overt 
diabetes in those with impairments in glucose intolerance. 
 Dietary interventions for treatment of diabetes promote appro-
priate dietary caloric intake with an appropriate distribution of 
calories among carbohydrates, protein, and fat. There is contradic-
tory information in the literature regarding the optimal diet that 
should be recommended for patients with diabetes. Studies compar-
ing different diets for achieving weight loss have yielded inconsistent 
results. In general, obese patients can be encouraged to follow a 
weight reduction regimen that is most acceptable to their taste, as 
this is more likely to result in a reasonable degree of compliance. 
 The Mediterranean diet which emphasizes the intake of fresh 
fruits and vegetables, whole grains, beans, nuts, and olive oil, may 
have some advantages over traditional low-fat diets in the elderly 
population. In one European study of more than 2000 subjects 
aged 70 to 90 years, the integration of a Mediterranean style diet 
with other healthy lifestyle interventions reduced all-cause mortal-
ity by more than 50%. The Mediterranean diet not only promotes 
weight loss, but also has demonstrated favorable effects on circu-
lating lipids and BG levels. 
 In the ongoing Look AHEAD Study, subjects with type 2 dia-
betes between the ages of 45 and 74 years were able to achieve a 
9% weight loss and 21% increase in fitness level with 30 minutes 
of exercise and 1200 to 1800 calorie intake each day. Exercise 
prescriptions and encouragement to maintain a reasonable level of 
physical activity are as important in the elderly as in the younger 
population. There is no longer a requirement to perform cardiac 
stress testing before recommending an exercise program. To opti-
mize compliance with exercise prescriptions, it is important to 
encourage activities that are enjoyed, that can be performed safely, 
and that can be incorporated into a daily routine. Some insurance 
companies now provide health club memberships as a way of 
encouraging activity. Many elderly individuals have difficulty with 
aerobic activity as a form of exercise. For those who are house-
bound or who have difficulty walking for any distance due to 
presence of spinal stenosis, peripheral neuropathy, claudication or 
other medical problems, stationary bicycling, arm lifts with 
weights, or leg lifts can be encouraged. Progressive resistance train-
ing has been proposed as a more reasonable and beneficial form of 
exercise in these patients. 
 B. Pharmacologic therapy 
 TLI is rarely adequate at achiev-
ing and maintaining glycemic control without pharmacologic 
therapy in the majority of patients with type 2 diabetes, including 
the elderly. This means that some form of pharmacologic therapy 
will almost always be required. While there is no absolute con-
traindication to use of any of the oral or injectable agents available 
for treating diabetes, there are special considerations for prescrib-
ing and monitoring of these agents in older adults. As a general 
rule, medications should be started at the lowest dose and gradu-
ally titrated upward as tolerated until glycemic targets are reached. 
In some cases, it becomes necessary to add on a second agent 
before maximal doses are reached with one agent as a way of 
minimizing adverse reactions. For example, the incidence of gas-
trointestinal side-effects increases with increasing doses of the 
biguanide, metformin. There are many patients who may be 
unable to tolerate the maximal dose of 2 g of metformin each day, 
but who are able to tolerate 1 to 1.5 g/d. In these instances, it may 
be desirable to continue metformin at a lower dose and add 
an insulin secretogogue to achieve the desired level of glycemic 
TABLE 23–4 Oral hypoglycemic agents available for treatment of type 2 diabetes.
Class
Mechanism Action
Side Effects
Agents
Sulfonylureas
Short-acting insulin secretagogues
Stimulates insulin production
Hypoglycemia
Glyburide Glipizide 
Glimeperide
Repaglinide
Nateglinide
Biguanides (metformin)
↓Gluconeogenesis
↑ Insulin sensitivity
Nausea, diarrhea, rarely lactic 
acidosis
Metfomin
Thiazolidinediones
Reduce insulin 
resistance
Edema, CHF
Decrease bone density
Increase LFTs
Rosiglitazone
Pioglitazone
α-Glucosidase inhibitors
Decrease rate of 
carbohydrate absorption
Bloating, abdominal discomfort, 
diarrhea
Acarbose
miglitol
DPP IV inhibitors
Prolongs action GLP1
Increases insulin release
Decreases glucagon
URI
Nausea
Sitagliptin
Saxagliptin
CHAPTER 23 Geriatric Endocrinology     747
control. A discussion of pharmacologic therapy in this review is 
presented with consideration of this strategy in an elderly popula-
tion (see Table 23–4). 
 Initiation of metformin together with TLI is recommended at 
the time of diagnosis of type 2 diabetes. Side-effects with use of 
metformin that have particular relevance to elderly patients 
include anorexia, nausea, abdominal cramping, and diarrhea 
that preclude the use of this drug in approximately 5% of all 
individuals. Reductions in vitamin B 12 levels have also been 
observed. Given the high prevalence of vitamin B 12 deficiency in 
the elderly population, it is reasonable to monitor its levels and/
or recommend vitamin B 12 supplementation at a dose of 50 µg/d 
or more. 
 The most feared complication of therapy with metformin is 
lactic acidosis. This can be avoided by following prescribing guide-
lines that recommend against use of metformin in those with renal 
insufficiency, defined as a serum creatinine ≥1.5 mg/dL in men, 
≥1.4 mg/dL in women; or a creatinine clearance of <60 mL/min. 
The observed age-related decline in glomerular filtration rate 
(GFR), as a measure of creatinine clearance, raises concerns for 
using metformin in the elderly; however, the formulas used to 
estimate GFR (eGFR) do not always provide accurate results in 
this population. When there is doubt as to whether metformin 
can be initiated or continued in a patient with a normal serum 
creatinine but a reduced eGFR, measurement of a creatinine clear-
ance with 24-hour urine collections can provide a more accurate 
measure of renal function. In patients assessed as having normal 
renal function at the time metformin is started; renal function 
needs to be reassessed with changes in clinical status. Caution is 
suggested in patients >80 years of age, although there are no data 
demonstrating a higher incidence of lactic acidosis in this popula-
tion, provided that renal function is normal. 
 There may in fact be advantages to metformin therapy. In a 
study of patients age 72 years with type 2 diabetes and congestive 
heart failure (CHF), those treated with metformin experienced 
lower morbidity and mortality when compared to those treated 
with sulfonylurea monotherapy. There are also epidemiologic data 
that suggest that treatment with metformin is associated with a 
lower incidence of cancer and cancer-related deaths. 
 Alternative or additional pharmacologic therapy is required for 
patients for whom metformin therapy is contraindicated, who do 
not tolerate the medication, or who do not achieve the desired 
level of glycemic control. Insulin secretogogues include long-act-
ing sulfonylureas and shorter-acting meglitinides, which have 
similar efficacy in lowering A1c levels by 1.5%. The sulfonylureas 
reduce both fasting and postprandial glucose levels while the 
shorter-acting meglitinides reduce postprandial glucose excur-
sions. Both renal insufficiency and increasing age are risk factors 
for hypoglycemia with use of these agents in the elderly when used 
as either monotherapy or combination therapy. Glipizide and 
glimepiride are less likely to cause prolonged hypoglycemia in the 
elderly than glyburide, which has active metabolites. The shorter- 
acting meglitinides administered immediately prior to a meal can 
be useful in reducing the risk for hypoglycemia in the elderly who 
experience variability in appetite or the timing of meals. 
 When insulin secretogogues are prescribed, it is important that 
patients and their family members be educated in how to both 
recognize and treat a low-BG reaction (Table 23–5). Many indi-
viduals are unaware of what these symptoms are and can mistake 
this for simple fatigue or a cardiac event, resulting in potentially 
dangerous delays in therapy. It is important that patients be 
instructed to carry a glucose source with them at all times. This 
can be in the form of hard candy or glucose tablets. 
 The two thiazolidinediones available for clinical use are piogli-
tazone and rosiglitazone. Both agents reduce HA1c levels by 0.8% 
to 1.5%, with pioglitazone having more favorable effects on circu-
lating triglycerides. Caution is warranted when using this class of 
medications in elderly individuals due to their potential to cause 
weight gain, edema, CHF, and reductions in bone mineral density 
(BMD) with increased fracture risk. In one report investigating 
outcomes with glitazones in individuals age >65, treatment with 
rosiglitazone was associated with a 60% increased risk of new-
onset CHF, a 40% increased risk for MI, and a 29% increase in 
mortality. As both the incidence and prevalence CHF increase 
with age in those with diabetes, caution is required when using 
these agents in elderly patients. If a decision is made to use 
these agents, close monitoring for onset of edema, weight gain, 
and shortness of breath is important. Regular monitoring of 
25-hydroxyvitamin D levels and BMD measurements is also 
indicated to address fracture risk. 
 The alpha-glucosidase inhibitors, acarbose and miglitol, delay 
absorption of carbohydrate from the small intestine by inhibiting 
the enzymes that convert carbohydrates into monosaccharides. 
This results in a reduction in postprandial glucose excursions, with 
reductions in A1c of 0.5% to 0.8% when used alone or in combi-
nation with other oral agents or insulin. The main limitation to the 
use of these agents is the high incidence of GI side effects that are 
directly related to their mechanism of action. Abdominal bloating 
and distension, diarrhea, and cramping occur in approximately 
TABLE 23–5 Symptoms of hypoglycemia.
Sympathoadrenal Activation
 Sweating
 Sensation of warmth
 Anxiety
 Tremor
 Nausea
 Palpitations
 Tachycardia
 Hunger
Neuroglycopenic
 Fatigue
 Dizziness
 Headache
 Visual disturbance
 Difficulty speaking
 Inability to concentrate
 Loss of memory
 Confusion
 Loss of consciousness
 Seizures
748    CHAPTER 23 Geriatric Endocrinology
50% of patients. Initiating therapy at a low dose of 25 mg once a 
day given with the main meal and allowing gradual upward titra-
tion can improve compliance with this group of medications. It is 
important that patients be instructed to use glucose tablets to treat 
hypoglycemia that may occur when taking this class of medications 
with sulfonylureas or insulin, as there can be delayed absorption of 
glucose from food sources. 
 There are now two relatively new classes of medications that 
address the role of the incretin hormone, GLP1, in glucose 
homeostasis: injectable GLP1 analogs and orally administered 
dipeptidyl peptidase IV inhibitors (DPP IV). GLP1 is a hormone 
that is normally secreted by L cells in the distal ileum in response 
to a meal ( Figure 23–7 ). GLP1 acts directly on beta cells to 
enhance endogenous insulin secretion, and on alpha cells to 
reduce glucagon levels. Endogenously secreted GLP1 is degraded 
by the DPP IV, which contributes to its short circulating half-life. 
Exenatide is the first GLP1 mimetic approved for clinical use. 
Liraglutide is another agent in this class that has recently been 
approved for use. Sustained reductions in A1c of approximately 
1% have been observed with use of these agents. The major side- 
effects include anorexia, nausea and vomiting, abdominal pain, 
diarrhea, and weight loss. However, these side-effects often abate 
over time and with exenatide are minimized by starting with doses 
of 5 µg administered twice a day for a month before increasing to 
10 µg twice a day. Hypoglycemia is possible when used in combi-
nation with a sulfonylurea. There are at least 36 postmarketing 
reports of acute pancreatitis with use of exenatide, but the inci-
dence of this disorder does not appear to be greater than in the 
general population with type 2 diabetes. Nevertheless, a high 
index of suspicion is recommended in patients who report abdom-
inal pain with use of these agents. It is anticipated that a once- 
weekly preparation of exenatide will become available for clinical 
use in the next 1 to 2 years. 
 There are two DPP IV inhibitors available for clinical use, 
sitagliptin and saxagliptin. By prolonging the duration of action of 
endogenously secreted GLP1, these agents reduce A1c by 0.6% to 
0.9%. The DPP IV inhibitors are weight neutral and do not cause 
hypoglycemia when used as monotherapy. The major side-effects 
of these agents are an increase in upper respiratory and lower uri-
nary tract infections, headache, skin rash, sinusitis, and back pain. 
The higher incidence of infectious complications may have sig-
nificance in the elderly population who are more likely to have 
asymptomatic bacteriuria. However, there is no absolute contrain-
dication to use of these agents in the elderly. Dose adjustments are 
required in the presence of renal insufficiency with each of the 
available agents. The relatively benign side-effect profile can make 
them attractive for use; however, these agents are expensive and 
may have effects that are currently unknown. DPP IV is a ubiqui-
tous enzyme that is also expressed in lymphocytes, raising concern 
for alterations in immune function. 
 When glycemic targets cannot be achieved with the agents 
discussed earlier, insulin therapy becomes necessary. In patients 
with isolated morning hyperglycemia, the addition of a bedtime 
dose of neutral protamine Hagedorn (NPH) can be effective in 
controlling fasting glucose levels. When both fasting and daytime 
BG levels are elevated, a long-acting insulin administered once 
daily can be more effective in lowering glucose levels throughout 
the day (Table 23–6). When BG levels remain elevated despite the 
use of basal insulin alone, premeal doses of a short- or rapid-acting 
insulin can be added. 
 When adding NPH insulin at bedtime to oral agents, a low 
starting dose of 5 to 10 U allows an elderly patient to become 
accustomed to insulin injections with a low risk for hypoglycemia. 
Insulin
Amylin
Glucagon
GLP1 inactivated
by dipeptidyl
peptidase IV
(DPP IV)
enzyme
Gut hormones
Jejunum/ileum L cells
produce glucagon-like
peptide 1 (GLP1), an
incretin hormone that acts
upon pancreatic islets
β cells +
α cells –
FIGURE 23–7 Hormonal regulation of insulin secretion and glucose homeostasis.
TABLE 23–6 Insulin preparations.
Insulin
Onset
Peak
Duration
Lispro/aspart/
glulisine
5-15 min
1-2 h
4-6 h
Regular
30-60 min
2-3 h
6-10 h
NPH
2-4 h
4-10 h
12-18 h
Glargine
2-4 h
Flat
20-24 h
Detemir
2 h
Flat
6-24 h
CHAPTER 23 Geriatric Endocrinology     749
The dose can then be titrated gradually over a period of several 
weeks until glucose levels are in the desired range. A commonly 
used strategy is to advise patients to increase by 1 or 2 U every 
4 days until they achieve a fasting glucose of less than 140 mg/dL. 
 When initiating basal/bolus insulin, the starting dose of insulin 
can be calculated as 0.2 to 0.3 U/kg/d, with 50% of the dose 
administered as basal insulin and 50% as premeal insulin in 
divided doses prior to meals. For patients already receiving basal 
insulin who require the addition of premeal insulin, the dose of 
premeal insulin can be calculated as follows: 
 • If the BG is mildly elevated with the majority of readings 
below 200 mg/dL, the dose of basal insulin can be reduced by 
50% with distribution of the remaining 50% into three pre-
meal insulin doses. 
 • If the majority of BG levels are >200 mg/dL, premeal insulin 
doses can be started as approximately 25% to 30% of the cur-
rent basal dose given before each meal. For example, if a patient 
is receiving 24 U of glargine or NPH each day, the starting dose 
of regular or humalog before each meal would be 6 to 8 U. 
 Many elderly individuals can be given instructions in how to 
advance their insulin doses or how to adjust the dose of insulin 
according to results of BG measurements. Correction insulin refers 
to the administration of supplemental doses of short or rapid-acting 
insulin when BG exceeds glycemic targets. A reasonable glycemic 
target may be to maintain all BG between 100 and 150 mg/dL. In 
these cases, the individual patient can be instructed to reduce their 
premeal insulin dose by 1 to 2 U if their BG is <100 mg/dL, and to 
increase by 1 U for every 50 mg/dL above 150 mg/dL. 
 There will be a minority of elderly patients who are unable to 
achieve adequate control of postprandial glucose excursions with 
insulin alone. Pramlintide, a synthetic analog of the beta cell hor-
mone amylin, is effective at reducing postprandial BG levels when 
used in combination with insulin. This injectable medication is 
approved for use in combination with insulin for patients with both 
type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Side-effects of pramlintide include nausea 
and vomiting, which are more common in people with type 1 
 diabetes, and hypoglycemia. Nausea and vomiting can be minimized 
by starting at doses of 15 µg before each meal with gradual upward 
titration to 60 for people with type 1 diabetes. Those with type 2 
diabetes can be started at a dose of 60 µg and titrated to 120 µg 
before meals. The risk for hypoglycemia can be reduced by reducing 
prandial insulin doses by 50% when pramlintide is initiated. 
 In summary, there are five classes of oral agents and two nonin-
sulin injectable therapies, in addition to insulin, that are effective 
at achieving glycemic control as monotherapy or as part of combi-
nation therapy. The side-effect profile, risk for hypoglycemia, 
and cost need to be considered when choosing a regimen for an 
individual patient. 
 Screening for Diabetes-Related 
Complications in the Elderly 
 The care of older adults with diabetes is complicated by their 
clinical and functional heterogeneity. Some older individuals devel-
oped diabetes years earlier and may have significant complications. 
Others may be newly diagnosed but may already have complica-
tions related to the disease. Some older adults with diabetes are frail 
with limited physical or cognitive abilities due to the presence of 
other underlying chronic conditions. Life expectancies are highly 
variable for this population, but often longer than clinicians realize. 
Providers caring for older adults with diabetes must take this het-
erogeneity into consideration when setting and prioritizing treat-
ment goals. 
 Screening for microvascular diabetes-related complications is as 
important in older adults as it is in younger individuals, with atten-
tion directed to complications that can result in functional impair-
ments if these remain untreated. While the natural history of 
diabetic retinopathy is different in those above age 70, recommen-
dations for periodic eye examinations to detect not only changes 
related to diabetic retinopathy, but also for cataracts, macular degen-
eration, or glaucoma are important in allowing for early detection 
of disorders that can progress to cause visual impairment. 
 Annual measurement of serum creatinine and urine microalbu-
min allow for identification of nephropathy and chronic kidney 
disease due to other causes that can have their progression modi-
fied by dietary interventions and use of medications to lower 
blood pressure. Annual measurement of a lipid profile with inter-
ventions to treat those identified as having dyslipidemia can 
modify risk for cardiovascular events, which are associated with 
morbidity, decreased quality of life, and mortality. 
 Regular foot examinations with identification of anatomic 
abnormalities and sensory deficits that can reduce mobility are 
recommended. Medicare will cover the cost of special shoe wear 
for individuals with diabetes complicated by neuropathy or foot 
deformity. Pedorthic shoe wear is characterized by increased depth 
with a wider toe box that reduces pressure points that predispose 
to ulcer formation. Many prescriptions for shoe wear also include 
orthotics that allow for more even pressure distribution, thus 
improving the ability to walk without concern for foot injury. 
 A. Acute hyperglycemic complications 
 Hyperglycemic 
hyperosmolar nonketotic syndrome (HHNS) is more common in 
elderly patients than diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA). HHNS can 
occur in patients with and without a history of type 2 diabetes. It is 
characterized by severe elevations in BG (>600-800 mg/dL), plasma 
hyperosmolarity (>320 mOsm/L), severe dehydration, and absent 
to mild acidosis. The development of HHNS in the elderly popula-
tion can be attributed, in part, to an impaired thirst mechanism and 
an age-related increase in the renal threshold for reabsorption of 
glucose leading to an osmotic diuresis and intravascular volume 
contraction. Predisposing factors include myocardial infarction, 
pneumonia, infections, use of certain medications (eg, diuretics, 
phenytoin, glucocorticoids), or any acute medical illnesses. Patients 
often present with an altered mental status (lethargy, coma), marked 
volume depletion, orthostatic hypotension, and prerenal azotemia. 
Urine and serum ketones can be mildly elevated but usually not to 
the degree observed with diabetic ketoacidosis. 
 HHNS is a life-threatening disorder that requires prompt 
therapy with intravenous fluids and close monitoring of cardiac 
status. In addition to therapy directed toward treatment of the 
precipitating event (if known), extracellular fluid volume deficits, 
750    CHAPTER 23 Geriatric Endocrinology
which can be profound, are replaced initially with normal saline 
followed by half-normal (0.45%) saline. Half of the fluid and 
electrolyte deficits can be replaced in the first 24 hours and the 
remainder over the next 48 hours. 
 Once volume replacement is addressed, low-dose intravenous 
infusions of insulin (5 U bolus followed by 1-5 U/h) can be initiated. 
The administration of insulin prior to volume correction can exacer-
bate intravascular fluid depletion and further compromise renal 
function as glucose shifts to the intracellular compartment. Potassium 
deficits can be addressed once urine output is established. Following 
resolution of the hyperglycemia, patients require careful evaluation of 
the cause of the deterioration as well as attention to the need for 
ongoing management of hyperglycemia with insulin or oral agents. 
 Care of the Elderly Patient with Diabetes 
in the Hospital 
 Hyperglycemia frequently accompanies acute illnesses that prompt 
hospitalization in patients with and without a history of diabetes. 
Newly recognized hyperglycemia adversely affects patient out-
comes to a greater extent than established diabetes, with longer 
hospital length of stay, higher mortality, and increased likelihood 
of discharge to an extended care or rehabilitation facility. For these 
reasons, attention to glycemic control is as important during peri-
ods of hospitalization as it is in the outpatient setting. 
 The ability to achieve tight glycemic control in the hospital is 
hampered by rapid changes in clinical status, as well as by hospital 
routines that can increase risk for undetected hypoglycemic events 
that are associated with adverse patient outcomes. Current guide-
lines suggest glycemic targets of 140 to 180 mg/dL in both critically 
ill and non-critically ill-hospitalized patients. In critical care settings, 
this can be achieved with validated IV insulin infusion protocols. In 
non-critically ill patients, scheduled subcutaneous basal-bolus insu-
lin is preferred. Less stringent glycemic targets may be appropriate 
for patients who have multiple comorbidities and reduced life 
expectancy, but in general, glucose levels should be maintained at 
values below 200 mg/dL to minimize fluid and electrolyte abnor-
malities, reduce renal complications, and avoid infections. 
 The practice of using  sliding scale insulin as the only glycemic 
management strategy in hospitalized patients is discouraged. 
These regimens are associated with both hypoglycemia and hyper-
glycemia as they encourage reaction to a single BG value rather 
than a rational management strategy. Oral and injectable nonin-
sulin glucose-lowering agents have a limited role for hospital use 
but may be appropriate for selected non-critically ill patients. 
 OSTEOPOROSIS AND CALCIUM 
HOMEOSTASIS 
 OSTEOPOROSIS 
 Despite the high prevalence, severe morbidity, and expense of 
osteoporosis, until recently most of our knowledge was derived 
from studies of younger postmenopausal women. Yet it is the 
older woman who typically experiences the ravages of the disease. 
Twenty-five percent of women have vertebral fractures by age 70; 
by age 80, the figure is closer to 50%. More than 90% of hip 
fractures occur in patients over age 70, and by age 90, one woman 
in three will have sustained such a fracture. Hip fractures are asso-
ciated with significant morbidity, an increased risk of institution-
alization, and an up to 20% increase in mortality rates. Despite 
the significant differences between perimenopausal and older 
women, diagnostic and therapeutic approaches for older women 
are derived largely from studies of newly postmenopausal women. 
The relevance of such studies for older women has only recently 
been questioned. 
 Definition and Risk of Fracture 
 The definition of osteoporosis has changed over the years. In 
1991, a consensus development conference defined osteoporosis 
as “a disease characterized by low bone mass and microarchitec-
tural deterioration of bone tissue, leading to enhanced bone 
fragility and a consequent increase in fracture risk.” The World 
Health Organization issued classification criteria for postmeno-
pausal women based on measurements of BMD or bone min-
eral content. Osteoporosis is defined as a BMD T-score of −2.5 
standard deviations below the young adult mean value 
(Table 23–7). This permits numerical standardization of the 
definition. In 2008 the World Health Organization developed 
the FRAX algorithm that estimates the likelihood for a patient 
to sustain a hip or a major osteoporotic fracture (clinical spine, 
forearm, hip, or shoulder) over the next 10 years. The model is 
designed to include men and women, age 40 to 90, who have 
not previously been treated with medications for osteoporosis. 
FRAX uses population-based cohorts for Europe, North 
America, Asia, and Australia, and for the United States risk 
assessments are available for Caucasian, African American, 
Hispanic, and Asian groups. In addition to specific risk factors 
(Table 23–8), the model uses age, gender, height, weight, and 
femoral neck BMD or T-scores. 
TABLE 23–7  World Health Organization diagnostic 
criteria for osteoporosis. 
Diagnosis 
Criteria 
Normal 
Bone mineral density or content –1 SD and above 
of the young adult mean value (T-score at –1.0 
and above) 
Osteopenia (low 
bone mass) 
Bone mineral density or content between –1 SD 
and –2.5 SD of the young adult mean value 
(T-score between –1 and –2.5; includes individu-
als in whom prevention of bone loss would be 
most useful) 
Osteoporosis 
Bone mineral density or content at or below 
–2.5 SD of the young adult mean value (T-score at 
or below –2.5) 
Modified and reproduced, with permission, from Kanis JA: The diagnosis of osteopo-
rosis. J Bone Miner Res. 1994;9:1137. 
CHAPTER 23 Geriatric Endocrinology     751
 Risk Factors for Osteoporosis 
and Fractures 
 Multiple factors contributed to the risk of low bone mass, osteo-
porosis, or fractures. Lifestyle factors include low calcium or vita-
min D intake, high caffeine or salt intake, alcohol, smoking, falls, 
thin/frail habitus, and inactivity. Common endocrine disorders in 
the elderly include hyperthyroidism, hyperparathyroidism, and 
diabetes. Multiple myeloma and lymphoma can present with frac-
tures. Emphysema, congestive heart failure, depression, end-stage 
renal disease, and malabsorption also contribute to it. Medications 
in the elderly that contribute to bone loss include glucocorticoids 
(≥5 mg/d of prednisone or equivalent for ≥3 months), anticonvul-
sants, aromatase inhibitors, androgen deprivation therapy, excess 
thyroid hormone, lithium, antirejection drugs, and heparin. By 
age 70, approximately 80% of women have a hip BMD that is 
osteopenic or osteoporotic, compared with 40% of women in 
their fifties ( Figure 23–8 ). 
 Falling is often cited as a major risk factor for hip fracture in 
older women. Although more than one-third of elderly women 
fall annually, however, fewer than 5% of falls result in fracture. A 
fall to the side, a low hip BMD, low BMI (lean body habitus), and 
high-fall energy have been shown to be significant independent 
risk factors for hip fracture in community-dwelling elderly. In 
nursing home subjects, a fall to the side, low hip BMD, and 
impaired mobility were independent risk factors. Other factors, 
including a maternal history of hip fracture, previous hyperthy-
roidism, inability to rise from a chair, poor depth perception, poor 
contrast vision, and use of anticonvulsants or long-acting benzo-
diazepines are also associated with hip fractures in elderly women. 
Furthermore, with multiple risk factors, the risk of hip fracture 
increases significantly. 
 Factors Affecting Bone Physiology 
 There are significant physiologic differences between newly 
postmenopausal and older women with respect to maintenance 
of skeletal integrity. Although calcium intake is often inade-
quate in both age groups, calcium absorption declines with age 
despite an age-related increase in serum levels of parathyroid 
hormone (PTH). This increase is not due solely to a decrease in 
renal reabsorption of calcium but may represent secondary 
hyperparathyroidism from vitamin D insufficiency. When PTH 
levels are assessed in elderly community dwelling women, PTH 
levels increase as vitamin D levels fall below roughly 30 ng/mL 
(75 nmol/L) ( Figure 23–9 ), similar to what has been observed 
in younger cohorts. 
 A. Vitamin D 
 Vitamin D deficiency is common in the elderly, 
and vitamin D metabolism changes with age. Up to 15% of 
healthy elderly residents of communities in the sunny southwest-
ern United States have frank vitamin D deficiency; still more have 
subclinical vitamin D deficiency; and up to 50% of elderly nurs-
ing home residents are deficient in vitamin D. This occurs because 
elderly individuals have decreased sun exposure and an impaired 
ability to form vitamin D precursors in the skin, a decreased 
dietary intake of vitamin D, and (possibly) an age-related decline 
in vitamin D receptors in the duodenum. In addition, the ability 
to convert vitamin D to its active moiety (1,25[OH] 2 -D 3 ) is 
impaired with age. Certain vitamin D receptor polymorphisms 
have been associated with lower BMD and bone loss in some 
populations, although further investigations of vitamin D metab-
olism are needed in the elderly in the United States. Finally opti-
mal vitamin D levels of ≥30 ng/mL (75 nmol/L) have been 
associated with higher BMD, decreased fracture risk, improved 
TABLE 23–8  Risk factors included in the WHO FRAX 
model for the 10-y risk of a fracture.
Current age
Parent fractured hip
Gender
Glucocorticoids (≥5 mg/d prednisone for ≥3 mo)
Weight
Rheumatoid arthritis
Height
Secondary osteoporosis
Previous fracture
Alcohol three or more drinks per day
Current smoking
Femoral neck bone mineral density or T-score
50-59
Age (years)
 60-69  70-79
80+
100
80
60
40
20
0
Percent
A. Low femur neck BMD
50-59
Age (years)
 60-69  70-79
80+
B. Low trochanter BMD
50-59
Age (years)
 60-69  70-79
80+
C. Low intertrochanter
               
50-59
Age (years)
 60-69  70-79
80+
D. Low total BMD
BMD
FIGURE 23–8 Prevalence of low femur bone mineral density (BMD) by age for non-Hispanic white women: light color, osteopenia; dark color, 
osteoporosis. (Source: CDC/NCHS III, phase 1, 1988-1991.) (Reproduced, with permission, from Looker AC, Melton LJ 3rd, Harris TB, Borrud LG, 
Shepherd JA. Prevalence of low femoral bone density in older US women from NHANES III. J Bone Min Res. 2010 Jan;25(1):64–71. [PMID: 19580459])
752    CHAPTER 23 Geriatric Endocrinology
lower extremity function, and decreased risk of colon cancer 
( Figure 23–10 ). 
 A. Bone loss and architectural changes 
 The rate of bone 
loss also differs between newly postmenopausal and older women. 
Cortical and trabecular bone are lost rapidly at menopause. Older 
longitudinal studies suggested that bone loss ceased or slowed in 
older women. However, longitudinal studies suggest that older 
women lose an average of 0.7% to 1% per year at the hip, and 
femoral bone loss increases with age. Vertebral BMD changes 
assessed by anteroposterior measurements can give a misleading 
assessment of bone mass as a consequence of nonspecific calcifica-
tions from osteoarthritis, sclerosis, aortic calcifications, and osteo-
phytes that interfere with and falsely elevate the measurement. 
Therefore, measurement of femoral BMD is more reliable in the 
elderly. 
 In addition, there are changes in bone geometry; cortical bone 
remodeling in older women is insufficient to compensate for the 
loss of bone mineral content ( Figure 23–11 ). There are also quali-
tative changes in trabecular bone, because an age-related reduction 
in trabecular bone jeopardizes plate integrity or connectivity; tra-
becular plates not only become perforated and disconnected, but 
with aging they continue to thin, causing further loss of bone 
strength and compromising the bone’s ability to regain structural 
integrity with conventional therapy. The loss of trabecular con-
nectivity in the elderly can be visualized by high resolution 
MicroMRI technology of the wrist ( Figure 23–12 ). 
0
0
20
40
60
80
10
20
30
Vitamin D (ng/mL)
PTH (pg/mL)
PTH vs vitamin D at baseline
40
50
60
FIGURE 23–9 Baseline parathyroid hormone (PTH) and 25- 
hydroxyvitamin D levels in 553 community-dwelling elderly women. 
The line shown is a locally smoothed regression line (LOESS) of PTH 
given 25-hydroxyvitamin D. Twenty-six observations with PTH above 
80 pg/mL are not shown (mean vitamin D level 13.1 ng/mL) to allow 
details of the LOESS curve to be visible. (Reproduced, with permis-
sion, from Greenspan SL, et al. Vitamin D supplementation in older 
women. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2005;60:754-759. [PMID: 
15983179])
30
0
–0.5
0.5
1
1.5
50
70
90
Median 25(OH)D concentration (nmol/L)
RR (95% Cl)
110
–0.4
–0.3
–0.2
–0.1
0
0
g/cm2
BMD (g/cm2)
Fracture (RR)
Colon cancer (RR)
8’ walk time (s)
Attachment
loss (mm)
0.02
0.04
s or mm
FIGURE 23–10 Relative risks (RRs) of fracture and colon cancer. Solid lines relate to the left axis, and dashed lines relate to the right axis. 
25(OH)D, 25-hydroxyvitamin D. For bone mineral density (BMD), the example of older whites was chosen, and the unit is shown in the upper 
part of the right y axis. For lower extremity, the 8-ft walk test was chosen; the unit is seconds, as shown on the lower half of the right y axis. 
Alveolar attachment loss (measure of periodontal disease) is given in millimeters for older men, as shown in the lower part of the right y axis. 
This summary of all outcomes indicates that a desirable serum 25(OH)D concentration for optimal health begins at 75 nmol/L, and the best con-
centration is 90 to 100 nmol/L. (Reproduced, with permission, from Bischoff-Ferrari HA, et al. Estimation of optimal serum concentrations of 
25-hydroxyvitamin D for multiple health outcomes. Am J Clin Nutr. 2006;84:18. [PMID: 16825677])
CHAPTER 23 Geriatric Endocrinology     753
 Evaluation 
 Screening older patients by obtaining a BMD measurement is a 
comfortable, painless, noninvasive, rapid technique for determin-
ing an individual’s bone mass and relative fracture risk. In general, 
the relative risk of spine or hip fracture roughly doubles for every 
standard deviation decrease in BMD below young, gender-
matched mean values. Patients may remain dressed and lie on a 
padded table. Although several methods are available, currently 
the best technique uses dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA) 
of the hip or spine ( Figures 23–13 and  23–14 ). The National 
Osteoporosis Foundation suggests obtaining a bone mass assess-
ment in all women age 65 or older and all men age 70 or older 
regardless of risk factors. In addition, younger postmenopausal 
women and men age 50 to 69 with risk factors (see Risk Factors 
for Osteoporosis), adults who fracture after age 50, and those with 
a condition or medication causing bone loss should receive a bone 
mass measurement. For most elderly women, the hip is the single 
most useful measurement because nonspecific calcifications can 
lead to falsely elevated measurements in the posteroanterior view 
of spine. 
Men
Women
FIGURE 23–11 Schematic representation of cortical bone 
remodeling with age in males and females. Note that with age- 
related bone loss, bone is remodeled in men to increase its diameter 
and partially offset the loss of strength. In women, bone diameter 
changes little with age, so that bone strength decreases proportion-
ately more than in men. (Reproduced, with permission, from Ruff CB, 
Hayes WC. Sex differences in age-related remodeling of the femur 
and tibia. J Orthop Res. 1988;6:886.)
76-year-old woman
80-year-old woman
Young female
FIGURE 23–12 High-resolution MicroMRI images of radial trabecular bone in a young woman at peak bone mass and in 76-year-old and 
80-year-old women demonstrating loss of trabecular connectivity (trabecular horizontal struts) with age.
 Similar to the evaluation in a younger individual who presents 
with bone loss or fracture, the workup in an older patient can be 
designed to exclude secondary causes of osteoporosis. 
Hyperthyroidism and hyperparathyroidism are both more com-
mon in older women, can cause bone loss, and can be clinically 
silent in older individuals. Because 10% of women over age 65 are 
receiving thyroid hormone replacement therapy and because thy-
roid hormone overreplacement results in bone loss in postmeno-
pausal women, true physiologic replacement with a normal serum 
TSH (if possible) should be the goal of treatment. Osteomalacia, 
vitamin D deficiency, and insufficiency may present as nonspecific 
muscle or skeletal discomfort and is more common in the elderly. 
This can best be assessed by checking a 25 hydroxyvitamin D level 
that should be ≥30 ng/mL or 75 nmol/L. In addition, metastatic 
carcinoma, multiple myeloma, hepatic and renal disease, and mal-
absorption (especially secondary to gastrectomy) should be 
excluded. Hypogonadism in men can be evaluated with a testos-
terone level. Medications (listed under Risk Factors) can cause 
bone loss. 
 Biochemical markers of bone turnover reflect bone formation 
and resorption. Although these markers are associated with the 
rate of bone turnover even in elderly women, they cannot be used 
in lieu of a BMD measurement to assess bone mass or to make a 
diagnosis. Because factors outside the skeleton contribute to frac-
ture risk in the elderly, however, the search for correctable factors 
must extend beyond those that affect BMD. Particular attention 
should be devoted to the patient’s home environment and medica-
tion use. 
 Patients who have sustained a fragility fracture as an adult have 
clinical osteoporosis and require evaluation and treatment. Because 
two-thirds of vertebral fractures are asymptomatic, patients with 
1.5 to 2 in of height loss may need a lateral radiograph to look for 
vertebral deformities or compression fractures. Older patients 
presenting with skeletal discomfort should be evaluated by radiog-
raphy to rule out a fracture. Vertebral osteoporosis usually presents 
with anterior wedging, involvement of more than one vertebra, 
prominent vertebral trabeculae, and vertebral deformities usually 
occurring below T 6 ( Figure 23–15 ). Worrisome signs suggesting 
that skeletal involvement is not due to osteoporosis alone include 
nerve root compression, posterior wedging, isolated vertebral 
involvement (especially above T 4 ), and pedicle destruction. 
754    CHAPTER 23 Geriatric Endocrinology
FIGURE 23–13 This patient has a total hip bone mineral den-
sity (BMD) of 0.330 g/cm2 (black circle on the reference database 
graph) as measured by dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry, a femoral 
neck T-score of −4.69 and a total hip T-score of −5.02. The reference 
database graph displays age- and sex-matched mean BMD levels ±2 
SD (shaded areas) derived from the third National Health and 
Nutrition Examination Survey. T-score indicates the difference in SD 
between the subject’s BMD and the predicted sex-matched mean 
peak young adult BMD; Z-score, the difference in SD between the 
subject’s BMD and the sex- and age-matched mean BMD; and % of 
mean, the subject’s BMD as a percentage of the mean peak young 
adult BMD- or age-matched BMD level. (Adapted from bone densi-
tometry report, QDR-4500C bone densitometer, Hologic Inc, 
Bedford, Massachusetts.)
FIGURE 23–14 This patient has a lumbar spine (L1-L4) bone 
mineral density (BMD) of 0.410 g/cm2 (cross on the reference data-
base graph) measured by dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry and 
a T-score of −5.79. The reference database graph displays age- and 
sex-matched mean BMD levels ±2 SDs (shaded areas) derived from a 
normative database from the manufacturer, Hologic Inc, Bedford, 
Massachusetts. T-score indicates the difference in SD between the 
subject’s BMD and the predicted sex-matched mean peak young 
adult BMD; Z-score, the difference in SD between the subject’s BMD 
and the sex- and age-matched BMD level; and percentage of mean, 
the subject’s BMD as a percentage of the mean peak young adult 
BMD- or age-matched BMD level. (Adapted from bone densitometry 
report, QDR-4500C bone densitometer; Hologic Inc, Bedford, 
Massachusetts.)
CHAPTER 23 Geriatric Endocrinology     755
Furthermore, older individuals may complain of persistent groin 
pain with weight-bearing, while plain radiographs of the hip reveal 
no fracture. A bone scan may be necessary to confirm the diagno-
sis of hip fracture. Vertebral fractures can also be assessed with 
DXA technology by Vertebral Fracture Assessment. Because this 
can be done at the same point of care when a patient is having a 
DXA scan, this is convenient for older patients. 
 Treatment 
 Because the factors that affect bone physiology—the rate of bone 
loss, the structure of remaining bone, and the risk of fracture—are 
substantially different in newly postmenopausal and elderly 
women, interventions appropriate for younger women may be 
inappropriate for elderly women. Studies of older individuals that 
use BMD—or preferably fracture—as an end-point provide the 
best data. 
 A. Calcium 
 Controversy surrounds the use of calcium supple-
mentation by itself in postmenopausal women, and few data are 
available regarding its use in older women. Theoretically, calcium 
supplementation seems appropriate because calcium intake in the 
elderly is low, and the ability to adapt to a low calcium diet 
declines with age. Calcium supplementation reduces the rate of 
bone loss. A meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies and ran-
domized controlled trials concluded that calcium intake by itself 
was not associated with hip fracture risk and was neutral for non-
vertebral fractures. However, a reduction in hip fractures and 
improvement in BMD has been demonstrated in very elderly 
women (mean age 84) treated with vitamin D (800 IU daily) 
and calcium (1200 mg daily). The National Academy of Sciences 
recommends 1200 mg/d of elemental calcium in divided doses. In 
addition to dairy products, many foods (eg, orange juice, cereals, 
and nutritional bars) are now fortified with calcium. Calcium 
carbonate supplements should be given in divided doses with 
meals to improve absorption in the elderly, who may suffer from 
achlorhydria. Calcium citrate can be used as an alternative in such 
patients. A potential problem with prescribing high doses of cal-
cium in the elderly includes inducing or exacerbating constipa-
tion. In addition, because compliance with other drug regimens 
decreases as the number of drugs increases, calcium tablets may be 
taken at the therapeutic expense of more important medications. 
Finally, because supplementary calcium does interfere with 
absorption of zinc, elderly patients receiving calcium supplemen-
tation should be encouraged to take a multivitamin containing 
zinc. Calcium absorption is not impaired by psyllium. 
 B. Vitamin D 
 Vitamin D deficiency is common in the elderly, 
and vitamin D is needed for calcium absorption, mineralization of 
bone, and improvement in muscle strength. The current recom-
mendation from the National Osteoporosis Foundation is 800 to 
1000 IU/d. Vitamin D can be administered as a pure supplement 
of cholecalciferol (available as 400-2000 U tablets), in a daily 
multivitamin (400-800 IU) or calcium supplement (200-500 IU/
tablet). A Cochrane review of 45 trials involving 84,585 partici-
pants comparing vitamin D alone or with calcium versus placebo 
reported vitamin D alone was not effective, but when combined 
with calcium, did result in hip fracture reduction in institutional-
ized elderly. Another meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials 
concluded that 700 to 800 IU/d of vitamin D, but not 400 
IU/d of vitamin D, reduced the risk of hip and nonvertebral 
fractures in elderly patients. Clinical trials utilizing calcitriol 
(1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D 3 ) as a therapeutic option for osteoporo-
sis have reported conflicting results. Given that the complications 
of hypercalcemia are increased, this form of vitamin D should 
probably be avoided. 
 C. Exercise 
 Although the rationale for exercise therapy is 
sound, few data are available on results of exercise in elderly 
women. One study prescribed exercise for older women and found 
that forearm bone mineral content increased in those who contin-
ued exercising during a 3-year trial. Middle-aged women (mean age 
60) participating in high-intensity strength training for 1 year had 
improvements in femoral bone mass, muscle strength, balance, and 
activity level compared with controls. A Cochrane review of 111 
trials (55,303 participants in the community) reported that mul-
tiple component group exercise reduced the rate of falls and risk of 
falling, as did TaiChi. Walking—generally 30 minutes three times 
a week—is often suggested for frail individuals. 
 D. Bisphosphonates 
 Bisphosphonates—nonhormonal 
agents that inhibit bone resorption—effectively prevent and treat 
osteoporosis. Bisphosphonates are the mainstay of therapy in the 
elderly. The aminobisphosphonates, alendronate, risedronate, 
ibandronate, and zoledronic acid have been shown to increase 
BMD at the spine (5%-8%) and hip (3%-6%) over 3 years in 
prospective clinical trials in postmenopausal women. Fractures of 
FIGURE 23–15 Lateral thoracic radiograph demonstrating a 
thoracic anterior wedge fracture. (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Clinical Crossroads. A 73-year-old woman with osteoporosis. JAMA. 
1999;281:1531.)
756    CHAPTER 23 Geriatric Endocrinology
the spine were reduced by approximately 40% to 70%. Alendronate, 
risedronate, and zoledronic acid have reduced nonvertebral frac-
tures (25%-40%), including hip fractures (40%-60%), in women 
with osteoporosis. Improvements following treatment with alen-
dronate and risedronate have also been demonstrated in older 
women residing in long-term care facilities. Furthermore zole-
dronic acid has been shown to reduce clinical fracture 35% and 
reduce all-cause mortality by 28% in patients following a hip 
fracture. When taken properly, the oral medications are well- 
tolerated—an important factor in choosing therapeutic alterna-
tives for the elderly. Moreover the oral medications are available as 
a daily, weekly (alendronate, risedronate), and once monthly (rise-
dronate, ibandronate) medication and the IV therapies can be 
given every 3 or 12 months (ibandronate and zoledronic acid 
respectively). The oral medications have been associated with nau-
sea, heartburn, and epigastric distress. Both the IV and oral bis-
phosphonates have been associated with arthromyalgias and 
myalgias which is an important clinical consideration in this age 
group. Theses agents should not be used in elderly patients with 
an estimated GFR ≤35 mL/min. Osteonecrosis of the jaw is a rare 
event in patients using these agents at a dose for osteoporosis. For 
men, alendronate, risedronate, and zoledronic acid are approved. 
For glucocorticoid-induced bone loss, alendronate, risedronate, 
and zoledronic acid are approved for treatment, risedronate is 
approved for prevention. 
 E. Estrogen and selective estrogen receptor modula-
tors 
 There is considerable evidence that estrogen therapy, if 
initiated at menopause, slows bone loss, temporarily increases 
bone mass, and may prevent osteoporotic vertebral and hip frac-
tures. If therapy is continued, its efficacy is sustained at least until 
age 70. In addition, some studies have shown that estrogen 
increases vertebral and femoral bone mass. However, the Women’s 
Health Initiative found an increased risk of cardiovascular disease, 
breast cancer, and thromboembolic events along with a significant 
reduction in hip fractures and other osteoporotic fractures in 
women receiving conjugated estrogen plus medroxyprogesterone. 
Because of the increased risks, hormone therapy is currently not 
recommended as a treatment for osteoporosis because there are 
other available and effective therapies. 
 Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) have estrogen 
agonist and antagonist actions. Raloxifene has been approved for 
the prevention and treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis. 
Although improvements in BMD are less with raloxifene than 
estrogen therapy, studies demonstrate a reduction of approximately 
50% in vertebral fractures with no mastalgia, vaginal bleeding, or 
increased endometrial thickness. Studies demonstrated a reduction 
in cholesterol and raloxifene is also approved for the reduction in 
the risk of invasive breast cancer in postmenpausal women with 
osteoporosis. Because there is an increase in venous thromboembo-
lic events, raloxifene should not be used in immobilized elderly or 
those with clotting abnormalities. Raloxifene has not been shown 
to reduce nonvertebral or hip fractures. 
 F. Other therapeutic options 
 Although calcitonin is an 
approved therapy for osteoporosis in postmenopausal women, few 
data are available about its effect on the incidence of fractures. It 
is expensive and when given by injection is poorly tolerated by the 
elderly. Nasal calcitonin has been shown to reduce fractures of the 
spine—but not of the hip—with no improvement in hip bone 
density. Calcitonin may reduce acute pain associated with verte-
bral fractures. 
 Teriparatide, PTH (1-34), the first anabolic agent, has been 
shown to significantly increase bone density (9.7% for spine bone 
density in 18 months) and reduce vertebral and nonvertebral frac-
tures in postmenopausal osteoporotic women. Teriparatide is 
approved for postmenopausal women and men at high risk for 
fracture and for patients with glucocorticoid-induced osteoporo-
sis. There are little data in the frail elderly. This is given as a sub-
cutaneous daily injection for 2 years only. 
 Denosumab, an antiresorptive agent, that is a fully monoclonal 
antibody to receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B ligand 
(RANK-L) inhibits binding to RANK and the formation and 
activation of osteoclasts. Denosumab has been shown to increase 
BMD at the spine by 9.2% and at the hip by 6.0% over 3 years 
compared to placebo in a clinical trial in women with an average 
age of 72 years. Denosumab reduced vertebral fractures by 68%, 
hip fractures by 40%, and nonvertebral fractures by 20% (all 
p <0.05). This is given as a subcutaneous injection every 6 months 
and is still under evaluation by the FDA. There are little data in 
the elderly. 
 Although results regarding the efficacy of hip protectors for hip 
fracture reduction in elderly patients have been mixed, hip protec-
tors represent a relatively inexpensive option in frail elders. Poor 
compliance has been a key component in the lack of efficacy. 
Furthermore the type and design of the hip pad may also play a 
role in its efficacy. 
 Vertebroplasty and kyphoplasty are interventions in which 
polymethylmethacrylate (vertebroplasty) or polymethylmethacry-
late in a balloon (kyphoplasty) are placed in compressed vertebrae 
for patients with intractable pain from vertebral fractures. There 
are few trials with these interventions, and it is not known whether 
the procedures strengthen or weaken adjacent vertebrae. Recent 
randomized trials with sham-operated controls suggest that verte-
broplasty was similar to the control group for pain and pain-re-
lated disability associated with an osteoporotic compression 
fracture. 
 Summary of Management 
Recommendations 
 In summary, there is ample reason to question the validity of 
extrapolating data from studies of newly postmenopausal women 
when formulating a treatment plan for older women. However, 
given the prevalence of the problem, it is reasonable to recom-
mend an adequate daily intake of vitamin D (800-1000 IU), an 
adequate daily intake of calcium (totaling 1200 mg), and judi-
cious participation in an individually tailored exercise program. 
The use of bisphosphonates, SERMs, teriparatide (PTH) (1-34), 
or other treatments needs to be individually considered in elderly 
women. For elderly men, the use of alendronate, risedronate, 
zoledronic acid, and teriparatide are available for treatment. 
CHAPTER 23 Geriatric Endocrinology     757
 Perhaps more importantly, the risk of falls should be addressed. 
The risk can be reduced by reviewing medications (including 
nonprescription agents) and discontinuing (when possible) those 
with adverse effects on cognition, balance, or blood pressure. 
Common offenders include long-acting benzodiazepines, tricyclic 
antidepressants, antipsychotics, antihypertensives, and agents with 
anticholinergic side-effects. It is also important to correct revers-
ible sensory losses and medical conditions and to educate patients 
about hazards in their environment, such as throw rugs, extension 
cords, and poorly illuminated stairways, which could lead to falls 
and fractures. For patients with gait disorders, physical therapy 
should be considered. 
 Patients who have recently sustained a hip fracture should 
receive the same evaluation and consideration as those without a 
fracture. Because a hip fracture places the patient at a more than 
double the risk for a future fracture, and bisphosphonate therapy 
will reduce that risk, a hip fracture should not serve as a reason to 
omit evaluation or treatment (see also Chapter 8). 
 HYPERPARATHYROIDISM 
 Clinical Features 
 The prevalence of hyperparathyroidism increases with age. 
Although its incidence is less than 10 per 100,000 in women 
under age 40, the incidence increases to 190 per 100,000 in 
women over age 60. As a result, more than half of all cases of 
hyperparathyroidism occur in individuals over the age of 65. Most 
cases are mild. Detection is by routine screening of serum calcium, 
and few or no symptoms are present. However, with relatively minor 
elevations of serum calcium (up to 11-12 mg/dL [2.8-3 mmol/L]), 
some elderly subjects may experience weakness, fatigue, depres-
sion, and confusion. Failure to thrive and constipation are com-
monly seen; renal, gastrointestinal, and skeletal complications 
occur less often. Other causes of hypercalcemia in the elderly—
especially multiple myeloma, malignancy, vitamin D intoxication, 
and thiazide diuretics—must be considered in the differential 
diagnosis (see Chapter 8). Familial benign hypocalciuric hypercal-
cemia, an autosomal dominant disease, can generally be ruled out 
with a urinary calcium creatinine clearance ratio of less than 0.01. 
Other causes of secondary hyperparathyroidism due to vitamin D 
deficiency (common in the elderly) such as malabsorption and 
chronic kidney disease should also be excluded. 
 Treatment 
 For symptomatic patients and those with serum calcium levels 1 
mg/dL above the upper limit of normal, parathyroidectomy may 
be recommended according to current guidelines (see Chapters 8 
and 26). Parathyroidectomy is well tolerated in the elderly and is 
the treatment of choice. Minimally invasive parathyroidectomy 
uses preoperative localization by neck ultrasound and sestamibi 
scan and intraoperative measurement of PTH rather than the 
conventional approach of visualization of all glands. This not only 
improves the success rate but simplifies the surgical procedure 
as well. Parathyroidectomy procedures in elderly patients have 
similar outcomes compared with younger patients with respect to 
cure rate, morbidity, mortality, and patient satisfaction. For those 
with more modest elevations, treatment recommendations are less 
simply stated because it is difficult to differentiate symptoms and 
signs due to the disease from those seen in older individuals with-
out hyperparathyroidism. Moreover, asymptomatic individuals—
especially those with levels of serum calcium under 11 mg/dL (2.8 
mmol/L)—have been known to remain asymptomatic for more 
than a decade. An observational study of 116 patients followed up 
to 15 years, reported that one-third of subjects had disease pro-
gression meeting surgical criteria. Until more data become avail-
able, the decision to treat asymptomatic individuals surgically 
should be made on an individual basis. 
 In older patients who are not surgical candidates, cinacalcet (a 
calcimimetic that binds to the calcium-sensing receptor on the 
cells of the parathyroid gland) can rapidly normalize serum cal-
cium and reduce PTH in patients with primary hyperparathyroid-
ism. Short-term studies demonstrate normalization of serum calcium, 
a small decrease in serum PTH without a significant impact on 
BMD. In women, a course of estrogen may be effective. Ethinyl 
estradiol (30-50 µg/d) or conjugated estrogens (0.625-1.25 mg/d) 
reduce serum calcium by an average of 0.8 mg/dL (0.2 mmol/L), 
diminish urinary calcium excretion, and antagonize the skeletal 
effects of PTH. However, the risks of estrogen (discussed earlier) 
make this an undesirable choice. In men and women with 
higher elevations of serum calcium, oral phosphates can be used, 
but they are less well tolerated in the elderly because of their 
gastrointestinal side-effects and the potential for ectopic calcifica-
tion. Furosemide is a less satisfactory alternative in frail elderly 
patients because it increases the risk of dehydration and resultant 
hypercalcemia. 
 CHANGES IN WATER BALANCE 
 With age, major changes in renal function and homeostatic 
mechanisms result in significant changes in water balance. Renal 
blood flow, cortical mass, the number of glomeruli, and tubular 
function all decline with age, though medullary mass is preserved. 
On average, the glomerular filtration rate decreases at a rate of 
10 mL/min per decade from age 30 onward. Clinically, however, 
the most relevant change is the age-related decline in creatinine 
clearance, which is largely due to relative hypertension in the 
elderly. Because of the decrease in muscle mass associated with 
aging, however, serum creatinine levels are unchanged and may 
not accurately reflect the extent of renal functional impairment. 
 Extrarenal modulators of water balance also change signifi-
cantly with age. Although there are no changes in the basal level, 
half-life, volume of distribution, or metabolic clearance of vaso-
pressin, the stimulated responses of vasopressin are significantly 
altered. Hyperosmolar stimuli increase serum vasopressin levels in 
older subjects to five times those achieved in younger subjects. 
This exaggerated antidiuretic hormone response makes elderly 
patients more susceptible to hyponatremia. On the other hand, 
the normal vasopressin increase observed in response to overnight 
dehydration and postural change is impaired in the elderly. 
758    CHAPTER 23 Geriatric Endocrinology
Additionally, basal and stimulated levels of serum renin and aldos-
terone decline with age. In contrast, basal levels of atrial natri-
uretic peptide are three times higher in healthy elderly individuals 
than in young controls. These elevated levels of atrial natriuretic 
peptide may help identify patients at risk for the development of 
CHF. Finally, the thirst sensation appears to be somewhat 
impaired in healthy elderly individuals and is more impaired in 
those who are frail. 
 In addition to physiologic changes, many diseases and drugs 
further increase the vulnerability of the elderly to changes in water 
balance. These include kidney disease, hypertension, and conges-
tive heart failure as well as medications that alter water balance 
(eg, narcotics, diuretics, lithium, carbamazepine, amphotericin B, 
intravenous hypotonic fluids, and hypertonic contrast agents). 
 HYPERNATREMIA 
 Clinical Features 
 The incidence of hypernatremia in elderly patients admitted to 
the hospital ranges from 1% to 3% and is higher for institutional-
ized elderly patients. Signs and symptoms are usually nonspecific 
(eg, lethargy, weakness, confusion, depression, failure to thrive). 
The cause is usually multifactorial, including impaired thirst 
mechanism, renal disease, sedative-induced confusion, use of 
restraints, reduced access to free water intake, excess water loss due 
to fever, and decreased response to vasopressin. Medications can 
cause nephrogenic diabetes insipidus; these include lithium, fos-
carnet, diuretics, amphotericin B, and demeclocycline. Central 
diabetes insipidus can result from CNS trauma, malignancy, infec-
tion, or it may be idiopathic. 
 Treatment 
 As in younger patients, initial therapy involves correcting the vol-
ume deficit with isotonic saline and then correcting the water 
deficit with half-normal (0.45%) saline. Roughly 30% of the 
deficit should be corrected within 24 hours and the remainder 
within the next 24 to 48 hours (see also Chapter 5). 
 HYPONATREMIA 
 Clinical Features 
 The prevalence of hyponatremia is approximately 2.5% in the 
general hospital setting—higher in geriatric units—and rises to 
25% in nursing home settings. Hyponatremia can be classified by 
the total body sodium as hypovolemic hyponatremia (decrease in 
total body sodium, eg, after diarrhea, vomiting, diuretic use), euv-
olemic hyponatremia (normal total body sodium, as seen with 
syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone [SIADH]), hypo-
thyroidism, adrenal insufficiency, and medications) or hyperv-
olemic hyponatremia (excess total body sodium, as seen with CHF 
or cirrhosis). Presenting symptoms and signs of euvolemic hypona-
tremia are often nonspecific and include lethargy, weakness, and 
confusion. The mechanisms predisposing to hyponatremia include 
the exuberant response of vasopressin to osmolar stimuli, a 
decreased ability to excrete a water load, and the sodium-wasting 
tendency of the older kidney. Furthermore, elderly patients often 
use medications and have diseases that impair free water excretion. 
Drugs that can cause hyponatremia include tricyclic antidepres-
sants, phenothiazines, serotonin reuptake inhibitors, angiotensin-
converting enzyme inhibitors, morphine, antiseizure medications, 
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and acetamino-
phen. Common hyponatremic syndromes in the elderly include 
SIADH and thiazide-induced hyponatremia. In the geriatric reha-
bilitation hospital, approximately half of patients with hypona-
tremia have SIADH (see Chapters 5 and 21). 
 Treatment 
 The treatment of hyponatremia in the elderly depends on the type 
of hyponatremia. The treatment of euvolemic hyponatremia does 
not differ from that in younger patients (Chapters 5 and 24). 
Vasopressin receptor antagonists lead to an increase in electrolyte-
free water diuresis, and an increase in serum sodium levels in 
patients with SIADH and hypervolemic hyponatremia from CHF 
or cirrhosis. Additional studies are needed, but these agents may 
become the mainstay of treatment. 
 HYPORENINEMIC 
HYPOALDOSTERONISM 
 Hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism usually occurs in elderly 
patients with diabetes and mild renal insufficiency. Patients are 
usually asymptomatic. Hyperkalemia and metabolic acidosis are 
found on routine screening. Symptoms of hyperkalemia (eg, heart 
block) may be provoked by administration of a beta-adrenergic 
blocking agent, which further compromises extrarenal regulation 
of potassium homeostasis. After other causes of persistent hyper-
kalemia are ruled out, patients respond well to administration of 
small doses of fludrocortisone (0.05 mg/d) or furosemide com-
bined with restriction of dietary potassium. 
 GLUCOCORTICOIDS AND STRESS 
 Cortisol levels increase 20% to 50% with age. There is an increase 
in the nocturnal level of cortisol, an age-related morning increase 
in cortisol in women (not men), and an advancement in the circa-
dian rhythm ( Figure 23–16 ). Aging is associated with an increase 
in the cortisol production rate, independent of weight, and this 
accounts for the increased daily urinary free cortisol levels in older 
individuals. Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) secretion declines 
with age and can be partially restored by mineralocorticoid antag-
onism, but in healthy elders, trials do not support supplementa-
tion with DHEA. 
 In healthy elderly individuals, dynamic testing of the 
hypothalamic- pituitary-adrenal axis is normal; expected responses 
to insulin-induced hypoglycemia, metyrapone, dexamethasone, 
adrenocorticotropic hormone, and corticotropin-releasing hor-
mone (CRH) are preserved ( Figure 23–17 ). 
CHAPTER 23 Geriatric Endocrinology     759
 DISORDERS OF THE HYPOTHALAMIC-
PITUITARY-ADRENAL AXIS 
 1. ABNORMAL RESPONSE TO STRESS 
 In contrast to the normal responses in the elderly to dynamic test-
ing of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, increased stress 
elicits abnormal responses. For example, although serum cortisol 
levels increase to the same extent in young and old patients under-
going elective surgery, the increase may be protracted in the 
elderly. Compared to younger, physically fit women, older physi-
cally fit women have greater cortisol production in the recovery 
period after a physical exercise challenge. Patients with diabetes 
mellitus and hypertension have also been found to have an exag-
gerated and prolonged response to corticotropin-releasing hor-
mone (CRH) stimulation. Older patients with Alzheimer disease 
may also have a delayed and prolonged response to CRH stimula-
tion. It is not known if these elevated cortisol levels contribute to 
the increased hypertension, glucose intolerance, muscle atrophy, 
and impaired immune function observed in the elderly. However, 
an elevated urinary free cortisol level is an independent predictor 
of osteoporotic fractures in the elderly. 
 2. ADRENAL HYPERSECRETION 
 Although adrenal hypersecretion (Cushing syndrome) is uncom-
mon in the elderly, it is easily overlooked because it mimics nor-
mal aging processes. Signs such as hypertension, glucose 
intolerance, weight gain, and osteoporosis are less specific in 
elderly than in younger patients, but as in younger patients the 
diagnosis is established or excluded using the usual criteria 
(Chapter 9). 
 3. ADRENAL INSUFFICIENCY 
 Symptoms of adrenal insufficiency in younger patients (eg, failure 
to thrive, weakness, weight loss, confusion, and arthralgias) are 
common complaints in adrenally intact elderly patients; the most 
specific sign of adrenal insufficiency in the elderly is hyperpigmen-
tation. The laboratory findings of adrenal insufficiency are similar 
to those in younger patients and include azotemia, hypoglycemia, 
hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, and eosinophilia. Because the meta-
bolic clearance rate of cortisol decreases with age, older patients 
generally require lower replacement doses of cortisol (Chapter 9). 
For critically ill patients, the routine use of glucocorticoids should 
be reserved for patients diagnosed with adrenal insufficiency or 
24-Hour mean
cortisol level (nmol/L)
150
250
50
350
450
15
25
35
45
55
65
75
85
Age (years)
Men
24-Hour mean
cortisol level (nmol/L)
150
250
50
350
450
15
25
35
45
55
65
75
85
Age (years)
Plasma cortisol (nmol/L)
150
0
300
450
19
23
03
07
11
15
19
Plasma cortisol (nmol/L)
150
0
300
450
19
23
03
07
11
15
19
Clock time
Clock time
Women
24-Hour cortisol profiles
24-Hour mean cortisol level (nmol/L)
 FIGURE 23–16  Upper panels: Age-related changes in 24-hour mean cortisol levels in men and women. The coefficient of correlation for 
the linear regression was  r = 0.29 in men (p <.002) and  r = 0.50 in women (p <.0001). Sex differences in the slope of the regression failed to reach 
significance. Lower panels: Mean 24-hour cortisol profiles in men and women 50 years of age and older ( n = 25 and  n = 22, respectively; blue 
lines) compared with those in 20- to 29-year-old subjects ( n = 29 and  n = 20, respectively; pink lines). The shading at each time point represents 
the SEM. (Reproduced, with permission, from van Cauter E, Leproult R, Kupfer DJ. Effects of gender and age on the levels and circadian rhyth-
micity of plasma cortisol.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 1996;81:2468. Copyright 1996 by The Endocrine Society.) 
760    CHAPTER 23 Geriatric Endocrinology
those with hypotension, sepsis, acute respiratory distress syn-
drome, or lack of responsiveness to standard supportive care. 
Treatment doses of hydrocortisone (200 mg/d IV in four divided 
doses) should be weaned as soon as possible. 
 CHANGES IN REPRODUCTIVE 
FUNCTION IN MEN 
 Overall, while sexual activity decreases with age, there are conflict-
ing reports about the physiologic changes in the hypothalamic-
pituitary-testicular axis. Longitudinal studies demonstrate an 
age-related decrease in testosterone and free testosterone and a 
higher frequency of hypogonadal values ( Figures 23–18 and 
 23–19 ). Some studies suggest that circulating testosterone and 
bioavailable testosterone fall with age by 40% to 65% and are even 
lower in institutionalized elderly. A decrease in the number or 
responsiveness of testicular Leydig cells is likely because serum 
follicle-stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone (LH) 
increase with age, and the testosterone response to human chori-
onic gonadotropin decreases. In addition, there is probably an 
age-related decrease in the ratio of circulating bioactive to immu-
noreactive LH. Finally, age-related alterations in pituitary function 
are suggested by a decreased gonadotropin response to luteinizing 
hormone–releasing hormone (LHRH) stimulation. 
 Epidemiologic studies suggest that the declining levels of tes-
tosterone are associated with decreased muscle mass and strength, 
decreased bone mass, increased fat, and insulin resistance. The 
benefit of testosterone replacement in older hypogonadal men is 
less clear. Potential adverse events of testosterone replacement 
include disordered sleep and polycythemia. The clinical impact on 
the cardiovascular system and prostate disease are also concerns. 
30
25
20
15
10
5
ACTH (pg/mL)
25
20
15
10
5
Group A
Group B
Group C
700
600
500
400
100
200
300
DHEA (ng/dL)
0
30
−30
60
90
120
Time (minutes)
F (μg/dL)
 FIGURE 23–17  Mean values for groups A, B, and C of plasma 
ACTH (upper panel), F or cortisol (middle panel), and DHEA (lower 
panel) before and up to 120 minutes after bolus intravenous injec-
tion of ovine CRH (1 μg/kg). Group A, 21-49 years, mean age 35.2 
years,  n = 19. Group B, 50-69 years, mean age 60.7 years,  n = 15. 
Group C, 70-86 years, mean age 77.1 years,  n = 15. (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Pavlov EP, et al. Responses of plasma adrenocorti-
cotropin, cortisol, and dehydroepiandrosterone to ovine corticotro-
pin-releasing hormone in healthy aging men.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
1986;62:767.) 
30
Testosterone (nmol/L)
14
12
16
10
18
20
40
50
60
(177)
(144)
(151)
(158)
(109)
(43)
70
80
90
Age (years)
Free T index (nmol/nmol)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
30
40
50
60
(177)
(144)
(151)
(158)
(109)
(43)
70
80
90
 FIGURE 23–18  Longitudinal effects of aging on date-adjusted 
testosterone (T) and free testosterone index (free T index). Linear 
segment plots for total T and free T index versus age are shown for 
men with T and sex hormone–binding globulin (SHBG) values on at 
least two visits. Each linear segment has a slope equal to the mean of 
the individual longitudinal slopes in each decade, and is centered on 
the median age, for each cohort of men from the second to the ninth 
decade. Numbers in parentheses represent the number of men in 
each cohort. With the exception of free T index in the ninth decade, 
segments show significant downward progression at every age, with 
no significant change in slopes for T or free T index over the entire 
age range (T, testosterone; SHBG, sex hormone–binding globulin; T/
SHBG, free T index). (Reproduced, with permission, from Harman SM, 
et al. Longitudinal effects of aging on serum total and free testoster-
one levels in healthy men.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2001;86:724. 
Copyright 2001 by The Endocrine Society.) 
CHAPTER 23 Geriatric Endocrinology     761
Androgen supplementation is currently not recommended in 
healthy older men. Clinical trials are needed to establish a clear 
benefit and document the safety of testosterone supplementation 
in elderly men. 
 The correlation between sexual activity and the age-related 
hormonal changes described is weak. There are decreased concen-
trations of spermatozoa in the ejaculate of older men, sperm 
motility and the volume of ejaculate decrease with age, and the 
proportion of abnormal spermatozoa also increases. DHEA and 
DHEA sulfate are steroids of adrenal origin that decrease with age. 
Levels do not correlate with cognitive function or decline, and 
DHEA supplementation has not been shown to be beneficial. 
However, studies in the elderly are ongoing. 
 Erectile dysfunction (impotence) becomes more prevalent 
with age, but an endocrinologic cause becomes less likely. The 
prevalence of erectile dysfunction in men under age 45 is 5%; the 
prevalence in men over age 75 is 50%. However, more than 90% 
of men in the latter group have coexistent medical conditions or 
are taking medications that contribute to the problem. 
Furthermore, up to 30% of men over age 76 develop erectile 
dysfunction following prostatectomy, compared with 3% to 11% 
in younger age groups. Often there are multiple overlapping 
causes of erectile dysfunction—psychosocial, neurovascular, met-
abolic (diabetes mellitus), medication-related, and vascular—in 
the same individual. 
 The evaluation of erectile dysfunction in the elderly is similar 
to that in younger individuals (Chapter 12), although more 
emphasis must be placed on the effects of drugs (both prescribed 
and nonprescribed) and vascular causes, and a search for multiple 
causative factors should be undertaken. Medications associated 
with erectile dysfunction include diuretics (thiazides, spironolac-
tone); antihypertensives (calcium channel blockers, beta blockers, 
clonidine), cardiac and cholesterol-lowering drugs, antidepressants 
(SSRI, tricyclic antidepressants, lithium), phenothiazines, H 2 
blockers, hormones (GnRH agonists, 5 alpha-reductase inhibi-
tors, glucocorticoids), anticholinergic agents, and cytotoxic agents. 
Excess alcohol and smoking also contribute to it. Therapies 
include phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors that relax vascular 
smooth muscle cells. Because these medications can result in 
hypotension and increase the risk of myocardial infarction, if used 
with nitrates, the use must be carefully considered in elderly men 
with coronary artery disease. 
 REFERENCES 
 Thyroid Function and Disease 
 Aoki Y, Belin RM, Clickner R, Jeffries R, Phillips L, Mahaffey KR. Serum TSH 
and total T4 in the United States population and their association with 
participant characteristics: National Health and Nutrition Examination 
Survey (NHANES 1999-2002).  Thyroid . 2007;17:1211. [PMID: 
18177256] 
 Biondi B, Cooper DS. The clinical significance of subclinical thyroid dysfunction. 
 Endocr Rev . 2008;29:76. [PMID: 17991805] 
 Gharib H, Tuttle RM, Baskin HJ, Fish LH, Singer PA, McDermott MT. 
Consensus statement: subclinical thyroid dysfunction: a joint statement on 
management from the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists, 
the American Thyroid Association, and the Endocrine Society.  J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab . 2005;90:581. [PMID: 15687817] 
 Haentjens P, et al. Subclinical thyroid dysfunction and mortality: an estimate of 
relative and absolute excess all-cause mortality based on time-to-event data 
from cohort studies.  Eur J Endocrinol . 2008;159:329. [PMID: 18511471] 
 Helfand M; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for subclinical thyroid 
dysfunction in nonpregnant adults: a summary of the evidence for the U.S. 
Preventive Services Task Force.  Ann Intern Med . 2004;140:128. [PMID: 
14734337] 
 Ochs N, Auer R, Bauer DC, et al. Meta-analysis: subclinical thyroid dysfunction 
and the risk for coronary heart disease and mortality.  Ann Intern Med . 
2008;148:832. [PMID: 18490668] 
 Shin SH, Holmes H, Bao R, et al. Outpatient minimally invasive parathyroidec-
tomy is safe for elderly patients.  J Am Coll Surg . 2009;208:1071. [PMID: 
19476894] 
 U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for thyroid disease: recommenda-
tion statement.  Ann Intern Med . 2004;140:125. [PMID: 14734336] 
 Villar HCCE, Saconato H, Valente O, Atallah AN. Thyroid hormone replacement 
for 
subclinical 
hypothyroidism. 
 Cochrane 
Database 
Syst 
Rev . 
2009(3):CD000227. [PMID: 17636722] 
 Walter MA, Briel M, Christ-Crain M, et al. Effects of antithyroid drugs on radio-
iodine treatment: systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised con-
trolled trials.  BMJ . 2007;334:514. [PMID: 17309884] 
 Carbohydrate Intolerance and Diabetes Mellitus 
 American Diabetes Association. Standards of medical care for patients with diabe-
tes mellitus—2010.  Diab Care . 2010;33:S11. [PMID: 20042772] 
 Brown AF, Mangione CM, Saliba D, et al. Guidelines for improving the care of the 
older person with diabetes mellitus.  J Am Ger Soc . 2003;51:S265. [PMID: 
12694461] 
 Chalmers J, Cooper ME. UKPDS and the legacy effect.  N Engl J Med . 
2008;359:1618. [PMID: 18843126] 
 Knoops KTB, de Groot LC, Kromhout D, et al. Mediterranean diet, lifestyle fac-
tors, and 10-year mortality in elderly European men and women: the HALE 
project.  JAMA . 2004;292:1433. [PMID: 15383513] 
Age decade
Testosterone
Percent
0
40
20
60
80
100
20-29 30-39 40-49
279
332
350
251
94
201
18
50-59 60-69 70-79
80+
Free T index
 FIGURE 23–19  Hypogonadism in aging men. Bar height indi-
cates the percentage of men in each 10-year interval, from the third 
to the ninth decades, with at least one testosterone (T) value in the 
hypogonadal range, by the criteria of total T <11.3 nmol/L (325 ng/dL) 
[shaded bars], or T/SHBG (free T index) <0.153 nmol/nmol (striped 
bars). Numbers above each pair of bars indicate the number of men 
studied in the corresponding decade. The fraction of men who are 
hypogonadal increases progressively after age 50 by either crite-
rion. More men are hypogonadal by free T index than by total T 
after age 50, and there seems to be a progressively greater differ-
ence, with increasing age, between the two criteria (T, testosterone; 
SHBG, sex hormone–binding globulin; T/SHBG, free T index). 
(Reproduced, with permission, from Harman SM, et al. Longitudinal 
effects of aging on serum total and free testosterone levels in 
healthy men.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2001;86:724. Copyright 2001 
by The Endocrine Society.) 
762    CHAPTER 23 Geriatric Endocrinology
 Masoudi FA, Inzucchi SE, Wang Y, Havranek EP, Foody JM, Krumholz HM. 
Thiazolidinediones, metformin, and outcomes in older patients with diabe-
tes and heart failure: an observational study.  Circulation . 2005;111:583. 
[PMID: 15699279] 
 Nathan DM, Buse JB, Davidson MB, et al. Medical management of hyperglycaemia 
in type 2 diabetes mellitus: a consensus algorithm for the initiation and adjust-
ment of therapy: a consensus statement from the American Diabetes Association 
and the European Association for the Study of Diabetes.  Diabetologia . 
2009;52:17. [PMID: 18941734] 
 Osteoporosis and Calcium Homeostasis 
 Avenell A, Gillespie WJ, Gillespie LD, O’Connell D. Vitamin D and vitamin D 
analogues for preventing fractures associated with involutional and post-
menopausal osteoporosis.  Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2009;(2):CD000227. 
[PMID: 19370554 ] 
 Bischoff-Ferrari HA, Dawson-Hughes B, Baron JA, et al. Calcium intake and hip 
fracture risk in men and women: a meta-analysis of prospective cohort stud-
ies and randomized controlled trials.  Am J Clin Nutr . 2007;86:1780. 
[PMID: 18065599] 
 Bischoff-Ferrari HA, Giovannucci E, Willett WC, Dietrich T, Dawson-Hughes B. 
Estimation of optimal serum concentrations of 25- hydroxyvitamin D for 
multiple health outcomes.  Am J Clin Nutr . 2006;84:18. [PMID: 
16825677] 
 Cranney A, Papaioannou A, Zytaruk N, et al: Parathyroid hormone for the treat-
ment of osteoporosis: a systematic review. CMAJ 2006;175:52. [PMID: 
16818910 ] 
 Cummings SR, San Martin J, McClung MR, et al; FREEDOM Trial. Denosumab 
for prevention of fractures in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis. 
 N Engl J Med . 2009;361:756. [PMID: 19671655] 
 Fraser WD. Hyperparathyroidism.  Lancet . 2009;374:145. [PMID: 19595349] 
 Gillespie LD, Robertson MC, Gillespie WJ, et al. Interventions for preventing falls 
in older people living in the community.  Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 
2009;(2):CD007146. [PMID: 19370674] 
 Greenspan SL, Schneider DL, McClung MR, et al. Alendronate improves bone 
mineral density in elderly female long-term care facility residents with osteo-
porosis. A double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized trial.  Ann Intern 
Med . 2002;136:742. [PMID: 12020142] 
 Greenspan SL, Myers ER, Kiel DP, Parker RA, Hayes WC, Resnick NM. Fall 
direction, bone mineral density, and function: risk factors for hip fracture in 
frail nursing home elderly.  Am J Med . 1998;104:539. [PMID: 9674716] 
 Holick MF. Vitamin D deficiency.  N Engl J Med . 2007;357:266. [PMID: 
17634462] 
 Kallmes DF, Comstock BA, Heagerty PJ, et al. A randomized trial of vertebroplasty 
for osteoporotic spinal fractures.  N Engl J Med . 2009;361:569. [PMID: 
19657122] 
 Kanis JA, Oden A, Johnell O, et al. The use of clinical risk factors enhances the 
performance of BMD in the prediction of hip and osteoporotic fractures in 
men and women.  Osteoporos Int . 2007;18:1033. [PMID: 17323110] 
 Kiel DP, Magaziner J, Zimmerman S, et al. Efficacy of a hip protector to prevent 
hip fracture in nursing home residents: the HIP PRO randomized controlled 
trial.  JAMA . 2007;298:413. [PMID: 17652295] 
 Lyles KW, Colón-Emeric CS, Magaziner JS et al; HORIZON Recurrent Fracture 
Trial. Zoledronic acid and clinical fractures and mortality after hip fracture. 
 N Engl J Med . 2007;357:1799. [PMID: 17878149] 
 National Osteoporosis Foundation.  Clinicians’ Guide to Prevention and Treatment 
of Osteoporosis . Washington, DC: National Osteoporosis Foundation; 2008. 
 Parikh S, Avorn J, Solomon DH. Pharmacological management of osteoporosis in 
nursing home populations: a systematic review.  J Am Geriatr Soc . 2009;57:327. 
[PMID: 19207148] 
 Peacock M, Bilezikian JP, Klassen PS, Guo MD, Turner SA, Shoback D. 
Cinacalcet hydrochloride maintains long-term normocalcemia in patients 
with primary hyperparathyroidism.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2005;90:135. 
[PMID: 15522938] 
 Rubin MR, Bilezikian JP, McMahon DJ, et al. The natural history of primary 
hyperparathyroidism with or without parathyroid surgery after 15 years.  J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab . 2008;93:3462. [PMID: 18544625] 
 Wells G, Cranney A, Peterson J, et al. Risedronate for the primary and secondary 
prevention of osteoporotic fractures in postmenopausal women.  Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev . 2008;(1):CD004523. [PMID: 18254053] 
 Wells GA, Cranney A, Peterson J, et al. Alendronate for the primary and secondary 
prevention of osteoporotic fractures in postmenopausal women.  Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev . 2008;(1):CD001155. [PMID: 18253985] 
 Changes in Water Balance 
 Lin M, Liu SJ, Lim IT. Disorders of water imbalance.  Emerg Med Clin North Am . 
2005;23:749. [PMID: 15982544] 
 Rosner MH. Hyponatremia in heart failure: the role of arginine vasopressin and 
diuretics.  Cardiovasc Drugs Ther . 2009;23:307. [PMID: 19554441] 
 Schrier RW, Bansal S. Diagnosis and management of hyponatremia in acute illness. 
 Curr Opin Crit Care . 2008;14:627. [PMID: 19005303] 
 Glucocorticoids and Stress 
 Arafah BM. Hypothalamic pituitary adrenal function during critical illness: limita-
tions of current assessment methods.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2006;91:3725. 
[PMID: 16882746] 
 Arlt W. Dehydroepiandrosterone and ageing.  Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2004;18:363. [PMID: 15261843] 
 Giordano R, Bo M, Pellegrino M, et al. Hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal hyperac-
tivity in human aging is partially refractory to stimulation by mineralocorti-
coid receptor blockade.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2005;90:5656. [PMID: 
16014406] 
 Purnell JQ, Brandon DD, Isabelle LM, Loriaux DL, Samuels MH. Association of 
24-hour cortisol production rates, cortisol-binding globulin, and plasma-free 
cortisol levels with body composition, leptin levels, and aging in adult men 
and women.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2004;89:281. [PMID: 14715862] 
 Traustadottir T, Bosch PR, Cantu T, Matt KS. Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal 
axis response and recovery from high-intensity exercise in women: effects of 
aging and fitness.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2004;89:3248. [PMID: 
15240599] 
 Reproductive Function in Men 
 Harman SM, Metter EJ, Tobin JD, et al. Longitudinal effects of aging on serum 
total and free testosterone levels in healthy men.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2001;86:724. [PMID: 11158037] 
 Haren MT, Kim MJ, Tariq SH, Wittert GA, Morley JE. Andropause: a quality-of-
life issue in older males.  Med Clin North Am . 2006;90:1005. [PMID: 
16962854] 
 Liu PY, Swerdloff RS, Veldhuis JD. The rationale, efficacy and safety of androgen 
therapy in older men: future research and current practice recommendations. 
 J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2004;89:4789. [PMID: 15472164] 
 McVary KT. Clinical practice. Erectile dysfunction.  N Engl J Med . 2007;357:2472. 
[PMID: 18077811] 
 Mohr BA, Kim MJ, Tariq SH, Wittert GA, Morley JE. Normal, bound and non-
bound testosterone levels in normally ageing men: results from the 
Massachusetts Male Ageing Study.  Clin Endocrinol . 2005;62:64. [PMID: 
15638872] 
 
 
 
763
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
  Endocrine Emergencies 
 David G. Gardner, MD 
 ACTH 
Adrenocorticotropic hormone 
 ADH 
Antidiuretic hormone (vasopressin) 
 APACHE 
Acute physiology and chronic health 
 
evaluation 
 CT 
Computed tomography 
 DDAVP 
1-deamino-8-D arginine vasopressin 
 DKA 
Diabetic ketoacidosis 
 FT 4 
Free thyroxine 
 GFR 
Glomerular filtration rate 
 IL 
Interleukin 
 MRI 
Magnetic resonance imaging 
 PTH 
Parathyroid hormone 
 PTHrP 
Parathyroid hormone–related protein 
 SIADH 
Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic 
 
hormone secretion 
 T 3 
Triiodothyronine 
 TPP 
Thyrotoxic periodic paralysis 
 TSH  
Thyroid-stimulating hormone 
24
 Acute or chronic failure of an endocrine gland can occasionally 
result in catastrophic illness and even death. Thus, it is important 
to recognize and appropriately manage these endocrine emergen-
cies. This chapter will discuss crises involving the thyroid, anterior 
pituitary, or adrenal glands; diabetes mellitus; and abnormalities 
in calcium, sodium, and water balance. Except where indicated, 
management recommendations are provided for adult patients. 
Studies in the general area of endocrine emergencies have been 
limited in size and number. In many instances, recommendations 
offered in this chapter are based on published expert opinion 
rather than scientific evidence. 
 MYXEDEMA COMA 
 Clinical Setting 
 Myxedema coma is the end stage of untreated or inadequately 
treated hypothyroidism. The clinical picture is often that of an 
elderly obese female who has become increasingly withdrawn, 
lethargic, sleepy, and confused. The presentation is one of severe 
hypothyroidism, with or without coma (the term myxedema coma 
may, therefore, be a misnomer). The history from the patient may 
be inadequate, but the family may report that the patient has had 
thyroid surgery or radioiodine treatment in the past or that the 
patient has previously been receiving thyroid hormone therapy. 
Myxedema coma is most frequently associated with discontinua-
tion of thyroid hormone therapy and less frequently as the first 
manifestation of hypothyroidism. Myxedema coma may be 
 precipitated by an illness such as a cerebrovascular accident, myo-
cardial infarction, or an infection such as a urinary tract infection 
or pneumonia. Other precipitating factors include gastrointestinal 
hemorrhage; acute trauma; excessive hydration; or administration 
of a sedative, narcotic, or potent diuretic drug. 
 Diagnosis 
 The physical findings are not specific. The patient may be semico-
matose or comatose with dry, coarse skin, hoarse voice, thin scalp 
and eyebrow hair, possibly a scar on the neck, and slow reflex 
relaxation time. There is marked hypothermia, with body tem-
perature sometimes falling to as low as 24°C (75°F), particularly 
in the winter months. It is important to be alert to the presence of 
complicating factors such as pneumonia, urinary tract infection, 
ileus, anemia, hypoglycemia, or seizures. Fever may be masked by 
coexistent hypothermia. Often there are pericardial, pleural, or 
peritoneal effusions. The key laboratory tests are a low free thyrox-
ine (FT 4 ) and elevated thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). Note 
that in an emergency situation, serum TSH can be done in 1 hour. 
The TSH elevation may be less than predicted due to the presence 
of euthyroid sick syndrome or glucocorticoid or dopamine ther-
apy. If the FT 4 is low and the TSH is low-normal, consider central 
or pituitary hypothyroidism. Pituitary insufficiency can be con-
firmed with a low serum cortisol, impaired response to the cosyn-
tropin stimulation test, and/or low follicle-stimulating hormone 
and luteinizing hormone. It is essential to check blood gases, elec-
trolytes, creatinine, and an electrocardiogram in evaluating 
764    CHAPTER 24 Endocrine Emergencies
 pulmonary, renal, cardiac, and central nervous system status. The 
combination of hypothermia, hyponatremia, and hypercapnia 
should increase suspicion of myxedema coma. It may be necessary 
to differentiate myxedema coma from the  euthyroid sick syn-
drome associated with coma due to other causes. These patients 
may present with a low triiodothyronine (T 3 ), normal or low 
TSH, but the FT 4 (by dialysis) is normal. 
 Myxedema coma is a complex problem involving a number of 
organ systems. The pathogenesis is presented in  Figure 24–1 . The 
decrease in serum T 4 results in a lowering of intracellular T 3 . This 
can directly affect central nervous system function with altered 
mental status. The decrease in intracellular T 3 causes decreased ther-
mogenesis, resulting in hypothermia, which in turn causes decreased 
central nervous system sensitivity to hypercapnia and hypoxia. The 
resulting respiratory insufficiency induces cerebral anoxia and coma. 
At the same time, the decreased intracellular T 3 results in decreased 
cardiac inotropism and chronotropism, decreased sensitivity to 
adrenergic stimuli, decreased cardiac output, and generalized vaso-
constriction. This leads to a low-output state which, if untreated, 
culminates in decreased blood pressure and eventually shock and 
death. Finally, there is a change in fluid balance with increased water 
retention due to impaired renal perfusion as well as increased vascu-
lar permeability. These changes result in effusions and hypona-
tremia, which in turn contribute to the coma. 
 Management 
 Management of myxedema coma involves much more than sim-
ply replacing T 4 ( Table 24–1 ). The patient is severely ill and 
 usually is admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) for intubation 
and ventilatory support. Oral medications may be poorly absorbed 
(due to gastric atony or ileus), and medications should be given 
intravenously if possible. A loading dose of 300 to 400 μg of T 4 
intravenously is given initially to saturate T 4 binding sites in 
plasma-binding proteins. The patient is then maintained on 50 to 
100 μg of T 4 intravenously daily. In addition, small doses of T 3 
(eg, 10 μg intravenously every 6-8 hours) may be given over the 
first 48 hours, but this is usually not necessary, and it may contrib-
ute to untoward cardiovascular events. Its use should be restricted 
to younger patients without history of ischemic heart disease or 
cardiac arrhythmias. Water restriction is necessary to correct the 
hyponatremia, and intravenous glucose counteracts the tendency 
↓ T4
↓ Intracellular T3
↓ Thermogenesis
↓ Sensitivity to
hypercapnia and
hypoxia
Cardiovascular
↓ Inotropism
↓ Chronotropism
Hypothermia
↓ Cardiac output
↑ Vasoconstriction
↓ Blood pressure,
shock
Fluid balance
↑ Vascular
permeability
↑ Water retention
Effusions,
low Na+
CNS
Altered
mental status
Respiratory
insufficiency
Low blood
volume
Cerebral
anoxia
COMA
 FIGURE 24–1  Pathogenesis of myxedema coma (CNS, central nervous system). (See text for details.) 
TABLE 24–1 Management of myxedema coma.
(1) Admit to ICU for ventilatory support and for intravenous 
  medications.
(2) Parenteral thyroxine: Give a loading dose of 300-400 μg IV, then 
  50-100 μg IV daily. (May also give liothyronine sodium, 10 μg IV 
  every 8 h for the first 48 h if necessary.)
(3) Electrolytes: Water restriction for hyponatremia. Avoid fluid overload.
(4) Limit sedation. Appropriate reduction in drug dosage.
(5) Glucocorticoids: Controversial but necessary in hypopituitarism or 
  polyglandular failure. Dosage: Hydrocortisone sodium phosphate 
  or sodium succinate, 50-100 mg every 6 h initially and tapered 
  downward over 1 wk. (If initial serum cortisol was >30 μg/dL, 
  corticosteroids are unnecessary.)
(6) Hypothermia: Do not externally rewarm.
CHAPTER 24 Endocrine Emergencies     765
to hypoglycemia. It is essential to treat the precipitating illness (eg, 
pneumonia or urinary tract infection). The use of hydrocortisone 
is prudent because patients may have hypopituitarism or autoim-
mune polyglandular failure. Glucocorticoids are generally given in 
high doses until baseline cortisol or the results of rapid adrenocor-
ticotropic hormone (ACTH) testing are available. If the initial 
serum cortisol is more than 30 μg/dL, steroid support is probably 
unnecessary. However, if serum cortisol is less than 30 μg/dL, 
hydrocortisone should be given intravenously in a dosage of 50 to 
100 mg every 6 hours for the first 48 hours and the dose then 
tapered over the next 5 to 7 days while the pituitary-adrenal axis 
undergoes formal testing. Once myxedema coma is suspected in a 
hypothermic patient, external rewarming should be avoided, 
because this may cause redistribution of blood flow to subcutane-
ous tissues and cardiovascular collapse. 
 Prior to the recognition of the need for intravenous T 4 and 
for respiratory support, the mortality from myxedema coma 
was about 80%. Currently, the mortality is about 20% and is 
mostly due to the underlying or precipitating illness. Predictors 
of acute mortality include level of consciousness, lower Glasgow 
scores, and higher (acute physiology and chronic health evalu-
ation) APACHE II scores, all indicative of the severity of the 
illness at presentation. Higher mortality is also associated with 
increased age, cardiac complications, and high-dose thyroid 
hormone replacement (≥500 μg/d of L-T 4 or ≥75 μg/d of 
L-T 3 ). The latter presumably reflects the increased metabolic 
demand attendant to high dose replacement in the setting of 
limited physiologic reserve. Persistent hypothermia and brady-
cardia, despite therapy, are associated with a poor prognosis. 
 THYROID STORM 
 Clinical Setting 
 Thyroid storm, or thyrotoxic crisis, is an acute life-threatening 
exacerbation of thyrotoxicosis. It accounts for 1% to 2% of 
 hospital admissions for thyrotoxicosis. It may occur in a patient 
with a history of Graves disease who has discontinued antithy-
roid medication or in a patient with previously undiagnosed 
hyperthyroidism. The clinical picture is that of an acute onset of 
hyperpyrexia (with temperature >40°C [104°F]), sweating, 
marked tachycardia often with atrial fibrillation, nausea, 
 vomiting, diarrhea, agitation, tremulousness, and delirium. The 
presence of jaundice is considered a poor prognostic sign. 
Occasionally, the presentation is apathetic without the restless-
ness and agitation, but with symptoms of weakness, confusion, 
cardiovascular and gastrointestinal dysfunction, and  hyperpyrexia. 
Some of the factors that may precipitate thyroid storm are listed 
in  Table 24–2 . 
 Diagnosis 
 The diagnosis is largely based in the clinical findings. Serum T 4 , 
free T 4 , T 3 , and free T 3 are all elevated, and TSH is suppressed. 
These findings are not different from what is seen in other patients 
with hyperthyroidism, but the difference is in the setting. It is 
thought that thyroid storm represents an exacerbation of thyro-
toxicosis associated with a shift of T 4 from the bound to the free 
compartment with an increase in free T 3 and T 4 , as well as an 
exaggerated response to a surge of catecholamines that results from 
the stress of the precipitating event. The cause of death is usually 
cardiac arrhythmia and failure. Liver function abnormalities are 
often seen, as is leukocytosis, even in the absence of infection. 
 Management 
 The management of thyroid storm is summarized in  Table 24–3 . 
Patients are typically admitted to an ICU for cardiac monitoring. 
Initially it is important to block further synthesis and secretion of 
thyroid hormone, first with antithyroid drugs and then with 
iodide. One may give propylthiouracil, 150 mg every 
6 hours orally or rectally, or methimazole, 20 mg every 8 hours 
orally or rectally. A few hours after initiation of antithyroid drug 
therapy, iodides may be started. Traditionally, saturated solution of 
potassium iodide, five drops twice daily, has been used, but cur-
rently iopanoic acid in a dose of 0.5 g twice daily orally or intra-
venously, or iohexol 0.6 g (2 mL of Omnipaque 300) intravenously 
twice daily is the treatment of choice. These drugs not only inhibit 
TABLE 24–2 Thyroid storm—precipitating factors.
Withdrawal of antithyroid drugs
Severe infection
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Myocardial infarction
Cerebrovascular accident
Cardiac failure
Surgery
Parturition
Trauma (eg, hip fracture)
Radioiodine (rare)
Drug reaction
Iodinated contrast medium
TABLE 24–3 Management of thyroid storm.
Supportive care
Fluids
Oxygen
Cooling blanket
Acetaminophen
Multivitamins
If indicated, antibiotics, digoxin
Specific measures
Propranolol, 40-80 mg orally every 6 h
Propylthiouracil, 150 mg every 6 h, or methimazole, 20 mg every 8 h; 
 may be administered per rectum if oral route is unavailable
Saturated solution of potassium iodide, 5 drops (250 mg) orally twice 
 daily; or iopanoic acid, 0.5 g IV or orally twice daily; or iohexol, 
 0.6 g (2 mL of Omnipaque 300) IV twice daily
Dexamethasone, 2 mg every 6 h
Cholestyramine or colestipol, 20-30 g/d
766    CHAPTER 24 Endocrine Emergencies
thyroid hormone synthesis but also block the conversion of T 4 to 
T 3 , lowering the thyroid hormone level in the blood. Additional 
specific therapy includes β-adrenergic blockade with propranolol, 
40 to 80 mg orally every 6 hours or 0.5 to 1 mg intravenously over 
10 minutes every 3 hours, with continuous cardiac monitoring. In 
patients with asthma, the β 1 -selective antagonist esmolol can be 
given as a bolus dose (0.25-0.5 mg/kg over 10 minutes) followed 
by continuous intravenous infusion (0.05-0.1 mg/kg/min). The 
half-life of glucocorticoids is markedly reduced in severe thyro-
toxicosis, so that adrenal support may be very useful. Dexamethasone 
also reduces conversion of T 4 to T 3 (as do the β blockers, especially 
propranolol). For this purpose, dexamethasone is given in a dosage 
of 2 mg every 6 hours for 48 hours, followed by tapering of the 
dose. Finally, cholestyramine or colestipol binds T 4 in the gut 
interfering with its enterohepatic circulation and may help bring 
the circulating level of T 4 down more quickly. Supportive therapy 
includes adequate fluids, oxygen, management of atrial fibrillation 
or heart failure, parenteral water-soluble vitamins, and a cooling 
blanket and acetaminophen for hyperpyrexia. Aspirin should be 
avoided, because it will displace T 4 from thyroid hormone– 
binding globulin, resulting in an increase in FT 4 . Plasmapheresis 
or dialysis to remove FT 4 has been reported to be useful in nonre-
sponders, but this is rarely necessary. 
 Therapy for thyroid storm has improved markedly, so the mor-
tality has dropped from 100% in the 1920s to about 20% to 30% 
in recent series. However, because storm is often associated with 
other underlying medical problems, it still represents a serious 
medical complication. 
 THYROTOXIC PERIODIC PARALYSIS 
 Clinical Setting 
 Thyrotoxic periodic paralysis (TPP) is a rare but frightening thyroid 
emergency. The usual clinical presentation is of an Asian male 
(male:female ratio approximately 17:1) with symptoms of untreated 
hyperthyroidism who awakens at night or in the morning with flac-
cid ascending paralysis. Typically, there is a history of vigorous 
exercise and/or a large high-carbohydrate meal before retiring. 
There is usually no family history of periodic paralysis, but there 
may be a family history of autoimmune thyroid disease. The paraly-
sis initially involves the lower extremities but progresses to the girdle 
muscles, followed by the upper extremities. Proximal muscle groups 
are affected to a greater extent than distal. Facial and respiratory 
muscles are usually spared. Sensory function, bowel and bladder 
function are not affected. Deep tendon reflexes are depressed or 
absent. The acute episode may be complicated by cardiac arrhyth-
mias due to the concomitant presence of hypokalemia. The illness 
has also been reported to occur in Native Americans, African 
Americans, and in individuals of Mexican or South American 
descent, but these ethnic groups are affected rarely. 
 Diagnosis 
 The differential diagnosis of TPP includes familial periodic 
paralysis, Guillain-Barré syndrome, and acute intermittent 
 porphyria. The diagnosis is based on the absence of a family his-
tory, the characteristic presentation, the presence of hyperthyroid-
ism due either to Graves disease or toxic nodular goiter (other 
types of hyperthyroidism have been implicated as well), and usu-
ally a low serum potassium level. 
 The pathogenesis is summarized in  Figure 24–2 . Thyrotoxicosis, 
increased β-adrenergic activity, and an assumed genetic predispo-
sition, perhaps involving the potassium channel Kir2.6, which 
together with increased Na + -K + ATPase activity leads to increased 
intracellular potassium concentrations. A high-carbohydrate meal 
with increased insulin secretion and glycogen deposition, vigor-
ous exercise high salt intake, and the normal nocturnal potassium 
flux serve to drive serum potassium levels even lower, resulting in 
flaccid neuromuscular paralysis. Note that there is no loss of total 
body potassium, merely a shift from the extracellular to the intra-
cellular space. Consequently, aggressive potassium repletion, par-
ticularly through the parenteral route, is discouraged because this 
frequently results in significant hyperkalemia as potassium redis-
tributes across cellular compartments following resolution of the 
attack. Hypophosphatemia and hypomagnesemia may be present. 
This is also assumed to reflect intracellular sequestration. The 
electromyogram, performed while the patient is experiencing 
weakness, shows myopathic changes with reduced amplitude of 
compound muscle action potentials. These do not change in ampli-
tude after administration of intra-arterial low-dose epinephrine 
(distinguishes from familial periodic paralysis). Electrocardiograms 
show changes associated with hypokalemia, tachycardia, increased 
QRS voltage, first-degree heart block, and, on occasion, serious 
ventricular arrhythmias. 
 Management 
 The management of this problem is presented in  Table 24–4 . 
Propranolol in doses of 60 mg every 6 hours blocks the 
β-adrenergic stimulation of Na + -K + ATPase. Antithyroid drug 
therapy should be started immediately, even though it takes time 
to bring the patient into a euthyroid state. Oral potassium, if 
indicated, should be administered cautiously. It is particularly 
Thyrotoxicosis
↑ Na+-K+ ATPase activity
↓ Serum K+ 
Paralysis
High carbohydrate
intake
High insulin
β-adrenergic
activity
Genetics
(Typically
Asian male)
Exercise
High salt intake
Nocturnal flux
 FIGURE 24–2  Pathogenesis of thyrotoxic periodic paralysis. 
(See text for details.) 
CHAPTER 24 Endocrine Emergencies     767
important to be cautious if administering intravenous potassium, 
which may raise total body potassium to toxic levels as the episode 
resolves. One should also avoid intravenous glucose, which stimu-
lates insulin secretion and worsens hypokalemia, and β-adrenergic 
agonists such as isoproterenol, which promote movement of 
potassium into the intracellular compartment and exacerbate the 
problem. There is no role for potassium supplementation in pre-
venting attacks. Acetazolamide, which has been shown to reduce 
frequency of attacks in familial periodic paralysis, may worsen 
attacks of thyrotoxic periodic paralysis and should be avoided. 
With appropriate treatment, recovery is rapid, and once the thy-
rotoxicosis is controlled, the paralysis will not recur. 
 AMIODARONE-INDUCED 
THYROTOXICOSIS 
 Clinical Setting 
 Amiodarone is a benzofuran derivative that is widely used in 
the treatment of cardiac arrhythmias. It contains two atoms of 
iodine per molecule, which represents 37.5% iodine by weight. 
The compound is stored in adipose tissue and has a half-life in the 
body of 2 to 3 months, with gradual and continuous release of 
iodide. The usual daily maintenance dose of amiodarone of 200 to 
400 mg/d releases 6,000 to 12,000 μg of iodine daily, which when 
compared to the normal daily requirement of about 150 μg of 
iodide represents an enormous iodide load. 
 The structure of amiodarone resembles that of T 3 , and it is 
thought that part of the cardiac depressant effect of amiodarone 
may be due to binding to and blocking the T 3 receptor in cardiac 
muscle. However, the effect of amiodarone on the thyroid gland is 
different and is due in part to a direct effect of iodine on the thy-
roid cell—to inhibit or stimulate hormone synthesis—and a cyto-
toxic effect of amiodarone on the follicular cell—inducing 
destruction of the cell and release of stored hormone. Thus, the 
drug may induce hypothyroidism, which is easily managed by 
thyroxine replacement, or hyperthyroidism, which, because of the 
underlying heart disease, is much more difficult to manage and 
may represent a true thyroid emergency. Two mechanisms have 
been suggested to explain the development of hyperthyroidism: 
(1) the high iodine level in a multinodular gland, or in the gland 
of a patient with latent Graves disease, or even in a previously 
normal gland, can induce hyperthyroidism (see Chapter 7), and 
(2) the toxic effect of amiodarone itself may cause acute and 
chronic thyroiditis with release of T 4 and T 3 into the circulation 
and severe thyrotoxicosis. Risk factors for amiodarone-induced 
thyrotoxicosis include the presence of autoimmune thyroiditis and 
baseline elevation of TSH levels. 
 The patient with amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis may have 
been on the drug for months. Thyrotoxicosis typically appears 6 
to 12 months after the onset of treatment. The underlying heart 
disease gradually worsens with increasingly frequent episodes of 
arrhythmia and heart failure. At the same time there may be 
weight loss, heat intolerance, increased nervousness, and marked 
muscle weakness. On physical examination, one may find non-
tender nodular or diffuse thyroid enlargement, tachycardia with or 
without atrial fibrillation, tremor, hyperreflexia, and, occasionally, 
lid lag and stare. Laboratory findings are unique because amio-
darone inhibits the conversion of T 4 to T 3 . Thus, even in the 
euthyroid patient taking amiodarone, total T 4 may be elevated 
while FT 4 and TSH are normal. In the hyperthyroid patient, the 
FT 4 is markedly elevated and TSH is less than 0.01 mU/L (below 
the detection limit of the assay). Radioiodine uptake in the iodide-
loaded patient is low. It has been difficult to distinguish thyro-
toxicosis due to follicular cell hyperfunction from that due to 
follicular cell destruction. Thyroid ultrasound with color Doppler 
studies may show increased circulation with hyperfunction and 
decreased blood flow with thyroiditis. Also, the cytokine interleu-
kin (IL)-6 is low in patients with hyperfunction, whereas it is 
markedly elevated in patients with thyroiditis. However, these 
tests have not proven sufficiently robust to separate these two 
disorders. 
 Management 
 Management of amiodarone-induced hyperthyroidism is difficult 
( Table 24–5 ). Ideally, amiodarone should be discontinued, but 
often it cannot be stopped because of the underlying heart dis-
ease, and even if it is discontinued, the iodine load persists for 
several months. Further synthesis of T 4 should be blocked with 
methimazole in a dosage of 40 to 80 mg/d or propylthiouracil in 
doses of 400 to 800 mg/d. β-Adrenergic blockade, if needed 
(amiodarone, itself, has some β-blocking activity), should be 
instituted with propranolol or a comparable drug if cardiac status 
permits it. Potassium perchlorate in a dosage of 250 mg every 
6 hours blocks further iodine uptake and lowers intrathyroidal 
iodide content. Aplastic anemia has occurred in patients on 
TABLE 24–4  Management of thyrotoxic periodic 
paralysis.
(1) Oral potassium supplement (if needed); monitor serum K+
(2) Oral propranolol (60 mg every 6 h)
(3) Antithyroid drug therapy
Avoid:
IV  potassium
IV  glucose (ie, crystalloid fluid replacement only)
β-Adrenergic agonists (eg, isoproterenol)
TABLE 24–5  Management of amiodarone-induced 
hyperthyroidism.
(1) Stop amiodarone if possible
(2) Institute β-blocker therapy if possible
(3) Antithyroid drugs: Methimazole, 40-60 mg/d
(4) Potassium perchlorate, 200 mg every 6 h
(5) Cholestyramine or colestipol, 20-30 g/d
(6) Prednisone, 40 mg/d, for acute thyroiditis (consider monitoring 
  IL-6 levels)
(7) Thyroidectomy
768    CHAPTER 24 Endocrine Emergencies
 high-dose or  long-term potassium perchlorate therapy, so that use 
of this medication has usually been limited to 1 month. Iopanoic 
acid (0.5 g orally twice daily) can be used to decrease T 4 to T 3 
conversion. Cholestyramine or colestipol in a dosage of 20 to 
30 g/d binds T 4 and T 3 in the gut and brings blood levels down 
more quickly. If there is reason to suspect thyroiditis (elevated 
serum IL-6 or decreased blood flow on ultrasound), corticoster-
oid therapy often yields dramatic results. Prednisone is given in a 
dosage of 40 mg/d for 1 month, gradually tapering the dose over 
the following 2 months. In those cases where a mixed etiology is 
suspected (ie, hyperfunction plus thyroiditis), a combination of 
steroids, antithyroid drugs, and β blockers can be used. If medical 
therapy is unable to control the disease, thyroidectomy results in 
a permanent cure and may be used as a last resort. Iopanoic acid 
(see above) can be used to prepare the patient for surgery. 
Perioperative mortality may be as high as 8% to 9% due to the 
underlying cardiac disease. 
 ACUTE ADRENAL INSUFFICIENCY 
 Clinical Setting 
 Acute adrenal insufficiency usually occurs as an acute illness in a 
patient with chronic adrenal insufficiency (see Chapter 9). The 
chronic adrenal insufficiency may be primary, due to destruction 
of the adrenal glands associated with autoimmune adrenalitis, 
adrenal leukodystrophy or, rarely, tuberculosis, fungus, or meta-
static malignancy. Chronic adrenal insufficiency may also be 
secondary to pituitary or hypothalamic disease. Acute adrenal 
insufficiency may also occur with bilateral adrenal hemorrhage in 
a previously healthy individual during the course of septicemia 
with disseminated intravascular coagulopathy or in a patient 
receiving anticoagulant therapy. In the patient with known adre-
nal insufficiency, an acute crisis may be precipitated by inadver-
tent omission of steroid medication or by the concurrent 
development of a precipitating illness such as severe infection, 
acute myocardial infarction, cerebrovascular hemorrhage or 
infarction, surgery without adrenal support, or severe acute 
trauma. Acute adrenal insufficiency may also be precipitated by 
the sudden withdrawal of steroids in a patient previously on long-
term steroid therapy with associated adrenal atrophy (ie, second-
ary adrenal insufficiency). Finally, administration of drugs 
impairing adrenal hormone synthesis such as ketoconazole, 
aminoglutethimide, etomidate, or mitotane—or drugs increasing 
steroid metabolism such as phenytoin or rifampin—may 
 precipitate an adrenal crisis. 
 The patient presents with an acute onset of nausea, vomiting, 
hyperpyrexia, abdominal pain, dehydration, hypotension, and 
shock. A clue to the diagnosis of primary adrenal insufficiency is the 
presence of pigmentation in unexposed areas of the skin, particu-
larly in the creases of the palms and in the buccal mucosa. The 
differential diagnosis includes consideration of other causes of car-
diovascular collapse, sepsis, and intra-abdominal abscess. Failure of 
the hypotension to respond to pressors is suggestive of adrenal insuf-
ficiency and is an indication for a trial of glucocorticoid therapy. 
 Diagnosis 
 Primary adrenal insufficiency is characterized by hyponatremia 
and hyperkalemia. However, in situations of adrenal crisis, the 
hyponatremia may be obscured by dehydration. Random serum 
cortisol determinations are not helpful unless the levels are very 
low (<5 μg/dL [138 nmol/L]) during a period of great stress. The 
key diagnostic test is failure of serum cortisol to rise above 20 μg/dL 
(552 nmol/L) 30 minutes after intravenous injection of 250 μg 
synthetic ACTH (cosyntropin) (see Chapter 9 for details). This 
test functions best in the diagnosis of primary versus secondary 
adrenal insufficiency. At a specificity of 95%, sensitivities are 97% 
and 57%, respectively (see Chapter 3). Interpretation of the test, 
particularly in the evaluation of secondary adrenal insufficiency, is 
complicated in the presence of hypoalbuminemia, a marker for 
reduced protein-bound cortisol in plasma. In this setting, serum-
free cortisol levels provide a more accurate assessment of adrenal 
function. Random serum-free cortisol of >1.8 μg/dL and a 
 Cortrosyn-stimulated value of >3.1 μg/dL in critically ill patients 
is considered normal. There has been increased interest in using a 
more physiologic dose of ACTH to perform this stimulation test 
(1 μg vs 250 μg); however, a recent comparison suggests no par-
ticular advantage in the performance characteristics of the low-
dose test. Basal serum ACTH is elevated (>52 pg/mL 
[>11 pmol/L]) in patients with primary adrenal insufficiency but 
not in patients with secondary adrenal insufficiency due to pitu-
itary or hypothalamic disease. Computed tomography (CT) or 
sonography of the abdomen reveals adrenal enlargement in 
patients with adrenal hemorrhage, active tuberculosis, or meta-
static malignancy. Atrophy of the adrenals is associated with 
chronic adrenal insufficiency. 
 Management 
 The management of adrenal crisis is outlined in  Table 24–6 . 
Hydrocortisone should be administered in a dosage of 100 mg 
intravenously followed by 50 to 75 mg every 6 hours thereafter. 
Fluids and Na + should be replaced with several liters of 5% glu-
cose in normal saline. After the first 24 hours, the dose of intra-
venous hydrocortisone can be slowly reduced, but intravenous 
doses should be given at least every 6 hours because of the short 
half-life (1 hour) of hydrocortisone in the circulation. When the 
TABLE 24–6 Management of adrenal crisis.
(1) Hydrocortisone sodium phosphate or sodium succinate, 100 mg 
  IV stat and then 50-75 mg IV every 6 h for 24 h. Then taper slowly 
  downward over the next 72 h, giving the drug every 4-6 h IV. 
  When patient is tolerating oral feedings, shift to oral replacement 
  therapy, overlapping the first oral and last intravenous doses.
(2) Replace salt and fluid losses with several liters of 5% glucose in 
  normal saline IV.
(3) Patients with primary adrenal insufficiency may require 
  mineralocorticoid (fludrocortisone) when shifted to oral 
  hydrocortisone maintenance therapy.
(4) Diagnose and treat the illness that precipitated the acute crisis.
CHAPTER 24 Endocrine Emergencies     769
patient can tolerate oral feedings, hydrocortisone can be given 
orally, but the first oral dose should overlap the last intravenous 
dose. Alternatively, hydrocortisone can be administered as a 
continuous infusion at the rate of 10 mg/h for the first 24 hours, 
followed by a gradual decrease in the dose. Mineralocorticoid is 
not necessary during the acute replacement period since enough 
NaCl and glucocorticoid are being administered to treat the min-
eralocorticoid deficiency. However, in patients with chronic pri-
mary adrenal insufficiency, mineralocorticoid supplementation is 
necessary when shifting to an oral maintenance program (see 
Chapter 9). After steroid therapy has been instituted, it is 
extremely important to evaluate and treat the illness that may have 
precipitated the acute crisis (eg, infection, myocardial infarction). 
 Prevention of acute adrenal insufficiency in patients with 
chronic adrenal insufficiency exposed to mild stress can be 
addressed merely by doubling the daily steroid dose until the con-
dition resolves followed by rapid titration back to prestress doses. 
More severe stress (eg, severe infection) requires intravenous 
hydrocortisone in dosages as outlined above or administration of 
dexamethasone sodium phosphate, 4 mg intramuscularly every 
24 hours for two doses. Dexamethasone would replace glucocor-
ticoids but not mineralocorticoid and would not be adequate in 
the presence of severe dehydration. 
 Sepsis 
 Studies of patients with septic shock have identified a subgroup 
that may have relative adrenal insufficiency (ie, decreased adrenal 
reserve). These patients were identified based on a limited incre-
ment (ie, the difference between basal and post-ACTH cortisol 
levels) rather than the absolute level of post-ACTH cortisol. A 
recent randomized trial (CORTICUS [Corticosteroid Therapy of 
Septic Shock] study) demonstrated that hydrocortisone therapy did 
not improve survival or reversal of shock in patients with septic 
shock, regardless of their response in the Cortrosyn stimulation test. 
However, hydrocortisone did hasten reversal of shock in those 
patients in whom shock was reversed. At the present time, the util-
ity of steroid therapy in the management of vasopressor-dependent 
septic shock remains controversial. 
 PITUITARY APOPLEXY 
 Pituitary apoplexy is a rare but frightening syndrome of violent 
headache, visual and cranial nerve disturbances, and mental con-
fusion, resulting from hemorrhage or infarction of a pituitary 
tumor or, more rarely, a normal pituitary gland. 
 Clinical Setting 
 Pituitary apoplexy usually occurs as a sudden crisis in a patient 
with a known or, more rarely, previously unrecognized pituitary 
tumor. However, it may occur in a normal gland during or after 
parturition. Risk factors include cardiac surgery, dynamic pitu-
itary function testing, head trauma, or anticoagulation therapy. 
The patient presents with severe headache and visual disturbances, 
often a bitemporal hemianopia due to compression of the optic 
chiasm. There may be oculomotor defects, either bilateral or uni-
lateral, due to extension of the hemorrhage into the cavernous 
sinus(es) where cranial nerves II, III, IV, and VI are located. Often 
there are meningeal symptoms with stiff neck and mental confu-
sion, so that the differential diagnosis includes subarachnoid 
hemorrhage and meningitis. Finally, there may be symptoms of 
acute secondary adrenal insufficiency with nausea, vomiting, 
hypotension, and collapse. A more subacute/chronic presentation 
(ie, subclinical hemorrhage followed by partial resolution) may be 
dominated by symptoms of hypopituitarism. 
 Diagnosis 
 The diagnosis of pituitary apoplexy is best approached with mag-
netic resonance imaging (MRI) of the cranium with pituitary 
views. Pituitary enlargement and signs of hemorrhage are diagnos-
tic. In the acute setting, hormonal studies are of academic interest 
only since therapy should include glucocorticoid support regard-
less of the acute findings. After appropriate acute therapy, evalua-
tion of anterior and posterior pituitary function is indicated to 
evaluate the possibility of permanent hypopituitarism. 
 Management 
 Management involves both hormonal and neurosurgical ther-
apy. High-dose dexamethasone, 4 mg twice daily, provides both 
glucocorticoid support and relief of cerebral edema. Alternatively, 
hydrocortisone 50 mg IV every 6 hours can be used. Trans-
sphenoidal pituitary decompression often provides dramatic 
relief of visual and extraocular motor dysfunction and in the 
level of consciousness. Pituitary hormone secretion also may 
resolve particularly in those with normal or elevated prolactin 
levels. The need for emergent surgery is controversial and 
should be approached on a case-by-case basis. Conservative 
medical management in less severely affected patients has been 
shown to result in recovery of both neurological and endocrine 
function. After the acute episode has subsided, the patient must 
be evaluated for the possibility of multiple pituitary hormonal 
deficiencies (see Chapter 4). 
 DIABETIC KETOACIDOSIS 
 Clinical Setting 
 Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) occurs in a setting of absolute or rela-
tive insulin deficiency. Estimated annual incidence is 4 to 8 epi-
sodes per 1000 patients with diabetes. Specific clinical settings 
should generate a high index of suspicion for the disorder. 
Interruptions of normal insulin delivery due to purposeful reduc-
tion in insulin dosage or interference with the delivery system (eg, 
kinking in pump tubing) are frequent precipitating events, as are 
reduced insulin sensitivity in the setting of systemic infection, 
myocardial infarction, burns, trauma, or pregnancy. In a significant 
percentage of patients, DKA is the presenting feature of diabetes. 
In these instances, clinical suspicion and accurate interpretation 
of the initial laboratory studies will usually lead to the correct 
770    CHAPTER 24 Endocrine Emergencies
 diagnosis. Measurement of HbA 1C (hemoglobin A1C) levels may 
help in assessing the chronicity of the diabetes. Mortality in DKA 
is less than 5% in experienced centers. Prognosis worsens at the 
extremes of age and in the presence of coma or hypotension. 
 Diagnosis 
 DKA is characterized metabolically by two prominent features: 
hyperglycemia and ketoacidosis (see Chapter 17). Patients with 
DKA present with evidence of volume contraction (eg, dry 
mucous membranes, thirst, orthostatic hypotension) and labored 
breathing (Kussmaul respiration) related to the underlying acido-
sis. The breath often has a fruity odor, reflecting the presence of 
acetone. Patients may have abdominal pain mimicking an acute 
abdomen, nausea, and vomiting. The latter symptoms may be 
related to elevated gastrointestinal prostaglandins that accrue in 
the presence of insulin deficiency. Presentation may be dominated 
by symptoms of the precipitating illness (eg, urinary tract infec-
tion, pneumonia, or myocardial infarction). 
 Plasma glucose levels are elevated, usually to over 250 mg/dL. 
This reflects impairment in glucose utilization (see discussed ear-
lier), increased gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis, and reduced 
renal clearance of glucose in the setting of decreased glomerular 
filtration rate (GFR). Osmotic diuresis related to glucose excretion 
results in reduction in intravascular volume and depletion of total 
body water, sodium, potassium, phosphate, and magnesium. In 
general, the relative depletion of water is roughly twice that of the 
solutes it contains. Hypertonicity in the extracellular fluid com-
partment, although typically not as severe as that seen in hyperos-
motic nonketotic coma (see later), can be significant. Calculated 
plasma osmolalities greater than 340 mOsm/kg are associated with 
coma. Plasma osmolality—rather than acidemia—correlates most 
closely with state of consciousness in DKA ( Figure 24–3 ). 
 Arterial blood pH is low and, in the absence of coexistent 
respiratory disease, is partially compensated by a reduction in 
PCO 2 . The acidosis is metabolic in origin and accompanied by an 
anion gap that is calculated by subtracting the combined concen-
trations of chloride and bicarbonate from serum sodium concen-
tration. Anion gaps greater than 12 mEq/L are considered 
abnormal. Keto acids account for most of the unmeasured anions 
that generate the abnormal gap, although under conditions of 
extreme volume contraction and hypoperfusion, lactate accumula-
tion may also contribute. Levels of serum and urinary ketones 
(measured using the nitroprusside reagent) are typically high in 
DKA. It should be recalled, however, that this reagent reacts 
strongly only with acetoacetate, less strongly with acetone (which 
is not a keto acid and does not contribute to the anion gap), and 
not at all with β-hydroxybutyrate. Thus, paradoxically, the most 
extreme levels of ketoacidosis may be accompanied by relatively 
modest levels of ketones measured by this method. As a corollary 
450
500
400
380
360
340
320
300
280
Plasma osmolality (mOsmol/L)
5
4
3
2
1
Grade of consciousness
7.4
7.3
7.5
7.2
7.1
7.0
6.9
6.8
1
2
Grade of consciousness
3
4
5
Arterial blood pH
A
B
 FIGURE 24–3  A: Relationship between state of consciousness and blood pH in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis.  B: Relationship 
between state of consciousness and plasma osmolality in diabetic ketoacidosis. Note that the state of consciousness correlates with plasma 
osmolality rather than blood pH.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Fulop M, et al. Ketotic hyperosmolar coma.  Lancet . 1973;2:635.) 
CHAPTER 24 Endocrine Emergencies     771
of this, resolution of severe DKA may be linked to transient 
increases in measurable ketone levels as β-hydroxybutyrate is con-
verted to the more readily detectable acetoacetate. 
 Serum sodium levels may be high, normal, or low, but in all 
instances total body sodium is depressed. Estimates of depletion 
range from 7 to 10 mEq/kg body weight. As blood glucose levels 
rise in DKA, they create an osmotic gradient that draws water, as 
well as intracellular solutes, into the extracellular space. This 
results in moderate hyponatremia, which can be corrected to 
account for the dilutional effect of the transmembrane flux of 
water by adding 1.6 mEq/L (more recent studies suggest that the 
correction factor is closer to 2.4 mEq/L) to the sodium concentra-
tion for every 100 mg/dL increment in plasma glucose above a 
basal concentration of 100 mg/dL (see below). The decrease in 
serum sodium partially offsets the increase in tonicity that accom-
panies the elevation in plasma glucose. This results in a net 
increase in plasma osmolality of 2 mOsm/kg H 2 O per 100 mg/dL 
elevation in plasma glucose: 
Corrected Na
Measured Na
+
+
Measured Na
=
 Total body potassium levels are also severely depleted in DKA 
to an average of 5 to 7 mEq/kg body weight. This results from a 
number of factors, including exchange of intracellular potassium 
for extracellular hydrogen ion, impaired movement of K + into cells 
in the insulinopenic state, increased urinary potassium excretion 
secondary to the osmotic diuresis and, in those instances where 
intravascular volume contraction is present, secondary hyperaldos-
teronism. Serum potassium levels may be high, normal, or low 
depending on the severity and duration of DKA, the status of 
extracellular fluid volume, and the adequacy of renal perfusion 
and excretory function. A low serum potassium at presentation 
generally indicates severe potassium deficiency and, in the pres-
ence of adequate renal function, is an indication for early and 
aggressive repletion (see below). Potassium depletion can result in 
muscle weakness and cardiac arrhythmias, including ventricular 
fibrillation. 
 The H + excess in DKA titrates endogenous buffer systems 
including serum bicarbonate, resulting in reduction in concentra-
tions of the latter. Chloride levels may also be low, reflecting the 
osmotic diuresis alluded to above. Ketone bodies have been esti-
mated to account for one-third to one-half of the osmotic diuresis 
seen in DKA. Electrolyte depletion is further aggravated by the 
obligate cation (eg, sodium) excretion required to maintain elec-
trical neutrality. In patients who have maintained adequate hydra-
tion during the development of DKA or in those who are 
aggressively resuscitated with normal saline, chloride levels may be 
elevated and the anion gap narrowed. This reflects the enhanced 
clearance of the keto anions in the kidney, converting the system 
from an anion gap acidosis to a hyperchloremic, nongap acidosis 
(ie, the hydrogen ion excess persists despite clearance of the 
anion). Because the excreted keto anions represent a lost source of 
bicarbonate regeneration, correction of the hyperchloremic acido-
sis may proceed slowly. The hyperchloremic acidosis is inconse-
quential from a clinical standpoint. 
 Total body magnesium and phosphate levels are also depleted 
by the osmotic diuresis in DKA. Phosphate depletion is ampli-
fied by diffusion of the anion from the intracellular to the extra-
cellular compartment in the absence of insulin. Phosphate 
depletion can result in muscle weakness, rhabdomyolysis, hemo-
lytic anemia, respiratory distress, and altered tissue oxygenation 
(due to reduction in 2,3-diphosphoglycerate levels in the red 
blood cell). 
 Management 
 Treatment of DKA is focused on two major objectives. The first 
is restoration of normal tonicity, intravascular volume, and sol-
ute homeostasis. The second is correction of the insulinopenic 
state with suppression of counterregulatory hormone secretion, 
glucose production, and ketogenesis and improved utilization of 
glucose in target tissues. The steps outlined in  Table 24–7 pro-
vide a general approach to the management of this disorder. 
 Because depletion of intracellular and extracellular fluids may 
be severe in DKA (typically in the range of 5-10 L), early and 
aggressive resuscitation with fluids is mandatory. This is usually 
initiated with administration of 1 to 2 L of isotonic normal 
saline (0.9% NaCl) over the first hour of therapy. As intravascu-
lar volume is restored, renal perfusion increases, with a conse-
quent increase in renal clearance of glucose and a fall in plasma 
glucose levels. If volume contraction is severe, a second liter of 
normal saline can be administered. If not, half-normal saline 
(0.45% NaCl) can be initiated at a rate of 250 to 500 mL/h 
TABLE 24–7 Management of diabetic ketoacidosis.
Fluid administration
(1) 1-2 L of normal saline over the first hour. Repeat if clinically 
  significant volume contraction persists after the first hour.
(2) Change to half-normal saline, 500-1000 mL/h, depending on 
  volume status. Continue for about 4 h. Decrease rate to 250 mL/h 
  as intravascular volume returns to normal.
(3) Convert fluids to D5W when plasma glucose falls to 250 mg/dL.
Insulin
(1) Administer 10-20 U of regular insulin IV.
(2) Mix 50 U of regular insulin in 500 mL of normal saline (1 U/10 mL). 
  Discard first 50 mL of infusion to accommodate insulin binding to 
  tubing. Administer through piggyback line along with parenteral 
  fluids at a rate of 0.1 U/kg/h.
3. Double the infusion rate after 2 h if there is no improvement in 
  plasma glucose levels.
Potassium
(1) Administer supplemental potassium chloride once renal function is 
  established; provide 20 mEq/L of fluids for patients who are 
  initially normokalemic, 40 mEq/L for those who are hypokalemic 
  at presentation. In the latter case, hold insulin until serum 
  potassium levels begin to increase.
(2) Gauge subsequent replacement based on serum K+ measurements 
  at 2-h intervals.
Bicarbonate 
(1) Sodium bicarbonate only for patients with blood pH less than 7.0.
(2) Add 1 ampule of sodium bicarbonate (44 mEq) to 500 mL of D5W 
  or half-normal saline. Administer over 1 h.
+ 1.6 Plasma glucose
100
100
−
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
772    CHAPTER 24 Endocrine Emergencies
depending on intravascular volume status. Because water is typi-
cally lost in excess of solute in DKA, half-normal saline addresses 
both the volume depletion and the hypertonicity. It has been 
suggested that approximately half of the total fluid deficit should 
be corrected within the first 5 hours of therapy. Half-normal 
saline can be continued until intravascular volume has been 
restored or plasma glucose levels fall to 250 mg/dL, at which 
point D 5 W should be started. The latter maneuver reduces the 
likelihood of insulin-induced hypoglycemia and avoids the theo-
retical complication of cerebral edema due to osmotically 
induced fluid shifts from plasma into the central nervous system. 
This complication is, in fact, seen rarely in adults and uncom-
monly in children with DKA. It is important to account for 
ongoing urinary volume and electrolyte losses in assessing fluid 
requirements. 
 Once fluid resuscitation has been initiated, insulin should be 
administered. Only short-acting insulin should be used. A number 
of different insulin regimens have demonstrated efficacy in the treat-
ment of DKA; however, a commonly used regimen includes a load-
ing dose (10-20 U) of regular insulin intravenously followed by a 
continuous infusion at a rate of 0.1 U/kg/h. The need for a loading 
dose is controversial and may not be required in the majority of cases. 
It is not recommended for children with ketoacidosis. If intravenous 
access is problematic, maintenance insulin can be given intramuscu-
larly (0.1 U/kg/h). This regimen provides plasma insulin levels in a 
physiologic range (100-150 mU/mL) with minimal risk of 
 hypoglycemia or hypokalemia. It restores plasma glucose levels at 
rates equivalent to those obtained with regimens using higher insulin 
doses. Plasma glucose levels should fall at a rate of 50 to 100 mg/dL/h. 
Failure to achieve this end point over a 2-hour period should lead to 
doubling of the infusion rate with reevaluation an hour later. When 
plasma glucose concentrations reach 250 mg/dL, D 5 W is begun to 
prevent hypoglycemia (see above). Some diabetologists recommend 
a coincident reduction in insulin dose (to 0.05-0.1 U/kg/h) at this 
point. The insulin infusion is continued to suppress ketogenesis and 
allow restoration of normal acid-base balance. 
 As noted above, total body potassium stores are depleted in 
DKA (∼3-4 mEq/kg), and plasma K + levels fall with treatment. 
Repletion of K + is almost always indicated in management of 
DKA (one notable exception being DKA that occurs in the 
 setting of chronic renal insufficiency); however, the timing of 
repletion varies as a function of the plasma K + level. If the initial 
K + level is less than 4 mEq/L, K + depletion is severe, and reple-
tion should begin with the first administration of parenteral 
fluids if renal function is adequate. Twenty milliequivalents of 
potassium chloride can be added to the first liter of normal 
saline if the serum K + is in the 3.5 to 4 mEq/L range; 40 mEq 
should be added for K + levels less than 3.5 mEq/L. Particular 
attention should be devoted to patients in this latter state, 
because K + levels may plummet to very low levels with initiation 
of insulin therapy. To avoid this, insulin therapy should be post-
poned in this group until K + repletion has begun and serum K + 
levels are on the rise. The general goal of therapy should be to 
keep the K + in a near-normal range. This may require several 
hundred  milliequivalents of potassium chloride administered 
over several days. 
 The administration of bicarbonate in the setting of DKA has 
been controversial. Acidosis, in addition to increasing ventilatory 
work (Kussmaul respiration), may also suppress cardiac contractile 
function. Therefore, restoration of normal pH would seem to 
make sense in the setting of DKA. However, there is considerable 
risk associated with the use of sodium bicarbonate in this setting, 
including paradoxical acidification of the central nervous system 
due to the selective diffusion of CO 2 versus HCO 3 − across the 
blood–brain barrier and an increase in intracellular acidosis, which 
may worsen rather than ameliorate cardiac function. Volume over-
load related to the high tonicity (44.6-50 mEq/50 mL) of the 
bicarbonate solution, hypokalemia resulting from overly rapid 
correction of the acidosis, hypernatremia, and rebound alkalosis 
are also potential complications of bicarbonate therapy. In general, 
pH of 7.0 or greater is not life-threatening to the average patient 
with DKA and will resolve with appropriate volume expansion 
and insulin therapy. For pH less than 7.0, many clinicians would 
argue for a limited administration of sodium bicarbonate. If bicar-
bonate is used, careful patient monitoring looking for alterations 
in mental status or cardiac decompensation is indicated. The goal 
of therapy should be to maintain pH greater than 7.0, not to 
return pH to normal. 
 Similarly, phosphate administration, once considered a key 
component in the management of DKA (estimated deficit 
∼5-7 mmol/kg), has come under closer scrutiny. Phosphate deple-
tion definitely occurs in DKA for the reasons outlined above, and 
in the past repletion of phosphate (much of it as potassium phos-
phate salts) had been advocated to forestall the development of 
muscle weakness and hemolysis and to promote tissue oxygen-
ation through generation of 2,3-diphosphoglycerate in erythro-
cytes. However, the administration of phosphate salts has been 
associated with the development of hypocalcemia and deposition 
of calcium phosphate precipitates in soft tissues, including the 
vasculature. Thus, in general, parenteral phosphate repletion is not 
routinely provided for patients with DKA unless plasma phos-
phate falls to very low levels (<1 mmol/L). In this case, 2 mL of a 
mixture of KH 2 PO 4 and K 2 HPO 4 solution, containing 3 mmol of 
elemental phosphorus and 4 mEq of potassium, may be added to 
1 L of fluids and introduced over 6 to 8 hours. In no instance 
should all K + repletion be in the form of potassium phosphate 
salts. In general, renewal of food ingestion and insulin therapy 
complete restoration of total body phosphate stores and return 
plasma phosphate levels to normal over a period of several days. 
 In pediatric patients (age <20 years) the need for volume 
expansion needs to be weighed against the potential risk of cere-
bral edema secondary to aggressive fluid administration, although 
this is controversial (see below). A recent recommendation sug-
gests 10 to 20 mL/kg/h of normal saline during the first 1 to 
2 hours with limitation of total fluid administration to 50 mL/kg 
over the first 4 hours. The remaining fluid deficit is corrected 
over the next 48 hours. Normal saline or half-normal saline 
(depending on serum Na + levels) usually accomplishes this with 
a rate of 5 mL/kg/h. The decrease in serum osmolality should 
not exceed 3 mOsm/kg H 2 O/h. An insulin bolus prior to initiat-
ing the insulin infusion (0.1 U/kg/h) is usually not required in 
children. 
CHAPTER 24 Endocrine Emergencies     773
 Finally, it is necessary to actively seek out and treat the pre-
cipitants of DKA when they are identified. This includes appro-
priate cultures of urine and blood (and cerebrospinal fluid, if 
indicated) and empiric antibiotic therapy directed against the 
most likely pathogenic organisms (pending the results of the cul-
tures). The presence of fever is typically a good marker for infec-
tion or other inflammatory process because it is not a feature of 
DKA per se. Elevated white blood cell counts, on the other hand, 
are frequently seen with DKA alone. Hyper-amylasemia is com-
mon but rarely reflects pancreatitis—the amylase is usually of 
salivary origin. Other precipitants should also be sought. 
Myocardial infarction, which is often clinically silent in diabetic 
patients, is an uncommon but life-threatening precipitant of DKA 
in patients with established diabetes. 
 Complications 
 Aggressive resuscitation with isotonic or hypotonic fluids is a 
theoretical but uncommon cause of fluid overload during manage-
ment of DKA. Careful attention to the cardiovascular examina-
tion, chest x-ray, and urine output should aid in preventing this 
complication. 
 Hypoglycemia is relatively rare in the current era given the low 
doses of insulin used in management and appropriate initiation of 
glucose-containing fluids as plasma glucose levels fall below 
250 mg/dL. 
 Cerebral edema due to rapid correction of plasma hypertonic-
ity has usually been reported with plasma glucose levels below 
250 mg/dL. Clinically significant cerebral edema is relatively 
uncommon in adult patients. Milder forms of cerebral edema have 
been noted in many patients being treated for DKA but have not 
been strongly correlated with changes in extracellular tonicity. At 
present, in a symptomatic adult patient, it would appear prudent 
to treat hypertonicity exceeding 340 mOsm/kg aggressively with 
hypotonic fluids to avoid complications related to plasma hyper-
viscosity. Further correction from that point to normal plasma 
osmolality (about 285 mOsm/kg) can probably be accomplished 
in slower fashion over several days. Cerebral edema occurs in 1% 
to 2% of children with DKA, frequently with devastating results. 
Approximately one-third of children with clinically significant 
cerebral edema die during the acute illness, and another third 
sustain permanent neurologic impairment. The predilection for 
young children may reflect, in part, immaturity of the autoregula-
tory mechanism that governs cerebral blood flow. There is increased 
risk in children less than 5 years of age, and those with low PCO 2 
or high blood urea nitrogen at presentation. Cerebral edema in 
children may be associated with high initial rates of fluid resuscita-
tion (>4 L/m 2 /d) and rapid falls in plasma sodium (or corrected 
sodium) concentration, although it can occur in clinical settings 
without an apparent cause, and mild degrees of cerebral edema 
have been noted in DKA even prior to initiation of therapy. In the 
absence of definitive trial data to guide therapy, lower rates of fluid 
administration (<2.5 L/m 2 /d) with volume resuscitation spread 
over a longer time interval would seem appropriate if the clinical 
situation permits. When signs of cerebral edema appear— 
deterioration in level of consciousness, focal neurologic signs, 
hypotension or bradycardia, sudden decline in urine output after 
an initial period of apparent recovery following treatment for 
DKA—fluid administration should be reduced and mannitol 
(0.2-1 g/kg given intravenously over 30 minutes) should be 
administered with repetition at hourly intervals based on response. 
CT or MRI scan of the brain can be done once therapy has been 
initiated to confirm the diagnosis. Hyperventilation has not been 
shown to alter the course of this complication once it develops. 
 Patients with DKA are also prone to develop acute respiratory 
distress syndrome, presumably reflecting the sequelae of a dam-
aged pulmonary endothelium and elevated capillary hydrostatic 
pressures following fluid resuscitation. Patients who present with 
rales at the time of initial diagnosis may be at higher risk for the 
development of this complication. Patients may also be at 
increased risk for development of pancreatitis as well as systemic 
infection, including fungal infections (eg, mucormycosis). 
 Abdominal pain and gastric stasis seen in DKA may put a 
semi-stuporous patient at risk for aspiration. Up to 25% of 
patients with DKA have emesis that may be guaiac positive. The 
latter finding appears to result from hemorrhagic gastritis. Patients 
who are believed to be at risk with regard to airway protection 
should have a nasogastric tube in place for evacuation of stomach 
contents. 
 Finally, patients with DKA are at risk for recurrence of the 
disorder if insulin is withdrawn prematurely. The current infusion 
protocols, because they raise plasma insulin only to physiologic 
levels, have a very short half-life for control of blood glucose and 
ketogenesis. Premature cessation of insulin therapy before depot 
insulin (eg, NPH or glargine insulin) can exert its effect may allow 
the patient to regress into ketoacidosis. To preclude this possibility, 
subcutaneous regular and intermediate-acting insulin should 
be provided on the morning when feeding is to be resumed. 
The insulin drip should be continued for 1 hour following this 
injection to provide coverage until the depot insulin becomes 
effective. 
 NONKETOTIC HYPEROSMOLAR COMA 
 Clinical Setting 
 Hyperosmolar nonketotic coma, like DKA, is a consequence of 
uncontrolled diabetes mellitus; however, a number of features of 
this disorder clearly distinguish it from DKA. First, plasma glu-
cose levels in ketoacidosis are usually in the 250 to 400 mg/dL 
rather than the 700 to 1000 mg/dL range that can be seen with 
hyperosmolar nonketotic coma. Second, the time course for devel-
opment of hyperosmolar nonketotic coma typically takes a week 
or longer, whereas ketoacidosis can develop over 1 to 2 days. 
Third, ketosis is rare in hyperosmolar nonketotic coma. Circulating 
insulin levels are probably adequate to control ketogenesis in the 
latter, although they are incapable of establishing euglycemia. 
Fourth, hyperosmolar nonketotic coma tends to occur more com-
monly in the elderly population, often in those receiving chronic 
care who have difficulty reporting symptoms or maintaining ade-
quate hydration. Like DKA, hyperosmolar nonketotic coma may 
present as the first manifestation of diabetes mellitus. Mortality 
774    CHAPTER 24 Endocrine Emergencies
remains high in hyperosmolar nonketotic coma (perhaps as high 
as 20% vs 1%-2% in DKA); in both cases, mortality increases 
with age. 
 Precipitants of hyperosmolar nonketotic coma include many of 
the same complicating illnesses that lead to DKA. Infections (pneu-
monias are said to be the most common precipitating infection in 
40%-60% of cases, with urinary tract infections representing 
5%-16% of the total), myocardial infarction, cerebrovascular acci-
dent, pancreatitis, burns, heat stroke, and endocrine dysfunction 
(eg, Cushing syndrome, acromegaly) are frequently associated with 
hyperosmolar nonketotic coma. Administration of hyperosmolar 
fluids (eg, tube feedings, total parenteral nutrition, peritoneal dialy-
sis) can precipitate hyperosmolar nonketotic coma, as can medica-
tions that impair insulin secretion or action (eg, β-adrenergic 
blocking agents, phenytoin, corticosteroids, or diazoxide). Diuretics, 
particularly thiazides, can reduce intravascular volume, reduce the 
GFR (the dominant mechanism for glucose clearance), and activate 
counterregulatory hormones (eg, catecholamines), all of which pro-
mote development of the hyperosmolar state. Finally, limited access 
to free water intake, particularly in patients who are dependent on 
others to provide access to water, is a major determinant in the 
progression of the hyperosmolar state. 
 These factors interact in a highly variable fashion to promote 
the hyperosmolar state associated with hyperosmolar nonketotic 
coma. In a typical scenario, poorly controlled diabetes—or undi-
agnosed diabetes presenting for the first time—is aggravated by 
coincident infection (or other precipitant). This results in signifi-
cant hyperglycemia as the balance of counterregulatory hormones 
versus insulin shifts in favor of the former. Hyperglycemia pro-
motes increased insulin resistance and further elevations in blood 
glucose levels. This leads to an osmotic diuresis in the kidney as 
plasma glucose levels exceed the threshold for tubular reabsorp-
tion. This threshold typically increases with age, leading to even 
higher plasma glucose levels in the elderly. The osmotic diuresis 
results in a progressive loss of water and, to a lesser degree, solutes 
(eg, Na + , Cl – , K + ) in the urine. As with DKA, the water loss is 
 buffered initially by an osmotically driven movement of water out 
of the cells into the extracellular compartment. As the diuresis 
continues, however, contraction of intravascular volume ensues 
and glomerular filtration falls, shutting off the body’s primary 
mechanism for controlling plasma glucose levels in this setting. 
Glucose levels increase dramatically; often to extraordinarily high 
levels (normal renal excretory function generally limits elevations 
in plasma glucose to 500-600 mg/dL). Nausea and vomiting, 
related to the infection, uremia, or hyperosmolality per se, may 
further aggravate intravascular volume contraction. Factor into 
this an elderly patient with age-dependent suppression of the 
thirst mechanism and difficulty communicating a sense of thirst 
to caregivers, and the stage is set for severe dehydration and the 
hyperosmolar state of hyperosmolar nonketotic coma. 
 Diagnosis 
 The diagnosis is usually based on strong clinical suspicion and 
laboratory assessments of plasma glucose levels and serum osmo-
lality. The typical patient may be a patient with known type 2 
diabetes (often taking an oral hypoglycemic agent), who has 
shown a subtle but steady deterioration over several days immedi-
ately preceding admission. The patient demonstrates significant 
dehydration, somnolence, stupor, or coma. The course may be 
marked by a precipitating illness, as described above. Tachycardia 
and low-grade fever may be present, but blood pressure and respi-
ratory rate are normal. Urine output typically is reduced to low 
levels as the hyperosmolar state progresses. 
 The clinical presentation is usually dominated by the central 
nervous system findings. Patients with hyperosmolar nonketotic 
coma are lethargic and weak, with an altered sensorium. True 
coma is less common and usually does not appear until plasma 
osmolality is significantly elevated (see below). Hallucinations are 
occasionally present, and seizures, particularly focal seizures, may 
occur in 25% of patients with hyperosmolar nonketotic coma. 
Focal findings suggesting cortical ischemia may also be seen. A 
minority of these reflect true cerebrovascular accidents related to 
thromboembolic complications (see below). Most represent low-
flow states in areas of baseline cerebrovascular ischemia that 
recover with correction of the metabolic abnormality. 
 Plasma glucose levels are typically high (occasionally 
>1000 mg/dL). Measured plasma osmolality is often greater than 
350 mOsm/kg. These measurements usually include the contribu-
tion of urea, which may accumulate to significant levels in the 
setting of volume contraction and prerenal azotemia; however, 
urea does not contribute to the osmotic force that drives fluid 
movement across cellular membranes because it is freely perme-
able in these membranes and distributes itself in equivalent 
 concentrations in the intracellular and extracellular compart-
ments. A more accurate measure of the effective osmolality, or 
tonicity, is obtained from the following formula: 
 
Effective osmolality
2Na
Glucose
18
+
+
 where Na + and glucose are the concentrations of sodium ion and 
glucose, respectively. Normal effective osmolalities are in the range 
of 275 to 295 mOsm/kg. Hyperosmolar nonketotic coma is diag-
nosed with an effective osmolality greater than 320 mOsm/kg, 
whereas coma itself is seen with osmolalities greater than 
340 mOsm/kg. Coma at effective osmolalities ≤340 mOsm/kg 
suggests some other cause (eg, meningitis, cerebrovascular  accident, 
or other metabolic abnormality). 
 Anion gap acidosis is usually not a major component of hyper-
osmolar nonketotic coma, because ketogenesis is suppressed 
(see above). If gap acidosis is present, it may suggest lactate accu-
mulation due to tissue hypoperfusion, low-output state, met-
formin toxicity, or coexistent renal failure or toxic ingestion. 
Measurement of serum lactate levels, standard renal function tests, 
or a screen for toxic substances in blood (if a suggestive history is 
obtained) should help discriminate among these possibilities. 
 Management 
 Therapy is in some ways similar to that for DKA except that there 
is less concern about correction of the acidosis, which is mild or 
CHAPTER 24 Endocrine Emergencies     775
nonexistent with most conventional cases of hyperosmolar nonke-
totic coma, and greater emphasis is placed on restoration of intra-
vascular volume and serum osmolality. It is also important to 
address the potentially life-threatening precipitants of nonketotic 
coma. 
 Resuscitation of intravascular volume is initiated with paren-
teral fluids. Over the first hour 1 to 2 L of normal saline are 
administered. If the patient is profoundly hyperosmolar (>330 
mOsm/L), half-normal saline (0.45% NaCl) should be substi-
tuted for normal saline. Volume status is reassessed based on blood 
pressure, urine output, or central venous pressure. If volume con-
traction persists, normal saline (or half-normal saline if hyperto-
nicity persists) can be continued at a rate of 1 L/h. Once blood 
pressure and urine output have been restored, hypotonic fluids 
(eg, half-normal saline) can be substituted for isotonic saline at a 
rate of 250 to 500 mL/h depending on the need for continued 
volume resuscitation. The total free water deficit can be approxi-
mated using the following formula: 
Water deficit
Plasma osmolality
295
295
0.
=
−
×
6(
6 Body weight)
 where plasma osmolality is in milliosmoles per kilogram, body 
weight in kilograms, and water deficit in liters. Fluid rates should 
be adjusted to correct half of the free water deficit in the first 
12 hours and the remainder over the ensuing 24 to 36 hours. As 
with DKA, glucose-containing fluids (eg, D 5 W) should be started 
when plasma glucose levels fall to 250 mg/dL. 
 Insulin therapy is of secondary importance in the management 
of hyperosmolar nonketotic coma. It is imperative that insulin 
therapy not be initiated until volume resuscitation is well under 
way (eg, following 1-2 L of crystalloid). Insulin promotes move-
ment of glucose, electrolytes, and water into the intravascular 
compartment. In the absence of adequate volume resuscitation, 
this can lead to hypotension and cardiovascular collapse. Therapy 
should be initiated with a loading dose of 10 to 20 U intrave-
nously followed by a drip delivering 0.1 U/kg/h. Conversion back 
to the outpatient regimen once the acute event has resolved can be 
accomplished using a strategy similar to that outlined above 
for DKA. 
 Electrolytes (ie, Na + , K + , Cl – , PO 4 3– , and Mg 2+ ) are signifi-
cantly depleted in hyperosmolar nonketotic coma due to the 
osmotic diuresis. These should be repleted as needed (beginning 
with the first liter of fluids if necessary). Once again, parenteral 
phosphate should be administered with care, keeping serum phos-
phate above 1 mg/dL until feeding can reestablish phosphate 
 balance. 
 Complications 
 A. Thromboembolic events 
 Coagulopathies related to 
increased platelet aggregation, hyperviscosity of circulating blood, 
or disseminated intravascular coagulation can develop in hyperos-
molar nonketotic coma. The most appropriate therapy is resuscita-
tion of intracellular volume and treatment of systemic infections. 
Focal neurologic findings that fail to improve with fluid 
 resuscitation should be further investigated with appropriate con-
sultation and imaging studies, if indicated. Some investigators 
have recommended low-dose heparin anticoagulation in patients 
with hyperosmolar nonketotic coma to guard against thromboem-
bolic sequelae. If such therapy is initiated, patients should be 
closely monitored for development of gastrointestinal bleeding. 
 B. Cerebral edema  This is a serious—although fortunately 
uncommon—complication of fluid resuscitation in hyperosmolar 
nonketotic coma (and DKA; see above). It occurs more commonly 
in children than in adults and frequently follows an overly aggres-
sive management strategy involving administration of large 
amounts of parenteral fluids. The pathogenesis is not completely 
defined but probably relates to the increase in cortical capillary 
hydrostatic pressure and the osmotic gradient engendered by the 
aggressive use of hypotonic fluids in this setting. Cerebral edema 
rarely appears with serum glucose levels above 250 mg/dL. 
Appropriate introduction of glucose-containing fluids into the 
management strategy when plasma glucose approaches this level is 
an effective way to guard against this complication. 
 Clinically, brain edema develops after an initial period of 
improvement. It is often heralded by the development of head-
ache, altered mental status, and seizure activity. If untreated, this 
can progress to herniation, with respiratory arrest and death. 
Recognition of the syndrome and appropriate treatment with 
mannitol, dexamethasone, and furosemide can be life saving in 
this setting. 
 HYPERCALCEMIC CRISIS 
 Clinical Setting 
 Severe hypercalcemia, defined arbitrarily as a total Ca 2+ greater 
than 14 mg/dL, can occur in the setting of a known hypercalcemic 
illness but may represent the initial manifestation of such a disor-
der. Patients present initially with polyuria and polydipsia and, 
with a more protracted course, develop evidence of intravascular 
volume contraction with decreased urine output. Alterations in 
the sensorium dominate the clinical picture and range from 
behavioral changes and drowsiness to stupor and coma. 
Bradyarrhythmias and heart block are major cardiac sequelae of 
hypercalcemia. Hypercalcemia also potentiates digoxin activity, 
increasing the risk of cardiac glycoside toxicity. Gastrointestinal 
complaints are prominent. Anorexia, nausea, and vomiting, which 
further aggravate the volume contraction, are frequently present. 
Abdominal pain may be of sufficient intensity to mimic an acute 
abdomen. 
 Most chronic hypercalcemia is caused by primary hyperpara-
thyroidism and is usually detected as a result of routine laboratory 
screening. Cancer-related hypercalcemia, most of which is caused 
by parathyroid hormone–related protein (PTHrP), is a less 
 frequent but important cause of chronic hypercalcemia (see 
Chapter 21). In acute hypercalcemic crises, malignancy emerges as 
the major cause of the elevations in serum calcium. Other causes 
of hypercalcemia (eg, vitamin D intoxication, thiazides, or 
776    CHAPTER 24 Endocrine Emergencies
Addison disease) are either too uncommon or cause such small 
increments in serum calcium that they rarely need to be consid-
ered in the differential diagnosis (see Chapter 8). 
 Hypercalcemia due to any cause creates a state of nephrogenic 
diabetes insipidus by uncoupling vasopressin from its receptor-
effector system in the kidney ( Table 24–8 ). This results in a water 
diuresis that eventually promotes intravascular volume contrac-
tion and reduced GFR, effectively suppressing the only route of 
egress for calcium mobilized from bone or transported across the 
gut lumen. Thus, volume contraction is in large part responsible 
for the very high levels of serum calcium found in hypercalcemic 
crisis. By inference, resuscitation of intravascular volume (see 
below) represents an excellent initial intervention to improve renal 
perfusion and tubular clearance of Ca 2+ . 
 Hypercalcemic crisis should be considered in any patient with 
disseminated malignancy, particularly squamous carcinomas of 
the head, neck, and lung. This is especially true when there is a 
change in the patient’s mental status or general clinical condition 
that cannot be explained by tumor progression, infection, or other 
metabolic abnormality (eg, uremia). It should also be considered 
in patients with known primary hyperparathyroidism, particularly 
in a clinical setting characterized by vomiting, diarrhea, or dehy-
dration (eg, due to thiazide therapy). 
 Diagnosis 
 The diagnosis is confirmed by measurement of a total or ionized 
serum calcium level. The latter may be preferable in the presence 
of low serum albumin, the predominant Ca 2+ -binding protein in 
blood, because hypoalbuminemia may mask an elevation in the 
free fraction if only total calcium levels are assessed. Albumin-
corrected calcium levels can be derived by increasing the total 
calcium by 0.8 mg/dL for each 1 g/dL decrease in serum albumin, 
based on a normal albumin level of 4 g/dL. The albumin-adjusted 
calcium does not always correlate with the measured ionized cal-
cium, however, and should not be relied on for more than a rough 
estimate of the free calcium fraction, particularly if ionized cal-
cium measurements are available. 
 On the initial presentation with hypercalcemia, plasma samples 
should be sent for measurement of intact parathyroid hormone 
(PTH), PTHrP, and, if the clinical setting is suggestive, 
25- hydroxyvitamin D or 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D levels. Primary 
hyperparathyroidism is a common disease, and even in a patient 
with known malignancy it should be excluded as a potentially cur-
able cause of the hypercalcemia. 
 Management 
 Intravenous fluids represent the first avenue of approach for 
management of severe hypercalcemia ( Table 24–9 ). Normalization 
of intravascular volume improves GFR and increases renal excre-
tion of calcium. Sodium and calcium handling is closely linked 
in the distal nephron. Fluid resuscitation with normal saline 
(0.9% NaCl) both restores GFR and promotes natriuresis and 
calciuresis by regulating transporter mechanisms responsible for 
sodium and calcium handling in the distal nephron. Over the 
first hour 500 to 1000 mL of normal saline is given, with rates 
of 250 to 500 mL/h thereafter depending on the state of volume 
contraction. The latter can be assessed based on clinical exami-
nation, urine output, and assessment of renal function. Several 
liters of fluid are frequently required before intravascular volume 
is restored. Continued infusions should be matched with urine 
outputs to avoid fluid overload. Loop diuretics (eg, furosemide) 
may be used to accomplish this in patients with an underlying 
predilection toward fluid retention (eg, congestive heart failure). 
Saline and loop diuretics can increase urinary calcium excretion 
by as much as 800 mg/d. This is typically accompanied by a 
moderate but significant reduction in serum calcium levels 
(1-3 mg/dL). Careful attention should be devoted to detection 
of signs of fluid overload. Potassium and magnesium depletion 
related to the diuresis should be corrected. If loop diuretics are 
used, it is important that the volume of normal saline adminis-
tered should at least match urine output. Diuretic-induced 
 volume contraction may lead to reduced GFR and worsening 
hypercalcemia. 
 At this point, more definitive and specific therapy should be 
introduced (see Chapter 8). Severe hypercalcemia is almost always 
TABLE 24–8 Pathogenesis of hypercalcemic crisis.
Calcium mobilized from bone
↓
Increased urinary calcium
Serum calcium remains normal initially
↓
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
Decrease in GFR
↓
Decreased clearance of calcium 
from serum
Continued calcium mobilization 
from bone
↓
↓
Increased serum calcium
TABLE 24–9 Therapy for hypercalcemic crisis.
0.9% NaCl (250-500 mL/h) plus furosemide if required
↓
Calcitonin (2-4 mg/kg SC or IM every 8 h) with or without prednisone
↓
Pamidronate (60-90 mg IV over 1 to 2 h)
or
↓
Zoledronic acid (4 mg IV over 15 min)
↓
Evaluate need for retreatment
CHAPTER 24 Endocrine Emergencies     777
a result of increased mobilization of calcium from bone. Therefore, 
most effective therapies for hypercalcemia have been directed 
against the osteoclasts of bone. Bisphosphonates represent the 
mainstay of therapy. Pamidronate administered at a dose of 60 to 
90 mg in 250 mL of saline over 1 to 4 hours (4 hours for outpa-
tients) is effective in reducing serum calcium levels, often into the 
normal range. A newer generation bisphosphonate, zoledronic 
acid (4-mg intravenous infusion over 15-30 minutes) has also 
been used for management of hypercalcemia. In comparison to 
pamidronate, it is more potent, with a similar safety profile. In 
addition, it has the advantage of a shorter infusion period and 
longer duration of antihypercalcemic activity in head-to-head 
comparisons with pamidronate. The effect of intravenous bispho-
sphonates can take 2 to 4 days to peak, and the duration of the 
response is variable, lasting from 1 week to several months. 
Retreatment for recurrent hypercalcemia is usually successful. 
Side effects of therapy include inflammation at the infusion site; 
low-grade fever with flu-like syndrome; osteonecrosis of the man-
dible and maxilla with long-term or frequent infusions; renal 
insufficiency; and transient depression of serum calcium, phos-
phate, and magnesium. Bisphosphonates are also attractive 
because of their efficacy in controlling pain and fracture in 
myeloma and osteolytic metastases from breast cancer and other 
solid tumors. The mechanism here is thought to involve suppres-
sion of tumor-induced osteoclastic activity in the neighborhood 
of the metastases. 
 Calcitonin has a long history of use in the management of 
hypercalcemia. It has a direct effect on the osteoclast to suppress 
bone resorption. It is given either subcutaneously or intramuscu-
larly at a dose of 2 to 4 U/kg body weight every 6 to 12 hours 
after administration of a test dose to exclude hypersensitivity to 
the drug. In general, the response to calcitonin, which should be 
noted after 6 to 12 hours, is modest in magnitude (decrease in 
serum calcium levels of 1-2 mg/dL) and declines with increasing 
duration of therapy (tachyphylaxis). Coadministration of gluco-
corticoids with calcitonin may limit this latter effect and extend 
the duration of the hypocalcemic effect. Calcitonin is useful 
largely as adjunctive therapy in controlling hypercalcemia in the 
acute setting until the effects of more powerful but slower acting 
agents (eg, bisphosphonates) become available. 
 Cinacalcet, a calcium receptor agonist, can be useful in the 
management of PTH-dependent hypercalcemia such as that seen 
with parathyroid carcinoma. Doses are typically in the range of 30 
to 60 mg bid or higher. 
 Plicamycin is a tumoricidal antibiotic with pronounced 
hypocalcemic properties at nontumoricidal doses. It presumably 
targets the osteoclast and its bone-resorptive activity. It is admin-
istered as an infusion at a dosage of 15 to 25 μg/kg body weight 
over 4 to 24 hours. Calcium levels fall, often into the normal 
range, within 24 to 48 hours in a majority of patients treated. 
Plicamycin has significant renal and hepatic toxicity, and it 
induces platelet abnormalities that may result in clinically signifi-
cant hemorrhage. Toxicity tends to increase with repeated admin-
istration, limiting chronic use of the drug. Given the ready 
availability of less toxic treatment modalities, plicamycin is rarely 
used in the management of severe hypercalcemia. 
 Gallium nitrate has shown efficacy in the management of 
tumoral hypercalcemia in clinical trials. Like the bisphosphonates 
and plicamycin, gallium is apparently targeted at the osteoclast. 
Patients are infused with gallium nitrate at a dosage of 200 mg/m 2 
over a 5-day period. Gallium’s major limitations are the duration 
of the infusion (often requiring hospitalization) and the potential 
for significant nephrotoxicity, particularly if it is used in the set-
ting of other nephrotoxic agents. 
 Other nonselective treatment modalities that are available for 
management of hypercalcemic crisis include steroids, phosphate, 
and dialysis. Aside from their potentiation of calcitonin’s effects, as 
described above, steroids are usually effective only in the manage-
ment of hypercalcemia due to lymphoproliferative disease (eg, 
multiple myeloma) or vitamin D toxicity (eg, due to ingestion of 
vitamin D or disseminated granulomatous disease). They are best 
suited for chronic management of hypercalcemia associated with 
these disorders. Parenteral phosphate effectively reduces serum 
calcium levels, although often at the expense of deposition of cal-
cium phosphate salts in parenchymal tissues, and cannot be rec-
ommended. Peritoneal or hemodialysis against a low-calcium 
bath is also very effective in reducing serum calcium levels and is 
the treatment of choice for severe hypercalcemia in renal failure 
patients incapable of tolerating or responding to saline diuresis. 
In clinically tenuous patients not in renal failure undergoing 
maximal saline diuresis, persistent hypercalcemia may be an indi-
cation for hemodialysis as a tool to bridge the interval until more 
definitive therapy (eg, bisphosphonates) can achieve its maximal 
effect. 
 Finally, some effort should be taken to addressing the primary 
cause of the hypercalcemia. In some instances (eg, disseminated 
malignancy), therapeutic options may be limited and ineffective 
in controlling serum calcium levels. In other instances (eg, 
 primary hyperparathyroidism), a definitive surgical approach 
can be curative and limit further morbidity. Thus, careful 
 investigation of the source of the hypercalcemia is warranted. 
Such investigation—even in patients with an obvious potential 
source of hypercalcemia (eg, malignancy)—may identify 
 correctable problems and, at the very least, assist in the develop-
ment of long-term management strategies once the acute crisis 
has resolved. 
 ACUTE HYPOCALCEMIA 
 Clinical Setting 
 Hypocalcemia may be seen in a number of disorders affecting the 
synthesis or action of PTH or vitamin D or following sequestra-
tion of calcium into a functionally inaccessible compartment (see 
Chapter 8). Many of these represent chronic illnesses where 
hypocalcemic symptoms develop insidiously or where the compli-
cation of hypocalcemia is anticipated early and appropriate treat-
ment initiated prior to acute decompensation. However, in 
selected situations, acute hypocalcemia may dominate the clinical 
presentation. Appropriate recognition of the high-risk clinical set-
ting should lead to earlier diagnosis and therapeutic intervention 
with reduced morbidity and mortality. 
778    CHAPTER 24 Endocrine Emergencies
 Probably the most important cause of PTH-deficient hypocal-
cemia occurs in the postoperative setting following neck surgery for 
treatment of malignancy or resection of adenomatous or hyperplas-
tic parathyroid glands. This may reflect accidental or purposeful 
(eg, radical neck dissection) removal of all functioning parathyroid 
tissue or inadvertent vascular compromise of tissue left in the neck. 
Residual normal parathyroid tissue can also be functionally atro-
phied in a patient undergoing surgery for hyperparathyroidism. It 
can take 1 to 2 days for PTH secretion and calcium levels to return 
to normal following resection of the adenoma. 
 Magnesium deficiency can compromise both PTH secretion 
from the parathyroid gland and PTH action at target tissues in the 
periphery. Magnesium repletion in patients with low serum mag-
nesium and calcium should be undertaken before launching an 
exhaustive workup of the hypocalcemia. 
 Hypocalcemia can be seen in chronic renal insufficiency. 
Hyperphosphatemia and reduced 1-α hydroxylase activity result 
in deficient 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D 3 generation and consequent 
hypocalcemia. Aggressive management of the hyperphosphatemia 
(eg, with phosphate binders) and calcitriol are generally useful in 
promoting normal calcium balance. 
 Acute sequestration of calcium into bone or nonphysiologic 
compartments can lead to severe hypocalcemia. Hypocalcemia 
following removal of a parathyroid adenoma may reflect a 
hypoparathyroid or aparathyroid state, as discussed above. 
Alternatively, in patients with severe osteitis fibrosa cystica, the 
bones, in the absence of PTH-driven bone resorption, serve as a 
sink for extracellular calcium deposition, as previously unmineral-
ized osteoid becomes calcified. This results in the syndrome 
termed  hungry bones or  recalcification tetany . It is usually dis-
tinguished from PTH deficiency by measurements of the hor-
mone (PTH is typically elevated in the hungry bones syndrome). 
A similar sequestration phenomenon is seen in osteoblastic metas-
tases (eg, in breast or prostatic carcinoma). Typically, osteoclastic 
activity in these metastases is abrogated through some specific 
therapeutic intervention, leaving unmineralized matrix to calcify 
at the expense of extracellular calcium levels. 
 Sequestration may also occur in nonphysiologic settings such 
as the peritoneal cavity in acute pancreatitis, where deposition of 
calcium soaps leads to a subsequent reduction in serum calcium 
levels. A similar phenomenon occurs in damaged muscle following 
rhabdomyolysis. Deposition of calcium salts in damaged muscle 
beds leads to a reduction in serum calcium levels. Interestingly, 
serum calcium returns to normal or even elevated levels during the 
recovery phase, reflecting dissolution of the precipitates as the 
muscle undergoes repair. 
 Hypocalcemia occurs in the setting of acute systemic illness 
with a prevalence of nearly 80% in the ICU setting. It has been 
linked to the cytokine-mediated inflammatory response that fre-
quently dominates this clinical setting. Other potential contribu-
tors include increased calcium binding to albumin (eg, as seen 
with alkalosis), relative PTH deficiency, and decreased renal 1-α-
hydroxylase activity. It has also been associated with specific drugs, 
including antineoplastic agents such as doxorubicin and cytara-
bine and other agents such as ketoconazole, pentamidine, and 
foscarnet. 
 Diagnosis 
 Symptomatic hypocalcemia presents with a predictable constella-
tion of signs and symptoms. Most of these findings are related to 
the increased neuroexcitability that is seen with reductions of 
extracellular calcium levels ( see Table 24–10 ). Symptoms fre-
quently begin as circumoral paresthesias or paresthesias of the 
fingers or toes. This is followed by increased muscle cramping and 
spasm (particularly carpopedal spasm) (see Figure 8–18) and dif-
fuse hyperreflexia. The increased propensity for muscle spasm can 
provoke generalized tetany which if extended to the laryngeal 
muscles can lead to laryngospasm and respiratory arrest. Increased 
excitability in the central nervous system can result in seizures, 
particularly in patients with a history of seizure disorder. 
 Physical examination looking for evidence of neuromuscular 
hyperexcitability is often revealing ( see Table 24–10 ). Chvostek 
sign is evoked by repetitive tapping of the area overlying the facial 
nerve approximately 2 cm anterior to the ear lobe below the zygo-
matic arch. A positive test is contraction of musculature inner-
vated by the facial nerve. The extent of the contraction is roughly 
proportionate to the severity of the hypocalcemia. Trousseau sign 
is triggered by inflating a blood pressure cuff on an upper extrem-
ity to a level that roughly equates with the systolic blood pressure 
for 3 to 5 minutes. Spasm of the hand musculature (see carpope-
dal spasm, above) due to transient ischemia of hyperexcitable 
nerves innervating the hand is regarded as a positive test. Of the 
two, a positive Trousseau sign is regarded as more specific for 
hypocalcemia than is the positive Chvostek sign. 
 Hypocalcemia can also have significant effects on cardiovascu-
lar function, including decreased blood pressure, impaired car-
diac contractility, and conduction disturbances. On the 
electrocardiogram, significant hypocalcemia can manifest as pro-
longation of the QT interval. In extreme cases this can lead to 
ventricular arrhythmias, including torsades de pointes. Evidence 
of sequelae of chronic hypocalcemia may also identify individuals 
who are at risk for acute hypocalcemia. Subcapsular cataracts and 
TABLE 24–10  Symptoms and signs of acute 
hypocalcemia.
Symptoms
Perioral numbness
Tingling paresthesias in distal extremities
Hyperreflexia
Muscle cramps
Carpopedal spasm
Laryngospasm
Seizures
Coma
Signs 
Chvostek sign
Trousseau sign
Hypotension
Bradycardia
Prolonged QT interval
Arrhythmias
CHAPTER 24 Endocrine Emergencies     779
basal ganglia calcification are features associated with long-stand-
ing hypocalcemia. 
 Measurement of total serum calcium, albumin, or ionized cal-
cium, if available, leads quickly to the correct diagnosis. 
Measurement of plasma PTH, 25-hydroxyvitamin D, and 
1,25-dihydroxyvitmin D assists in identifying deficiency of PTH 
secretion, adequacy of vitamin D stores, or impaired synthesis of 
bioactive vitamin D, respectively. Mg 2+ levels should be obtained 
to exclude hypomagnesemia. Magnesium depletion can present 
with the same symptoms as hypocalcemia. If present, magnesium 
repletion should be initiated before additional diagnostic tests are 
undertaken. 
 Examination of the medication list looking for drugs with 
hypocalcemic properties (eg, bisphosphonates, calcitonin, aspara-
ginase, cisplatin, foscarnet) should be performed. 
 Measurement of serum amylase and lipase should aid in identi-
fying pancreatitis as a source of the hypocalcemia. Creatine kinase 
and aldolase levels exclude the presence of rhabdomyolysis. 
 One area of potential confusion is the evaluation of patients in 
the immediate postparathyroidectomy period. Differentiating a 
hypoparathyroid or aparathyroid state from hungry bones syn-
drome can be difficult acutely. As pointed out above, measure-
ment of plasma PTH levels (high in hungry bones syndrome and 
low in hypoparathyroidism) provides the most definitive separa-
tion of the two, but outside of referral centers this typically takes 
several days and thus is usually not helpful in the acute setting. 
Measurement of serum phosphate (elevated in hypoparathyroid-
ism and low-normal or low in hungry bones syndrome) or urinary 
phosphate (often low or absent in hypoparathyroidism) may 
be useful in identifying the source of hypocalcemia. Fortunately, the 
treatment of hypocalcemia in these two conditions is largely the 
same. Thus, establishment of a definitive diagnosis is important 
mainly for planning the subacute and long-term management of 
the patient’s disease. 
 Management 
 In a life-threatening situation (eg, cardiovascular collapse) or in 
the setting of frank generalized tetany, 10 mL of calcium glucon-
ate (93 mg of elemental calcium) can be administered intrave-
nously over a 5- to 10-minute period and repeated if necessary. 
Less acute but recurrent hypocalcemic episodes can be managed 
with continuous calcium infusions. Nine hundred and thirty mil-
ligrams (10 ampules) of calcium gluconate can be mixed in 
500 mL of D 5 W. Infusion rates are established empirically. The 
initial infusion rate is typically 0.3 mg/kg/h but may be increased 
to as much as 2 mg/kg/h in patients with high demands for cal-
cium (eg, hungry bones syndrome). Intravenous calcium should 
be given through a central vein since extravasation of the infusate 
can lead to tissue sloughing. Caution should also be exercised in 
infusing calcium in patients with hyperphosphatemia (precipita-
tion of calcium phosphate salts in soft tissues), hypokalemia, or 
those on digoxin therapy (increased risk of cardiac arrhythmias). 
 As the acute situation resolves, selected patients become can-
didates for chronic replacement therapy. Those with minor 
hypocalcemia may be treated with calcium supplements alone. 
Administration of 1 to 3 g of elemental calcium (calcium car-
bonate contains about 40% elemental calcium by weight) may 
suffice to restore calcium to the low-normal range and eliminate 
hypocalcemic symptoms. In those with more refractory hypocal-
cemia—a category that includes most patients with hypopara-
thyroidism—the addition of some form of vitamin D or a 
derivative is required. If ergocalciferol (vitamin D 2 ) is employed 
to manage patients with hypoparathyroidism, supraphysiologic 
doses (50,000 U/d or higher) may be required, reflecting the 
limited capacity for 1-α hydroxylation of the vitamin D pro- 
hormone in the hypoparathyroid state. 1,25-Dihydroxycholecal-
ciferol (calcitriol) works faster than vitamin D 3 and circumvents 
the 1-α hydroxylase blockade, but it is more expensive and the 
risk of acute hypercalcemia may be higher. It is given in a dose 
of 0.25 to 1 μg daily. 
 In all cases the goal of therapy should be to alleviate hypocal-
cemic symptoms and restore serum calcium levels to the low-
normal range. This can usually be accomplished with some 
combination of vitamin D and supplemental calcium. The latter 
allows the practitioner additional flexibility in controlling serum 
calcium levels without requiring frequent dose modification of the 
longer-acting vitamin D. Efforts to push calcium levels higher 
may come at the expense of significant hypercalciuria and 
increased risk of renal stone formation. Difficulty in maintaining 
calcium even in the low-normal range without unacceptable 
hypercalciuria may be managed by addition of a thiazide diuretic 
(hydrochlorothiazide, 25-100 mg/d) to the regimen. These agents 
reduce hypercalciuria and, secondarily, raise serum calcium levels. 
If thiazides are used, careful follow-up is required to guard against 
the possibility of iatrogenic hypercalcemia. Efforts should be made 
to restore calcium to the target range and maintain it at this level 
indefinitely. Chronic hypocalcemia is associated with develop-
ment of subcapsular cataracts and basal ganglia calcification 
which, in some cases, leads to the development of a parkinsonism-
like syndrome. 
 HYPONATREMIA 
 Clinical Setting 
 Hyponatremia is the most frequent electrolyte problem observed 
in hospitalized patients (see Chapter 5). It is often asymptomatic 
when mild to moderate in severity and subacute to chronic in its 
time course of development. However, significant hyponatremia 
(<120 mEq/dL) of rapid onset is frequently symptomatic and can 
be life-threatening. 
 Hyponatremia typically occurs in one of three clinical settings, 
each of which is linked to a specific pathophysiologic paradigm 
( Table 24–11 ). Hypovolemic hyponatremia is associated with 
volume contraction. As intravascular volume is reduced by more 
than about 9%, there is a nonosmotic stimulation of antidiuretic 
hormone (ADH; vasopressin) release as the body attempts to 
retain water to support intravascular volume. Hyponatremia of 
this type is seen with protracted vomiting, diarrhea, or excessive 
sweating, particularly when fluid losses are replenished with water 
or hypotonic fluids alone. Volume contraction and hyponatremia 
780    CHAPTER 24 Endocrine Emergencies
may also be seen with disorders of renal sodium handling 
(eg, diuretic use, mineralocorticoid deficiency, or other salt-wast-
ing syndromes). Urinary Na + concentration is typically elevated 
(>20 mEq/L) in these latter disorders, whereas in the former, uri-
nary Na + concentration is low, reflecting aggressive resorption of 
Na + in all tubular segments. 
 Hypervolemic hyponatremia includes those edematous disor-
ders typified by paradoxical retention of Na + and water in the face 
of a total body excess of each. Specific causes of hyponatremia in 
this group include congestive heart failure, cirrhosis of the liver 
with ascites, and nephrotic syndrome. Hyponatremia in this set-
ting presumably results from perceived hypoperfusion by barore-
ceptors in the arterial circulation. Neural impulses transmitting 
this information to the hypothalamus trigger an increase in ADH 
release and net water retention. 
 Normovolemic hyponatremia is probably the most heteroge-
neous category and the most difficult to define pathophysiologi-
cally. It includes the syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion 
(SIADH), hypothyroidism, glucocorticoid insufficiency (eg, sec-
ondary adrenal insufficiency), psychogenic polydipsia, postopera-
tive hyponatremia, and hyponatremia seen following transurethral 
resection of the prostate ( see Table 24–11 ). 
 Diagnosis 
 Acute hyponatremia, developing over the course of 24 hours or 
less, presents with headache, nausea, vomiting, lethargy, restless-
ness, hyporeflexia, seizures, and altered sensorium, which may 
progress to stupor and coma. Hyponatremic encephalopathy is 
responsible for 30% of new-onset seizures in the ICU. These find-
ings are thought to result from cerebral edema as the hypotonic 
extracellular compartment shifts water into the cerebral cortical 
cells. Such fluid shifts are opposed early through a reduction in 
intracellular electrolyte concentration and later by depletion of 
intracellular solutes (eg, amino acids). This acts to reduce the 
osmotic gradient and limit the net movement of fluid into brain. 
With chronicity, such solute shifts can reduce brain water content 
to near-normal. Thus, the acuteness of the reduction in serum Na + 
concentration and the magnitude of the reduction are important 
markers of potential morbidity in this disorder. Young menstruat-
ing women are particularly susceptible to the deleterious effects of 
cerebral edema in the postoperative setting. They are 25 times 
more likely than postmenopausal women or men to die or have 
permanent brain damage. This increased susceptibility may reflect 
the effects of estrogen and progesterone to promote solute accumu-
lation in the cells of the central nervous system. Such accumulation 
would be predicted to increase the osmotic drive that leads to cere-
bral edema in these patients. Other patient groups at particular risk 
include children and patients with hypoxia or hepatic disease. 
 The first step in making the diagnosis is to exclude the presence 
of pseudohyponatremia. The latter results from high circulating 
concentrations of triglycerides or osmotically active solutes (eg, 
glucose or proteins) in circulating plasma. Hypertriglyceridemia 
artifactually lowers serum sodium by physically excluding it from 
the sizable nonaqueous phase of the sample being measured. This 
is usually readily detected in the laboratory (eg, by noting the pres-
ence of lactescent serum) and is corrected by centrifuging the 
sample prior to measuring Na + concentration in the aqueous 
phase. Osmotically active solutes, like glucose, draw water from 
the intracellular to the extracellular compartment, where it may 
transiently lower existing electrolyte (eg, Na + ) concentrations (see 
Diabetic Ketoacidosis, above). 
 Assuming that the presence of hyponatremia is confirmed, an 
attempt to examine the different diagnostic possibilities listed 
above should be initiated. Evidence of congestive heart failure, cir-
rhosis, or nephrotic syndrome is usually apparent on physical 
examination and confirmable with standard laboratory or imaging 
studies. Similarly, renal dysfunction should be excluded using con-
ventional renal function tests. Thiazide diuretic use is a frequent 
cause of hyponatremia and should be investigated early in the 
evaluation. A careful history of water consumption should be 
obtained and measurements of water intake in a monitored setting 
made to exclude psychogenic polydipsia or dipsogenic diabetes 
insipidus. Hypothyroidism can be excluded with measurement of 
plasma TSH and free thyroxine levels and glucocorticoid deficiency 
through an ACTH stimulation test (see Chapters 7 and 9). 
 Nonosmotic, non-volume-driven ADH secretion is found in 
SIADH. This is typically a diagnosis of exclusion in non-volume-
contracted individuals without evidence of edema, renal 
TABLE 24–11 Classification of hyponatremia.
Hypovolemic
 Extrarenal volume loss
 Excessive perspiration
 Losses due to widespread skin involvement (eg, burns)
 Vomiting
 Diarrhea
Renal volume loss
 Diuretic use
 Salt-wasting nephropathy
 Cerebral salt wasting
 Osmotic diuresis with selective repletion of water
Hypervolemic
 Congestive heart failure
 Nephrotic syndrome
 Cirrhosis with ascites
 Chronic renal failure
Normovolemic
 Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion
 Intracranial disease
 Pulmonary disease
 Drugs (eg, opioids)
 Severe pain or emotional distress
 Nausea and vomiting
 Postsurgical
 Resetting of the osmostat
Adrenal insufficiency (may be hypovolemic in presence of severe 
 mineralocorticoid deficiency)
Hypothyroidism
Water intoxication
 Psychogenic polydipsia
 Nonpsychogenic polydipsia
 Excessive administration of parenteral hypotonic fluids
 Posttransurethral prostatectomy
CHAPTER 24 Endocrine Emergencies     781
 insufficiency, hypothyroidism, or adrenal insufficiency. Serum 
Na + and osmolality are low in the face of a concentrated urine. 
Urine Na + may be modestly elevated (>20 mEq/L), reflecting 
activation of natriuretic pathways responding to the increase in 
total body fluid volume. If findings are equivocal, an abnormal 
water load test (inability to excrete at least 90% of a 20 mL/kg 
water load in 4 hours or failure to dilute urine osmolality to below 
100 mOsm/kg) can be used to confirm the diagnosis. SIADH is 
seen with a variety of disorders affecting the central nervous sys-
tem (eg, encephalitis, multiple sclerosis, meningitis, psychosis), 
the pulmonary system (eg, tuberculosis, pneumonia, aspergillosis), 
or as a paraneoplastic process associated with a number of solid 
tumors (eg, small cell carcinoma of the lung, carcinoma of the 
pancreas, bladder, or prostate). It may also be seen with certain 
types of drugs (eg, cyclophosphamide, vinca alkaloids, opioids, 
prostaglandin synthesis inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, car-
bamazepine, clofibrate, and serotonin reuptake inhibitors). 
 Some difficulty may be encountered in differentiating SIADH 
from a second hyponatremic syndrome called cerebral salt wast-
ing. The latter is also associated with central nervous system dis-
ease, particularly subarachnoid hemorrhage. It is thought to be 
due to a centrally mediated renal wasting of sodium with conse-
quent volume contraction, volume-dependent activation of ADH 
secretion, and hyponatremia. It has been suggested that atrial 
natriuretic peptide or brain natriuretic peptide may play a central 
role in mediating the natriuresis associated with this disorder. 
Comparison of the features of these two disorders ( Table 24–12 ) 
suggests that clinical or biochemical evidence of volume contrac-
tion is the major way to differentiate cerebral salt wasting from the 
euvolemic hyponatremia of SIADH. This is an important distinc-
tion, because therapy in cerebral salt wasting involves intravascular 
volume repletion, whereas in SIADH fluid restriction may repre-
sent first-line therapy. 
 Management 
 When the primary stimulus provoking water retention (eg, 
diuretic use) or consumption (eg, psychogenic polydipsia) can be 
identified, specific therapy represents the most rational approach 
for long-term management. 
 When the cause of hyponatremia is unclear or unaddressable 
(eg, SIADH), a more generic approach may be adopted. Patients 
with asymptomatic (eg, mild or chronic) hyponatremia can be 
managed with water restriction. Calculations of daily water intake 
should incorporate that included in nonliquid foods consumed by 
the patient. For patients who are symptomatic, non-acute but 
unable to adhere to water restriction, treatment with an oral vaso-
pressin antagonist, tolvaptan (15-60 mg/day), or demeclocycline 
(600-1200 mg/d in divided doses), an antibiotic that uncouples 
ADH from activation of its receptor, may be sufficient to control 
serum Na + levels. Water restriction is not required with demeclo-
cycline therapy and may even be deleterious. Such therapy should 
be carefully monitored to guard against precipitous dehydration 
and renal insufficiency. Alternatively, patients can be managed 
with regular administration of a loop diuretic (eg, furosemide), 
which leads to excretion of urine approximately half the tonicity 
of plasma (loop diuretics disrupt the osmotic gradient required for 
urine concentration). Loop diuretics should be used concomi-
tantly with NaCl supplementation (2-3 g/d) to increase urinary 
solute excretion and in that way amplify urinary water loss. 
 Symptomatic acute hyponatremia is an indication for hyper-
tonic saline (3% NaCl) administration. Estimates of excess total 
body water can be made using the following equation: 
 
Excess water
295
Plasma osmolality
295
0.
=
−
×
6(
6 Body weight)
 with plasma osmolality in milliosmoles per kilogram, excess water 
in liters, and body weight in kilograms. 
 The rise in serum sodium effected by 1 L of 3% saline infusate can 
be calculated by the following formula from Adrogue and Madias: 
 
=
+
+
+
ΔNa
Infusate Na
Serum Na
Total body wa
−
te
t r + 1
 where ΔNa + is the change in sodium concentration effected by 
administration of 1 L of infusate; infusate Na + is the concentration 
of Na + in the infusion (eg, 513 mmol/L for 3% NaCl); and total 
body water is body weight (kg) × 0.6 (children or nonelderly 
men), × 0.5 (nonelderly women and elderly men), or × 0.45 
(elderly women). The +1 in the denominator accounts for the 
volume of the infusate. Based on the calculated ΔNa + , one can 
adjust the infusion rate to provide the desired increase in serum 
Na + over a fixed time interval. An alternative guide to initial 
therapy estimates that 1 mL/kg of 3% NaCl will increase serum 
Na + by approximately 1 mEq/L. Infusion rate algorithms are 
intended only as a guide and should be adjusted, based on actual 
Na + measurements, to raise serum Na + levels by no more than 
0.5 mEq/h (total <8-12 mEq/d) to diminish the risk of central 
demyelination (see next). If necessary, infusion rates can be adjusted 
TABLE 24–12  Comparison of laboratory findings in 
SIADH with CSW.
SIADH
CSW
Intravascular volume contractiona
No
Yes
Serum sodium
↓
↓
Urine sodium
↑
↑↑
Urine volume
N or ↓
↑
Endocrine
 Plasma ADH
↑
N or ↑
 Plasma aldosterone
↓
N or ↑
 Plasma renin
↓
N or ↓
 Plasma ANP
↑
↑
Urea nitrogen, serum
N or ↓
↑
Serum uric acid
↓
N or ↑
aBased on clinical assessment or direct measurement of plasma volume.
ADH, antidiuretic hormone; ANP, atrial natriuretic peptide; CSW, cerebral salt wasting; 
N, normal; SIADH, syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion.
782    CHAPTER 24 Endocrine Emergencies
to increase serum sodium by 1 to 2 mEq/h for short periods of 
time in symptomatic patients; however, the limitation to 
8-12 mEq/d should be adhered to, if possible. Furosemide can be 
administered, if necessary, to avoid intravascular fluid overload; how-
ever, given the ability of this drug to promote excretion of a hypotonic 
urine, the clinician should be aware that the plasma osmolality may 
increase faster than predicted by the formula set forth above. Once 
serum Na + reaches 130 mEq/L, hypertonic saline infusion should be 
terminated and fluid restriction or normal saline (0.9% NaCl) plus 
furosemide used for the final correction of serum osmolality. 
 For moderately symptomatic hyponatremia in a patient requiring 
parenteral medication, the vasopressin receptor antagonist conivaptan 
may be used (20 mg IV initially followed by infusion of 20 mg/d for 
1-3 days; infusion rate may be increased to 40 mg/d if serum sodium 
fails to increase appropriately). Moderate fluid restriction is recom-
mended to facilitate reaching serum sodium goal. 
 It is important to mention that interventions directed at the 
cause of the hyponatremia (vs treatment of the hyponatremia 
itself) also require close monitoring. Rapid correction of hypona-
tremia through administration of glucocorticoids in adrenal insuf-
ficiency or volume repletion in thiazide-induced hyponatremia, 
for example, may be associated with central myelinolysis. Careful 
monitoring of serum Na + levels in the posttreatment period is 
mandatory. If Na + appears to be rising too rapidly (>1 mEq/h), 
administration of hypotonic fluids or a small dose of desmopressin 
acetate (0.25-1 μg parenterally) may be indicated. 
 Complications 
 Central pontine myelinolysis was first described in alcoholics and 
malnourished patients. In the original descriptions it was charac-
terized by demyelination confined to the pons, resulting in quad-
riplegia and, not infrequently, death. Subsequent observational 
studies linked it to the treatment of hyponatremia. The classic 
presentation is of a patient who is aggressively treated for hypona-
tremia with resolution of the presenting findings (ie, those of 
cerebral edema), only to develop symptoms of mutism, dysphasia, 
spastic quadriparesis, pseudobulbar palsy, delirium, and, in many 
cases, death. Surviving patients often have severe neurologic 
sequelae. More recent studies using CT and MRI indicate that 
myelinolysis is not confined to the pons but present in many 
extrapontine locations as well. Lesions are typically symmetrically 
distributed and clustered in areas where there is close juxtaposition 
of gray and white matter. 
 There has been considerable controversy about the prevalence 
of this particular syndrome and its relationship to the treatment of 
hyponatremia. However, both animal and human studies are 
strongly suggestive of a link between this syndrome and rapid, 
aggressive correction of hyponatremia. Given the imperfect state 
of our understanding of this disorder, it would seem prudent to 
approach the correction of chronic hyponatremia, where solute 
distribution and water content in the brain are undoubtedly 
altered because of the chronicity of the disorder, cautiously, with 
rates of correction no greater that 0.5 mEq/h, as indicated above. 
The risk of solute redistribution in documented acute hypona-
tremia (ie, duration <24 hours) is substantially reduced. Clinical 
signs of cerebral edema in this setting may be approached more 
aggressively, although repletion rates greater than 1 mEq/h with a 
maximal correction of 12 mEq over the first 24 hours should be 
avoided if possible. 
 DIABETES INSIPIDUS 
 Clinical Setting 
 Diabetes insipidus is a disorder due to absolute or relative defi-
ciency in the circulating levels or bioactivity of ADH (vasopressin) 
(see Chapter 5). 
 ADH release is normally suppressed at plasma osmolalities 
below 285 mOsm/kg, leading to generation of a maximally dilute 
urine (<100 mOsm/kg). Above 285 mOsm/kg, ADH secretion 
increases linearly with plasma osmolality. At a plasma ADH level 
of 5 pg/mL, which corresponds to a plasma osmolality of about 
295 mOsm/kg, the urine is maximally concentrated. Despite the 
fact that plasma ADH levels continue to rise beyond this point, 
there is no further concentration of the urine. At 295 mOsm/kg, 
the osmotic threshold for the thirst mechanism is activated. Thirst 
also rises linearly with increasing plasma osmolality. It provides the 
body’s main defense against hypertonicity, much as suppression of 
ADH secretion guards against hypotonicity. Provided that the 
patient remains awake and able to drink and provided that the 
thirst mechanism remains intact, even complete deficiency of 
ADH secretion can be adequately compensated by increased water 
intake. 
 Defects in ADH secretion (central diabetes insipidus) may 
occur on a heritable basis, occasionally in association with diabetes 
mellitus, optic atrophy, and sensorineural deafness (DIDMOAD, 
or Wolfram syndrome). It may also be seen as a component of a 
polyendocrine autoimmune syndrome (see Chapter 2). Secondary 
causes of central diabetes insipidus include head injury (often with 
stalk section), pituitary surgery, granulomatous disease (sarcoido-
sis, tuberculosis, histiocytosis X), infections, vascular aneurysms 
and thrombosis, and tumors (craniopharyngioma; dysgerminoma, 
meningioma; metastatic disease from breast, lung, or gastrointes-
tinal tumors). 
 Osmoreceptors for ADH release are believed to reside in the 
organum vasculosum of the lamina terminalis, whereas those con-
trolling thirst are believed to lie in an independent but neighbor-
ing location. Thus, those patients with an isolated defect in ADH 
secretion (either in the osmoreceptors or the secretory nuclei) are 
protected from severe dehydration by activation of the thirst 
mechanism. In those with combined involvement of both ADH 
secretion and the osmoreceptors controlling thirst (hypodipsic or 
adipsic diabetes insipidus), the risk of volume contraction and 
severe dehydration is extreme (see below). 
 Adequacy of the renal response to ADH requires adequate 
delivery of glomerular filtrate to distal tubular segments, adequacy 
of tubular function in the ascending limb of the loop of Henle 
(to establish and maintain the gradient of medullary tonicity and 
to generate free water for excretion), and a normal response to 
vasopressin (ie, intact signal transduction mechanism) in the col-
lecting duct. Unresponsiveness to ADH is due to genetic lesions 
CHAPTER 24 Endocrine Emergencies     783
in the V 2 receptor (X-linked recessive diabetes insipidus) or the 
functionally linked aquaporin-2 water channel (autosomal reces-
sive diabetes insipidus). It may also be seen in an acquired form 
with hypokalemia or hypercalcemia, in various forms of intrinsic 
renal disease (eg, medullary cystic disease) and following therapy 
with demeclocycline or lithium. 
 Diagnosis 
 The presentation of diabetes insipidus in an alert, conscious 
patient is typically an abrupt onset of polyuria and polydipsia. 
Hypertonicity is avoided as long as the thirst mechanism remains 
intact and water intake is able to keep up with urinary losses. In a 
patient who is unconscious or otherwise incapable of communi-
cating the need for fluids or in patients with coexistent adipsia, 
polyuria is transient and quickly followed by evidence of severe 
dehydration and hyperosmolality. Urine volumes in this setting 
may be normal or even reduced. The clinical findings in hyperna-
tremia associated with diabetes insipidus are dominated by the 
effects of cellular dehydration and contraction of intravascular 
volume. In the brain, this can lead to increased traction on dural 
veins and venous sinuses. This may result in avulsion of vessels 
from their cranial attachments and intracranial hemorrhage. 
Other findings include irritability, lethargy, weakness, muscle 
twitching, hyperreflexia, seizures, and coma. 
 The diagnosis of polyuria is usually reserved for urine outputs 
greater than 2.5 L/d. A careful history should be taken to docu-
ment oral fluid intake (particularly beer or other hypotonic fluids) 
or parenteral fluid administration (eg, in a postoperative setting). 
Neurologic or endocrine symptoms that might suggest either a 
hypothalamic or intrasellar mass, use of medications that could 
impair water reabsorption (eg, furosemide, demeclocycline, or 
lithium) or intercurrent conditions that might mimic diabetes 
insipidus (eg, osmotic diuresis associated with diabetes mellitus or 
resolving obstructive uropathy) should also be investigated. 
 Initial evaluation should include measurement of serum 
sodium, plasma osmolality, and urine osmolality. Diabetes 
insipidus is typically associated with a high-normal or elevated 
serum sodium and osmolality in the face of submaximally con-
centrated urine. Plasma glucose measurement and standard renal 
function tests should help exclude osmotic diuresis as contribut-
ing to the polyuria. Measurement of serum K + and Ca 2+ assists 
in excluding polyuria resulting from hypokalemia and hypercal-
cemia, respectively. 
 In patients with equivocal initial tests, a water deprivation test 
may be performed. This involves serial measurements of serum 
Na + , urine volume, and osmolality in the absence of fluid intake 
until serum Na + is greater than 146 mmol/L or urine osmolality 
plateaus (<10% change with three successive determinations), and 
the patient has lost more than 2% of body weight. The test should 
be stopped if the decrease in body weight reaches 3% or the 
patient demonstrates orthostatic hypotension. Patients with dia-
betes insipidus become progressively more hypertonic with water 
deprivation but fail to increase urine osmolality. Administration of 
desmopressin promotes water retention and an increase in urine 
osmolality in patients with central but not nephrogenic diabetes 
insipidus. Increases in osmolality of more than 50% indicate cen-
tral diabetes insipidus, whereas responses of less than 10% suggest 
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. Responses between 10% and 50% 
are equivocal. Plasma ADH levels may be of assistance in defining 
the nature of the diabetes insipidus in the latter setting. In the 
presence of high plasma but low urine osmolality, increased 
plasma ADH levels are associated with nephrogenic diabetes 
insipidus, whereas subnormal levels are found with central diabe-
tes insipidus. It may be difficult to establish the diagnosis of mild 
partial central diabetes insipidus. These patients can often achieve 
maximally concentrated urine during extreme dehydration, reflect-
ing reduced GFR and stimulated vasopressin secretion; however, 
as plasma osmolality is corrected and intravascular volume is 
restored, they typically begin to dilute their urine at a plasma 
osmolality that is well above normal. 
 Coexistence of glucocorticoid deficiency may mask the pres-
ence of central diabetes insipidus. The development of polyuria 
with the initiation of glucocorticoid replacement should alert the 
clinician to the possible presence of diabetes insipidus. 
 In the 48 hours following pituitary surgery or head trauma, 
transient diabetes insipidus with polyuria is not uncommon. Over 
the ensuing 2 to 14 days, a period of antidiuresis and  hyponatremia 
may dominate the clinical course. This in turn may be followed by 
persistent polyuria. The first phase is thought to result from tran-
sient dysfunction or stunning of the ADH-producing neurons of 
the hypothalamus, the second from leakage of ADH from dam-
aged or dying neurons, and the third from permanent loss of 
ADH-secretory neurons. Not all patients progress through the 
entire series of events. It is important to recognize the existence of 
this syndrome and the natural progression of the disorder in 
evaluating the need for chronic therapeutic intervention. 
 In pregnancy, there is a resetting of the osmostats controlling 
both ADH and thirst, resulting in a state of physiologic hypo-os-
molality (about 10 mOsm/kg below that seen in the nonpregnant 
state). In addition, elevations in placental vasopressinase may 
rarely promote polyuria in patients with otherwise compensated 
partial central diabetes insipidus. The appropriate treatment for 
this disorder is desmopressin acetate, an ADH analog that is resis-
tant to degradation by vasopressinase. 
 Virtually anything that increases the rate of tubular flow (eg, 
primary polydipsia or central diabetes insipidus) may create a state 
of functional nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. This is due to wash-
out of the medullary tonicity responsible for generating the 
osmotic gradient that promotes movement of water from the 
tubular lumen into the medullary interstitium as well as down 
regulation of aquaporin-2 water channels as a result of vasopressin 
deficiency. A therapeutic trial of 1-deamino-8-D arginine vaso-
pressin (DDAVP) for 1 to 2 days often restores medullary tonicity 
and facilitates the diagnostic workup. Primary polydipsia (eg, 
psychogenic polydipsia or dipsogenic diabetes insipidus) presents 
with a dilute urine, but plasma osmolality and serum Na + levels 
are typically low or low-normal and ADH levels are low. Moreover, 
due to the elevation in tubular flow rates, the response to desmo-
pressin may be limited in magnitude (<10%, which is less than 
that predicted for central diabetes insipidus). This may make it 
difficult to differentiate primary polydipsia from partial forms of 
784    CHAPTER 24 Endocrine Emergencies
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. Plasma ADH levels may be of 
assistance in making this distinction (elevated in nephrogenic 
diabetes insipidus and suppressed in psychogenic polydipsia). 
 Management 
 Acute diabetes insipidus is characterized by polyuria in the presence 
or absence of plasma hyperosmolality. As noted above, the presence 
of hyperosmolality is determined by the adequacy of the patient’s 
thirst mechanism. When a hyperosmolar state with clinical evi-
dence of severe dehydration is present, it is necessary to correct 
intravascular volume. This is accomplished by administering hypo-
tonic fluids (eg, D 5 W), which restore intravascular volume and 
move plasma osmolality back toward normal. The rate at which the 
hyperosmolality is corrected is dictated in part by the severity of the 
clinical symptoms and by the chronicity of the disorder. Chronic 
hyperosmolality (>24 hours) leads to the accumulation of idiogenic 
osmoles (eg, taurine and myoinositol) in the central nervous system 
that serve to offset the osmotically driven movement of water out 
of that compartment. Aggressive correction of the hyperosmolar 
state can lead to cerebral edema if the rate of hypotonic fluid 
administration greatly exceeds the rate at which the neurons in the 
central nervous system eliminate these idiogenic osmoles. If severe 
volume contraction is present and blood pressure is reduced, intra-
vascular volume should be repleted initially with normal saline 
(0.9% NaCl). Following expansion of intravascular volume with 
normal saline, correction of plasma osmolality with D5W at a rate 
of 0.5 to 1 mOsm/h—not to exceed 15 mOsm within the first 
24-hour period—appears to be reasonably effective in reducing 
plasma tonicity without incurring an increased risk of cerebral 
edema. Typically, higher infusion rates are used early in the course 
when serum osmolalities are highest and reduced as osmolality 
decreases into the range of 330 mOsm/kg. Correction of the total 
free water deficit should be spread over about 48 hours. Total water 
deficit is defined above in the section dealing with DKA. 
Calculation of hypotonic fluid infusion rates can be made using the 
formula for change in serum sodium set out in the preceding sec-
tion, substituting 0 mmol/L for D 5 W, 77 mmol/L for 0.45% 
NaCl, or 154 mmol/L for 0.9% NaCl into the equation, as needed, 
to calculate the net reduction in serum Na + . Again, based on the 
calculated ΔNa + , one can adjust the rate of delivery of the infusate 
to provide a specific increment in serum Na + concentration over a 
defined time interval. If signs of cerebral edema (see Hyponatremia, 
above) appear, hypotonic fluids should be discontinued and appro-
priate administration of hypertonic fluids (eg, mannitol) initiated. 
 If the diagnosis of central diabetes insipidus has been established, 
the patient should receive parenteral desmopressin acetate. The ini-
tial dose, in the range of 1 to 2 μg every 24 hours (administered 
intravenously or intramuscularly), should be given in the evening 
with the aim of controlling nocturia and maintaining daily urine 
output under 2 L. If polyuria returns well before the end of the 
24-hour dosing interval, the single dose can be increased or split 
doses can be administered every 12 hours. Ideally, one would like to 
see some degree of breakthrough polyuria at the end of the dosing 
interval. This serves to guard against the development of iatrogenic 
hyponatremia. If this proves difficult to achieve, a dose can be 
skipped every 48 to 72 hours. Once the patient has been stabilized 
on a fixed dose of parenteral desmopressin, conversion to a formula-
tion more suitable for the outpatient setting is indicated. Desmopressin 
acetate is available in liquid form for insufflation through a nasal 
cannula or as a fixed-dose (10 μg) nasal spray. The former has the 
advantage of greater flexibility in adjusting the nasal dose, whereas 
the latter offers greater convenience for some patients. Parenteral 
desmopressin is generally about 10 times more potent than the 
nasally administered drug; however, intranasal doses should be 
titrated for each individual patient. Desmopressin is also available in 
an oral form. Effective doses can range widely (50-1200 μg/d in 
divided doses) and should be adjusted for the individual patient. 
 Treatment of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is more complex 
because the problem is one of resistance to—rather than defi-
ciency of—the endogenous hormone. If possible, one should 
attempt to address the underlying cause of ADH resistance. This 
can be accomplished by correcting electrolyte abnormalities (eg, 
hypokalemia or hypercalcemia) or discontinuing medications (eg, 
demeclocycline, lithium) that are likely to contribute to ADH 
insensitivity. Failing this, administration of a thiazide diuretic 
together with salt restriction often reduces the polyuria. This is 
assumed to result from contraction of intravascular volume with 
increased proximal reabsorption of fluids and solutes and, conse-
quently, limited availability of fluid in distal nephron segments for 
free water generation and excretion; however, there may be a sec-
ond, ADH-independent effect on the aquaporin-2 channels in the 
collecting duct. Prostaglandins are endogenous antagonists of 
ADH activity in the collecting duct. Administration of cyclooxy-
genase inhibitors (eg, indomethacin, 100 mg/d in divided doses) 
may improve sensitivity to endogenous ADH and reduce polyuria. 
If the impairment in ADH responsiveness is mild, higher doses of 
synthetic desmopressin (DDAVP) occasionally prove effective in 
promoting water retention. Amiloride is the preferred treatment 
for lithium toxicity. It is thought to prevent the uptake of lithium 
in collecting duct cells. However, lithium-induced diabetes insipi-
dus may not abate following discontinuation of the drug. 
 Disorders of thirst in the setting of central diabetes insipidus 
deserve special mention with regard to therapy. Excessive thirst 
due to altered osmoreceptor function or behavioral conditioning 
(eg, before desmopressin treatment) may result in severe hypona-
tremia once desmopressin treatment is initiated. The patient 
should be cautioned about excessive consumption of water, and 
fluid must be restricted if necessary. 
 Adipsic diabetes insipidus is probably one of the most difficult 
therapeutic problems faced by endocrinologists. Affected patients 
have essentially lost all ability to regulate water metabolism on their 
own. This function must be taken over by the medical team provid-
ing their care. Desmopressin is administered in a fixed parenteral 
dose that is sufficient to reduce urine output to 1.5 to 2 L/d with a 
fluid intake of 2 to 2.5 L. The difference here is intended to cover 
the daily insensible losses (about 500-1000 mL) and may need to be 
adjusted empirically to maintain normal fluid homeostasis. After 
plasma osmolality and sodium are in the normal range, fluid intake 
is balanced against urine output. Any net change in urine output 
over an 8-hour period (this may be extended as the patient’s fluid 
requirements become more predictable) is accommodated by 
CHAPTER 24 Endocrine Emergencies     785
modifying the fluid orders for the ensuing 8 hours. The patient 
should also be weighed daily. Any alteration in weight is usually 
reflective of net changes in water retention and can be corrected 
through modification of fluid intake. Plasma osmolality and serum 
sodium should be monitored once or twice weekly and appropriate 
changes in fluid administration made depending on the direction 
and magnitude of the shift in osmolality. With this system of redun-
dant monitoring, urine volumes and plasma  osmolality can be rea-
sonably well controlled for protracted periods of time. 
 Complications 
 If left untreated, polyuria secondary to diabetes insipidus can 
lead to dilation of the collecting system, hydronephrosis, and 
renal dysfunction. This is the dominant reason for treating 
polyuria even in patients with an intact thirst mechanism who 
are capable of controlling plasma osmolality through water 
ingestion. 
 Overly rapid correction of the hyperosmolality can result in 
cerebral edema. The relative risk of this complication should be 
minimized by careful attention to the rate at which the water 
deficit is corrected (see earlier). 
 REFERENCES 
 Myxedema Coma 
 Dutta P, Bhansali A, Masoodi SR, et al. Predictors of outcome in myxoedema coma: 
a study from a tertiary care center.  Crit Care . 2008;12:R1. [PMID: 18173846] 
 Kwaku MP, Burman KD. Myxedema coma.  J Intensiv Care Med . 2007;22:224. 
[PMID: 17712058] 
 Ringel MD. Management of hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism in the intensive 
care unit.  Crit Care Clin . 2001;17:59. [PMID: 11219235] 
 Sarlis NJ, Gourgiotis L. Thyroid emergencies.  Rev Endocr Metab Disord . 
2003;4:129. [PMID: 12766540] 
 Yamamoto T, Fukuyama J, Fujiyoshi A. Factors associated with mortality of myxe-
dema coma: report of eight cases and literature survey.  Thyroid . 1999;9:1167. 
[PMID: 10646654] 
 Thyroid Storm 
 Jiang YZ, Hutchinson KA, Bartelloni P, Manthous CA. Thyroid storm presenting 
as multiple organ dysfunction syndrome.  Chest . 2000;118:877. [PMID: 
10988222] 
 Yeoung SC, Go R, Balasubramanyam A. Rectal administration of iodide and pro-
pylthiouracil in the treatment of thyroid storm.  Thyroid . 1995;5:403. 
[PMID: 8563481] 
 Thyrotoxic Periodic Paralysis 
 Kung AWC. Thyrotoxic periodic paralysis: a diagnostic challenge. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab. 2006;91:2490. [PMID: 16608889]
Lin SH. Thyrotoxic periodic paralysis. Mayo Clin Proc. 2005;80:95. [PMID: 
15667036]
Lin SH, Lin YF. Propanolol rapidly reverses paralysis, hypokalemia and hypophos-
phatemia in thyrotoxic periodic paralysis.  Am J Kidney Dis . 2001;37:620. 
[PMID: 11228188] 
 Lu K-C, et al. Effects of potassium supplementation on the recovery of thyrotoxic 
periodic paralysis.  Am J Emerg Med . 2004;22:544. [PMID: 15666258] 
 Ryan DP, da Silva MR, Soong TW et al.  Mutations in potassium channel Kir2.6 
cause susceptibility to thyrotoxic hypokalemic periodic paralysis. Cell 
2010;140:88. [PMID: 20074522] 
 Tassone H, Mouslin A, Henderson SO. The pitfalls of potassium replacement in 
thyrotoxic periodic paralysis: a case report and review of the literature. 
 J Emerg Med . 2004;26:157. [PMID: 1490336] 
 Amiodarone-Induced Hyperthyroidism 
 Bartelena L, Wiersinga WM, Tanda ML, et al. Diagnosis and management of 
amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis in Europe: results of an international 
survey among members of the European Thyroid Association.  Clin 
Endocrinol . 2004;61:494. [PMID: 15473883] 
 Basaria S, Cooper DS. Amiodarone and the thyroid.  Am J Med . 2005;118,706. 
[PMID: 15989900] 
 Conen D, Melly L, Kaufmann C, et al. Amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis.  J Am 
Coll Cardiol . 2007;49:2350. [PMID: 17572251] 
 Eaton SE, Euinton HA, Newman CM, Weetman AP, Bennet WM. Clinical expe-
rience of amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis over a 3-year period: role of 
colour-flow Doppler sonography.  Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) . 2002;56:33. 
[PMID: 11849244] 
 Acute Adrenal Insufficiency 
 Arafah BM. Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal function during critical illness: limi-
tations of current assessment methods.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2006;91:3725. [PMID: 16882746] 
 Cooper MS, Stewart PM. Corticosteroid insufficiency in acutely ill patients. 
 N Engl J Med . 2003;348:727. [PMID 12594318] 
 Dorin RI, Qualls CR, Crapo LM. Diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency.  Ann Intern 
Med . 2003;139:194. [PMID: 12899587] 
 Hamarahian AH, Oseni TS, Arafah B. Measurements of serum free cortisol in 
critically ill patients.  N Engl J Med . 2004;350:1629. [PMID: 
15084695] 
 Sprung CL Annane D, Keh D et al. Hydrocortisone therapy for patients with 
septic shock.  N Engl J Med . 2008;358:111. [PMID: 18184957] 
 Pituitary Apoplexy 
 Biousse V, Newman NJ, Oyesiku NM. Precipitating factors in pituitary 
apoplexy.  J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry . 2001;71:542. [PMID: 
11561045] 
 Nawar RN, AbdelMannan D, Selman WR, Arafah BM. Pituitary tumor apoplexy: 
a review.  J Intensive Care Med . 2008;23:75. [PMID: 18372348] 
 Diabetic Ketoacidosis 
 Fleckman AM. Diabetic ketoacidosis.  Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am . 
1993;22:181. [PMID: 8325282] 
 Hom J, Sinert R. Is fluid therapy associated with cerebral edema in children 
with diabetic ketoacidosis?  Ann Emer Med . 2008;52:69. [PMID: 
18387706] 
 Kearney T, Dang C. Diabetic and endocrine emergencies.  Postgrad Med J . 
2007;83:79. [PMID: 17308209] 
 Kitabachi AE, et al. Hyperglycemic crises in adult patients with diabetes. Diabetes 
Care. 2009;32:1335. [PMID: 19564476]
 Kitabchi AE, Umpierrez GE, Fisher JN, Murphy MB, Stentz FB. Thirty years of 
personal experience in hyperglycemic crises: diabetic ketoacidosis and hyper-
glycemic hyperosmolar coma.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2008;93:1541. 
[PMID: 18270259]
Wolfsdorf J, Glaser N, Sperling MA. Diabetic ketoacidosis in infants, 
children and adolescents. Diabetes Care. 2006;29:1150. [PMID: 
16644656]
 Hyperosmolar Nonketotic Coma 
 English P, Williams G. Hyperglycemic crises and lactic acidosis in diabetes melli-
tus.  Postgrad Med . 2004;80:253. [PMID: 15138313] 
 Lorber D. Nonketotic hypertonicity in diabetes mellitus.  Med Clin North Am . 
1995;79:39. [PMID: 7808094] 
 Hypocalcemia 
 Cooper MS, Gittoes NJL. Diagnosis and management of hypocalcemia.  Br Med J . 
2008;336:1298. [PMID: 18535072] 
786    CHAPTER 24 Endocrine Emergencies
 Dickerson RN. Treatment of hypocalcemia in critical illness.  Nutrition . 
2007;23:358,436. [PMID: 17400132, 17360159] 
 Hypercalcemic Crisis 
 Berenson JR. Treatment of hypercalcemia of malignancy with bisphosphonates. 
 Sem Oncol . 2002;30(2 suppl 5):12. [PMID: 12584690] 
 Hyponatremia 
 Adrogue HJ, Madias NE. Hyponatremia.  N Engl J Med . 2000;342:1581. [PMID: 
10824078] 
 Ghali J, et al. Efficacy and safety of oral conivaptan: a V1A/V2 vasopressin receptor 
antagonist, assessed in a randomized, placebo-controlled trial in patients 
with euvolemic or hypervolemic hyponatremia.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 
2006;91:2145. [PMID: 16522696] 
 Greenberg A, Verbalis JG. Vasopressin receptor antagonists.  Kid Int . 2006;69:2124. 
[PMID: 16672911] 
 Kumar S, Berl T. Sodium. Lancet. 998;352:220. [PMID: 98832227]
Sahun M, Villabona C, Rosel P, et al. Water metabolism disturbances at different 
stages of primary thyroid failure.  J Endocrinol . 2001;168:435. [PMID: 
11241175] 
 Singh S, Bohn D, Carlotti AP, et al. Cerebral salt wasting: truths, fallacies, theories 
and challenges.  Crit Care Med . 2002;30:2575. [PMID: 12441772] 
 Verbalis JG. Disorders of body water homeostasis.  Best Prac Res Clin Endocr Metab . 
2003;17:471. [PMID: 14687585] 
 Diabetes Insipidus 
 Adrogue HJ, Madias NE. Hypernatremia.  N Engl J Med . 2000;342:1493. [PMID: 
10816188] 
 Mavrakis AN, Tritos NA. Diabetes insipidus with deficient thirst: report of a patient 
and review of the literature.  Am J Kid Dis . 2008;51:851. [PMID: 
18436097] 
 Morello J-P, Bichet DG. Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.  Annu Rev Physiol . 
2001;63:607. [PMID: 11181969] 
 Singer I, Oster JR, Fishman LM. The management of diabetes insipidus in adults. 
 Arch Intern Med . 1997;157:1293. [PMID: 92011003] 
787
5
2
 AIDS Endocrinopathies 
 Carl Grunfeld, MD, PhD and   Grace Lee, MD 
 ACTH 
Adrenocorticotropic hormone 
 AIDS 
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome 
 BMD 
Bone mineral density 
 CMV 
Cytomegalovirus 
 CRH 
Corticotropin-releasing hormone 
 CVD 
Cardiovascular disease 
 DHEA 
Dehydroepiandrosterone 
 DXA 
Dual energy x-ray absorptiometry 
 FSH 
Follicle-stimulating hormone 
 GH 
Growth hormone 
 GHRH 
Growth hormone–releasing hormone 
 GnRH 
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
 HAART 
Highly active antiretroviral therapy 
 HDL 
High-density lipoprotein 
 HIV 
Human immunodeficiency virus 
 IGF 
Insulin-like growth factor 
 IL 
Interleukin 
 IMT 
Intima media thickness 
 LDL 
Low-density lipoprotein 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 LH 
Luteinizing hormone 
 M/I 
Glucose disposal adjusted for insulin level 
 MRI 
Magnetic resonance imaging 
 NRTI 
Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor 
 NNRTI 
Nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor 
 PI 
Protease inhibitor 
 PPARγ 
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ 
 PTH 
Parathyroid hormone 
 RANK 
Receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa 
 REE 
Resting energy expenditure 
 RXR 
Retinoid X receptor 
 SREBP 
Sterol regulatory enhancer-binding 
 
protein 1 
 T 3 
Triiodothyronine 
 T 4 
Thyroxine 
 TBG 
Thyroxine-binding globulin 
 TNF 
Tumor necrosis factor 
 TRH 
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone 
 VLDL 
Very low density lipoprotein 
 Symptoms consistent with endocrine disorders and alterations in 
endocrine laboratory values are not unusual in individuals 
infected with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Some 
of these changes are common to any significant systemic illness; 
others appear to be more specific to HIV infection or its thera-
pies. Alterations can be found in HIV infection even before 
clinically significant immunocompromise occurs. As the infected 
individual becomes immunocompromised, opportunistic infec-
tions and neoplasms—as well as the agents used in the treatment 
of these disorders—can give rise to further changes in endocrine 
function. Herein we discuss alterations in endocrine function 
that can accompany HIV infection and acquired immunodefi-
ciency syndrome (AIDS), focusing on evaluation and interpreta-
tion of clinical and laboratory findings. 
 THYROID DISORDERS 
 In the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART), clinical 
thyroid dysfunction is relatively uncommon in stable HIV-
infected patients. In several large studies, the prevalence of hypo-
thyroidism was 1% to 2.5% and hyperthyroidism was 0.5% to 
1%. The prevalence of subclinical disease was higher, with sub-
clinical hypothyroidism between 3.5% and 20% and subclinical 
hyperthyroidism <1%, although definitions varied between stud-
ies. These data do not support screening for thyroid disease above 
the standard guidelines. With advanced HIV disease, alterations 
in thyroid function tests do occur but generally do not result in 
clinical dysfunction. In patients with AIDS, the effects of oppor-
tunistic infections and neoplastic involvement of the thyroid, as 
788    CHAPTER 25 AIDS Endocrinopathies
well as the effects of some medications used to treat HIV-infected 
patients, should be considered. 
 Alterations in Thyroid Function Tests 
 HIV-infected patients can show alterations in thyroid function tests 
that are largely asymptomatic. Some of the changes are similar to 
those seen in the classic euthyroid-sick syndrome, whereas others are 
unique to the HIV disease state. Advanced HIV is associated with a 
decrease in thyroid hormone levels, triiodothyronine (T 3 ) and thy-
roxine (T 4 ), similar to that seen in the euthyroid-sick syndrome. 
When HIV-infected patients were stratified by weight loss and the 
presence of secondary infection, a decline in T 3 levels corresponded 
to the severity of disease, consistent with the euthyroid-sick syn-
drome. Deterioration in nutritional status can also contribute to the 
decrease in T 3 and T 4 , because there is a strong correlation between 
albumin levels and both free T 4 and total T 3 levels. In the euthyroid-
sick syndrome, decreased levels of serum thyroid hormones are due 
to impaired peripheral T 4 to T 3 conversion by 5′ deiodinase. In HIV-
infected patients, decreases in serum free T 4 and free T 3 may be due 
to decreased extrathyroidal conversion of T 4 to T 3 , an increase in 
serum binding proteins, and/or decreased secretion of TSH. 
 Despite the similarities in serum thyroid hormone levels 
between HIV and the euthyroid sick syndrome, significantly ill 
HIV-infected patients often do not demonstrate the elevated 
reverse T 3 levels characteristic of the euthyroid sick syndrome. The 
significance of this difference is unknown. 
 Another characteristic finding in HIV-infected patients is an 
elevation in thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG), which rises pro-
gressively with advancing immunosuppression. TBG levels corre-
late inversely with the CD4 lymphocyte count, and in the past 
were used as a surrogate marker for disease progression. The 
increase in TBG does not appear to be due to generalized changes 
in protein synthesis, increases in sialylation and altered clearance 
of TBG, or changes in estrogen levels. The cause and clinical sig-
nificance of the increased TBG found in HIV-infected patients are 
unknown. However, increases in TBG affect total T 4 and T 3 mea-
surements, and this should be considered when interpreting these 
tests in HIV-infected patients. 
 Subtle alterations in TSH dynamics have been reported in stable 
HIV-infected patients. Although their TSH and free T 4 levels 
remain within the normal range, these individuals demonstrate 
significantly higher TSH values and lower free T 4 values than unin-
fected controls. In circadian studies, HIV-infected individuals have 
higher TSH pulse amplitudes with unchanged pulse frequency as 
well as a higher peak TSH in response to thyrotropin-releasing hor-
mone (TRH) stimulation. These studies are consistent with a subtle 
state of compensated hypothyroidism in HIV infection; the mecha-
nisms underlying these alterations have not been elucidated. 
 The typical pattern of alterations in thyroid function tests in 
HIV-infected patients is outlined in Table 25–1. 
 Opportunistic Infections and Neoplasms 
 Opportunistic pathogens and neoplasms can invade the thyroid 
in HIV-infected individuals but generally do not cause clinical 
thyroid dysfunction. Although the prevalence of thyroid involve-
ment is unknown, autopsy of 100 AIDS patients prior to the era of 
HAART showed the presence of  Mycobacterium tuberculosis in 23% 
of patients’ thyroids, followed by cytomegalovirus (CMV) (17%), 
 Cryptococcus neoformans (5%),  Mycobacterium avium (5%), 
 Pneumocystis carinii (4%), and other bacteria or fungi (7%). 
 A few of these pathogens are noteworthy because they have 
been associated on occasion with both hyper- and hypothyroidism. 
 Pneumocystis carinii has been associated with inflammatory thy-
roiditis accompanied by hypothyroidism in seven cases, hyperthy-
roidism in three cases, and normal thyroid function in one case. 
Antithyroid antibodies were negative in all six cases in which they 
were measured. Radionuclide scanning in seven cases revealed poor 
visualization of the entire thyroid gland in patients with bilateral 
disease and nonvisualization of the affected lobe in patients with 
unilateral disease. Two patients with hyperthyroidism had normal-
ization of thyroid function after treatment of the  P. carinii infec-
tion. Kaposi sarcoma has also been reported to infiltrate the thyroid 
gland and resulted in significant destruction and hypothyroidism 
in at least one case. In two cases, lymphoma was associated with 
thyroid infiltration, causing thyroidal enlargement. 
 Medication Effects 
 Several medications used to treat HIV-infected patients can alter 
the clearance of thyroid hormone by inducing hepatic microsomal 
enzymes. These medications include rifampin, phenytoin, keto-
conazole, and ritonavir. Patients with normal thyroid function 
should not be clinically affected, although decreases in T 4 may be 
observed. However, patients receiving L-thyroxine may require 
increased doses, and patients with decreased pituitary or thyroid 
reserve may develop clinically apparent hypothyroidism. Isolated, 
but well-documented reports of need for increased thyroxine doses 
after starting ritonavir and decreased doses after indinavir have 
been published; these medications affect glucuronidation, but 
given the common use of high doses of these drugs in the past, it 
is surprising how rarely problems present. Interferon-alpha, a 
therapy used for Kaposi sarcoma and hepatitis C (an increasing 
coinfection with HIV), has been associated with autoimmune 
diseases of the thyroid, including hyperthyroidism and hypothy-
roidism. Medications used in HIV-infected patients that can affect 
the endocrine system are listed in Table 25–2. 
TABLE 25–1  Thyroid function tests in HIV-infected 
patients.
Basal
After TRH Stimulation
T3
↓
T4
Normal
Reverse T3
Normal or ↓
TBG
↑
TSH
Normal
↑ Pulse amplitude
↓, decreased; ↑, increased.
CHAPTER 25 AIDS Endocrinopathies     789
 With the advent of HAART, there have been case report series of 
newly diagnosed autoimmune diseases such as Graves disease, 
Hashimoto thyroiditis, and alopecia areata. Immune reconstitution 
with HAART raises the possibility of subsequent induction of auto-
immune diseases. The cases appeared late after immune reconstitu-
tion (8-32 months). Possible theories include thymic regeneration 
or peripheral T lymphocyte expansion causing irregularities in toler-
ance, leading to autoimmune dysfunction. Other studies, however, 
could not link autoimmune thyroid disease to HAART, and the low 
prevalence in the large published studies suggests that increased 
screening above standard guidelines may not be warranted. 
 ADRENAL DISORDERS 
 Opportunistic infections commonly involve the adrenal glands 
but rarely occupy enough of the gland to cause adrenal insuffi-
ciency. Impaired adrenal reserve without overt symptoms of adre-
nal insufficiency has been described in patients with HIV. Those 
patients with a subnormal response to dynamic testing represent a 
group for which there is controversy over when to give baseline 
replacement glucocorticoids (or mineralocorticoids) or increased 
doses in stressful situations, especially when baseline levels are 
normal or elevated. With restoration to health by treatment of 
opportunistic infections or HIV itself, many of these patients no 
longer have adrenal insufficiency. 
 Opportunistic Infections and Neoplasms 
 Opportunistic organisms are found commonly in the adrenal 
glands of patients dying of AIDS although they rarely cause clini-
cal adrenal insufficiency. CMV has been associated with signifi-
cant necrosis of the adrenal gland, although the amount of tissue 
affected rarely reaches 90%, thought necessary to cause clinical 
adrenal insufficiency. In one preliminary study, however, the pres-
ence of CMV retinitis was associated with an increased rate of 
adrenal insufficiency compared with AIDS patients without that 
disorder. Less common opportunistic infections involving the 
adrenals include  Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Mycobacterium 
 avium-intracellulare, Cryptococcus neoformans, Histoplasma capsula-
tum, P. carinii, and  Toxoplasma gondii. In addition, Kaposi 
sarcoma and lymphoma can involve the adrenals, but rarely to the 
extent of inducing adrenal insufficiency. 
 Glucocorticoids 
 Classic clinical symptoms of adrenal insufficiency are seldom seen, 
but some clinicians view the weakness and weight loss observed in 
patients with AIDS as an indicator of adrenal insufficiency. HIV-
infected patients usually have normal or, even more commonly, 
elevated basal cortisol levels. The elevated levels occur most com-
monly in advanced disease, which may be a stress response, but is 
confounded by an increase in cortisol-binding globulin. 
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) levels have mostly been 
found to be normal or elevated in patients with elevated basal 
cortisol levels, although some reports of low levels exist. Some of 
these alterations may be mediated by multiple cytokines; both 
interleukin (IL)-1 and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) can directly 
stimulate cortisol secretion, while IL-1 and IL-6 can stimulate 
ACTH and corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) release. On 
the other hand, IL-2 and IL-4 increase sensitivity to cortisol. An 
increase in cortisol levels may also be a direct response to HIV 
infection itself. The HIV envelope protein gp120 increases corti-
sol levels. HIV-1 virus encodes several proteins such as Vpr and 
Tat that may increase cortisol sensitivity. An increased cortisol to 
dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) ratio correlates with body 
weight loss and HIV-associated malnutrition. 
 Subclinical abnormalities in hypothalamic pituitary axis 
dynamics are often present. Nearly all HIV-infected patients have 
a normal cortisol response to the standard high-dose (250 µg) 
ACTH stimulation testing. Other studies have shown that stimu-
lation with low-dose cosyntropin (1 µg) resulted in a diagnosis of 
glucocorticoid insufficiency in roughly 10% to 20% of outpa-
tients with HIV and up to 50% of critically ill HIV-infected 
patients. During CRH stimulation testing, a reduced ACTH or 
cortisol response was seen in up to 50% of stable HIV-infected 
patients with CD4 counts less than 500/µL. The abnormalities of 
decreased reserve either at the pituitary or at the adrenal level in 
HIV infection are similar to those that occur in other infections or 
serious illnesses. 
 Although clinically significant abnormalities in glucocorticoid 
secretion appear to be uncommon, subtle alterations in adrenal 
biosynthesis may be more common. HIV-infected patients have 
TABLE 25–2  Medications used in HIV-infected 
patients that can affect the endocrine 
system.
Thyroid
 Rifampin
 Phenytoin
 Ketoconazole
 Possibly ritonavir
 Possibly indinavir
 Interferon-alpha
Adrenals, Electrolytes
 Rifampin
 Ketoconazole
 Ritonavir
 Megestrol acetate
 Trimethoprim
 Pentamidine
 Sulfonamides
 Amphotericin B
 Foscarnet
Gonads
 Ketoconazole
 Megestrol acetate
Bone, Calcium
 Tenofovir
 Adefovir
 Cidofovir
 Foscarnet
 Pentamidine
 Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
 Ketoconazole
 Rifampin, rifabutin
Pancreas, Glucose
 Indinavir
 Ritonavir
 Possibly 
  lopinavir/ritonavir
 Pentamidine
 Trimethoprim-
  sulfamethoxazole
 Dedeoxyinosine (ddI)
 Dedeoxycytosine (ddC)
 Megestrol acetate
 Growth hormone
Lipids
 Ritonavir
 Efavirenz
 Nevirapine
 Stavudine
 Tenofovir
790    CHAPTER 25 AIDS Endocrinopathies
reduced products of the 17-deoxysteroid pathway (corticosterone, 
deoxycorticosterone, and 18-hydroxydeoxycorticosterone) with 
normal or elevated products of the 17-hydroxy pathway (cortisol) 
before and after ACTH stimulation. It is not known whether this 
alteration represents an early indication of evolving adrenal insuffi-
ciency or is an adaptive response that shifts adrenal synthetic activity 
to steroids that are crucially needed under conditions such as HIV 
infection that impose physical stress. Twenty-four-hour urine-free 
cortisol levels do not predict the subtle adrenal alterations in HIV-
infected patients, but may indicate adequate adrenal function. 
 Glucocorticoid resistance has been described in HIV-infected 
patients. This syndrome is characterized by symptoms of weak-
ness, fatigue, weight loss, and hyperpigmentation, with elevated 
cortisol levels and mildly increased ACTH levels. Decreased lym-
phocyte glucocorticoid receptor affinity for glucocorticoids has 
been described in these patients. A similar state is seen in 
 glucocorticoid-resistant asthma patients. Increased expression of 
the beta form of the glucocorticoid receptor, which inhibits the 
alpha form, has also been reported. Partial glucocorticoid resis-
tance could explain the finding of increased basal cortisol in some 
HIV-infected patients, but the prevalence and clinical significance 
of this syndrome are uncertain. 
 Adrenal Androgens 
 HIV-infected patients have decreased basal adrenal androgen levels 
and impaired adrenal androgen responses to ACTH stimulation. 
Decreased adrenal androgens have been seen at all stages of HIV 
infection, as well as in HIV-negative intensive care unit patients. 
Thus, this change may not be specific to HIV infection but may 
instead be a feature of the physiologic response to illness, which is 
often accompanied by increased cortisol. In two studies, a fall in 
DHEA levels predicted progression to AIDS independent of CD4 
cell counts. DHEA has been shown in vitro to inhibit HIV replica-
tion, which raised the possibility that the decreased DHEA levels 
observed in HIV-infected patients might influence the effects of 
the HIV infection. However, the efficacy of DHEA replacement in 
HIV-infected patients has never been demonstrated. Adrenal 
androgens may be decreased in women with HIV infection; low-
dose testosterone replacement has been shown to induce small 
improvements in lean mass, depression, and sexual function. 
 Mineralocorticoids 
 Although electrolyte disturbances are not uncommon in HIV-
infected patients, provocative testing of the mineralocorticoid axis 
has revealed few abnormalities. In contrast to glucocorticoid lev-
els, basal and ACTH-stimulated aldosterone levels have been 
found to be normal in almost all HIV-infected patients studied, 
including both outpatients and inpatients. Nevertheless case 
reports of hypo- and hyperaldosteronism appear in the literature, 
although there is no evidence that these disorders are increased in 
HIV infection. Longitudinal studies suggest that the aldosterone 
response to ACTH stimulation may diminish with progression to 
later stages of HIV infection in up to half of HIV-infected 
patients; however, basal levels of aldosterone and plasma renin 
activity remain normal, and clinically significant hypoaldoster-
onism does not develop. 
 The usual pattern of alterations in adrenal hormones is shown 
in Table 25–3. 
 Medication Effects 
 Several medications used in the treatment of HIV-related disor-
ders can alter glucocorticoid metabolism. Ketoconazole inhibits 
the cytochrome P450 enzymes P450scc and P450c11, decreasing 
cortisol synthesis and leading to adrenal insufficiency in patients 
with decreased adrenal reserve. Rifampin increases hepatic metab-
olism of steroids and may lead to adrenal insufficiency in patients 
with marginal adrenal reserve. 
 Megestrol acetate has intrinsic cortisol-like activity, decreasing 
serum cortisol and ACTH levels through suppression of the 
 hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis centrally. Patients taking mege-
strol have decreased cortisol and ACTH levels in response to 
metyrapone testing. They may become frankly Cushingoid and may 
show signs of adrenal insufficiency upon its rapid discontinuation. 
Some HIV protease inhibitors (PIs) block the metabolism of the 
inhaled steroid fluticasone by CYP3A4 and can lead to Cushing 
syndrome even in the absence of systemic steroid use. PIs do not 
seem to have an effect on plasma cortisol levels. However, there is 
debate in the literature about whether these agents increase or 
decrease urinary free cortisol or 17-hydroxycorticosteroid excretion. 
 Medications used to treat HIV-related illnesses can lead to 
electrolyte disturbances mimicking disorders of mineralocorti-
coids. Trimethoprim impairs sodium channels in the distal 
nephron, decreasing potassium secretion, which can result in 
hyperkalemia. Pentamidine has also been associated with hyper-
kalemia in rare instances, perhaps through nephrotoxicity. 
Sulfonamides are associated with interstitial nephritis and 
hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism. Finally, amphotericin B causes 
renal potassium and magnesium wasting. 
 Medications used in HIV-infected patients that can affect the 
endocrine system are listed in Table 25–2. 
 Summary of Adrenal Disorders 
 In summary, there is little evidence for clinically significant impair-
ment of adrenal steroid excretion in HIV infection. The subtle 
alterations in the glucocorticoid and androgen synthesis pathways 
TABLE 25–3  Usual pattern of adrenal hormones in 
HIV infection.
Basal
After ACTH 
Stimulation
Glucocorticoids
Normal or ↑ cortisol; 
↓ 17-deoxysteroids
Normal cortisol 
response
Mineralocorticoids
Normal
Normal
Androgens
↓
↓
↓, decreased; ↑, increased.
CHAPTER 25 AIDS Endocrinopathies     791
may be an adaptive response to physiologic stress and may occur 
with other illnesses. Patients with HIV infection who exhibit 
symptoms consistent with adrenal hormone deficiency should 
undergo provocative testing in the same manner as uninfected 
individuals. Patients with both low baseline and abnormal gluco-
corticoid or mineralocorticoid responses to provocative testing 
should be treated with physiologic replacement doses of oral gluco-
corticoids or mineralocorticoids. Patients on replacement should be 
covered with high doses of glucocorticoids (usually 150-300 mg of 
hydrocortisone per day or equivalent) during episodes of severe 
illness. Electrolyte abnormalities should prompt evaluation for 
medication effects and the presence of renal disease. 
 The HIV-infected patient with a minimally elevated or frankly 
high basal cortisol who does not increase significantly after 
ACTH stimulation poses a difficult problem. Most of these indi-
viduals have normal responses to prolonged ACTH stimulation, 
and seronegative patients with significant illness can have similar 
patterns that revert to normal after treatment of the illness. 
Chronic glucocorticoid therapy may have significant adverse 
consequences in these individuals, who are already immunocom-
promised. Most HIV-infected patients with this pattern and even 
many with baseline low levels during acute illness do not appear 
to require long-term glucocorticoid replacement. Consideration 
could be given to administering short courses of steroid therapy 
during significant illness for individuals with indeterminate 
stimulation results based on clinical judgment and individual 
patient circumstances. 
 BONE AND MINERAL DISORDERS 
 Osteopenia and Osteoporosis 
 There is evidence of low bone mass and, less commonly, osteopo-
rosis in HIV-infected patients either without therapy or while 
receiving HAART, but the etiology remains controversial. The 
incidence of fractures may be increased, but there are too few stud-
ies of fracture rate to know with certainty. Therapy with bisphos-
phonates is effective at increasing bone mineral density (BMD) in 
HIV-infected patients, but there are no convincing data on fracture 
prevention. 
 Prior to the introduction of HIV PIs, low BMD was not com-
monly observed in HIV-infected patients. The few clinical studies 
on the effects of HIV on bone mineralization suggested that HIV 
had relatively little effect on BMD. One study followed 45 HIV-
infected men for 15 months and found no change in lumbar spine 
and hip BMD. However, histomorphometric analysis of bone 
biopsies from AIDS patients showed some evidence of decreased 
bone formation and bone turnover; these changes were more 
marked in more severely affected patients. HIV itself may have an 
indirect effect on BMD by activating the receptor activator of 
nuclear factor kappa B ligand (RANK-L), which activates osteo-
clasts and their precursors. Activated T cells express the receptor 
for RANK-L—that is, RANK. The cytokines TNF-alpha and 
IL-1, whose levels may be increased in HIV infection, also have 
been shown to activate RANK-L. 
 After the introduction of PI-based HAART, reports of osteopo-
rosis began to emerge. Some cross-sectional studies suggested that 
patients on PIs had a higher prevalence of osteoporosis and 
osteopenia compared to HIV-infected patients not taking PIs. 
However, other studies did not find a specific association of PIs 
with decreased BMD by dual energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA). 
To date, most cross-sectional studies have shown that both HIV-
infected men and women, on any form of HAART, have lower 
BMD or a higher prevalence of osteopenia, compared to gender- 
and ethnicity-matched control subjects. In one meta-analysis of 
20 papers, the prevalence of reduced BMD was 67%, and the 
prevalence of osteoporosis was 15% in HIV-infected patients, 
which represents a 6.4-fold greater prevalence of reduced BMD 
and 3.7-fold greater prevalence of osteoporotic T scores compared 
to controls. Furthermore, those treated with ARV had a 2.5-fold 
higher prevalence of reduced BMD than those who were ARV-
naive. Lactic acidemia associated with nucleoside reverse tran-
scriptase inhibitor (NRTI) use has been hypothesized to contribute 
to bone demineralization. However, the role of specific ARV drugs 
as a cause of bone demineralization remains debated, as many 
recent studies fail to show an association between osteopenia and 
individual drugs. Thus, ARV use  per se is associated with lower 
BMD. Divergent effects of PIs on bone cells in vitro have been 
reported. 
 Another meta-analysis found that the effect of HIV infection 
was mostly accounted for by decreased weight. Other studies have 
found associations of low albumin and past steroid use with low 
BMD. A randomized longitudinal study showed that continuous 
ARV therapy, used to suppress HIV, was associated with greater 
loss of bone mass and perhaps more fractures than intermittent 
ARV therapy designed to reduce drug exposure. However, the 
absolute rate of BMD loss by DXA was actually quite small in 
those on continuous ARV therapy (−0.5%/year at the hip and 
−0.7%/year at the spine). In a large database analysis, the fracture 
rate was increased 1.7-fold in HIV-infected Caucasian men and 
1.4-fold in HIV-infected Caucasian and African American women 
compared to their respective controls. 
 Treatment for HIV-associated osteoporosis with bisphospho-
nates has been examined. Multiple studies have shown that the 
bisphosphonates alendronate and zoledronic acid given either 
with or without calcium and vitamin D supplementation to 
HIV-infected patients with osteopenia or osteoporosis improved 
BMD in the lumbar spine and hip after 1 to 2 years of therapy. 
The effects of treatments for other HIV-related problems on 
BMD or bone markers have been assessed. Eugonadal men with 
AIDS wasting syndrome treated with intramuscular testosterone 
for 3 months had small increases in lumbar spine BMD; how-
ever, high doses of testosterone were associated with decreases in 
HDL cholesterol levels. Recombinant growth hormone (GH) 
treatment for 24 weeks in HIV wasting syndrome did not affect 
BMD. Short-term growth hormone–releasing hormone 
(GHRH), used to treat HIV-infected men with abdominal fat 
accumulation, was associated with an increase in bone turnover 
markers; however the effect of GHRH use on BMD remains to 
be determined. 
792    CHAPTER 25 AIDS Endocrinopathies
 Osteonecrosis 
 Osteonecrosis has been reported both in adults and in children 
infected with HIV, and there is concern about the rising preva-
lence of osteonecrosis in this population. The most likely reason 
for the apparent rise in prevalence of the syndrome is increased 
awareness among clinicians. A study of 339 HIV-infected patients 
reported a prevalence of asymptomatic osteonecrosis, diagnosed 
by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) as 4.4%. The annual inci-
dence has been reported to be between 0.08% and 1.3%, which is 
much higher than the annual incidence in the general population 
(0.01%-0.135%). 
 The clinical presentation and anatomic distribution are simi-
lar to HIV-negative patients. The most common location for 
osteonecrosis is the hip, but other locations include the humeral 
heads, femoral condyles, and scaphoid and lunate bones. In HIV 
infection, the majority of large joint involvement is bilateral. 
Cases of osteonecrosis of the jaw/oral cavity have also been 
reported. 
 Plain film x-rays often underdiagnose osteonecrosis as changes 
on x-ray are confined to advanced stage (III and IV) disease; MRI 
is more effective at finding early-stage disease. Some data support 
treatment with bisphosphonates in early disease involving major 
joints to reduce pain, but there are inadequate randomized, con-
trolled trials to assess whether such therapy prevents progression. 
Core decompression with and without bone graft has had some 
success. Total joint replacement may be the only recourse in late 
disease (eg, following collapse of the femoral head). 
 An association between osteonecrosis and PIs was initially 
reported; however, subsequent studies have failed to show a causal 
relationship with PI use. Other possible etiologies include those 
that may be more frequent in patients with HIV infection (corti-
costeroid use, HIV-associated vasculitis, chemotherapy, and irra-
diation) and other traditional risk factors (ethanol use, sickle cell 
disease, hemoglobinopathies, and clotting disorders). 
 Calcium and Phosphate Homeostasis 
 Calcium, phosphate, and calciotropic hormone disturbances are 
associated with several HIV-related illnesses and medications. 
Hypercalcemia with an elevated 1,25-dihyroxyvitamin D level has 
been associated with both AIDS-related lymphoma and infections 
with  M. tuberculosis, M. avium-intracellulare, P. jiroveci, C. neofor-
mans, and Coccidioides immitis . This hypercalcemia is likely due to 
increased extrarenal 1-alpha hydroxylation of 25-hydroxyvitamin 
D to 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D by inflammatory macrophages or 
tumor cells. In CMV infection, activated T cells or proinflamma-
tory cytokines may secrete factors that activate osteoclasts, causing 
hypercalcemia. The syndrome has also been reported after starting 
antiretroviral therapy, with improvements in lymphocyte func-
tion, as part of the immune reconstitution syndrome. Recombinant 
human GH treatment has been associated with slight increases in 
serum calcium levels in some studies. 
 Mild hypocalcemia has been associated with HIV disease. 
HIV-infected patients have been shown to have low 1,25- 
hydroxyvitamin D and 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels, but normal 
vitamin D–binding protein levels, suggesting an impairment in 
1-alpha hydroxylation and a compromised nutritional state. Low 
1,25-hydroxyvitamin D levels are associated with advanced disease 
stage and increased TNF-alpha levels. 
 Inadequate parathyroid hormone (PTH) responses (ie, func-
tional hypoparathyroidism) may also contribute to the hypocal-
cemia seen with HIV. PTH levels have been shown to be 
decreased in HIV-infected patients compared to controls. 
Parathyroid cells may be targeted by HIV infection: they express 
CD4 receptors which when activated affect PTH secretion. 
Invasion of the parathyroid gland by neoplasms and infections 
can also rarely occur. 
 Severe hypocalcemia is usually due to medications used to 
treat opportunistic infections. Variations on Fanconi syndrome 
are reported increasingly. Hypocalcemia and hypophosphatemia 
have been reported with tenofovir and adefovir (which are used 
to treat HIV) and cidofovir (which is used to treat CMV). 
Hypocalcemia has also been seen during therapy for CMV 
retinitis with foscarnet. Foscarnet can complex ionized calcium 
and may have mineral wasting effects at the level of the renal 
tubule, leading to concurrent hypomagnesemia and hypokalemia. 
Hypocalcemia and hypomagnesemia have also been reported dur-
ing pentamidine treatment, and the combination of foscarnet 
and pentamidine can result in severe, even fatal, hypocalcemia. 
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, ketoconazole, and aminoglyco-
sides are also associated with hypocalcemia. Ketoconazole and 
rifampin can alter vitamin D metabolism but usually do not 
produce clinically significant effects. Ketoconazole can reduce 
serum levels of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D and lower total—but not 
ionized—calcium levels. Rifampin and rifabutin can decrease 
25-hydroxyvitamin D levels, but usually do not appear to signifi-
cantly change calcium or PTH levels; one case has been reported 
of severe osteomalacia attributed to rifabutin. 
 Medications used in HIV-infected patients that can affect the 
endocrine system are listed in Table 25–2. 
 GONADAL DISORDERS 
 Testicular Function 
 Testicular atrophy is common in AIDS patients. Histopathologic 
changes include decreased spermatogenesis, thickened basement 
membrane, and an interstitial infiltrate. Possible causes of testicu-
lar atrophy include opportunistic infection by  M. avium-intracel-
lulare, Toxoplasma, and CMV, hypogonadism, HIV infection 
itself, and chemotherapy toxicity. HIV-infected men generally 
have oligoteratospermia, and as the disease state becomes more 
severe, the sperm can become grossly abnormal. Hence, male fer-
tility decreases with advancing disease. 
 Semen washing has been used as a technique for HIV-
discordant couples to reduce the risk of viral transmission. The 
three-step process involves gradient centrifugation, washing, and 
spontaneous migration to obtain motile sperm. There have been 
several thousand published cases of semen washing followed by 
either intrauterine or in vitro fertilization. These observational 
CHAPTER 25 AIDS Endocrinopathies     793
reports have shown that semen washing is a relatively safe and 
effective means of establishing pregnancy in HIV-negative women. 
Still, there is concern that the risk of infection is not completely 
eliminated after the procedure. 
 Hypogonadism is a common finding in men, particularly 
with advanced HIV disease. Prior to the introduction of 
HAART, hypogonadism was observed in approximately 40% of 
HIV-infected men. With the widespread use of HAART, the 
prevalence of hypogonadism has declined to 20%. Early in HIV 
infection, testosterone levels are normal or even elevated. 
Elevated basal luteinizing hormone (LH) levels and an increased 
LH response to gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) have 
been observed in these patients, suggesting pituitary dysfunc-
tion. In the later stages of HIV infection, low serum testosterone 
levels are seen, often accompanied by symptoms of decreased 
libido or erectile dysfunction. Because hypogonadism is associ-
ated with loss of lean body tissue and muscle mass, it is thought 
to contribute to AIDS wasting syndrome. Hypogonadal men 
infected with HIV tend to have low or normal LH and follicle-
stimulating hormone (FSH) levels, similar to that seen in 
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. However, GnRH testing in 
hypogonadal men with HIV has been normal in most cases. 
Primary hypogonadism with elevated LH and FSH levels has 
been observed but is far less common. 
 Several etiologies of the hypogonadism in men infected with 
HIV have been proposed, and in many cases, the cause of hypog-
onadism is multifactorial. Chronic illness and weight loss can alter 
the hypothalamic-pituitary axis. HIV infection increases the levels 
of the cytokines IL-1 and TNF, which have been shown to sup-
press hypothalamic pituitary function. Direct pituitary or hypo-
thalamic invasion by toxoplasmosis or CMV is rare. There are 
divergent data on the extent to which treatment of HIV with ARV 
drugs increases testosterone levels. 
 Medications can also alter testicular function. Ketoconazole 
inhibits gonadal steroidogenesis, resulting in lower testosterone 
levels, oligospermia, and gynecomastia. Megestrol acetate, a 
 progesterone-like agent, can lead to decreases in testosterone in 
HIV-infected men, perhaps through central feedback on gonado-
tropins. Medications used in HIV-infected patients that can affect 
the endocrine system are listed in Table 25–2. 
 Most of the studies of testosterone replacement have been per-
formed in the context of AIDS wasting syndrome in which muscle 
and fat mass are decreased. Testosterone therapy in hypogonadal 
men with HIV increases lean body mass, but only small improve-
ments in strength are seen. Most studies find that testosterone 
replacement therapy results in improved sexual functioning, mood, 
and energy. Testosterone therapy does not appear to exacerbate 
Kaposi sarcoma, although the studies of this relationship have 
involved limited numbers of patients. 
 Ovarian Function 
 Women represent one of the fastest growing populations with 
HIV infection. Two key issues include the effects of reproductive 
function on the natural history of HIV disease, and conversely, the 
effects of HIV on reproductive function. Recent studies found 
that women infected with HIV possess 30% to 50% lower HIV-1 
RNA levels than men. Limited data suggests that the ovulatory 
cycle affects HIV infection in women. Early studies suggested no 
association between the menstrual cycle and HIV-1 RNA levels 
but may have included women with anovulatory cycles. In ovulat-
ing women, HIV-1 RNA levels have been shown to decline from 
the early follicular phase to the luteal phase. Menopause does not 
seem to affect the progression of HIV disease or the response to 
therapy. 
 In addition to affecting HIV-1 RNA levels, the menstrual 
cycle may also affect the pharmacokinetics of drugs used to treat 
HIV infection. Zidovudine levels have been shown to be nega-
tively correlated with estradiol levels, suggesting that the men-
strual cycle may affect zidovudine glucuronidation. Further 
studies are warranted. 
 Pregnancy does not seem to have a deleterious effect on mater-
nal progression of HIV disease. However, an increase in HIV-1 
RNA levels may occur in the early postpartum period. Several, but 
not all, studies suggest that pregnancy increases the rate of detec-
tion of HIV-1 in the genital tract. When HIV-1 is identified in the 
genital tract, the risk of perinatal transmission has been consis-
tently shown to increase. Simple ARV regimens at the time of 
delivery have been shown to significantly reduce transmission of 
HIV to the child. 
 It is unclear whether HIV infection itself causes menstrual 
irregularities and/or amenorrhea. Early studies reported men-
strual irregularities in HIV-infected women. However, these 
studies relied on self-report of menstrual symptoms and cycles, 
and many studies had enrolled an inadequate number of HIV-
negative women as controls. Recent studies suggest that HIV 
may alter menstrual function only slightly. One large study of 
802 HIV-infected and 273 HIV-negative women matched for 
demographic characteristics, body mass index, and substance 
abuse found that HIV infection increased the odds of having a 
very short or long cycle. There were no differences in amenor-
rhea, length of menses, or variability between the two groups. 
Another study of 197 HIV-infected women and 189 HIV-
negative women found that HIV was not associated with men-
strual dysfunction. 
 It is also uncertain whether HIV has an effect on the onset and 
symptoms of menopause. The average age at menopause in HIV-
infected women has been reported to be between 46 and 50 years. 
While some studies contrast that to reported average age at 
menopause in controls being slightly greater than 50, the range 
in multiple population studies is actually 48 to 51. The diagnosis 
of menopause is complicated by the occurrence of amenorrhea 
lasting more than 1 year (which meets the clinical definition of 
menopause) in HIV-infected women who do not have ovarian 
failure as indicated by normal FSH and LH levels. Factors associ-
ated with such amenorrhea include opiate use, low body mass 
index, and low serum albumin levels suggesting hypothalamic 
dysfunction and malnutrition as causes rather than menopause. 
There are conflicting data concerning whether HIV is associated 
with increased or decreased symptoms of menopause. 
794    CHAPTER 25 AIDS Endocrinopathies
 With HIV infection, fertility rates decline. Quantifying the 
rate of decrease in fertility in the United States has been difficult 
due to confounding factors such as sociodemographics, drug use, 
weight loss, systemic illness, and sexually transmitted diseases. In 
Africa, where therapy for HIV was rare, there are numerous stud-
ies establishing an association between untreated HIV infection 
and infertility in virtually all age groups. In sub-Saharan Africa, 
HIV infection has been shown to account for a population- 
attributable decline in total fertility of 0.37% for each percentage 
point of HIV prevalence. 
 Like men, women infected with HIV have a decline in serum 
testosterone and adrenal androgen levels with progression of 
HIV disease and development of complications. Approximately 
50% of women with AIDS-related wasting have low androgen 
levels. Androgen-deficient women may have subtle symptoms 
of decreased energy, libido, mood, strength, and bone mass. 
Despite the increased prevalence of androgen deficiency in 
study subjects with advanced disease, clinical laboratory diagno-
sis remains difficult in the female population. Total testosterone 
levels may be increased due to elevations in sex hormone–
binding globulin in HIV-infected women, whereas free testos-
terone levels for women are not well-standardized in clinical 
laboratories. 
 Hormonal contraception is affected by ARV therapy. The 
estrogen component is metabolized by CYP3A4 enzyme. Many of 
the PIs and some nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors 
(NNRTIs) either inhibit or induce CYP3A4, thus altering ethinyl 
estradiol and norethindrone levels. Other medications used to 
treat opportunistic infections such as rifabutin and rifampicin can 
also induce CYP3A4. There are very few studies on the effects of 
these medications on ovulation in subjects taking oral contracep-
tives. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recom-
mend using barrier methods or condoms in addition to or in place 
of oral contraception. 
 PITUITARY DISORDERS 
 Opportunistic Infections and Neoplasms 
 In autopsy series of AIDS patients, nearly 10% of pituitary glands 
demonstrate some degree of infarction or necrosis; infectious 
organisms such as CMV,  P. carinii, Cryptococcus, Toxoplasma, and 
 Aspergillus have been observed. Antemortem pituitary function 
was not reported in these patients. 
 Anterior Pituitary Function 
 Hypopituitarism appears to be rare in AIDS patients; stimula-
tion with TRH, GnRH, or CRH results in normal pituitary 
responses in almost all patients. Likewise, prolactin levels gener-
ally have been found to be normal, with a normal response to 
TRH stimulation. Some patients have shown a higher maximal 
pituitary response to stimulation testing compared with unin-
fected subjects, but the clinical significance of this alteration is 
not known. 
 The GH axis has received particular attention in children with 
HIV who can have poor growth velocity, especially when symp-
tomatically ill. Most of these children demonstrate normal GH 
levels, although low insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I levels can 
be seen. Low IGF-I in the setting of relatively normal GH is often 
seen in states of malnutrition, which may partially explain this 
finding. In adults, IGF-I levels may be low in malnourished or 
symptomatic HIV-infected patients but are usually normal in 
clinically stable individuals. Circadian GH secretion does not 
appear to be altered in adults with HIV infection, except in the 
presence of visceral obesity. 
 Posterior Pituitary Function 
 Posterior pituitary function may be altered in HIV infection. 
Hyponatremia is common in both inpatients and outpatients with 
HIV. Inappropriately high serum antidiuretic hormone levels have 
been seen in euvolemic AIDS patients with hyponatremia; how-
ever, many of these patients had pulmonary or cerebral infections, 
which themselves can cause the syndrome of inappropriate antidi-
uretic hormone secretion. As with any patient, destruction of the 
posterior pituitary by infection or tumor can lead to central diabe-
tes insipidus; like anterior pituitary destruction, this appears to be 
rare in HIV infection. 
 AIDS WASTING SYNDROME 
 Prior to the introduction of HAART, weight loss and tissue wast-
ing were commonly observed complications of AIDS in up to 
30% of patients infected with HIV. A characteristic feature of this 
syndrome includes wasting of muscle, which is directly associated 
with increased morbidity and mortality. Muscle is disproportion-
ately lost compared to fat in men. In contrast, women start with 
higher fat mass, and fat depletion dominates muscle loss until fat 
reserves are decreased. Weight loss can either be gradual or rapid 
in nature. Gradual weight loss has been associated with gastroin-
testinal disease, whereas rapid weight loss is usually seen during 
opportunistic infections. 
 The pathogenesis of wasting remains poorly understood. 
Several etiologies have been proposed including starvation, 
cachexia, hypermetabolic state, and hypogonadism. Starvation 
implies solely a limitation of calories, which may occur due to 
decreased appetite or decreased intake due to gastrointestinal 
infections with marked diarrhea. Cachexia refers to a state in 
which muscle is disproportionately lost due to direct effects on 
muscle. A hypermetabolic state has been proposed as a cause of 
AIDS wasting syndrome, because resting energy expenditure 
(REE) has been observed to be increased in HIV infection. 
However, the increase in REE is also seen in HIV-infected sub-
jects with stable weight. HIV patients with either opportunistic 
infections or gastrointestinal disease have decreased caloric 
intake, but do not show the protective decrease in REE that 
occurs in pure starvation. Hence, the combination of decreased 
caloric intake and hypermetabolism is the driving force for 
CHAPTER 25 AIDS Endocrinopathies     795
 wasting. The persistent metabolic defects make recovery from 
wasting incomplete, and recurrent events lead to progressive, 
step wise wasting. 
 Hypogonadism is a prominent finding in up to 50% of men 
and women with AIDS wasting. A direct correlation between 
testosterone levels and decreased muscle and fat mass exists. 
Resistance to GH has also been demonstrated in patients with 
more than a 10% loss in body weight. 
 Because a 10% loss of weight is associated with increased 
morbidity and mortality in patients infected with HIV, clinical 
trials have targeted the restoration of appetite, weight, and lean 
body mass. The cannabinol derivative dronabinol increased 
subjective appetite in patients with AIDS wasting syndrome, 
but had little or no effect to promote weight gain. Megestrol 
acetate increased appetite and weight, but resulted in mostly 
gain of fat. 
 Currently, recombinant GH therapy is the only Food and 
Drug Administration–approved treatment specifically for AIDS 
wasting syndrome that increases lean body mass. At high doses 
(0.1 mg/kg/d), 3 months of GH therapy increased lean body mass 
by 3 kg and weight by 1 kg. However, patients did experience 
side-effects including swelling and joint pain. In a lower-dose 
study (1.4 mg/d), patients had no significant increase in lean body 
mass after 12 weeks, which suggests that high-dose GH therapy is 
required. Therapy with recombinant GH is quite costly, especially 
if given at higher doses. 
 Androgen therapy has been studied extensively, because almost 
half of patients with AIDS wasting syndrome exhibit decreased 
levels of testosterone. In a meta-analysis of six clinical trials, testos-
terone therapy was shown to increase lean body mass and weight, 
especially when the therapy was given intramuscularly as opposed 
to transdermally. However, there have been no studies in which 
subjects have been randomized to different routes of administra-
tion of testosterone. Because testosterone may decrease HDL 
cholesterol levels, there is some concern about the long-term 
effects of testosterone therapy on lipid profiles and cardiovascular 
risk. However, no other side-effects were reported in these small, 
short-term studies. 
 Anabolic steroids have similar effects on the AIDS wasting 
syndrome. Nandrolone decanoate is an injectable testosterone 
derivative that is approved for treating anemia in patients with 
chronic renal failure. Two studies of nandrolone decanoate in men 
found that lean body mass and strength significantly increased. 
Nandrolone therapy improved lean body mass and weight without 
evidence of acute toxicity. Therapy using oral anabolic steroids 
oxandrolone and oxymetholone also increases lean body mass and 
weight in men and women, but it is associated with significant 
hepatic transaminitis as well as dyslipidemia. 
 Another approach has been to use anticytokine therapies to 
treat patients with AIDS wasting syndrome, but the results have 
been disappointing. Two studies reported small increases in 
weight after treatment with thalidomide, a TNF inhibitor. 
However, TNF levels actually increased and the patients 
 experienced significant side effects including rash, fever, and 
increased viral load. 
 ABNORMALITIES OF FAT DISTRIBUTION 
ASSOCIATED WITH HIV 
 Shortly after the introduction of HAART with PIs, a constellation 
of symptoms appeared including abdominal obesity, lipoatrophy 
in the extremities and face, dorsicocervical fat pads (buffalo 
hump), gynecomastia, breast enlargement, increased neck circum-
ference, and lipomas along with insulin resistance and dyslipi-
demia. These changes were clustered into a single syndrome 
reminiscent of the metabolic syndrome and named HIV lip-
odystrophy. 
 In retrospect, some of these changes are not related to HAART 
with PIs. The appearance of lipoaotrophy, fat accumulation in the 
dorsocervical fat pad, lipomas, and breast hypertrophy was 
reported in patients on two NRTIs before the introduction of 
HAART or PIs. The presence of dorsocervical fat pads and lipo-
mas is striking, but their prevalence is low. 
 Furthermore, the original description of the HIV lipodystro-
phy syndrome has been refuted, as it has been shown definitively 
that the major changes in fat (lipoatrophy and abdominal obesity) 
are not part of the same syndrome, but have different causes. 
Unfortunately, there is still no widely accepted definition of HIV 
lipodystrophy that is used in the literature. Depending on the 
definition of HIV lipodystrophy, the prevalence of these findings 
varies widely (11%-83%). Part of the confusion is due to differ-
ences in methodology used to report fat loss or gain. Many early 
studies relied on the patient’s self-report and/or the clinician’s 
subjective assessment. Later studies quantified fat by anthropo-
metrics or DXA. Neither technique permits the isolation of sub-
cutaneous from visceral fat in the abdomen and trunk; therefore 
computed tomography and MRI are needed and have been uti-
lized more recently to separately quantify fat in these compart-
ments. Because changes in fat may take years to develop, many 
studies in the field are cross-sectional rather than prospective in 
design. In these cross-sectional studies, it is unclear how to match 
patients to a control group with normal fat distribution, given that 
most healthy adults are overweight. 
 Despite these challenges, it has become apparent that periph-
eral fat loss in the extremities and face does occur with increased 
frequency in patients taking HAART. In one study, 50% of HIV-
infected subjects fell below the lowest decile (10%) of leg fat in 
controls. However, loss of subcutaneous fat in the abdomen also 
occurs. In contrast, it is not clear that visceral adipose tissue mass 
is increased in HIV infection. Furthermore, recent cross-sectional 
and prospective data showed that increased visceral fat is not 
linked to loss of subcutaneous fat. 
 Several etiologies have been proposed for the development of 
lipoatrophy associated with HIV, but to date no mechanism has 
been definitively linked to the disorder. The thymidine-based 
nucleoside analogs, stavudine and zidovudine, have the strongest 
association with the development of peripheral lipoatrophy. These 
NRTIs have been proposed to cause lipoatrophy through 
 mitochondrial injury by inhibiting mitochondrial DNA polymerase-γ 
or depleting mitochondrial DNA. Fortunately, the use of stavudine 
and zidovudine has decreased. Abacavir is the NRTI with the least 
796    CHAPTER 25 AIDS Endocrinopathies
effect on fat. Some PIs (eg, indinavir) and NNRTIs (eg, efavirenz) 
may contribute secondarily to the lipoatrophy observed with NRTI 
therapy, but there are not enough trials to understand fully the 
effects of each ARV drug. 
 The development of central lipohypertrophy is even less well 
understood. While central lipohypertrophy has been attributed to 
PI use, the evidence is controversial. In the first reports of appear-
ance of buffalo hump, half of the patients were not on PI therapy 
or HAART. Recent data suggest that increased visceral fat may be 
due to restoration to health and normal aging. 
 Much research has focused on the treatment of the fat changes 
associated with HIV. Fat loss, especially in the face, can reveal the 
HIV status of a patient and lead to social stigmatization. The 
metabolic sequelae can also predispose the patient to the develop-
ment of hypertriglyceridemia and atherosclerosis. One proposed 
strategy is to reverse the peripheral lipoatrophy by switching ARV 
drugs. Substituting another NRTI for a thymidine NRTI, such as 
stavudine or zidovudine, causes a minimal, albeit statistically sig-
nificant increase in subcutaneous fat. Lipoatrophy does not fully 
resolve. In one study, switching from stavudine or zidovudine to 
abacavir caused a 0.4-kg increase in total limb fat after 24 weeks 
and a 1.3-kg increase in total limb fat after 104 weeks. However, 
that gain is insufficient to reach the levels seen in control popula-
tions. Complete cessation of therapy without replacement of 
NRTI results in virologic failure. Switching from PIs to nevirap-
ine, efavirenz, or abacavir did not improve peripheral lipoatrophy. 
The newer NRTIs, tenofovir and emtricitabine, have been associ-
ated with less peripheral lipoatrophy than stavudine. 
 Thiazolidinediones are potentially attractive agents for treatment 
of peripheral lipoatrophy and insulin resistance. As ligands for the 
transcription factor perioxosome proliferator–activated receptor 
gamma (PPARγ), thiazolidinediones promote adipocyte differentia-
tion. Unfortunately, two randomized studies found no improve-
ment and a third showed minimal improvement in lipoatrophy after 
thiazolidine treatment for at least 24 weeks. However, the studies 
did show the expected improvement in insulin resistance. 
 Reconstructive therapy is available for peripheral lipoatrophy. 
Injectable skin fillers for the face include bioabsorbable and per-
manent fillers. Bioabsorbable fillers such as poly-L-acetic acid 
stimulate collagen production. In one open-label, single-arm 
study, 43% of patients had an increase in cutaneous thickness 
greater than 10 mm in the face after 96 weeks of therapy. The 
effects on collagen production last for approximately 18 months. 
Hyaluronic acid has also been used to a lesser extent in the treat-
ment of facial lipoatrophy. Side-effects include easy bruisability, 
redness, and swelling. Permanent fillers are generally not recom-
mended due to the dynamic nature of fat loss in peripheral lipoa-
trophy. More invasive procedures include autologous fat 
transplants. 
 Central lipohypertrophy has been treated with GH and 
GHRH analogues. At high doses (6 mg/d), GH decreased visceral 
fat by 21% to 24%. However, a significant number of patients 
experienced joint swelling, fluid retention, and deterioration in 
glucose tolerance. A lower dose of GH (3 mg/d) also reduced 
visceral fat, although to a lesser extent. With further dose 
 reduction, GH (1 mg/d) decreased total fat, but did not signifi-
cantly alter visceral fat content. A GHRH analogue, tesamorelin, 
is a recently approved therapy for reduction of visceral obesity in 
HIV-lipodystrophy that limits the side-effects of excessive GH 
secretion by increasing the endogenous pulsatility of GH secre-
tion. Tesamorelin (2 mg/d) given for 26 weeks decreased visceral 
fat by 15%. Unlike GH therapy, tesamorelin did not induce insu-
lin resistance; there were fewer GH-like symptoms of joint and 
fluid retention. GH therapy is very expensive, and the effects of 
GH and GHRH reverse when therapy is stopped. 
 DISORDERS OF GLUCOSE 
AND LIPID METABOLISM 
 Shortly after the introduction of HAART, reports of impaired fast-
ing glucose, glucose intolerance, diabetes, and hyperlipidemia 
appeared in the HIV literature. Given the close temporal relation-
ship to the introduction of PIs, studies focused on the association 
with PIs. However, other factors such as restoration of health, 
immune reconstitution, and body composition changes (includ-
ing lipoatrophy and visceral hypertrophy) may also contribute to 
the disturbances in metabolism. To clarify these issues, several 
groups have given HIV antiretroviral drugs to healthy, HIV-
seronegative volunteers in order to define direct drug effects. In 
the sections later, the results in HIV-infected subjects will be com-
pared to those in healthy volunteers to understand the effects of 
drug versus disease. Metabolic effects are specific to certain drugs 
and not an effect of the PI class as a whole. 
 Insulin Resistance, Glucose Intolerance, 
and Diabetes 
 With the reports of rapid onset of diabetes after introduction of 
HAART with a PI, researchers looked for effects of PI on insulin 
resistance. Subsequent studies looked at hepatic glucose produc-
tion and insulin secretion. 
 Several factors contribute to the development of insulin resistance 
in the setting of HIV. Unlike other infectious states, in which insulin 
resistance is common, early in the epidemic, AIDS was found to be 
associated with an increase in insulin sensitivity (Table 25–4). 
Compared with 10 healthy controls, insulin sensitivity was higher in 
10 stable patients with symptomatic HIV. However, with asymp-
tomatic HIV infection, another early study found that there was no 
change in insulin sensitivity compared with healthy controls. Insulin 
resistance is common in healthy subjects. Thus, improvement of 
HIV infection alone may contribute to an observed decrease in insu-
lin sensitivity. More recent studies have found insulin resistance in 
ARV-naïve, HIV-infected subjects. 
 Body composition influences insulin sensitivity. Patients stud-
ied early in the epidemic, were thin, if not cachectic. In recent 
studies body weight was higher even in many ARV-naïve patients. 
Increased visceral fat in the abdomen has been linked to insulin 
resistance in subjects with or without HIV disease. Upper trunk 
fat is also independently, strongly associated with insulin  resistance. 
CHAPTER 25 AIDS Endocrinopathies     797
Likewise, severe lipoatrophy has been linked to insulin resistance 
regardless of HIV status. The lesser levels of lipoatrophy seen in 
most HIV-infected patients may also contribute. It should be 
recognized that each of these factors may contribute in an additive 
way to insulin resistance. 
 Much attention has focused on the role of individual therapies 
in the induction of insulin resistance. Some PIs have been reported 
to decrease insulin-mediated glucose disposal per unit insulin level 
(M/I) during the hyperinsulinemic, euglycemic clamp, a tech-
nique during which insulin is infused at a steady rate and glucose 
infused to maintain euglycemia, which directly measures insulin 
action. In a double-blind, placebo-controlled study in healthy 
normal volunteers, a single dose of indinavir has been shown to 
decrease insulin-mediated glucose disposal by 34% (Table 25–5). 
Indinavir for 4 weeks has also been shown to cause a 17% decrease 
in insulin-mediated glucose disposal as well as deterioration in 
glucose tolerance. A single dose of ritonavir decreased insulin 
sensitivity by 15%. Lopinavir/ritonavir has less of an effect on 
insulin sensitivity, but the magnitude of this effect is not clear (see 
Table 25–5). In two studies, lopinavir/ritonavir given for 4 weeks 
caused no change in insulin sensitivity, whereas in shorter studies, 
lopinavir/ritonavir given for 1 to 5 days was associated with a 13% 
to 24% decrease in insulin sensitivity. The study reporting a 13% 
decrease compared rates in the same subjects on placebo and lopi-
navir/ritonavir; the study reporting the 24% decrease presented 
pooled data from some subjects who received both placebo and 
drug on different occasions, some drug only and some placebo 
only. 
 Of note, not all PIs decrease insulin-mediated glucose disposal. 
In double-blind, placebo-controlled studies, atazanavir and ampre-
navir had no effect on insulin sensitivity in healthy normal volun-
teers (see Table 25–5). NNRTIs have not been associated with 
insulin resistance. In studies where PIs are replaced with NNRTIs, 
insulin resistance improved. 
 The mechanism of insulin resistance with PIs includes the 
acute blockade of the peripheral insulin-regulated glucose trans-
porter (GLUT)4. In vitro studies have shown that PIs (indinavir, 
ritonavir, and amprenavir) selectively inhibit 2-deoxyglucose 
transport into 3T3-L1 adipocytes without affecting early insulin-
signaling events or the translocation of intracellular GLUT4 to the 
surface. Indinavir has also been shown to block partially GLUT2, 
the glucose transporter postulated to be involved in glucose sens-
ing in the pancreas and regulation of insulin secretion. Recently, 
an analog of the peptidomimetic phenylalanine moiety found in 
all PIs has been shown to inhibit GLUT4-induced glucose trans-
port in vitro. Because serum levels of PIs vary, some PIs, such as 
amprenavir, may block GLUT4 in vitro but have no effect in 
patients. 
 Increased insulin resistance has also been found in HIV-
infected subjects on NRTI therapy. However, it is unclear if the 
effects of NRTIs are a direct effect of the drug, reactivation of the 
immune system, restoration of health, or changes in body compo-
sition. When stavudine was given to healthy volunteers, there was 
no decrease in M/I. 
 In addition to peripheral insulin resistance, impairment in 
insulin secretion was reported in HIV patients on PI therapy. In 
HIV-infected subjects treated with either nelfinavir, indinavir, 
lopinavir/ritonavir, or saquinavir, beta cell function assessed by 
first-phase insulin secretion showed a 25% decrease. However, 
insulin secretion in the HIV-infected patients was higher than 
controls before PI therapy and was reduced only to that of con-
trols after PI therapy. The HIV-infected patients had suppression 
of HIV RNA levels and increases in CD4 counts. More recently, 
healthy normal volunteers were given lopinavir/ritonavir for 
4 weeks, and no effect was seen on first-phase insulin secretion. 
Thus, it is not clear whether currently used PIs alter insulin 
secretion. 
 Hepatic glucose production is also increased in some patients 
on PIs. Endogenous glucose production, comprised mostly of 
hepatic gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis, is the largest determi-
nant of fasting glucose and can be measured by tracer stable iso-
tope technology. In studies of healthy normal volunteers, indinavir 
increased endogenous glucose production in the fasting state. 
During the hyperinsulinemic, euglycemic clamp, indinavir blunted 
the ability of insulin to suppress endogenous glucose production. 
Endogenous glucose production was not increased in rats treated 
with intravenous indinavir during a hyperinsulinemic, euglycemic 
clamp study. However, the method of stable isotope analysis was 
different in the rat and human studies, which may explain the 
discrepancy in results. In humans, full-dose ritonavir has a small 
detrimental effect on endogenous glucose production, while 
amprenavir had no effect. The effects of other PIs remain to be 
determined. 
 Adipocytokine levels have been explored in HIV infection, and 
they may explain some of the results in glucose metabolism. 
Adiponectin, a hormone secreted by adipocytes, has been shown 
to increase peripheral and hepatic insulin sensitivity. Adiponectin 
levels inversely correlate with the amount of visceral fat in 
TABLE 25–4  Effect of HIV and AIDS status on glucose and lipid metabolism prior to the introduction of HAART.
Insulin 
Resistance
Total 
Cholesterol
Triglyceride
VLDL
LDL
HDL
HIV
↔
↓
↑ (8%)
↑ (7%)
↓ (16%) 
↓↓↓ (36%)
AIDS
↓
↓
↑↑↑↑ (99%)
↑↑↑↑ (98%)
↓↓↓ (31%)
↓↓↓ (37%)
↔, no effect; ↑ or ↓, 0%-20%; ↓↓, 20%-30%; ↓↓↓, 30%-40%; ↑↑↑↑, >40%. Percentage increases or decreases are denoted when available in the literature.
798    CHAPTER 25 AIDS Endocrinopathies
 HIV-negative subjects. In patients with HIV-associated periph-
eral lipoatrophy, adiponectin levels are reduced. Low adiponectin 
levels have been proposed to mediate some of the insulin resis-
tance observed in peripheral lipoatrophy and visceral lipohyper-
trophy. The mechanism which reduces adiponectin levels is 
unknown. Some have attributed the reduction to PI therapy. In 
vitro studies of cultured fat cells have suggested that PI treatment 
suppresses adiponectin mRNA and protein expression. However, 
two studies in healthy normal volunteers found that in fact adi-
ponectin levels were increased during treatment with the PIs 
indinavir or  lopinavir/ritonavir. The discrepancy in the effect of 
PIs on adiponectin levels in vitro and in humans is not well 
understood. 
 Levels of leptin, another hormone secreted by adipocytes, cor-
relate with insulin resistance. However, some diseases with very 
low leptin levels also have insulin resistance. Leptin levels have 
been shown to be decreased in HIV patients with peripheral 
lipoatrophy. 
 Current guidelines set forth by the International AIDS Society-
USA (IAS-USA) suggest measuring fasting glucose levels before 
and during PI therapy. In patients with risk factors for diabetes or 
with peripheral lipoatrophy or visceral lipohypertrophy, oral 
TABLE 25–5.  Effect of protease inhibitors and nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors on glucose and 
lipid metabolism.a
Drug
Fasting 
Glucose
Insulinb 
Resistance
EGP
Total 
Cholesterol
TG
LDL
HDL
Indinavir 
↑
(HIV negative)
↑↑↑
(−34% M/I)
(HIV negative)
↑↑
(HIV negative)
↔
↔
(HIV negative)
↔ (HIV negative)
↑ (HIV infected)c
↔↑
(0%-20%)
Ritonavir 
↔
↑↑
(−18% M/I)
(HIV negative)
↑
(HIV negative)
↑↑
↑↑↑
(150%
HIV negative)
↔(HIV negative)
↑(HIV infected)c
↓
(0%-5%)
Lopinavir/
ritonavir
↔
(HIV negative)
↔/↑d
(−13%-24% M/Id)
(HIV negative)
NA
↔
↑↑
(80%
HIV negative)
↔ (HIV negative)
↑ (HIV infected)c
↔
Tipranavir/
ritonavir
↔
NA
NA
NA
↑↑
(80% 
HIV infected)
NA
NA
Atazanavir/
ritonavir
↔
(HIV negative)
↔
(HIV negative)
NA
NA
↑
↔↑
↔↑
(0%-20%)
Darunavir/
ritonavir
NA
NA
NA
NA
↑
↔↑
NA
Amprenavir
↔
↔
(HIV negative)
↔ (HIV negative)
↔↑
↔↑
↑ (HIV infected)
↑
(0%-20%)
Nelfinavir
↔
↔
NA
↔↑
↔↑
↑
↑
(2%-20%)
Saquinavir
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
Atazanavir
↔
↔
(HIV negative)
NA
↔/↑
↔(HIV negative)
↔(HIV negative)
↔(HIV infected)
↔/↑
(0%-20%)
Efavirenz
NA
NA
NA
↔/↑↑
↔/↑↑
↔/↑
↑↑
(15%-23%)
Nevirapine
↔
↔
NA
↑
↔
↔/↑
↑↑↑ (49%)
Stavudine
NA
NA
NA
NA
↑
NA
NA
Tenofivir
NA
NA
NA
NA
↓
↓
NA
aPercentage changes are provided when available from the published literature. Some effects were not precisely quantified in publications. ↑ or ↓, small; ↑↑ or ↓↓, moderate; 
↑↑↑ or ↓↓↓, large change. ↔↑ signifies disagreement in the literature.
bInsulin resistance is expressed as M/I from euglycemic hyperinsulinemic clamp data as explained in the text. An increase in insulin resistance is reflected in a negative M/I and 
an upward arrow.
cLDL increases in patients with HIV infection who start with low LDL. There is little effect of PI in HIV-negative subjects.
dIn HIV-negative subjects given one to five doses. No effect after 4 weeks.
EGP, endogenous glucose production; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; LDL, low-density lipoprotein; NA not available; TG, triglyceride.
CHAPTER 25 AIDS Endocrinopathies     799
 glucose tolerance testing may be warranted. Patients with preexist-
ing abnormalities in glucose metabolism or with first-degree rela-
tives with diabetes mellitus should consider avoiding the PIs most 
associated with insulin resistance; atazanavir and newer PIs may be 
better choices. 
 Treatment of PI-induced diabetes should ideally be tailored to 
the specific alteration in glucose metabolism. Although there are 
no studies of treatment of PI-induced diabetes per se, there are 
studies of therapy of patients who have HIV-associated lipoa-
trophy and lipohypertrophy who also are taking PIs. 
Thiazolidinediones can ameliorate peripheral insulin resistance 
induced by PIs. Thiazolidinediones improve insulin resistance in 
patients with HIV-associated lipoatrophy and lipohypertrophy. 
Proliferation of lipomas has been reported in one patient with 
HIV-associated lipoatrophy. Given the recent findings that thiazo-
lidinediones decrease BMD and may increase fracture risk, cau-
tion is warranted in HIV-infected patients as they may be at 
higher risk for bone loss and fracture. Metformin decreases hepatic 
glucose production and peripheral insulin resistance. Metformin 
should be used with caution in combination with NNRTI’s stavu-
dine and didanosine, which, like metformin, are associated with 
increased lactic acidosis. Sulfonylureas may prove to be useful in 
improving insulin secretion. Due to the risk of hypoglycemia, 
sulfonylureas should be used with caution in treating mild 
PI-induced diabetes. 
 Other medications used to treat opportunistic infections are 
associated with hyperglycemia and hypoglycemia. Pentamidine 
causes pancreatic beta cell toxicity, acutely leading to hypoglyce-
mia, and over the long-term, it causes diabetes mellitus. 
Hypoglycemia during pentamidine treatment is associated with 
increased length of treatment, higher cumulative doses, and renal 
insufficiency. Patients who develop hypoglycemia in association 
with pentamidine therapy are at increased long-term risk of 
developing diabetes mellitus. HIV-infected patients who develop 
diabetes mellitus following pentamidine therapy have low C pep-
tide levels, suggesting beta cell destruction. Aerosolized pentami-
dine therapy has also been reported to cause hypoglycemia and 
diabetes mellitus. Pentamidine, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, 
and the nucleoside analogs didanosine and zalcitabine have been 
associated with acute pancreatitis. Megestrol acetate, which has 
intrinsic glucocorticoid activity, may be associated with diabetes 
mellitus in HIV-infected patients, perhaps through its glucocor-
ticoid activity, although the rate of hyperglycemia in controlled 
clinical trials appears to be low. GH can also cause insulin resis-
tance, leading to hyperglycemia and diabetes. Medications used 
in HIV-infected patients that can affect the endocrine system are 
listed in Table 25–2. 
 Lipid Disorders 
 Alterations in lipid and lipoprotein profiles are common in patients 
infected with HIV. The observed changes can be due to a number 
of interrelated issues, including HIV infection itself, antiviral medi-
cations, body composition changes, and immune reconstitution. A 
rational approach to disturbances in lipid metabolism is to assess the 
status of the HIV infection, medications used to treat HIV, and 
presence of body composition changes (including peripheral lipoat-
rophy and central lipohypertrophy). The following section reviews 
the lipid and lipoprotein profiles individually, with an emphasis on 
studies prospectively measuring fasting lipid levels. 
 HIV infection is associated with a mild increase in triglyceride 
and very low density (VLDL) cholesterol levels (see Table 25–4). 
Triglyceride and VLDL cholesterol levels rise in association with 
advancing HIV disease and correlate with HIV RNA levels. The 
increased triglycerides are thought to be due to interferon-alpha 
induced decreased clearance of triglycerides and, to a lesser extent, 
increased VLDL production. 
 Several antiviral medications can increase triglyceride levels. 
Full-dose ritonavir can cause a two- to three-fold increase in trig-
lyceride levels, probably by increased VLDL production 
(see Table 25–5). Ritonavir has been shown in vitro to inhibit the 
degradation of apolipoprotein B, a protein involved in the forma-
tion of VLDL particles. Other studies have suggested that acti-
vated sterol regulatory-binding proteins (SREBPs) in the liver are 
involved in the increase in VLDL production. Because of its abil-
ity to inhibit the hepatic enzyme CYP3A4, ritonavir is used to 
increase the pharmacologic doses of other PIs metabolized through 
the same cytochrome system. Boosting doses of ritonavir (100 mg 
twice daily) have also been shown to increase triglycerides, albeit 
to a lesser extent. The combination lopinavir/ritonavir given to 
healthy normal volunteers increased triglycerides and VLDL cho-
lesterol levels by 83% and 33%, respectively. Tipranavir/ritonavir 
produces similar increases to those of lopinavir/ritonavir in HIV-
infected individuals. Not all PIs alter triglyceride levels; in healthy 
normal volunteers, administration of indinavir and atazanavir 
resulted in no change in triglyceride levels (see Table 25–5). The 
data are mixed on amprenavir and nelfinavir, with some studies 
showing an increase in triglycerides and others finding no effect. 
 The NNRTI efavirenz is associated with increased triglycerides. 
Again, this is not a class effect as another NNRTI, nevirapine, has 
not been associated with alterations in triglyceride metabolism. 
 The effects of NRTIs on lipid metabolism have not been well 
studied. In some, but not all studies, stavudine use was associated 
with increased triglyceride levels. The most informative trial com-
pared stavudine with tenofovir and found an increase in triglyc-
erides in the stavudine arm, but not in the tenofovir arm. Given 
that all subjects got efavirenz, a likely interpretation is that there 
was a lipid-lowering effect of tenofovir; other data support this 
interpretation, as adding tenofovir to an effective ARV regimen 
lowers lipids. 
 The original clinical syndrome of HIV lipodystrophy has also 
been reported to be associated with increased triglyceride levels. 
One study found that 57% of patients with  both peripheral lipoa-
trophy and central lipohypertrophy had triglyceride levels above 
300 mg/dL. It has long been recognized that visceral obesity in the 
general population is associated with high triglycerides. However, 
recent data suggest that lower body fat is protective, as increased 
levels of lower body fat are associated with lower triglycerides in 
both HIV-infected patients and controls. Therefore, the loss of 
lower body fat in HIV-associated lipoatrophy is another reason 
800    CHAPTER 25 AIDS Endocrinopathies
why triglycerides are high in HIV infection. Hypertriglyceridemia 
is well known to be multifactorial; genes, diet, alcohol, and physi-
cal activity also play a role. In HIV infection, one can add the 
synergistic effects of the host response to HIV itself, treatment 
with ritonavir and efavirenz, and HIV-lipoatrophy to the patho-
genesis. 
 After the introduction of HAART, a reported increase in low-
density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol levels was largely attrib-
uted to PI therapy. Recently, it has become increasingly clear 
that factors other than PIs contribute to this rise in LDL choles-
terol levels. In the early stages of HIV infection, LDL cholesterol 
levels fall (see Table 25–4). With effective therapy, LDL choles-
terol levels rise in response to suppression of the infection, inde-
pendent of the type of therapy. Most, but not all PIs have been 
associated with increases in LDL cholesterol levels, but average 
levels are not high. Studies in healthy normal volunteers have 
provided insight into the direct effects of PIs on cholesterol 
metabolism apart from those associated with HIV infection. 
Indinavir, ritonavir, lopinavir/ritonavir, and atazanavir all have 
no effects on LDL cholesterol levels in healthy normal volunteers 
(see Table 25–5). In patients with HIV infection, treatment with 
the NNRTI nevirapine raises LDL cholesterol levels. Studies 
that involve switching patients from PIs to the NNRTIs nevirap-
ine and efavirenz found that LDL cholesterol levels do not 
change. Hence, the increase in LDL cholesterol seen in HIV-
infected patients is not solely an effect of PI therapy, but likely 
represents suppression of HIV and restoration to health. 
Tenofovir may lower LDL levels. 
 HIV infection and the NNRTIs have significant effects on 
high-density lipoprotein (HDL) metabolism. Early in the course 
of HIV infection, prior to the appearance of clinically evident 
disease, HDL cholesterol levels decline to levels around 25 to 
35 mg/dL (see Table 25–4). With advancing HIV disease, HDL 
cholesterol levels continue to decline to less than 50% of baseline 
values. The pathogenesis of these changes is not well understood. 
Shortly after the introduction of PIs, one cross-sectional study 
reported decreased HDL cholesterol levels in HIV-infected 
patients. However, subsequent studies have failed to show a 
decrease in HDL cholesterol levels in either HIV-infected patients 
or healthy normal volunteers. Indeed, some studies have found 
modest increases (13%-21%) in HDL cholesterol levels during 
treatment with indinavir, nelfinavir, amprenavir, and atazanavir 
therapy in prospective studies of HIV-infected patients. More 
impressive is the nearly 50% increase in HDL cholesterol seen 
during treatment with the NNRTI nevirapine. Efavirenz has also 
been shown to increase HDL cholesterol levels by 15% to 23%. 
When patients were switched from PIs to the NNRTIs efavirenz 
and nevirapine, somewhat smaller increases were seen again sup-
porting the concept that HAART with PI induces small increases 
in HDL. Hence, the increase in HDL cholesterol levels is likely 
directly due to NNRTI therapy. In some studies, HDL levels have 
been reported to be lower in patients with HIV-associated lip-
odystrophy, but the extent to which that decrease is due to HIV is 
not clear. Visceral obesity and upper trunk fat are associated with 
lower HDL levels. 
 A panel of the IAS-USA has suggested guidelines for the diag-
nosis and treatment of dyslipidemia in HIV-infected subjects. The 
National Cholesterol Education Program guidelines are recom-
mended for initiating therapy in patients infected with HIV. To 
monitor for dyslipidemia, a fasting lipid panel should be obtained 
before initiating or switching therapy. Lipid panels should be 
repeated 3 to 6 months after starting ARV therapy. In those 
patients with preexisting cardiovascular disease (CVD) or uncon-
trollable hyperlipidemia, switching HIV therapy should be con-
sidered if the regimen is one linked to the observed dyslipidemia 
and it is refractory to conventional treatment. 
 Hypolipidemic therapy should be tailored to the type of dys-
lipidemia. For patients with triglyceride levels greater than 
500 mg/dL, fibrate therapy is recommended. Studies have shown 
that gemfibrozil and fenofibrate are effective in reducing triglycer-
ide levels in patients infected with HIV, but those who start at 
high triglyceride levels do not reach normal levels. Fish oil lowers 
triglycerides, but raises LDL, leading to no net decrease in CVD 
risk. Niacin is effective and has the advantage of raising HDL 
levels as well as lowering triglycerides, but niacin-induced insulin 
resistance may be problematic in HIV-infected patients. HMG-
CoA reductase inhibitors may be better second-line agents for 
lowering triglycerides. As with HIV-negative patients, combina-
tion pharmacologic therapy may be required to correct extremely 
elevated triglyceride levels. 
 HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors are effective, first-line agents 
for the treatment of hypercholesterolemia. However, there are 
multiple drug-drug interactions that are important in HIV-
infected patients. Some statins are metabolized by Cyp3A4 which 
is induced or inhibited by some ARV drugs. In particular, the 
combination of PI and simvastatin or lovastatin should not be 
used. PI, especially ritonavir, which is used to boost levels of many 
HIV ARV drugs to therapeutic levels, inhibit Cyp3A4 which is 
the major metabolic pathway for simvastatin and lovastatin. 
Ritonavir-based regimens increase simvastatin levels by 5- to 
32-fold and multiple cases of rhabdomyolysis have been reported 
on such combinations. Atovastatin activity increases twofold, so 
80 mg atorvastatin should be avoided. Lopinavir/ritonavir increases 
rosuvastatin levels two- to fivefold, and tipranvir/ritonavir increases 
rosuvastatin levels twofold and atorvastatin levels eightfold by 
unknown mechanisms. If those PI combinations are used, only 
low doses of rosuvastatin (5 mg) and atorvastatin (10 mg) should 
be tried. Thus, pravastatin and fluvastatin XL are recommended as 
first-line statins for patients on PI- or ritonavir-based HAART. 
 The effects of HIV protease inhibitors on glucose and lipid 
metabolism are shown in Table 25–5. 
 HIV, Antiretroviral Therapy, and Risk 
of Atherosclerosis 
 The changes in lipid and glucose metabolism seen in HIV raise the 
question about whether atherosclerosis increases due to HIV or its 
therapies. Retrospective studies report an increased prevalence of 
CVD in HIV-infected patients. Some studies also found an asso-
ciation with ARV therapy, particularly PI therapy, in addition to 
CHAPTER 25 AIDS Endocrinopathies     801
traditional risk factors such as age, gender, smoking, and LDL and 
HDL cholesterol levels. Smoking is more prevalent in those with 
HIV infection versus noninfected controls. Cross-sectional studies 
of the intima media thickness (IMT) of the carotid and femoral 
arteries by ultrasound have also shown that traditional CVD risk 
factors provide the dominant contribution to increased plaque. 
However, after adjusting for traditional CVD risk factors, HIV 
infection is an independent risk factor for increased IMT, similar 
in magnitude to male sex, diabetes, and smoking. 
 CONCLUSION 
 Some of the changes in HIV infection are similar to those seen in 
other serious illnesses (euhormone-sick syndrome). However, 
many of the endocrine and metabolic changes that occur with 
HIV infection are unique to HIV and require careful consider-
ation in diagnosis and treatment. In addition to the HIV disease 
state itself, several factors contribute to the development of these 
changes such as opportunistic infections, immune reconstitution, 
and ARV medications. As patients are living longer due to the 
introduction of effective ARV therapy, there is increased interest 
in the long-term implications of metabolic alterations such as 
insulin resistance, dyslipidemia, and body composition changes. 
Given the increased atherosclerotic disease in HIV-infected 
patients, more aggressive treatment of dyslipidemia is warranted. 
 REFERENCES 
 Thyroid Function 
 Basilio-De-Oliveira CA. Infectious and neoplastic disorders of the thyroid in AIDS 
patients: an autopsy study.  Braz J Infect Dis . 2000;4:67. [PMID: 
10795071] 
 Chen F, Day SL, Metcalfe RA, et al. Characteristics of autoimmune thyroid disease 
occurring as a late complication of immune reconstitution in patients with 
advanced human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) disease.  Medicine . 
2005;84:98. [PMID: 15758839] 
 Grunfeld C, Pang M, Doerrler W, et al. Indices of thyroid function and weight loss 
in human immunodeficiency virus infection and the acquired immunodefi-
ciency syndrome.  Metabolism . 1993;42:1270. [PMID: 8412739] 
 Madge S, Kinloch-de-Loes S, Mercey D, Johnson MA, Weller IV. No association 
between HIV disease and its treatment and thyroid function.  HIV Med . 
2007;8:22. [PMID: 17305928] 
 Nelson M, Powles T, Zeitlin A, et al. Thyroid dysfunction and relationship to 
antiretroviral therapy in HIV-positive individuals in the HAART era.  J 
Acquir Immune Defic Syndr . 2009;50:113. [PMID: 19092451] 
 Adrenal Function 
 Chen F, Kearney T, Robinson S, Daley-Yates PT, Waldron S, Churchill DR. 
Cushing’s syndrome and severe adrenal suppression in patients treated with 
ritonavir and inhaled nasal fluticasone.  Sex Transm Infect . 1999;75:274. 
[PMID: 10615321] 
 Honour J, Schneider M, Miller R. Low adrenal androgens in men with HIV infec-
tion and the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.  Horm Res . 1995;44:35. 
[PMID: 7649525] 
 Mayo J, Collazos J, Martínez E, Ibarra S. Adrenal function in the human immu-
nodeficiency virus-infected patient.  Arch Intern Med . 2002;162:1095. 
[PMID: 12020177] 
 Norbiato G, Bevilacqua M, Vago T, Clerici M. Glucocorticoid resistance and the 
immune function in the immunodeficiency syndrome.  Ann NY Acad Sci . 
1998;840:835. [PMID: 9629309] 
 Stolarczyk R, Rubio SI, Smolyar D, Young IS, Poretsky L. Comparison of 1-micro g 
and 250-micro g corticotropin stimulation tests for the evaluation of adrenal 
function in patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.  Metabolism . 
2003;52:647. [PMID: 12759899] 
 Bone and Mineral Metabolism 
 Bolland MJ, Grey AB, Gamble GD, Reid IR. Clinical review: low body weight 
mediates the relationship between HIV infection and low bone mineral 
density: a meta-analysis.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2007;92:4522. [PMID: 
17925333] 
 Brown TT, Qaqish RB. Antiretroviral therapy and the prevalence of osteopenia and 
osteoporosis: a meta-analytic review.  AIDS . 2006;20:2165. [PMID: 17086056] 
 Earle KE, Seneviratne T, Shaker J, Shoback D. Fanconi’s syndrome in HIV+ adults: 
report of three cases and literature review.  J Bone Miner  Res . 2004;19:714. 
[PMID: 15068493] 
 Fakruddin JM, Laurence J. Interactions among human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV)-1, interferon-gamma and receptor of activated NF-kappa B ligand 
(RANKL): implications for HIV pathogenesis.  Clin Exp Immunol . 
2004;137:538. [PMID: 15320903] 
 Hasse B, et al. Antiretroviral treatment and osteonecrosis in patients of the Swiss 
HIV Cohort Study: a nested case-control study.  AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses . 
2004;20:909. [PMID: 15597520] 
 Huang J, Meixner L, Fernandez S, McCutchan JA. A double-blinded, randomized 
controlled trial of zoledronate therapy for HIV-associated osteopenia and 
osteoporosis.  AIDS . 2009;23:51. [PMID: 19050386] 
 Mondy K, Powderly WG, Claxton SA, et al. Alendronate, vitamin D, and calcium for 
the treatment of osteopenia/osteoporosis associated with HIV infection.  J 
Acquir Immune Defic Syndr . 2005;38:426. [PMID: 15764959] 
 Negredo E, Martínez-López E, Paredes R, et al. Reversal of HIV-1-associated 
osteoporosis with once-weekly alendronate.  AIDS . 2005;19:343. [PMID: 
15718847] 
 Triant VA, Brown TT, Lee H, Grinspoon SK. Fracture prevalence among human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected versus non-HIV-infected patients in 
a large U.S. healthcare system.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2008;93:3499. 
[PMID: 18593764] 
 Yombi JC, Vandercam B, Wilmes D, Dubuc JE, Vincent A, Docquier PL. 
Osteonecrosis of the femoral head in patients with type 1 human immuno-
deficiency virus infection: clinical analysis and review.  Clin Rheum . 
2009;28:815. [PMID: 19277811] 
 Gonadal Function 
 Cejtin HE, Kalinowski A, Bacchetti P, et al. Effects of human immunodeficiency 
virus on protracted amenorrhea and ovarian dysfunction.  Obstet Gynecol . 
2006;108:1423. [PMID: 17138776] 
 Conde DM, Silva ET, Amaral WN, et al. HIV, reproductive aging, and health 
implications in women: a literature review.  Menopause . 2009;16:199. 
[PMID: 18800017] 
 Cu-Uvin S. Effect of the menstrual cycle on virological parameters.  J Acquir 
Immune Defic Syndr . 2005;38:S33. [PMID: 15867614] 
 Dolan SE, Grinspoon S. Androgen deficiency and the role of testosterone admin-
istration in HIV-infected women.  J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr . 2005;38:S48. 
[PMID: 15867625] 
 Dolan SE, Wilkie S, Aliabadi N, et al. Effects of testosterone administration in 
human immunodeficiency virus-infected women with low weight: a random-
ized placebo-controlled study.  Arch Intern Med . 2004;164:897. [PMID: 
15240605] 
 Greenblatt RM, Ameli N, Grant RM, Bacchetti P, Taylor RN. Impact of the ovula-
tory cycle on virologic and immunologic markers in HIV-infected women.  J 
Acquir Immune Defic Syndr . 1999;21:293. [PMID: 10608754] 
 Knapp PE, Storer TW, Herbst KL, et al. Effects of a supraphysiological dose of 
testosterone on physical function, muscle performance, mood, and fatigue in 
men with HIV-associated weight loss.  Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab . 
2008;294:E1135. [PMID: 18430965] 
 Sauer MV. Sperm washing techniques address the fertility needs of HIV-
seropositive men: a clinical review.  Reprod Biomed Online . 2005;10:135. 
[PMID: 15705311] 
802    CHAPTER 25 AIDS Endocrinopathies
 Watts DH. Effect of pregnancy.  J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr . 2005;38:S36. 
[PMID: 15867616] 
 Zheng JH. Data from the United States Food and Drug Administration.  J Acquir 
Immune Defic Syndr . 2005;38:S24. [PMID: 15867608] 
 AIDS Wasting Syndrome 
 Grunfeld C, Feingold KR. Metabolic disturbances and wasting in the acquired 
immunodeficiency syndrome.  N Engl J Med . 1992;327:329-337. [PMID: 
1620172] 
 Grunfeld C, Kotler DP, Dobs A, Glesby M, Bhasin S. Oxandrolone in the treat-
ment of HIV-associated weight loss in men.  JAIDS . 2006;41:304. [PMID: 
16509313] 
 Kong A, Edmonds P. Testosterone therapy in HIV wasting syndrome: systematic 
review and meta-analysis.  Lancet Infect Dis . 2002;2:692. [PMID: 
12409050] 
 Mulligan K, Zackin R, Clark RA, et al. Effect of nandrolone decanoate therapy on 
weight and lean body mass in HIV-infected women with weight loss: a ran-
domized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter trial.  Arch Intern 
Med . 2005;165:578. [PMID: 15767536] 
 Schambelan M, Mulligan K, Grunfeld C, et al. Recombinant human growth hor-
mone in patients with HIV-associated wasting. A randomized, placebo-
controlled trial. Serostim Study Group.  Ann Intern Med . 1996;125:873-882. 
[PMID: 8967667] 
 Storer TW, Woodhouse LJ, Sattler F, et al. A randomized, placebo-controlled trial 
of nandrolone decanoate in HIV-infected men with mild to moderate weight 
loss with recombinant human growth hormone as active reference treatment. 
 J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2005; 90:4474. [PMID: 15914526] 
 Fat Redistribution Associated with HIV 
 The Study of Fat Redistribution and Metabolic Change in HIV Infection (FRAM). 
Fat distribution in men with HIV infection.  JAIDS . 2005;40:121. [PMID: 
16186728] 
 The Study of Fat Redistribution and Metabolic Change in HIV Infection (FRAM). 
Fat distribution in women with HIV infection.  JAIDS . 2006;42:562. 
[PMID: 16837863] 
 Falutz J, Allas S, Blot K, et al. Metabolic effects of a growth hormone-releasing 
factor in patients with HIV.  N Engl J Med . 2007;357:2359. [PMID: 
180757338] 
Grunfeld, C., Saag, M., Cofrancesco, J., et al. Regional Adipose Tissue Measured 
by MRI Over Five Years in HIV-Infected and Control Subjects Indicates 
Persistence of HIV-Associated Lipoatrophy. AIDS. 2010;24:1717-26.
 Kotler DP, Muurahainen N, Grunfeld C, et al. Effects of growth hormone on 
abnormal visceral adipose tissue accumulation and dyslipidemia in HIV-
infected patients.  J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr . 2004;32:239. [PMID: 
15076238] 
 Martin A, Smith DE, Carr A, et al. Reversibility of lipoatrophy in HIV-infected 
patients 2 years after switching from a thymidine analogue to abacavir: the 
MITOX Extension Study.  AIDS . 2004;18:1029. [PMID: 15096806] 
 Saag MS, Cahn P, Raffi F, et al. Efficacy and safety of emtricitabine vs stavudine in 
combination therapy in antiretroviral-naive patients: a randomized trial. 
 JAMA . 2004;292:180. [PMID: 15249567] 
 Sutinen J. Interventions for managing antiretroviral therapy-associated lipoatro-
phy.  Curr Opin Infect Dis . 2005;18:25. [PMID: 15647696] 
 Glucose and Lipid Metabolism 
 Currier J, Scherzer R, Bacchetti P, et al. Regional adipose tissue and lipid and lipopro-
tein levels in HIV-infected women.  J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr . 2008;48:35. 
[PMID: 18197118] 
 Fichtenbaum CJ, Gerber JG, Rosenkranz SL, et al. Pharmacokinetic interactions 
between protease inhibitors and statins in HIV seronegative volunteers: 
ACTG Study A5047.  AIDS . 2002;16:569. [PMID: 11873000] 
 Gallant JE, Staszewski S, Pozniak AL, et al. Efficacy and safety of tenofovir DF vs 
stavudine in combination therapy in antiretroviral-naive patients: a 3-year 
randomized trial.  JAMA . 2004;292:191. [PMID: 15249568] 
 Grunfeld C, Rimland D, Gibert CL, et al. Association of upper trunk and visceral 
adipose tissue volume with insulin resistance in control and HIV-infected 
subjects in the FRAM Study.  JAIDS . 2007;46:283. [PMID: 18167644] 
 Hertel J, Struthers H, Horj CB, Hruz PW. A structural basis for the acute effects 
of HIV protease inhibitors on GLUT4 intrinsic activity.  J Biol Chem . 
2004;279:55147. [PMID: 15496402] 
 Lee GA, Mafong DD, Noor MA, et al. HIV protease inhibitors increase adi-
ponectin levels in HIV-negative men.  J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr . 
2004;36:645. [PMID: 15097312] 
 Lee GA, Seneviratne T, Noor MA, et al. The metabolic effects of lopinavir/ritona-
vir in HIV-negative men.  AIDS . 2004;18:641. [PMID: 15090769] 
 Lee GA, Rao M, Mulligan K, et al. The effects of ritonavir and amprenavir on 
insulin-mediated glucose disposal in healthy volunteers: two randomized, 
placebo-controlled, cross-over trials.  AIDS . 2007;21:2183. [PMID: 
18090045] 
 Mulligan K, Grunfeld C, Tai VW, et al. Hyperlipidemia and insulin resistance are 
induced by protease inhibitors independent of changes in body composition 
in patients with HIV infection.  J Acq Immune Defic Syndr Hum Retrovirol . 
2000;23:35. [PMID: 10708054] 
 Noor MA, Lo JC, Mulligan K, et al. Metabolic effects of indinavir in healthy HIV-
seronegative men.  AIDS . 2001;15:F11. [PMID: 11399973] 
 Noor MA, Parker RA, O’Mara E, et al. The effects of HIV protease inhibitors 
atazanavir and lopinavir/ritonavir on insulin sensitivity in HIV-seronegative 
healthy adults.  AIDS 2004;18:2137. [PMID: 15577646] 
 Pao VY, Lee GA, Taylor S, et al. The protease inhibitor combination lopinavir/
ritonavir does not decrease insulin secretion in healthy, HIV-seronegative 
volunteers.  AIDS . 2010;24:265. [PMID: 19890203] 
 Schambelan M, Benson CA, Carr A, et al. Management of metabolic complica-
tions associated with antiretroviral therapy for HIV-1 infection: recommen-
dations of an International AIDS Society-USA panel.  J Acquir Immune Defic 
Syndr . 2002;31:257. [PMID: 12439201] 
 Schwarz JM, Lee GA, Park S, et al. Indinavir increases glucose production in 
healthy HIV-negative men.  AIDS . 2004;18:1852. [PMID: 15316349] 
 van der Valk M, Kastelein JJ, Murphy RL, et al. Nevirapine-containing antiretro-
viral therapy in HIV-1 infected patients results in an antiatherogenic lipid 
profile.  AIDS . 2001;15:2407. [PMID: 11740191] 
 Woerle HJ, Mariuz PR, Meyer C, et al. Mechanisms for the deterioration in glu-
cose tolerance associated with HIV protease inhibitor regimens.  Diabetes . 
2003;52:918. [PMID: 12663461] 
 Wohl D, Scherzer R, Heymsfield S, et al. The associations of regional adipose tis-
sue with lipid and lipoprotein levels in HIV-infected men.  JAIDS . 
2008;48:44. [PMID: 18360291] 
 HIV, Antiretroviral Therapy, and the Risk of Atherosclerosis 
 Currier JS, Kendall MA, Zackin R, et al. Carotid artery intima-media thickness 
and HIV infection: traditional risk factors overshadow impact of protease 
inhibitor exposure.  AIDS . 2005;19:927. [PMID: 15905673] 
 DAD Study Group, Friis-Møller N, Reiss P, Sabin CA, et al. Class of antiretroviral 
drugs and the risk of myocardial infarction.  N Engl J Med . 2007;356:1723. 
[PMID: 17460226] 
 Grinspoon SK Grunfeld C, Kotler DP. Initiative to decrease cardiovascular risk and 
increase quality of care for patients living with HIV/AIDS: executive sum-
mary.  Circulation . 2008;118:198. [PMID: 19455012] 
 Grunfeld C, Delaney JA, Wanke C, et al. Preclinical atherosclerosis due to HIV 
infection: carotid intima-medial thickness measurements from the FRAM 
study.  AIDS . 2009;23:1841. [PMID: 19455012] 
 Hsue PY, Lo JC, Franklin A, et al. Progression of atherosclerosis as assessed by 
carotid intima-media thickness in patients with HIV infection.  Circulation . 
2004;109:1603. [PMID: 15023877] 
803
6
2
 Endocrine Surgery 
 Geeta Lal, MD and   Orlo H. Clark, MD 
 INTRODUCTION 
 Many endocrine diseases are appropriately managed surgically. The 
details of clinical presentation, diagnosis, and medical management 
are discussed in other sections of this book. This chapter provides 
an overview of the principles involved in the surgical therapy for 
these conditions. The indications for surgical intervention, relevant 
procedures, and the benefits of these procedures are discussed. 
 THE THYROID GLAND 
 EMBRYOLOGY AND ANATOMY 
 The thyroid gland arises in the midline as an endoderm-derived 
pharyngeal diverticulum around the third week of gestation. The 
paired median thyroid anlages then descend from their origin at the 
base of the tongue (foramen cecum) and ultimately form a bilobed 
thyroid gland anterolateral to the trachea and larynx. The thyroid 
lobes are connected just below the cricoid cartilage by an isthmus. 
The connection to the foramen cecum—the thyroglossal duct—
separates and is partially resorbed by the sixth week of gestation. Its 
distal remnant forms the pyramidal lobe. The calcitonin-producing 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
ACTH
Adreno-corticotropic hormone
CASR
Calcium sensing receptor
CT
Computed tomography
FBHH
Familial benign hypocalciuric hypercal-
cemia
FNAB
Fine needle aspiration biopsy
FU
Flouro-uracil
MEN
Multiple endocrine neoplasia
MRI
Magnetic resonance imaging
MTC
Medullary thyroid cancer
NIH
National institutes of health
PHPT
Primary hyperparathyroidism
PTH
Parathyroid hormone
RAI
Radioactive iodine
RAIU
Radioactive iodine uptake
RFA
Radiofrequency ablation
TACE
Transarterial chemoembolization
SPECT
Single photon emission computed 
tomography
TSH
Thyroid stimulating hormone
VIP
Vasoactive intestinal peptide
ZES
Zollinger Ellison syndrome
C cells are neuroectodermal in origin, arise from the fourth branchial 
pouch, and are located in the superoposterior aspect of the gland. 
 A number of embryologic or developmental abnormalities of 
the thyroid have been described and are related to the absence or 
mutations of thyroid differentiation factors, including thyroid 
transcription factors 1 and 2 (TTF-1 and TTF-2) and transcription 
factor Pax 8. Thyroglossal duct cysts are usually found in the mid-
line, just inferior to the hyoid bone. A lingual thyroid results from 
maldescent of the median thyroid anlage and is often accompanied 
by agenesis of other thyroid tissue. Rests of thyroid tissue may be 
found anywhere in the central compartment of the neck, including 
the anterior mediastinum.  Tongues of thyroid tissue are often seen 
to extend off the lower thyroid poles, particularly in large goiters. 
In contrast to the above, thyroid tissue in the lateral neck lymph 
nodes (lateral aberrant thyroid) almost always represents metastatic 
thyroid cancer and is not a developmental abnormality. 
 The adult thyroid gland is reddish-brown in color and weighs 
approximately 20 g. The thyroid gland is supplied by paired 
 superior and inferior thyroid arteries. The former arise from the 
external carotid artery and the latter from the thyrocervical trunk. 
A thyroid ima artery arises directly from the aorta or innominate 
artery in approximately 2% of individuals and enters the isthmus, 
replacing an absent inferior artery. 
804    CHAPTER 26 Endocrine Surgery
 The thyroid is drained by three sets of veins: the superior, 
middle, and inferior thyroid veins. The first two drain into the 
internal jugular vein, whereas the last drains into the innominate 
veins. Both recurrent laryngeal nerves arise from their respective 
vagus nerves and enter the larynx at the level of the cricothyroid 
articulation, posterior to the cricothyroid muscle. The left recur-
rent laryngeal nerve recurs around the ligamentum arteriosum and 
ascends to the larynx in the tracheoesophageal groove. The right 
recurrent laryngeal nerve recurs around the subclavian artery and 
runs 1 to 2 cm lateral to the tracheoesophageal groove at the level 
of the clavicle and courses obliquely to the larynx. The superior 
laryngeal nerves also arise from corresponding vagus nerves and 
divide into internal and external branches. The former provides 
sensation to the larynx and the latter innervates the cricothyroid 
muscles. A description of parathyroid embryology and anatomy is 
presented in the next section. 
 Prior to discussing indications for thyroidectomy, it is prudent 
to clarify the definitions of various thyroid resections. A descrip-
tion of these terms is presented in Table 26–1. Of note, nodulec-
tomies are rarely performed, and most surgeons agree that thyroid 
lobectomy constitutes a minimum resection. 
 Indications for Surgery 
 DEVELOPMENTAL THYROID 
ABNORMALITIES 
 Thyroglossal duct remnants may become symptomatic, forming 
cysts, abscesses, and fistulae. There is also a 1% risk of thyroid 
cancer development in thyroglossal duct cysts. Most are papillary 
carcinomas, but very rarely a squamous cell carcinoma may 
develop. Medullary thyroid cancers do not occur at this site. 
 Treatment of thyroglossal duct remnants consists of the 
Sistrunk procedure, which involves removal of the cyst and duct 
up to the foramen cecum. Because the duct may pass anterior to, 
posterior to, or through the hyoid bone, it is generally recom-
mended that the midsection of this bone is also resected in order 
to reduce the risk of recurrence. Surgery may also be needed for 
enlarged lingual thyroid tissue causing symptoms such as choking, 
dysphagia, airway obstruction, and hemorrhage. Prior to resec-
tion, care must be taken to determine whether the patient has any 
other functioning thyroid tissue, usually via a thyroid scan or 
ultrasound. 
 HYPERTHYROIDISM 
 Hyperthyroidism may result from increased thyroid hormone 
production or release of stored thyroid hormone following injury 
to the thyroid gland such as that seen in subacute thyroiditis. This 
is an important distinction, because the former group of disorders 
leads to increased RAIU, whereas the latter are associated with low 
or normal RAIU. The most common causes of hyperthyroidism 
are diffuse toxic goiter (Graves disease), toxic multinodular goiter 
(Plummer disease), or a single toxic nodule, all of which cause 
increased RAIU. Rarer causes of hyperthyroidism with increased 
radioactive iodine uptake (RAIU) include a TSH–secreting tumor 
and a hydatidiform mole. Causes of hyperthyroidism without 
increased RAIU include subacute thyroiditis, excessive ingestion 
of medicinal thyroid hormone, struma ovarii, and thyroid 
 hormone–secreting metastatic thyroid cancer. These latter condi-
tions present with the usual symptoms and signs of hyperthyroidism 
but lack the extrathyroidal manifestations of Graves disease such as 
ophthalmopathy, pretibial myxedema, and thyroid acropachy. 
 Diagnostic Tests 
 Hyperthyroidism is characterized by a suppressed TSH in the 
presence of elevated free T 4 levels. If free T 4 is normal, free T 3 
levels should be measured because they are often elevated early in 
the course of disease. RAIU can be used to distinguish the various 
causes of hyperthyroidism. Approximately 90% of patients with 
Graves disease have elevated levels of thyroid-stimulating antibod-
ies or immunoglobulins (thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin). 
 Management of Hyperthyroidism 
 Hyperthyroidism may be treated medically with antithyroid 
medications, but relapse is common when the medical treatment 
is discontinued. Ablation of the thyroid gland with RAI is the 
mainstay of treatment in North America for patients over 30 years 
of age. A dose of 8 to 12 mCi of I-131 taken orally is generally 
required. However, it is associated with a prolonged latency period 
before effective action, a slightly increased risk of future benign 
and malignant thyroid tumors, hyperparathyroidism, worsening 
ophthalmopathy (particularly in smokers), and unavoidable hypo-
thyroidism (3% per year after the first year, independently of dos-
age). Furthermore, only about 50% of patients treated with RAI 
are euthyroid at 6 months. It is contraindicated in pregnant 
women, of concern in children, and should be avoided in women 
wishing to become pregnant for up to 1 year after treatment. 
TABLE 26–1  Definitions of various thyroid resections.
Procedure
Description
Nodulectomy or 
lumpectomy
Removal of lesion with minimal 
surrounding tissue
Partial thyroidectomy
Removal of lesion and larger rim of 
normal tissue
Subtotal thyroidectomy
Bilateral removal of >50% of each lobe 
and an isthmusectomy
Lobectomy or 
hemithyroidectomy
Complete removal of a lobe and isthmus
Near-total 
thyroidectomy
Complete removal of one lobe and 
isthmus and all but 1 g (1 cm) of the 
contralateral lobe (tissue near ligament 
of Berry)
Total thyroidectomy
Complete removal of both thyroid lobes, 
isthmus, and pyramidal lobe
CHAPTER 26 Endocrine Surgery     805
Surgery overcomes many of the problems associated with RAI and 
achieves rapid control of hyperthyroidism with minimal side 
effects in experienced hands. 
 Absolute indications for thyroidectomy in patients with Graves 
disease include biopsy-proven suspicious or cancerous nodules, local 
compressive symptoms, severe reactions to antithyroid medications, 
reluctance to undergo RAI ablation, or fear of recurrence after RAI. 
Women who want to become pregnant after treatment or who 
develop side effects from antithyroid drugs during pregnancy are 
also candidates for thyroidectomy, as are children. Relative indica-
tions for thyroidectomy include patients in whom rapid control of 
the disease is desired; poorly compliant patients; and patients with 
severe ophthalmopathy, very large goiters, or low RAIU. 
 Preoperative Preparation 
 Patients are usually treated with antithyroid medications to render 
them euthyroid and to prevent the risk of thyroid storm. 
Propylthiouracil (100-200 mg 3 times daily) or methimazole 
(10-20 mg twice daily and then once daily) are the most com-
monly used medications and are continued up to the day of sur-
gery. In patients who develop agranulocytosis as a complication of 
these medications, surgery should be deferred until granulocyte 
counts reach 1000 cells/uL. In addition, patients are also often 
treated with propranolol (10-40 mg 4 times daily) to control the 
adrenergic effects of hyperthyroidism. Relatively large doses may 
be necessary because of increased catabolism of the drug. Lugol 
solution (iodine and potassium iodide) or saturated solution of 
potassium iodide is also generally started about 10 days preopera-
tively to reduce the vascularity of the gland and decrease the risk 
of precipitating thyroid storm. 
 Extent of Surgery 
 The extent of surgery is controversial and depends on multiple fac-
tors. For those patients who have experienced severe complications 
with antithyroid drugs, those who want to eliminate the risk of 
recurrence, and those with coexistent carcinoma or severe ophthal-
mopathy, total or near-total thyroidectomy is recommended. 
However, total thyroidectomy results in inevitable hypothyroidism 
and is potentially associated with higher complication rates when 
compared to lesser procedures. Thus, the procedure traditionally 
preferred by most surgeons for treating patients with Graves disease 
is a subtotal thyroidectomy. This may be accomplished safely by 
bilateral subtotal excision or by unilateral lobectomy and isthmu-
sectomy with subtotal contralateral resection (Hartley-Dunhill 
procedure). Provided an adequate remnant is left behind, the pro-
cedure provides rapid relief of thyrotoxicosis while maintaining a 
euthyroid state without the need for thyroid hormone. However, it 
is difficult to define what constitutes an adequate remnant, 
although most surgeons consider a 4- to 7-g remnant sufficient in 
adults. Rates of postoperative hypothyroidism are variable and are 
primarily determined by remnant size, thyroid antibody titer, and 
whether hypothyroidism was reported to be subclinical or overt. 
Remnants <4 g are associated with a >50% risk of hypothyroidism, 
and those >8 g are associated with recurrence rates of 15%. Subtotal 
resections are associated with recurrence rates of 1.2% to 16.2%, 
and recurrence may take place many years after thyroidectomy. 
Therefore, many surgeons now consider avoidance of recurrence, 
rather than attainment of euthyroidism, as the goal for thyroidec-
tomy in Graves disease. This is gradually leading to total or near-
total thyroidectomy becoming the preferred operation for these 
patients. Patients who experience recurrence after surgery are usually 
treated with RAI. Patients with hyperthyroidism secondary to toxic 
multinodular goiter are managed similar to those with Graves dis-
ease. Subtotal thyroidectomy is generally advised, however, if no 
normal remnant can be left, a near-total or total thyroidectomy is 
recommended. Patients with a solitary toxic nodule >3 cm in size 
are best treated by ipsilateral lobectomy. Patients with smaller  hot 
nodules may be managed by tumor enucleation or RAI ablation. 
 THYROIDITIS 
 Thyroiditis, an inflammatory disorder of the thyroid gland, may 
be classified as acute, subacute, or chronic. Acute suppurative 
thyroiditis is diagnosed by fine-needle aspiration for cytology, 
smear, Gram stain, and culture and treated by incision and drain-
age and antibiotics. Acute thyroiditis is usually self-limited. 
Thyroidectomy, however, is occasionally needed for clinically 
coexistent suspicious nodules or cancer, local compressive symp-
toms, or persistent infection. Recurrent acute thyroiditis is often 
due to a persistent pyriform sinus fistula. Resection of the entire 
tract is necessary to prevent recurrence. Subacute and chronic 
thyroiditis is usually managed medically, but surgical resection is 
occasionally needed for local symptoms or relapse. 
 GOITER (NONTOXIC) 
 Goiters may be diffuse, uninodular, or multinodular. Thyroidectomy 
is indicated for goiters enlarging despite thyroxine suppression, those 
causing compressive symptoms (choking, dysphagia, hoarseness, 
dyspnea, or a positive Pemberton sign—dilation of neck veins and 
facial erythema on elevation of arms), nodules deemed suspicious by 
ultrasound, and goiters containing biopsy-proven suspicious or can-
cerous nodules. Goiters with a significant substernal component 
(>50%) are considered a relative indication for thyroidectomy. 
Subtotal thyroidectomy is the preferred treatment for multinodular 
goiters. A total lobectomy is performed on the side with the domi-
nant nodule, and a subtotal thyroidectomy is performed on the 
other. A total or near-total thyroidectomy may be performed if there 
is no normal thyroid tissue present. 
 THYROID NODULES 
 Approximately 4% of the North American population develops 
thyroid nodules. However, the incidence of clinical thyroid cancer 
is much lower (about 40 patients per million), thus making it 
imperative to determine which nodules require treatment with 
thyroidectomy. A thyroid nodule is more likely to be malignant if 
806    CHAPTER 26 Endocrine Surgery
the patient has a history of therapeutic radiation to the head and 
neck (6.5-3000 cGy to the thyroid), a family history of thyroid 
cancer, Cowden syndrome, or MEN 2, and a personal history of 
thyroid cancer. Other features suggesting cancer include male sex, 
young (<20) or old (>70) age; a solitary,  cold solid (or mixed solid-
cystic), hard nodule, a nodule with microcalcifications or irregular 
edges on ultrasonography; the presence of ipsilateral palpable nodes 
or vocal cord palsy; and a fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) 
suspicious for cancer. Approximately 40% of individuals with a 
history of therapeutic radiation exposure or a family history of 
thyroid cancer have a thyroid cancer. The cancer is in the index 
nodule in 60% and in other nodules in 40% of patients. 
 Diagnostic Tests 
 Patients with thyroid nodules should be evaluated with TSH mea-
surement and FNAB. If the biopsy suggests a follicular neoplasm, 
and the TSH level is suppressed or is in the low-normal range, an 
RAI scan should be performed to rule out a hot nodule. 
 Management 
 Nodules with any of the worrisome features mentioned above 
should be removed with—at minimum—an ipsilateral lobectomy 
and isthmusectomy. If FNAB confirms a malignancy, the patients 
should undergo thyroidectomy. Patients with benign nodules on 
FNAB may be treated with exogenous thyroxine. Nodules that 
continue to enlarge during follow-up may be re-biopsied or 
removed via a thyroidectomy. 
 THYROID CANCER 
 Malignant thyroid tumors include differentiated lesions (which arise 
from follicular cells); MTC; undifferentiated or anaplastic cancers; 
and other rare tumors such as lymphomas, squamous cell carcino-
mas, sarcomas, teratomas, plasmacytomas, paragangliomas, and 
metastatic thyroid cancers (from melanoma or from breast, kidney, 
lung, and other head and neck tumors). 
 1. DIFFERENTIATED THYROID CANCER 
 This group includes papillary, follicular variant of papillary, folli-
cular, and Hürthle cell tumors. Hürthle cell carcinoma has been 
considered a subtype of follicular carcinoma by some investigators 
and a unique differentiated thyroid cancer of follicular cell origin 
by others. 
 The characteristics of these tumors are depicted in Table 26–2. 
The biologic behavior of the follicular variant of papillary thyroid 
cancer is similar to that of papillary carcinoma. In follicular and 
Hürthle cell tumors, the diagnosis of malignancy can only be 
made by the presence of capsular, blood vessel, or lymphatic inva-
sion or when lymph node or distant metastases are present. 
Familial non-MTCs, especially if there is a family history of more 
than two affected relatives, have been shown to be more aggressive 
than their sporadic counterparts. 
TABLE 26–2  Characteristics of differentiated thyroid 
cancers.
Feature
Papillary
Follicular
Hürthle
Frequency
80%
10%-20%
3%-5%
Age group (y)
20-30
40-50
50-60
Multicentric
85%
10%
30%
Lymph node metastases
30%-40%
10%
25%
Distant metastases
2%-14%
33%
15%
RAI uptake
70%
80%
10%
Prognosis (10-y survival)
95%
85%
65%
TABLE 26–3  AGES system of classifying high-risk 
patients.
Variable
Description
Age
Women older than 50 y
Men older than 40 y
Grade
Poorly differentiated
Fibrous stroma
Insular, mucoid, and tall cell variants
Extent
Invasive into adjacent tissues or distant metastases
Size
Tumor with a maximum diameter of >4 cm
Reproduced, with permission, from Clark OH. Papillary thyroid carcinoma: rationale 
for total thyroidectomy. In: Clark OH, Duh Q-Y, ed. Textbook of Endocrine Surgery. 
Saunders; 1997.
 Surgical Treatment 
 Occult or minimal papillary carcinomas (<1 cm) have an excellent 
prognosis and are adequately treated by lobectomy. Lobectomy 
alone is also considered sufficient treatment for low-risk, unifocal, 
intrathyroidal cancers in the absence of a history of head and neck 
irradiation or a family history of thyroid cancer or cervical node 
metastases. Patients with high-risk cancers (determined by AGES, 
AMES, or TNM classification; Tables 26–3, 26–4, and 26–5) or 
bilateral cancers are best treated by total or near-total thyroidec-
tomy. Considerable debate has existed regarding optimal treat-
ment for low-risk differentiated thyroid cancer >1 cm. 
 Proponents of total thyroidectomy argued that this procedure 
is advantageous for several reasons: (1) RAI can be used to diag-
nose and treat recurrent or metastatic disease, (2) serum thyro-
globulin becomes a sensitive indicator of recurrent disease, (3) the 
procedure eliminates the risk of growth of occult cancer in the 
contralateral lobe and reduces the risk of recurrence, (4) it 
decreases the 1% risk of progression to undifferentiated cancer, 
and (5) it decreases the risk of reoperation in case of central neck 
recurrence. On the other hand, those favoring thyroid lobectomy 
noted that (1) total thyroidectomy is associated with a higher 
complication rate and that 50% of local recurrences can be cured 
with surgery, (2) <5% of recurrences occur in the thyroid bed, 
CHAPTER 26 Endocrine Surgery     807
 It is not usually possible to distinguish follicular and Hürthle cell 
carcinomas from corresponding adenomas preoperatively. If there 
are no obvious signs of cancer at surgery (lymphadenopathy or 
extrathyroidal invasion), a lobectomy is performed, because more 
than 80% of these tumors are benign. If final pathology confirms 
cancer, a completion thyroidectomy is usually recommended, 
except in those patients with minimally invasive tumors. Total or 
near-total thyroidectomy may be performed at the initial operation 
in individuals with large (>4 cm) tumors, particularly if nodules are 
present bilaterally. Total or near-total thyroidectomy is also recom-
mended if marked atypia is seen on FNA, if it is read as  suspicious 
for papillary carcinoma or the patient has a family history of thyroid 
cancer or a personal history of head and neck irradiation. 
 Postoperative Treatment 
 Long-term cohort studies by Mazzaferri and Jhiang and others 
demonstrate that postoperative RAI therapy reduces recurrence 
rates and leads to improved survival even in patients with low-risk 
tumors. Several features place patients at increased risk for local 
recurrences or metastases. These high-risk features include certain 
histologic subtypes (such as tall cell, columnar, insular, solid vari-
ant, and poorly differentiated thyroid cancer), presence of 
intrathyroidal vascular invasion, or gross or microscopic multifo-
cal disease. According to recently published guidelines from the 
American Thyroid Association, RAI is currently recommended for 
patients with known distant metastases, gross extrathyroidal 
extension of tumor (regardless of size) or tumors >4 cm even in 
the absence of other high-risk features. Ablation is also recom-
mended for selected patients with 1 to 4 cm tumors with lymph 
node metastases or other high-risk features. In contrast, RAI is not 
recommended for patients with unifocal cancers <1 cm in diam-
eter or patients with multifocal tumors (all <1 cm) without addi-
tional high-risk features. Thyroxine therapy is not only important 
as replacement but is given in higher doses to suppress TSH levels 
(to 0.1 μU/L in low-risk patients and <0.1 μU/L in high-risk 
patients), thus decreasing the growth stimulus for thyroid cancer 
cells. The need for TSH suppression must be balanced with the 
risks of subclinical thyrotoxicosis, such as exacerbation of angina 
in patients with ischemic heart disease, increased risk for atrial 
fibrillation, and osteoporosis in postmenopausal women. 
 2. MEDULLARY THYROID CANCER 
 This tumor comprises 7% of thyroid malignancies but accounts 
for approximately 17% of thyroid cancer–related deaths. It arises 
from the parafollicular (C cells) of the thyroid, which are derived 
from the neural crest and secrete calcitonin. MTC may be spo-
radic (75%) or occur in the setting of MEN 2A, MEN 2B, and 
familial non-MEN MTC. In the hereditary setting, the tumors are 
often bilateral and multicentric (90%). Approximately 50% of 
patients with MTC have nodal metastases in the central or lateral 
neck at presentation. All patients presenting with MTC should be 
screened for pheochromocytomas, hyperparathyroidism, and 
mutations of the  RET proto-oncogene. 
TABLE 26–4  AMES system for classifying high-risk 
patients.
Variable
Description
Age
Men >40 y, women >50 y
Metastases
Distant metastases
Extent
Invasion of adjacent tissues
Size
>5 cm
TABLE 26–5  TNMa staging system for papillary or 
follicular thyroid cancer.b
Papillary or Follicular
Under 45 y
Stage I
Stage II
Any T
Any T
Any N
Any N
M0
M1
45 y and older
Stage I
Stage II
Stage III
Stage IVA
Stage IVB
Stage IVC
T1
T2
T3
T1
T2
T3
T4a
T4a
T1
T2
T3
T4a
T4b
Any T
N0
N0
N0
N1a
N1a
N1a
N0
N1a
N1b
N1b
N1b
N1b
Any N
Any N
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M1
aTNM, tumor, node, metastasis.
bSeparate stage groupings are recommended for papillary or follicular, medullary, 
and anaplastic (undifferentiated) carcinoma.
Reproduced, with permission, from American Joint Committee on Cancer. Edge 
SB et al, eds. AJCC Cancer Staging Manual. 7th ed. Springer; 2010, p. 87
(3) multicentricity within the thyroid is not clinically significant, 
and (4) the prognosis is excellent in patients with low-risk tumors 
undergoing lobectomy. 
 Retrospective data indicate that the recurrence rate for patients 
with low-risk differentiated thyroid cancer is 10% and that the 
overall mortality rate is approximately 4% at 10 to 20 years. 
However, among patients who have recurrences, 33% to 50% die 
from thyroid cancer. Recent studies involving >50,000 patients 
with papillary cancers demonstrated that total thyroidectomy is 
associated with improved recurrence and survival rates even in 
patients with low-risk tumors. Furthermore, the most important 
information regarding risk for recurrence is available only postop-
eratively. Revised guidelines from the American Thyroid Association 
also recommend near-total or total thyroidectomy for thyroid can-
cers >1 cm unless there are contraindications to this procedure. 
808    CHAPTER 26 Endocrine Surgery
 In terms of surgical therapy, pheochromocytomas should be 
treated prior to thyroidectomy to avoid precipitating an intraop-
erative hypertensive crisis. Total thyroidectomy and bilateral cen-
tral compartment lymphadenectomy is the treatment of choice 
due to the high incidence of multicentric disease and ineffective-
ness of I-131 therapy for this tumor. An ipsilateral prophylactic 
lateral neck dissection is recommended for patients with positive 
central neck nodes and for primary tumors larger that 1 cm. 
 3. UNDIFFERENTIATED (ANAPLASTIC) 
   THYROID CANCER 
 This tumor type constitutes approximately 1% of all thyroid can-
cers and is the most aggressive variant. The peak incidence is in the 
seventh decade of life. Lymph node involvement is early and com-
mon (84%), as is local invasion into the larynx, vocal cords, recur-
rent laryngeal nerve, esophagus, and major vessels. Distant 
metastases are present in about 75% of patients. The role of sur-
gery is usually limited to palliation of obstruction by tumor deb-
ulking and tracheostomy. In patients without advanced disease, 
total or near-total thyroidectomy can be performed for cure in a 
minority of cases. External beam radiation and chemotherapy are 
usually recommended. 
 4. THYROID LYMPHOMA 
   AND METASTASES 
 Most thyroid lymphomas are of the non-Hodgkin B cell type and 
often develop in patients with long-standing chronic lymphocytic 
thyroiditis. Chemotherapy and radiotherapy form the mainstay of 
treatment, with thyroidectomy and node dissection reserved for 
palliation of airway obstruction or in patients who do not respond 
to the above therapies. The thyroid gland is a rare site of metasta-
ses from tumors of the kidney, lung, breast, and melanoma. In 
selected patients, thyroidectomy may increase survival. 
 5. MANAGEMENT OF LYMPH NODES IN 
   THYROID CANCER 
 Clinically inapparent lymph node metastases may be present in 
20% to 90% of papillary thyroid cancers, and a smaller proportion 
of patients with other tumor subtypes. Several retrospective studies 
have suggested that lymph node metastases do not have a signifi-
cant effect on survival in papillary thyroid cancers. Others report 
that lymph node metastases are associated with poorer survival but 
only in patients with follicular cancers and papillary cancer >45 
years of age. In patients with matted nodes or extranodal invasion, 
the recurrence rates are higher and the prognosis is worse. 
 The lymph node regions of the neck are depicted in Figure 26–1. 
A preoperative neck ultrasound is recommended for patients with 
malignant findings on FNAB to evaluate the contralateral lobe 
and lymph node regions. All clinically apparent disease in the 
central neck should be removed at the time of total thyroidectomy 
to improve clearance of disease from the central neck. Bilateral 
central node dissection (level VI) may also improve survival com-
pared to historic controls and decrease the risk of central neck 
recurrence. Other studies, however, show that central neck dissec-
tions are associated with a higher risk of hypoparathyroidism and 
recurrent nerve injury rates without any reduction in recurrence 
rates. Given the above, recently published guidelines do not 
 recommend routine prophylactic lymph node dissections but 
indicate that they may be performed in patients with advanced 
primary tumors (T 3 or T 4 ). Prophylactic central neck clearance 
should also be considered for Hürthle cell cancers which tend to 
be less RAI-responsive, provided they can be performed by expe-
rienced surgeons without increased rates of hypoparathyroidism 
and recurrent nerve injury. 
 Papillary and Hürthle cell cancers can also metastasize to 
lymph nodes in the lateral and posterior compartments (II, III, 
IV, and V). In patients with biopsy-proven nodal involvement, 
either clinically or on preoperative ultrasound examination, an 
ipsilateral modified radical neck dissection is recommended, par-
ticularly if these patients may fail RAI therapy based on lymph 
node number, size, or aggressive primary tumor histology. This 
procedure removes all the fibrofatty and lymph node tissue while 
preserving the internal jugular vein, the spinal accessory nerve, 
the cervical sensory nerves, and the sternocleidomastoid muscle 
and may reduce the risk of recurrence and subsequent mortality. 
Because thyroid cancers rarely metastasize to compartment I, 
these nodes are not routinely removed during a modified radical 
neck dissection. 
 In case of MTC, prophylactic central neck lymph node 
clearance is recommended because these tumors have a worse 
prognosis and do not take up RAI. The role of prophylactic 
lateral neck dissection is controversial. Ipsilateral node removal 
is recommended for MTCs over 1 cm in diameter (or a pal-
pable tumor) and when the central neck nodes are involved 
with cancer. If ipsilateral nodes are involved, a contralateral 
neck dissection will also be needed. Therapeutic modified 
radical neck dissection is indicated for biopsy-proven meta-
static disease in clinically involved nodes or those deemed 
suspicious by imaging. 
 6. RECURRENT AND METASTATIC 
   THYROID CANCER 
 Thyroglobulin levels are generally undetectable in patients follow-
ing total thyroidectomy and RAI ablation. Thyroglobulin levels 
>2 ng/mL in the absence of thyroglobulin antibodies indicates 
recurrent or persistent disease. These patients should be imaged 
with neck ultrasound, CT, or MRI. In general, surgical extirpation 
is recommended for patients with macronodular disease (>1 cm in 
diameter), followed by RAI therapy and TSH suppression. 
Thyroid cancers may metastasize to the lungs, bone, liver, and 
brain. Microscopic lung metastases in patients with papillary and 
follicular thyroid cancer are best treated with RAI and macro-
scopic disease surgically. External beam radiation is useful for 
unresectable, locally invasive or recurrent disease and to treat bony 
metastases with minimal to no RAI uptake. 
CHAPTER 26 Endocrine Surgery     809
 CONDUCT OF THYROIDECTOMY 
 A 4- to 5-cm incision is placed in or parallel to a natural skin 
crease 1 cm below the cricoid cartilage (Figure 26–2A). The sub-
cutaneous tissue and platysma are divided, subplatysmal flaps are 
raised (Figure 26–2B), and the strap muscles are separated in the 
midline from the thyroid cartilage to the suprasternal notch. 
Initial dissection is begun in the midline by identification of del-
phian nodes and the pyramidal lobe, followed by division of the 
fascia just cephalad to the isthmus. The trachea is then cleared just 
caudal to the isthmus. The thyrothymic ligaments and the inferior 
thyroid veins are ligated and divided. The side with the dominant 
or suspicious mass is approached first. In case of a proposed lobec-
tomy or the absence of cancer, the isthmus is divided. Tissues are 
swept lateral to the thyroid by blunt dissection, and the middle 
thyroid veins are ligated and divided (Figure 26–2C). The supe-
rior pole vessels are then individually ligated and divided low on 
the thyroid gland to decrease the risk of injury to the external 
branch of the superior laryngeal nerve (Figure 26–2D). The recurrent 
laryngeal nerve and the superior parathyroid gland are identified 
at the level of the cricoid cartilage. Once this is accomplished, the 
ligament of Berry is divided (Figure 26–2E), and the thyroid is 
sharply dissected off the trachea. The same procedure is repeated 
on the other side for a total thyroidectomy. 
 Several approaches to minimally invasive thyroidectomy such 
as mini-incision procedures, video-assisted thyroidectomy and 
total endoscopic thyroidectomy via supraclavicular, axillary 
incisions, chest and breast approaches have been described 
(Figure 26–3). These methods are clearly feasible; however, they 
do require further study to determine their advantages over the 
more traditional open approach. 
 Complications of Thyroidectomy 
 General complications after thyroid surgery include bleeding and 
wound complications such as infection and keloid formation. 
Specific complications include injury to the recurrent laryngeal 
nerve (<1%), or external branch of the superior laryngeal nerve, 
Superficial parotid nodes
(deep parotid nodes deep to
parotid gland)
Mastoid nodes
Occipital nodes
Sternocleidomastoid
muscle
External jugular node
(lateral superficial
cervical node)
Jugulodigastric node
Deep lateral nodes
(spinal accessory nodes)
Intercalated node
Jugular trunk
Inferior deep cervical
(scalene) node
Transverse cervical
chain of nodes
Superficial nodes
Mandibular and
submandibular
nodes
Submental node
Suprahyoid node
Internal jugular chain of nodes
(deep lateral cervical nodes)
Superior thyroid nodes
Anterior deep cervical
(pretracheal and thyroid)
nodes (deep to strap muscle)
Anterior superficial
cervical nodes
(anterior jugular nodes)
Supraclavicular nodes
Subclavian trunk and node
of subclavian chain
Thoracic duct
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
Facial nodes
(Buccal nodes)
Juguloomohyoid node
 FIGURE 26–1  Lymph node regions of the neck. Level I, submandibular; level II, III, and IV, upper, middle, and lower jugular nodes; level V, 
posterior triangle nodes; and level VI, central compartment nodes. (Reproduced, with permission, from Roseman BJ, Clark OH. Neck mass. In: 
Souba W, et al, eds.  ACS Surgery—Principles and Practice . 6th ed. WebMD Corporation; 2007.) 
810    CHAPTER 26 Endocrine Surgery
Small artery and vein
in ligament of Berry
Recurrent laryngeal nerve
Thyroid
E
Cricothyroid muscle
External branch of
superior laryngeal nerve
Superior 
thyroid vessels
D
Middle thyroid vein
C
Cricoid cartilage
Incorrect
Correct
A
Platysma
Cautery
Five straight clamps 
on dermis
B
 FIGURE 26–2  Conduct of thyroidectomy.  A. Placement of incision.  B. Raising subplatysmal flaps.  C. Dissection of the middle thyroid vein. 
 D. Dissection of superior pole vessels.  E. Dissection at the ligament of Berry. (Reproduced, with permission, from Lal G, Clark OH. Thyroid, para-
thyroid, and adrenal. In:  Schwartz’s Principles of Surgery . 8th ed. McGraw-Hill; 2004.) 
CHAPTER 26 Endocrine Surgery     811
temporary hypocalcemia (1.6%-15%), permanent hypocalcemia 
(<2% for total thyroidectomy), and injury to surrounding struc-
tures such as the esophagus, major vessels (carotid artery, internal 
jugular vein), and the cervical sympathetic trunk. 
 THE PARATHYROID GLAND 
 EMBRYOLOGY AND ANATOMY 
 Around the fourth week of gestation, the human embryo forms 
five pairs of endoderm-lined pharyngeal pouches. The inferior 
parathyroid glands are derived from the third branchial pouch 
(with the thymus), whereas the superior glands arise from the 
fourth branchial pouch. Most individuals have four parathyroid 
glands that are found as paired structures on the posterior aspect 
of the thyroid gland. Supernumerary glands occur in up to 22% 
of people. Fewer than four glands have also been reported in 3% 
to 5% of individuals. Approximately 85% of parathyroid glands 
are found within 1 cm of the point of intersection of the recurrent 
laryngeal nerve and the inferior thyroid artery. The superior para-
thyroid glands are usually dorsal to the nerve, whereas the inferior 
glands are usually ventral to it. The glands may also be found in 
several ectopic locations. Because the inferior glands migrate far-
ther, they are more often situated in ectopic locations such as the 
thyrothymic ligament, thymus, carotid sheath, and anterior medi-
astinum. Ectopically located superior glands can be located in the 
tracheoesophageal groove, carotid sheath, and posterior mediasti-
num. Intrathyroidal glands have been reported in 0.5% to 3% of 
individuals and may be superior or inferior. Normal parathyroid 
glands are generally embedded in fat, appear golden-yellow to 
light-brown in color, and weigh approximately 40 to 50 mg. The 
blood supply to the parathyroid glands is primarily via the inferior 
thyroid arteries, but the superior thyroid arteries may also supply 
both the upper and the lower glands. 
 Indications for Surgery 
 PRIMARY HYPERPARATHYROIDISM 
 This disorder occurs in 1:500 women and 1:2000 men. It is the 
most common cause of hypercalcemia in the outpatient popula-
tion, and along with malignancy-associated hypercalcemia accounts 
for the majority (>90%) of cases of hypercalcemia. Although most 
cases of PHPT are sporadic, the disorder may also be inherited as a 
component of MEN 1, MEN 2A, isolated familial hyperparathy-
roidism, and familial hyperparathyroidism with jaw tumor syn-
drome. PHPT is the earliest and most common manifestation of 
MEN 1, and 80% to 100% of patients develop hypercalcemia by 
age 40. MEN 1 is characterized by germline mutations in the 
 MENIN gene located on chromosome 11. In contrast, hyperpara-
thyroidism develops in only 20% of individuals with MEN 2A and 
is generally less severe. MEN 2A is characterized by inherited 
mutations in the  RET proto-oncogene located on chromosome 10. 
In sporadic cases, hyperparathyroidism results from a single 
enlarged gland (adenoma) in 85%, multiple enlarged glands 
(hyperplasia) in 11%, double adenomas in 3%, and parathyroid 
carcinoma in 1% of patients. Parathyroid carcinoma should be 
suspected if patients present with a short history, profound hyper-
calcemia, and a palpable parathyroid gland. In heritable disorders, 
hyperparathyroidism is more frequently associated with multiple 
abnormal parathyroid glands and a higher risk of persistent or 
recurrent disease. Familial hyperparathyroidism with jaw tumor 
syndrome is associated with an increased risk of parathyroid cancer 
and results from germline mutations in the  HRPT2 tumor suppres-
sor gene on chromosome 1. 
 The classic symptoms of PHPT include painful bones, renal 
stones, abdominal groans, psychic moans, and fatigue overtones. 
Other symptoms such as polyuria, nocturia, polydipsia, constipa-
tion, and musculoskeletal aches and pains may be present. The 
disorder may also be associated with hypertension, osteopenia, 
Endoscope
A
B
 FIGURE 26–3  Endoscopic thyroidectomy can be performed via (A) cervical or (B) axillary incisions. (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Inabnet WB, Gagner M. Endoscopic thyroidectomy: supraclavicular approach and Takami HE, Ikeda Y. Endoscopic thyroidectomy via an axillary 
or anterior chest approach. In: Gagner M, Inabnet WB, eds.  Minimally Invasive Endocrine Surgery . Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins; 2002). 
812    CHAPTER 26 Endocrine Surgery
osteoporosis, nephrolithiasis, gout, pseudogout, peptic ulcer dis-
ease, and pancreatitis. 
 Diagnostic Tests 
 Other causes of hypercalcemia can generally be excluded by a care-
ful history and physical examination. Laboratory tests that are 
helpful in making the diagnosis have been discussed in Chapter 
8. PHPT is characterized by hypercalcemia (95%), hypophos-
phatemia (50%), hyperchloremia (30%), serum chloride to phos-
phate ratio ≥33 (95%), elevated 24-hour urinary calcium, and an 
increased or inappropriately elevated intact PTH. An elevated 
alkaline phosphatase level suggests bone disease (osteitis fibrosa 
cystica). The 24-hour urinary calcium levels may be normal or 
elevated. Usually, 24-hour urinary studies are obtained unless the 
patient has previously had documented normocalcemia, to rule 
out FBHH, a disorder caused by inherited mutations in the  CASR 
gene and characterized by low (often <50 mg) 24-hour urinary 
calcium excretion. Furthermore, the serum calcium to creatinine 
clearance ratio is <0.01 in patients with FBHH and generally 
>0.02 in patients with PHPT (see Chapter 8). 
 Parathyroid tumors may be localized using noninvasive studies 
such as Tc-99m sestamibi (Figure 26–4A) and ultrasound scan-
ning (Figure 26–4B). MRI and CT scans and invasive localizing 
studies, including highly selective venous catheterization for PTH, 
and FNAB of suspected parathyroid masses and arteriograms are 
generally only used in cases of recurrent or persistent hyperpara-
thyroidism. The utility of noninvasive studies prior to initial neck 
exploration is controversial; however, most surgeons agree that 
they are indispensable for recurrent or persistent hyperparathy-
roidism and for using a minimally invasive approach. 99m- 
Technetium-labeled sestamibi has more than 80% sensitivity for 
the detection of hypercellular parathyroid glands, and when it is 
used in conjunction with SPECT, it has particular utility in iden-
tifying ectopic tumors. Neck ultrasound is often complementary 
and has a sensitivity of 75% in experienced centers. More recently, 
4-D CT scans have shown tremendous utility in localizing para-
thyroid tumors with excellent anatomic detail, in addition to 
providing functional information. It is important to note that 
most  localizing studies are less sensitive in the setting of multiglan-
dular disease. Since the first use of intraoperative PTH in 1993, it 
has become widely used to assess the adequacy of parathyroid 
resection. Although preoperative localization studies and a focused 
surgical approach are being increasingly used, long-term outcome 
and cost-effectiveness studies will be necessary before recommend-
ing their routine use. However, they should be obtained if a 
focused parathyroidectomy is planned. 
 Surgical Management 
 A. Rationale and guidelines for parathyroidec-
tomy 
 Patients with classic symptoms and metabolic complica-
tions related to PHPT are generally treated by parathyroidectomy. 
Whether asymptomatic patients should undergo parathyroidec-
tomy is controversial. One aspect of the controversy is the fact that 
there is no consensus on what constitutes an asymptomatic 
patient. At the 1990 NIH. Consensus Conference, asymptomatic 
PHPT was defined as, “the absence of common symptoms and 
signs of PHPT, including no bone, renal, gastrointestinal or neu-
romuscular disorders.” Nonoperative management was recom-
mended in this group of patients with calcium levels ≤12 mg/dL, 
based on several observational studies that suggested stability with 
respect to serum calcium, kidney stones, bone loss, and renal func-
tion with time. Parathyroidectomy was recommended for asymp-
tomatic patients <50 years of age and in certain other patients, as 
outlined in Table 26–6. 
 FIGURE 26–4  Parathyroid localization studies.  A. Sestamibi scan with early (5-10 minute) and delayed (60-90 minute) images showing per-
sistent uptake inferior to the right thyroid lobe (black arrow), suggesting a hypercellular parathyroid gland in this location.  B. Neck ultrasound 
(longitudinal view).  C. Neck ultrasound (transverse view) also showing a probable right inferior parathyroid adenoma (white arrow), which is 
hypoechoic compared to thyroid tissue. 
CHAPTER 26 Endocrine Surgery     813
 A second NIH Conference was held in 2002 to reevaluate the 
criteria for parathyroidectomy in asymptomatic patients. The 
guidelines issued were similar to the previous recommendations 
except for the following changes. Parathyroidectomy was recom-
mended in the following cases: for milder elevations in serum 
calcium (ie, if the serum calcium was 1 mg/dL above reported 
normal range) and if the bone mineral density at any site (fore-
arm, spine, or hip) was more than 2.5 standard deviations below 
that of gender-matched peak bone mineral density (T score, 
rather than Z score of <−2.5). The panel recommended caution 
in using neuropsychological abnormalities, cardiovascular dis-
ease, menopause, gastrointestinal symptoms, and serum or urine 
indices of increased bone turnover as sole indications for para-
thyroidectomy. These recommendations were revised again in 
2008, with elevated urinary calcium excretion (in the absence of 
nephrolithiasis) no longer being a criterion for surgery. 
Recommendations from all these conferences are summarized in 
Table 26–6. It is critical to emphasize that the level of evidence 
supporting the recommendations is not that of randomized con-
trolled trials. 
 However, recent investigations suggest that true asymptomatic 
hyperparathyroidism may be rare. Patients without classic symp-
toms often present with weakness, fatigue, polydipsia, polyuria, 
nocturia, bone and joint pain, constipation, and other symptoms. 
These patients also score lower than healthy controls when 
assessed by multidimensional health assessment tools such as the 
SF-36 and other more specific questionnaires. Furthermore, para-
thyroidectomy not only often improves the classic, but also the 
nonspecific symptoms described above. In addition, parathyroi-
dectomy has been associated with improved survival (in both 
asymptomatic and symptomatic patients), is more cost-effective 
than lifelong follow-up, and is successful in 95% of patients with 
a minimal (<1%) complication rate. Although bisphosphonates 
and calcimimetics show promise in the treatment of patients with 
PHPT, further studies are needed prior to recommending their 
routine use in this setting. Therefore, most clinicians recommend 
parathyroidectomy (by surgeons experienced in the procedure) for 
patients with PHPT, except in those patients where operative risks 
are prohibitively high. 
 B. Conduct of parathyroidectomy 
 Issues to consider 
before deciding on the optimal treatment approach are whether 
one is dealing with sporadic or familial disease and whether it is 
the initial operation or reexploration. The presence of concurrent 
thyroid pathology needing surgical treatment must also be consid-
ered. The positioning, incision, and dissection are as described 
previously for thyroidectomy. A bloodless field is crucial to enable 
identification of parathyroid glands. The middle thyroid veins are 
ligated and divided to allow medial retraction of the thyroid lobe. 
The space between the carotid sheath and thyroid is then opened 
by sharp and blunt dissection, from the level of the cricoid to the 
thymus, and the recurrent laryngeal nerve is identified. Most para-
thyroid glands are found within 1 cm of the junction of the nerve 
and inferior thyroid artery—the superior glands lie dorsal and the 
lower glands more ventral or anterior to the nerve. Because para-
thyroid glands are often embedded in fat, any fat lobule at typical 
parathyroid locations should be explored. 
 C. Bilateral versus unilateral approach 
 Traditionally, all 
four parathyroid glands have been explored without preoperative 
localizing studies, with a 95% success rate in the hands of an 
experienced surgeon. Investigators in favor of unilateral explora-
tion have suggested decreased recurrent laryngeal nerve injury, less 
postoperative hypocalcemia, shorter operative time, and early 
discharge as advantages of this approach. Potential disadvantages 
of unilateral exploration include the risk of missing multiple 
abnormal or ectopic parathyroid glands. 
 More surgeons today are using a unilateral or focal approach 
directed by localizing studies with or without intraoperative 
gamma probe or intraoperative PTH measurements. We have 
found that when two localizing studies—Tc-99m sestamibi and 
ultrasound—identify the same solitary parathyroid gland in 
patients with sporadic PHPT, this was the only abnormal parathy-
roid gland in 95% of patients. In patients with sporadic PHPT 
and positive preoperative localization studies, our current approach 
is to recommend focused parathyroidectomy via a 2.5-cm incision 
with intraoperative PTH measurement. If the PTH level falls 
more than 50% within 10 minutes after removal of an abnormal 
parathyroid gland, the procedure is terminated. If the level does 
TABLE 26–6  NIH Consensus Conference and International Workshop indications for surgery in patients with 
asymptomatic primary hyperparathyroidism.
Criterion
1990
2002
2008
Serum calcium
>12 mg/dL
>1 mg/dL above upper limit of normal
>1 mg/dL above upper limit of 
normal
Urinary calcium
>400 mg/24 h
>400 mg/24 h
Not indicated
Creatinine clearance
<30% of normal age-matched controls in the 
absence of another identifiable cause
Reduced by 30% of normal
Reduced to <60 mL/min
Bone mineral 
density
<2 SD below age- and sex-matched normal 
value (Z-score)
<2.5 SD below peak bone mass 
(T-score) at any site
T-score <−2.5 at any site and/or 
previous fracture
Age
<50 y
<50 y
<50 y
814    CHAPTER 26 Endocrine Surgery
not fall, a PTH measurement is repeated in another 10 minutes, 
because it may fall slowly in some patients. A bilateral approach is 
needed in patients with known familial disease, with negative or 
equivocal localization tests, with secondary or tertiary HPT, or a 
history of lithium treatment. If parathyroid cancer is suspected 
intraoperatively, it is resected with the ipsilateral thyroid lobe and 
regional lymph nodes. 
 D. Subtotal parathyroidectomy versus total parathyroi-
dectomy with autotransplantation 
 Either subtotal (gen-
erally resection of 3½ glands) or total parathyroidectomy with 
primary parathyroid autotransplantation may be performed in 
patients with multiglandular disease. In the latter technique, 12 to 
20 small fragments (1 × 1 mm) of parathyroid tissue are placed 
into multiple pockets in the forearm muscle of the nondominant 
arm. The site is marked with silk sutures and is easily accessible 
under local anesthesia should the patient develop recurrent hyper-
calcemia. The recurrence rates for hyperparathyroidism appear to 
be similar after subtotal or total parathyroidectomy. However, a 
5% failure rate has been reported after autotransplantation of 
parathyroid tissue. Therefore, subtotal parathyroidectomy is pre-
ferred. The most normal gland is biopsied first, leaving a 50-mg 
remnant (the size of a normal parathyroid gland); if it appears 
viable, the remaining glands are excised. Patients undergoing 
either of these procedures should have tissue cryopreserved, if pos-
sible. Parathyroid glands should not be routinely biopsied at 
exploration but rather biopsy should be used to confirm parathy-
roid tissue or help determine if the gland is normal or abnormal. 
As with thyroid surgery, video-assisted and endoscopic axillary 
approaches are feasible, but clear benefits compared with the open 
approach await long-term multicenter studies. 
 PERSISTENT AND RECURRENT PRIMARY 
HYPERPARATHYROIDISM 
 Persistent hypercalcemia occurs after about 5% to 10% of explora-
tions. Recurrent hypercalcemia is rare except in patients with 
familial disease and occurs after an intervening period (>6 
months) of normocalcemia. The most common reasons for persis-
tent or recurrent hyperparathyroidism are a missed gland in nor-
mal or ectopic location, unrecognized hyperplasia, supernumerary 
glands, subtotal tumor resection, parathyroid carcinoma, or para-
thyromatosis (usually due to implantation of cells due to spillage 
at the initial procedure). The most common sites of ectopic glands 
in patients with recurrent or persistent PHPT (Figure 26–5) are 
paraesophageal (28%), mediastinal (26%), intrathymic (24%), 
intrathyroidal (11%), carotid sheath (9%), and undescended 
(high cervical 2%). The management of these patients involves 
confirmation of the diagnosis—in particular, exclusion of FBHH; 
review of original operative notes and pathology reports; and 
localization studies, which are absolutely essential in this group of 
patients. Preoperative evaluation of the vocal cords is routinely 
performed. The issue of reexploration in mildly symptomatic 
patients is controversial. The neck is usually reexplored first, and 
median sternotomy may be needed in 1% to 2% of patients. 
Cryopreservation should be performed routinely and autotrans-
plantation selectively. Reexploration by an experienced surgeon is 
successful in more than 90% of patients, but reoperative parathy-
roidectomy is generally associated with more complications than 
an initial operation. 
 SECONDARY HYPERPARATHYROIDISM 
 This disorder occurs most often in individuals with end-stage 
renal failure but may also occur in other conditions resulting in 
hypocalcemia, such as vitamin D deficiency, idiopathic hypercal-
ciuria, and long-term lithium therapy. 
 Indications for surgery include serum calcium and phosphate 
product more than 70, renal osteodystrophy with or without bone 
pain, severe pruritus, ectopic soft tissue calcifications and tumoral 
calcinosis, serum calcium >11 mg/dL with markedly elevated 
PTH, and calciphylaxis. 
 These patients should undergo dialysis the day prior to surgery 
to correct electrolyte (specifically potassium) abnormalities. 
Patients with this disorder require bilateral exploration and either 
subtotal parathyroidectomy, leaving a 50 to 60 mg histologically 
confirmed, well-vascularized remnant of hyperplastic parathyroid 
distant from the recurrent laryngeal nerve; or total parathyroidec-
tomy with autotransplantation of a similar amount of tissue. 
15
Aortopulmonary
window
High cervical
position
Posterior
mediastinum
Carotid
sheath
Intrathymic
Anterior
mediastinum
(nonthymic)
Intrathyroidal
Paraesophageal
13
9
6
2
3
5
1
 FIGURE 26–5  Ectopic locations of parathyroid tumors found at 
reoperation after an initial failed neck exploration. The numbers indi-
cate the actual number of glands found at each location (n = 54). 
(Reproduced, with permission, from Shen W, et al. Reoperation for 
persistent or recurrent primary hyperparathyroidism.  Arch Surg . 
1996;131:861. Copyright 1996 by the American Medical Association.) 
CHAPTER 26 Endocrine Surgery     815
Upper thymectomy is usually performed in these patients, because 
up to 15% of patients have a fifth hyperplastic gland. 
 SPECIAL CONSIDERATION: FAMILIAL 
HYPERPARATHYROIDISM 
 Patients from MEN 1 families should have PHPT treated before 
coexisting gastrinoma. All glands should be identified, ectopic glands 
should be sought in the neck and upper mediastinum, and bilateral 
cervical thymectomy should be routinely performed due to the 
occurrence of thymic carcinoids. A subtotal parathyroidectomy (pre-
ferred by authors) or total parathyroidectomy, as described above, can 
be performed. MEN 2A patients should undergo screening for the 
presence of a pheochromocytoma and  RET mutation prior to thyroid 
or parathyroid surgery. Because the parathyroids are at risk during 
thyroidectomy and central neck node dissection, and hyperparathy-
roidism is less virulent in these patients, only obviously enlarged 
glands should be removed. Normal-appearing glands should be 
marked and removed abnormal parathyroid tissue cryopreserved. 
 COMPLICATIONS OF 
PARATHYROID SURGERY 
 General complications are similar to those associated with thyroi-
dectomy. Specific complications include recurrent laryngeal nerve 
injury, hypomagnesemia, and hypocalcemia. The latter may arise 
due to suppressed function of the remaining glands after removal 
of an adenoma; injury to the parathyroid remnant; or bone hun-
ger, which is the influx of calcium and phosphorus into metaboli-
cally active bones. Bone hunger can be predicted based on the 
severity of bone disease and the preoperative alkaline phosphatase 
level and is generally more severe in individuals with secondary 
hyperparathyroidism. Hypocalcemia can be treated with oral cal-
cium and vitamin D supplementation (calcitriol, 0.25-0.5 μg 
twice daily). Intravenous calcium is seldom required but may be 
necessary in severely symptomatic patients. 
 THE ADRENAL (SUPRARENAL) 
GLAND 
 EMBRYOLOGY AND ANATOMY 
 The adrenals are paired structures located superior to the kidneys. 
The adrenal is divided into an outer cortex and an inner medulla. 
The cortex originates from mesodermal tissue near the gonads on 
the adrenogenital ridge at approximately the fifth week of gesta-
tion. Adrenocortical tissue can thus be found in the ovaries, sper-
matic cord, and testes. The adrenal medulla originates from the 
neural crest, which is ectodermal in origin. 
 Each adrenal is supplied by three sets of arteries: the superior 
adrenal (from the inferior phrenic artery), the middle adrenal 
(from the aorta), and the inferior adrenal (from the renal artery). 
These vessels branch into as many as 50 arterioles. The left adrenal 
vein empties into the ipsilateral renal vein, whereas the right adre-
nal vein drains into the inferior vena cava (see Chapter 9). 
 Indications for Surgery 
 PRIMARY HYPERALDOSTERONISM 
 This disorder accounts for 1% of hypertensive patients and results 
from an adrenal adenoma (Conn syndrome, 75%), adrenal hyper-
plasia (24%), or adrenocortical cancer (1%). Glucocorticoid-
suppressible hyperaldosteronism is another rare cause of 
hyperaldosteronism. Patients with primary hyperaldosteronism 
typically present with hypertension (long-standing and difficult to 
control despite multiple medications), muscle weakness, polydip-
sia, polyuria, headaches, and fatigue. 
 Diagnostic Tests 
 The diagnosis must be suspected in any hypertensive patient with 
spontaneous hypokalemia (<3.2 mmol/L) or hypokalemia while on 
diuretic therapy (despite potassium supplementation). Other abnor-
malities include hypernatremia, alkalosis, and hypochloremia. 
Elevated plasma and urine aldosterone levels with suppressed plasma 
renin activity levels confirm the diagnosis. Plasma aldosterone con-
centration to plasma renin activity ratios of >1:25 to 30 are highly 
suggestive of the diagnosis. The diagnosis can be confirmed by docu-
menting failure to suppress plasma aldosterone with oral or intrave-
nous salt loading. Once the biochemical diagnosis is confirmed, it is 
important to distinguish between patients with a unilateral adenoma 
from those with hyperplasia because unilateral adrenalectomy is vir-
tually always curative for the former (see Chapter 9 for details). 
Tumors can be localized with CT scans, MRI, iodocholesterol scans, 
or selective venous catheterization for aldosterone and cortisol. A 
unilateral 0.5- to 2-cm adrenal tumor with a normal-appearing con-
tralateral gland essentially confirms an aldosteronoma if the bio-
chemical and clinical profiles are appropriate. 
 Surgical Management 
 Patients are prepared for surgery with potassium repletion, sodium 
restriction, and treatment with spironolactone or eplerenone (aldos-
terone antagonists). Amiloride or triamterene (potassium-sparing 
diuretics) as well as other effective antihypertensive medications, 
including calcium channel blockers and angiotensin-converting 
enzyme inhibitors, can also be used. Patients with a unilateral hyper-
functioning tumor are best managed with a laparoscopic adrenalec-
tomy. Postoperatively, patients may require saline infusions, 
fludrocortisone (50-100 μg/d), or, rarely, glucocorticoids if they 
develop Addison disease. Adrenalectomy improves blood pressure in 
approximately 80% of patients and leads to resolution of hypokalemia 
in most. Only 20% to 30% of patients with bilateral hyperplasia 
benefit from adrenalectomy. Surgical candidates can be selected 
based on bilateral adrenal vein sampling for aldosterone and corti-
sol. A unilateral gradient suggests a potential benefit from surgical 
816    CHAPTER 26 Endocrine Surgery
intervention. The remaining patients are best managed by medical 
therapy with spironolactone, triamterene, or amiloride. 
 HYPERCORTISOLISM 
 Cushing syndrome refers to a complex of symptoms and physical 
signs resulting from cortisol hypersecretion, independent of etiol-
ogy. Causes of Cushing syndrome include ACTH–secreting pitu-
itary tumor leading to bilateral adrenal hyperplasia (Cushing 
disease 70%); primary adrenal adenoma, hyperplasia, or carci-
noma (20%); ectopic ACTH-secreting tumors (small cell lung, 
pancreatic, thyroid, thymic, and other cancers—10%); or the 
exogenous administration of steroids. Patients present with weight 
gain, muscular weakness, polyuria, emotional lability, moon 
facies, acne, hirsutism, central obesity, hypertension, diabetes mel-
litus, and virilization. 
 Diagnostic Tests 
 Diagnostic tests in patients with Cushing syndrome are directed 
toward confirming the diagnosis and determining the etiology of 
the disorder. A low-dose (1-mg) overnight dexamethasone suppres-
sion test is usually performed. Patients with Cushing syndrome do 
not generally suppress cortisol levels to <3 ug/dL, although this 
threshold is controversial. In patients with a negative test but high 
clinical suspicion, the classic dexamethasone suppression test (2 mg 
over 48 hours) or a 24-hour urinary free cortisol measurement is 
performed. Salivary cortisol measurements are increasingly being 
used at some centers. Once hypercortisolism is confirmed, the 
plasma ACTH level, if suppressed, indicates a primary adrenal 
etiology for the disorder. High-dose (8-mg) dexamethasone sup-
pression tests may be performed to delineate the source of increased 
cortisol secretion (see Chapter 9 for details). Adrenal tumors are 
localized using CT, MRI, or iodocholesterol scans and pituitary 
tumors by MRI scanning and selective venous catheterization of 
petrosal veins after corticotropin-releasing factor stimulation. 
 Surgical Management 
 Cushing disease is treated with trans-sphenoidal hypophysectomy 
and microsurgical excision of the pituitary adenoma. Irradiation 
may also be used, but the response is delayed, and the treatment 
often results in panhypopituitarism. Unilateral laparoscopic 
adrenalectomy is the treatment of choice in patients with adrenal 
adenomas, whereas open adrenalectomy is recommended for car-
cinomas. Bilateral laparoscopic adrenalectomy is used to treat 
patients with Cushing disease who fail to respond to radiation or 
hypophysectomy and selected patients with Cushing syndrome 
secondary to ectopic ACTH production. Symptoms of Cushing 
syndrome can be treated with medications that inhibit steroid 
production (ketoconazole, metyrapone, aminoglutethimide). 
 Preoperatively, electrolyte abnormalities are corrected, and all 
patients are given exogenous steroids (hydrocortisone, 100 mg 
intravenously every 8 hours). After unilateral adrenalectomy, ste-
roids are tapered off over months. After bilateral surgery, lifelong 
treatment with hydrocortisone is necessary. Fludrocortisone is 
sometimes needed, and steroid supplementation must be increased 
in situations of stress. The prognosis after adrenalectomy for ade-
noma is excellent. After bilateral adrenalectomy, approximately 
20% of patients develop Nelson syndrome (hyperpigmentation, 
headaches, exophthalmos, and blindness) from continuing growth 
of the pituitary tumor. 
 ADRENAL CORTICAL CARCINOMA 
 This rare neoplasm is slightly more common in women than in 
men and has a bimodal age distribution, occurring more frequently 
in children under 5 years of age and in adults in their forties and 
fifties. Approximately 50% of these tumors are nonfunctioning. 
The remaining secrete cortisol (30%), androgens (20%), estrogens 
(10%), aldosterone (2%), or multiple hormones (35%). Most 
adrenocortical cancers are sporadic, but they can also occur in the 
setting of the Li-Fraumeni syndrome ( p53 ) and MEN 1 ( MENIN ). 
Adrenocortical cancers are often characterized by the rapid onset of 
Cushing syndrome with virilizing features. Nonfunctioning tumors 
usually present with an enlarging abdominal mass and abdominal 
pain or, less commonly, with weight loss, hematuria, varicocele, 
and dyspnea. 
 Diagnosis 
 The biochemical workup of a unilateral adrenal mass is outlined 
in the section on adrenal incidentaloma (see Chapter 9). CT or 
MRI scans are commonly employed to evaluate the size and inva-
siveness of the mass. The size of the mass remains the single most 
reliable indicator of malignancy. Carcinomas are more likely to be 
present in lesions over 6 cm in diameter. Studies based on SEER 
registry data show that the sensitivity, specificity, and likelihood 
ratio of tumor size in predicting malignancy as 96%, 51%, and 2, 
respectively, for tumors ≥4 cm; and 90%, 78%, and 4.1, respec-
tively, for tumors ≥6 cm. Other features suggesting malignancy on 
CT include irregular shape and margins, heterogeneity, and hem-
orrhage. On MRI, carcinomas have a moderate signal intensity on 
T2-weighted image (adrenal tumor to liver ratio 1.2-2.8). FNAB 
is usually recommended for patients with an isolated adrenal mass 
and a history of carcinoma of the lung, breast, stomach, kidney, 
colon, melanoma, or lymphoma and in those with symptoms and 
signs of underlying malignancy. FNAB is generally not recom-
mended when a primary adrenal carcinoma is suspected as the 
diagnosis cannot be reliably made via this test and has the poten-
tial to seed the biopsy tract. Care must be taken to exclude pheo-
chromocytoma prior to biopsy to avoid precipitating a hypertensive 
crisis (see Chapters 9 and 11). 
 Surgical Treatment 
 Complete surgical excision offers the only chance of prolonged 
survival or cure. Transabdominal adrenalectomy with en bloc exci-
sion of contiguously involved structures (liver, kidney, spleen, or 
pancreas) is usually recommended. A thoracoabdominal approach 
may also be used for large (>10 cm) right-sided tumors. 
CHAPTER 26 Endocrine Surgery     817
Laparoscopic adrenalectomy is not usually recommended for sus-
pected adrenal cancers. The adrenolytic agent mitotane and other 
antitumor drugs such as etoposide, cisplatin, and doxorubicin 
have also been used with partial success for metastatic tumors. 
Five-year actuarial survival rates of 32% to 48% have been 
reported in patients who underwent complete resection. Features 
predicting poor survival include tumor size over 12 cm, six or 
more mitoses per high-power field, intratumoral hemorrhage, 
local invasion, and distant metastases. 
 SEX STEROID EXCESS 
 Virilization and feminization can be caused by many disorders, 
including congenital adrenal hyperplasia, adrenal adenomas or 
carcinomas, ovarian or testicular tumors, hypothalamic or pituitary 
disease, placental disorders, and exogenous sex steroid administra-
tion. Several different variants of congenital adrenal hyperplasia 
occur, each caused by a specific enzyme defect. Adrenal virilization 
occurring postnatally usually results from an adenoma or carci-
noma. Virilization presents in females with hirsutism, clitoromeg-
aly, alopecia, breast atrophy, and oligomenorrhea. In males, 
feminizing tumors lead to gynecomastia and testicular atrophy. 
 Diagnostic Tests 
 Karyotype analysis to rule out sex chromosome anomalies such as 
Klinefelter syndrome and determinations of either plasma and or 
urinary steroid metabolites are needed to establish the diagnosis of 
a particular enzyme deficiency as discussed in Chapters 9 and 14. 
The dexamethasone suppression test (2-4 mg/d in divided 
doses 4 times daily for 7 days) can be used to distinguish con-
genital adrenal hyperplasia from neoplasia. CT, MRI, and iodoc-
holesterol scans are used to localize the tumors. 
 Surgical Management 
 Congenital adrenal hyperplasia is managed medically not surgi-
cally. Adrenalectomy is reserved for treatment of adrenal steroid 
excess caused by an adenoma or carcinoma. The perioperative 
management is similar to that for patients with Cushing syn-
drome. Patients with adrenal carcinomas have a poor prognosis. 
 PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA 
 This catecholamine-secreting tumor of the adrenal medulla and 
extra-adrenal chromaffin tissue accounts for 0.1% to 0.2% of all 
patients with hypertension. It is often called  the 10% tumor 
because 10% are bilateral, 10% are malignant, 10% occur in 
 children, 10% are extra-adrenal, and 10% are familial (occurring 
in association with MEN 2A, MEN 2B, von Hippel-Lindau syn-
drome, neurofibromatosis, other neurocutaneous syndromes, and 
the familial paraganglioma and pheochromocytoma syndromes 
caused by mutations in the succinyl dehydrogenase family of genes 
[ SDHB, SDHC and SDHD ]) (see Chapter 11). 
 Headache, palpitations, and diaphoresis constitute the classic 
triad of pheochromocytoma. Nonspecific symptoms include anxi-
ety, tremulousness, severe headaches, paresthesias, flushing, chest 
pain, shortness of breath, abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting 
as well as others. The most common clinical sign is hypertension, 
which may be sustained or episodic. 
 Diagnostic Tests 
 These are performed in a nonstressed patient. Twenty-four-hour 
urine collections are tested for catecholamines (epinephrine, norepi-
nephrine, dopamine) and their metabolites (metanephrines and 
normetanephrines). Plasma metanephrines, catecholamines, and 
chromogranin A levels are also used to make the diagnosis. 
Provocative tests such as glucagon infusion and clonidine suppres-
sion are rarely necessary. Radiologic investigations such as CT or 
MRI scans, and metaiodobenzylguanidine scans are used to localize 
the tumors and assess for possible extra-adrenal tumors (see Chapter 
11 for details). Of note, extra-adrenal sites lack phenylethanolamine-
 N -methyltransferase, and hence, secrete primarily norepinephrine 
rather than epinephrine. 
 Surgical Treatment 
 Adrenalectomy is the treatment of choice and can safely be per-
formed laparoscopically. Preoperative preparation typically con-
sists of treatment with an alpha-adrenergic blocker such as 
phenoxybenzamine (10-40 mg 4 times daily; maximum: 300 
mg/d) for at least 7 days preoperatively. Beta blockers such as 
propranolol (5-40 mg 4 times daily) are added in patients who 
have persistent tachycardia and arrhythmias but only after ade-
quate alpha blockade has been established in order to avoid the 
effects of unopposed alpha stimulation (ie, hypertensive crisis and 
congestive heart failure). Patients should also be volume repleted 
to avoid postoperative hypotension, which ensues with the loss 
of vasoconstriction after tumor removal. Nitroprusside is the drug 
of choice for intraoperative hypertension. After surgery, 95% of 
patients with paroxysmal hypertension and 65% with sustained 
hypertension become normotensive. Patients with malignant 
pheochromocytoma, defined by invasion into surrounding struc-
tures or presence of distant metastases, have a poor prognosis. 
Although risk of malignancy increases with size for all pheochro-
mocytomas, size does not seem to reliably predict malignancy in 
pheochromocytomas. The risk of malignant tumors is also 
increased in patients with germline SDHB mutations. 
 ADRENAL INCIDENTALOMA 
 The term  incidentaloma is used to denote an adrenal mass discov-
ered during imaging done for other reasons. Adrenal masses have 
been identified in up to 8% of individuals in autopsy series and in 
4.4% of those undergoing abdominal CT scans. The widespread use 
of ultrasound, CT, and MRI scans over the past two decades has led 
to an appreciable increase in the number of these lesions identified. 
Most of these lesions are benign nonfunctioning adenomas. The dif-
ferential diagnosis of these lesions is summarized in Table 26–7. 
818    CHAPTER 26 Endocrine Surgery
 Diagnosis 
 The workup is used to discern which lesions are functional or 
malignant and thus, warrant adrenalectomy. Asymptomatic 
patients with obvious cysts, hemorrhage, myelolipomas, or dif-
fuse metastatic disease do not mandate further testing. All other 
patients should undergo biochemical testing for hormonally 
active tumors. At a minimum, this includes serum electrolytes; 
low-dose (1-mg) dexamethasone suppression testing; and a 
24-hour urine collection for catecholamines, metanephrines, and 
17-ketosteroids; however, the issue of which tests to order is con-
troversial. Confirmatory tests can be performed based on the 
results of these screening tests. It is extremely important to iden-
tify patients with subclinical Cushing syndrome. Functional 
tumors and nonfunctional masses over 4 cm (in patients who 
have an acceptable operative risk) are treated by laparoscopic 
adrenalectomy, whereas heterogeneous, irregular, or enlarging 
tumors are treated by open or laparoscopic adrenalectomy. FNAB 
should be performed only in patients with a history of carcinoma 
and a suspected isolated adrenal metastasis, or if there is a ques-
tion as to whether the tumor is of adrenal origin (see Chapter 9 
for details). Care must be taken to exclude pheochromocytoma 
prior to biopsy to avoid precipitating a hypertensive crisis. 
 Treatment 
 Laparoscopic adrenalectomy has become the procedure of choice 
for most of the lesions described above except when malignancy 
is likely or suspected. Patients with nonfunctioning homoge-
neous lesions <4 cm in diameter should be followed with serial 
examinations and CT or MRI scans at 3 to 12 months. 
Adrenalectomy is indicated for any lesion that grows during the 
observation period. 
 TECHNIQUE OF ADRENALECTOMY 
 There are no randomized controlled trials comparing laparo-
scopic and open adrenalectomies. However, several retrospective 
studies have shown that the laparoscopic technique is safe and 
associated with less postoperative pain, shorter mean hospital 
stay, lower morbidity, and more rapid complete recovery. 
Laparoscopic adrenalectomy has become the procedure of choice 
for most adrenal lesions, and the indications are similar to those 
for open procedures. 
 Laparoscopic adrenalectomy is contraindicated in patients with 
a known adrenocortical cancer or coagulopathy. Two approaches 
have been described: transperitoneal (lateral and anterior) and 
posterior retroperitoneal. The former provides a conventional 
view of the anatomy, and the anterior approach allows for bilateral 
procedures without repositioning the patient. The posterior 
approach may be preferable in reoperative cases and obese patients 
but provides a limited working space. The lateral transperitoneal 
approach is described in the next paragraph. 
 The patient is placed in the lateral decubitus position, with the 
table flexed to open the space between the lower rib cage and the 
iliac crest. Pneumoperitoneum is created by insufflating carbon 
dioxide gas and four 10-mm trocars are placed between the mid-
clavicular line medially and the anterior axillary line laterally 
(Figure 26–6A), approximately two finger-breadths below the costal 
margin. A 30-degree laparoscope inserted via the midclavicular port 
is used to aid the dissection, which is carried out via atraumatic 
instruments inserted via the two most lateral ports. In general, the 
dissection of the adrenal usually begins superomedially and then 
proceeds inferiorly in a clockwise fashion (Figure 26–6B and Figure 
26–6C). The adrenal gland is dissected from surrounding tissue 
using an electrocautery or an ultrasonic scalpel (Harmonic Ultrasonic 
Scalpel). These methods are also useful for control of the small 
adrenal arteries, but the larger adrenal arteries and adrenal veins 
need to be clipped or stapled. The adrenal is placed in a specimen 
(EndoCatch) bag and can be morcellated prior to extraction. 
 Open adrenalectomy may be performed by the anterior, poste-
rior, retroperitoneal, or thoraco-abdominal approaches. The latter 
is very useful, particularly for large adrenal cancers. 
 Complications of Laparoscopic 
Adrenalectomy 
 Specific procedure-related complications include trocar site-asso-
ciated hematoma and subcutaneous emphysema, injury to sur-
rounding organs such as the spleen, pancreas, liver and colon, and 
bleeding from venous injuries. 
 THE ENDOCRINE PANCREAS 
 EMBRYOLOGY AND ANATOMY 
 The pancreas is a retroperitoneal organ located at the level of L2. 
It weighs 75 to 100 g, is approximately 15 to 20 cm in length, and 
is divided into the head and uncinate process, the neck, the body, 
and the tail. The uncinate process forms part of the head and sur-
rounds the superior mesenteric vessels. The main pancreatic duct 
(duct of Wirsung) is 2 to 3.5 mm wide, runs in the center of the 
pancreas, and drains the body, tail, and uncinate process. The 
lesser duct (duct of Santorini) usually drains the head, communicates 
TABLE 26–7  Differential diagnosis of an adrenal 
incidentaloma.
Benign
Malignant
Adrenal cortex
Functioning adenoma
Nonfunctioning adenoma
Adrenocortical cancer
Adrenal medulla
Pheochromocytoma
Malignant pheochromocytoma
Others
Cysts
Myelolipomas
Ganglioneuroma
Hematoma
Metastasis
CHAPTER 26 Endocrine Surgery     819
with the duct of Wirsung, and drains separately via a minor 
papilla located 2 cm proximal to the ampulla of Vater. The com-
mon bile duct is found posteriorly in the pancreatic head and joins 
the main pancreatic duct before draining into the ampulla. 
 The pancreas originates as dorsal and ventral pancreatic buds 
from the primitive endoderm at about the fifth week of gestation. 
The former gives rise to the superior head, neck, body, and tail, 
whereas the later forms the inferior head and the uncinate process. 
The ventral duct fuses with the dorsal bud to form the duct of 
Wirsung, and the proximal portion of the dorsal duct forms the 
duct of Santorini. In 10% of individuals, the ducts fail to com-
municate, resulting in pancreas divisum, where the entire pancreas 
is drained by the lesser duct. 
 Indications for Surgery 
 Endocrine pancreatic tumors arise from the islet cells, which are 
derived from the neural crest. Common functioning tumors are 
described next. 
 INSULINOMA 
 This β-cell–derived neoplasm is the most common pancreatic 
endocrine tumor. Insulinomas are evenly distributed throughout 
the pancreas (one-third each in the head, body, and tail). Most 
patients (90%) have a benign, solitary lesion. Approximately 10% 
of patients have malignant insulinomas with metastatic disease to 
the liver and peripancreatic lymph nodes. The insulinoma syn-
drome is characterized by the Whipple triad, which includes 
symptoms of hypoglycemia during fasting, serum glucose <50 
mg/dL, and relief of hypoglycemic symptoms by exogenous glu-
cose administration. Hypoglycemic symptoms may result from 
neuroglycopenia (confusion, seizures, personality change, coma) 
or due to a catecholamine surge (tachycardia, diaphoresis, trem-
bling). Other causes of hypoglycemia such as reactive hypoglyce-
mia, adrenal insufficiency, end-stage liver disease, nonpancreatic 
tumors (mesothelioma, sarcoma, adrenal carcinoma, carcinoid), 
and surreptitious administration of oral hypoglycemics or insulin 
should be excluded. 
 Diagnostic Tests 
 The diagnosis is made during a 72-hour monitored fast if glucose 
levels fall to <50 mg/dL while insulin levels are more than 20 uU/mL 
and the insulin to glucose ratio is >0.4 (normal: <0.3). This is 
considered the gold-standard test. Increased levels of C peptide 
and proinsulin are also diagnostic, whereas low levels suggest facti-
tious hyperinsulinemia. 
 Once the diagnosis is confirmed biochemically, noninvasive 
tests such as double-contrast, fine-cut (5 mm) CT or MRI scans 
can identify large tumors or liver metastases. Transgastric endo-
scopic ultrasound is the most successful preoperative localization 
test (sensitivity 83%-93%). Some pancreatic neuroendocrine 
tumors also express somatostatin receptors and can be imaged 
using radiolabeled octreotide. Unfortunately, this is only effective 
in about 30% of patients with insulinomas (see Chapter 18 for 
details). Selective arteriography with calcium stimulation of insu-
lin secretion, monitored through a catheter positioned in the right 
hepatic vein (Imamura-Doppmann test, sensitivity 88%) is an 
invasive test that is used selectively when other localization studies 
fail to identify the tumor or in patients following unsuccessful 
prior surgery. 
Umbilicus
1
2
3
4
A
 FIGURE 26–6  Technique of laparoscopic adrenalectomy.  A. 
Positioning and placement of trocars.  B. Exposure of the right adre-
nal is facilitated by division of the triangular ligament.  C. Dissection 
and reflection of the spleen and tail of the pancreas aids in identify-
ing the left adrenal. (Reproduced, with permission, from Lal G, Clark 
OH. Thyroid, parathyroid, and adrenal. In:  Schwartz’s Principles of 
Surgery . 8th ed. McGraw-Hill; 2004.) 
820    CHAPTER 26 Endocrine Surgery
 Treatment 
 A. Surgical treatment 
 Operation is the only curative treat-
ment. Prior to surgery, patients are instructed to take several small 
frequent meals, and diazoxide administration can be helpful in 
avoiding hypoglycemic attacks. Other medications commonly 
used include verapamil, diphenylhydantoin, and glucocorticoids. 
Somatostatin analogues can also be used if the tumors are positive 
for somatostatin receptors. Glucose levels are monitored periop-
eratively. The combination of inspection, palpation, and intraop-
erative ultrasound allows detection of nearly all tumors and their 
relationship to the pancreatic duct. Small (<2 cm) benign tumors 
in any part of the pancreas that are not intimately associated with 
the main pancreatic duct are best treated by enucleation. Larger 
tumors (up to 5 cm) can be enucleated if located in the pancreatic 
head but are removed by spleen-preserving distal pancreatectomy 
if located in the tail. Large tumors in the head that appear malig-
nant are usually resected by a Whipple procedure. When a tumor 
cannot be identified, blind distal resections should generally not 
be performed. However, a small distal pancreatic resection may be 
sufficient to rule out nesidioblastosis (β-cell hyperplasia). Resection 
of peripancreatic and duodenal nodes is advised in patients with 
probable malignant tumors. Hepatic resection should be consid-
ered for cure or palliation in patients with metastatic tumors. In 
cases of nonresectable disease, debulking may be reasonable to 
achieve symptomatic control and may also prolong survival. 
Other modalities such as RFA, cryotherapy, and TACE may also 
be considered in this setting. Patients with insulinomas in the set-
ting of MEN 1, in contrast to those with sporadic tumors, require 
distal pancreatectomy and enucleation of tumors from the head of 
the pancreas. Surgical resection is curative in about 95% of cases. 
 B. Medical treatment 
 Diazoxide and verapamil are often 
used to decrease insulin secretion from insulinoma. Combination 
chemotherapy (streptozocin, 5-FU, and doxorubicin) has also 
been used for unresectable insulinomas. 
 GASTRINOMA (ZOLLINGER-ELLISON 
SYNDROME) 
 This neoplasm leads to abdominal pain, peptic ulceration of the 
proximal gastrointestinal tract (90%) and diarrhea (50%). The 
diagnosis should be suspected in patients with recurrent postop-
erative and postbulbar ulcers, ulcers associated with diarrhea, a 
family history of ulcer diathesis or MEN 1, and failure to respond 
to adequate medical therapy. Up to 75% of gastrinomas occur 
sporadically. In contrast to insulinomas, 60% of gastrinomas are 
malignant and present with local invasion and metastases. Also, 
virtually all insulinomas are situated within the pancreas, but up 
to 70% of gastrinomas are found within the duodenum. 
 Diagnostic Tests 
 Fasting serum gastrin levels are generally over 200 pg/mL, and 
values over 1000 pg/mL are diagnostic of gastrinomas except in 
hypochlorhydric patients. Elevated gastrin levels may also be 
found in several other disease states (Table 26–8), and other tests 
are therefore necessary. Basal gastric acid output over 15 mEq/h 
(>5 mEq/h in patients with previous vagotomy) or a ratio of basal 
to maximal acid output >0.6 suggests a gastrinoma. An increase of 
gastrin over 200 pg/mL above the basal level on stimulation with 
2 U/kg secretin confirms the diagnosis. In patients with ZES, 
serum PTH, calcium, and prolactin levels should be measured to 
rule out MEN 1. 
 Imaging studies used to localize gastrinomas are similar to 
those used for investigation of insulinomas. However, endoscopic 
ultrasound and visceral angiograms are less sensitive for gastrino-
mas, because many are small and not within the pancreas. Most 
pancreatic gastrinomas are situated to the right of the superior 
mesenteric vessels. Octreotide scans or positron emission tomogra-
phy (PET) with  Ga-DOTATOC may be useful. Selective pancre-
atic angiograms utilizing secretin stimulation and hepatic venous 
sampling for gastrin levels may also be used. 
 Treatment 
 A. Surgical treatment 
 Patients are treated with proton 
pump inhibitors preoperatively. Most gastrinomas are located in 
the gastrinoma triangle, which is surrounded by the cystic duct 
superiorly, the second and third portions of the duodenum inferi-
orly, and the junction of the neck and body of the pancreas medi-
ally. The Whipple procedure is recommended for large (>6 cm) or 
clinically malignant tumors in the head of the pancreas. Intraoperative 
ultrasound, endoscopy with duodenal transillumination, and a 
longitudinal duodenotomy are necessary to identify many tumors. 
All peripancreatic and periduodenal lymph nodes should be 
removed, as primary lymph node gastrinomas have been reported. 
Single hepatic metastases may be resected. Total gastrectomy is 
rarely indicated today except in noncompliant patients or those 
refractory to medical therapy when the gastrinoma cannot be 
identified or completely removed. Patients with MEN 1 often 
have multiple gastrinomas. The extent and role of surgery in 
patients with MEN 1/ZES remains controversial. Some groups 
TABLE 26–8 Causes of hypergastrinemia.
A. Hypergastrinemia associated with increased gastric acid
 1. Gastrinoma, sporadic, or familial (MEN 1)
 2. Antral G cell hyperfunction (rare)
 3. Retained gastric antrum
 4. Short bowel syndrome
 5. Gastric outlet obstruction
 6. Renal failure (acid can be normal)
 7. Helicobacter pylori gastritis (acid can be low)
 B. Hypergastrinemia associated with little or no gastric acid
 1. Pernicious anemia (achlorhydria)
 2. Chronic atrophic gastritis
 3. Vagotomy
 4. Gastric ulcer associated with hypochlorhydria
CHAPTER 26 Endocrine Surgery     821
advise early and aggressive surgeries to prevent liver disease, 
whereas others advise resection of MEN 1 gastrinomas >2 cm as 
small tumors are characterized by a good prognosis. In advanced, 
surgically incurable tumors, cytoreductive measures including 
resection or RFA/TACE are reasonable if >90% of the tumor mass 
can be removed, although this does not appear to prolong survival. 
Liver transplantation may be a consideration in young patients 
with diffuse, unresectable pancreatic metastases. In contrast to 
patients with MEN 1 who have nearly 100% recurrence rates, 
about 34% of patients with sporadic gastrinomas remain disease-
free at 10 years after surgical treatment. Overall survival rates after 
surgical treatment are reported to be 94% at 10 years. 
 B. Medical treatment 
 Octreotide may be used to decrease 
gastrin secretion. The combination of doxorubicin, streptozoto-
cin, and 5-FU can be used as systemic chemotherapy. Somatostatin 
analogues and interferons have not shown much efficacy. 
 VIPOMA (VERNER-MORRISON) 
SYNDROME 
 This disorder is also known as the WDHA (watery diarrhea, 
hypokalemia, achlorhydria) or pancreatic cholera syndrome. 
Patients typically present with high-volume diarrhea (>5 L/d), 
muscular weakness (due to hypokalemia) and lethargy, hypergly-
cemia, hypercalcemia, and, rarely, cutaneous flushing. 
 Diagnostic Tests 
 Because secretion of VIP can be episodic, multiple fasting levels 
should be measured. Localizing studies are performed as described 
earlier for insulinomas and gastrinomas. 
 Treatment 
 A. Surgical treatment 
 Fluid and electrolytes should be 
aggressively repleted prior to surgery. The diarrhea often responds 
to octreotide. Most of these tumors are located in the body and 
tail and hence are best managed by a distal pancreatectomy. Small 
tumors may be enucleated. If the tumor is not localized, the auto-
nomic chain and adrenals should be examined for extrapancreatic 
tumors. If no tumor is identified, distal pancreatectomy may be 
considered. Palliative debulking may be performed for metastatic 
disease to control symptoms if >90% of the tumor mass can be 
resected. Other ablative therapies such as RFA/TACE or cryo-
therapy may also be used as cytoreductive measures and liver 
transplantation may be an option in selected cases. 
 B. Medical treatment 
 Somatostatin analogues may provide 
palliation of symptoms particularly if the tumors are octreotide 
scan positive. They may also have an effect on tumor growth. 
Interferon-α may be indicated in tumors not responding to soma-
tostatin analogues. Systemic therapy as described for other tumors 
may also be used. 
 GLUCAGONOMA 
 Patients with this tumor have mild diabetes, stomatitis, anemia, 
malnutrition, hypoproteinemia, and a characteristic severe derma-
titis (necrolytic migratory erythema). The latter is thought to be 
secondary to the hypoaminoacidemia. 
 Diagnostic Tests 
 The clinical presentation and biopsy of the rash are sufficient for 
the diagnosis. Hyperglycemia, hypoproteinemia, and an elevated 
fasting glucagon level (>150 pg/mL) confirm the diagnosis. 
Localizing and staging tests are performed, as described above for 
the more common tumors. Most of these tumors are malignant. 
 Treatment 
 A. Surgical treatment 
 Patients need preoperative octreotide, 
hyperalimentation, and routine deep venous thrombosis prophy-
laxis. Up to 70% of these tumors present with metastases, and 
surgery is the only potentially curable treatment. Most tumors are 
solitary and located in the tail, where they are amenable to distal 
pancreatectomy. Palliative debulking with distal pancreatectomy 
and splenectomy (if needed) in the setting of metastatic disease 
may help refractory symptoms. If splenectomy is planned, appro-
priate vaccination to reduce the risk of overwhelming postsplenec-
tomy sepsis is recommended preoperatively. 
 B. Medical treatment 
 As with other neuroendocrine tumors, 
octreotide and embolization of hepatic metastases may help con-
trol symptoms. 
 SOMATOSTATINOMA 
 The somatostatinoma syndrome is characterized by steatorrhea, 
diabetes, hypochlorhydria, and gallstone disease. Most somatosta-
tinomas are malignant (75% have metastases at presentation) and 
are located in the pancreatic head. The diagnosis is established by 
fasting somatostatin levels of 100 pg/mL or more. Somatostatinomas 
are usually treated with the Whipple procedure (ie, pancreati-
coduodenectomy). Fluid and electrolyte abnormalities should be 
corrected preoperatively. 
 NONFUNCTIONING 
PANCREATIC TUMORS 
 Approximately 33% of patients with pancreatic endocrine neo-
plasms have no evidence of a defined clinical syndrome and are 
deemed to have nonfunctioning tumors. However, some of these 
tumors produce pancreatic polypeptide and chromogranin A, 
particularly in the setting of MEN 1. These patients usually pres-
ent with abdominal pain, weight loss, and jaundice—similar to 
ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. The tumors are most 
commonly present in the head, neck, and uncinate process. The 
tumors are localized and staged similar to functional tumors. 
822    CHAPTER 26 Endocrine Surgery
Octreotide scans are recommended to assess receptor expression 
status and assess extent of disease. Endoscopic retrograde cholan-
giopancreatography and percutaneous transhepatic cholangiogra-
phy are used for the evaluation of jaundice. 
 Surgical Treatment 
 Approximately 75% of these tumors are malignant. Surgical resec-
tion (pancreaticoduodenectomy or distal pancreatectomy) is the 
treatment of choice for sporadic tumors, because these tumors are 
not amenable to enucleation. In the presence of MEN 1, the indi-
cations for surgery are controversial. More aggressive groups rec-
ommend tumor enucleation in the head and prophylactic subtotal 
pancreatectomy, whereas more conservative groups recommend 
close follow up and enucleation of lesions >2 cm. Biliary and 
gastric bypasses may be necessary for palliation. These tumors 
often grow slowly. Five-year survival rates after resection are 50%. 
Resectable liver disease should be treated with surgery and or RFA. 
In patients with unresectable disease, combination chemotherapy 
(streptozocin and doxorubicin) with RFA/TACE may provide pal-
liation. Poorly differentiated tumors are characterized by aggres-
sive tumor biology, absence of somatostatin receptors, and poor 
prognosis. Surgical resection is recommended only for resectable 
primary tumors. Cytoreductive procedures are generally not rec-
ommended in these patients. 
 Technique of Pancreatic Exploration for 
Neuroendocrine Tumors 
 Patients are explored through a midline or bilateral subcostal inci-
sion. A detailed description of the Whipple procedure and a distal 
pancreatectomy is beyond the scope of this chapter, and the reader 
is referred to surgical atlases. A general description of the necessary 
maneuvers is presented here. The gastrocolic ligament and the 
inferior retroperitoneal attachments of the pancreas are divided to 
permit examination of the body and tail. A Kocher maneuver is 
performed to facilitate bimanual examination of the head and 
uncinate process. The duodenum, splenic hilum, small bowel 
mesentery, gonads (in women), and lymph nodes are assessed for 
extrapancreatic disease. The liver is examined for metastatic dis-
ease. Intraoperative ultrasound may facilitate identification of 
tumors. Early experience suggests that a laparoscopic approach is 
also feasible in these tumors, particularly sporadic insulinomas, 
when the lesion is identified with localization studies. 
 Complications of Pancreatic Surgery 
 The most important complications of pancreatic surgery (tumor 
enucleation, distal pancreatectomy, or Whipple resection) are 
pancreatic fistula, pseudocyst, or abscess formation, which may 
lead to necrotizing retroperitoneal infection, and hemorrhage. 
Other complications include upper gastrointestinal tract bleeding, 
marginal ulceration, and biliary fistula formation. The mortality 
of a Whipple procedure is <5% and that of other pancreatic surgi-
cal procedures is <1%. 
 REFERENCES 
 The Thyroid Gland 
 Boger MS, Perrier ND. Advantages and disadvantages of surgical therapy and 
optimal extent of thyroidectomy for the treatment of hyperthyroidism.  Surg 
Clin North Am . 2004;84:849. [PMID: 15145239] 
 Brent GA. Clinical practice. Graves’ disease.  N Engl J Med . 2008;358:2594. 
[PMID: 18550875] 
 Chi SY, Hsei KC, Sheen-Chen SM, Chou FF. A prospective randomized compari-
son of bilateral subtotal thyroidectomy versus unilateral total and contralat-
eral subtotal thyroidectomy for Graves’ disease.  World J Surg . 2005;29:160. 
[PMID: 15650802] 
 Cooper DS, Doherty GM, Haugen BR, et al. Revised American Thyroid 
Association Management Guidelines for patients with thyroid nodules and 
differentiated thyroid cancer.  Thyroid . 2009;19:1167. [PMID: 19860577] 
 Hogan AR, Zhuge Y, Perez EA, Koniaris LG, Lew JI, Sola JE. Pediatric thyroid 
carcinoma: incidence and outcomes in 1753 patients.  J Surg Res . 
2009;156:167. [PMID: 19631341] 
 Kupferman ME, Patterson M, Mandel SJ, LiVolsi V, Weber RS. Patterns of lateral 
neck metastasis in papillary thyroid carcinoma.  Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck 
Surg . 2004;130:857. [PMID: 15262763] 
 Lee J, Grumbach M, Clark OH. The optimal treatment for pediatric Graves’ dis-
ease is surgery.  J Clin Endocrnol Metab . 2007;92:801. [PMID: 17341575] 
 Miccoli P, Pinchera A, Materazzi G, et al. Surgical treatment of low- and interme-
diate-risk papillary thyroid cancer with minimally invasive video-assisted 
thyroidectomy.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2009;94:1618. [PMID: 
19223525] 
 Moo-Young TA, Traugott AL, Moley JF. Sporadic and familial medullary thyroid 
carcinoma: state of the art.  Surg Clin North Am . 2009;89:1193. [PMID: 
19836492] 
 Neff RL, Farrar WB,  Kloos RT, Burman KD. Anaplastic thyroid cancer.  Endocrin 
Metab Clin North Am . 2008;37:525. [PMID: 18502341] 
 Richards ML. Thyroid cancer genetics: multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2, non-
medullary familial thyroid cancer, and familial syndromes associated with 
thyroid cancer.  Surg Oncol Clin N Am . 2009;18:39. [PMID: 19056041] 
 Woodrum DT, Gauger PG. Role of  131 I in the treatment of well differentiated 
thyroid cancer.  J Surg Oncol . 2005;89:114. [PMID: 15719384] 
 The Parathyroid Gland 
 Bilezikian JP, Khan AA, Potts JT Jr, Third International Workshop on the 
Management of Asymptomatic Primary Hyperparathyroidism. Guidelines 
for the management of asymptomatic primary hyperparathyroidism: sum-
mary statement from the third international workshop.  J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab. 2009;94:335.[PMID: 19193908] 
 Delellis RA. Challenging lesions in the differential diagnosis of endocrine tumors: 
parathyroid carcinoma.  Endocr Pathol . 2008;19:221. [PMID: 19058032] 
 Eastell R, Arnold A, Brandi ML, et al. Diagnosis of asymptomatic primary hyper-
parathyroidism: proceedings of the third international workshop.  J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab . 2009;94:340. [PMID: 19193909] 
 Henry JF, Sebag F, Cherenko M, Ippolito G, Taieb D, Vaillant J. Endoscopic 
parathyroidectomy: why and when?  World J Surg . 2008;32:2509. [PMID: 
18758853] 
 Irvin GL, III. Quick intraoperative parathyroid hormone assay: surgical adjunct to 
allow limited parathyroidectomy, improve success rate, and predict outcome. 
 World J Surg . 2004;28:1287. [PMID: 15517474] 
 Udelsman R, Pasieka JL, Sturgeon C, Young JE, Clark OH. Surgery for asymp-
tomatic primary hyperparathyroidism: proceedings of the third international 
workshop.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2009;94:366. [PMID: 19193911] 
 Westerdahl J, Bergenfelz A. Unilateral versus bilateral neck exploration for primary 
hyperparathyroidism: five-year follow-up of a randomized controlled trial. 
 Ann Surg . 2007;246:976. [PMID: 18043099] 
 The Adrenal Gland 
 Al-Fehaily M, Duh QY. Clinical manifestation of aldosteronoma.  Surg Clin North 
Am . 2004;84:887. [PMID: 15145241] 
 Broome JT, Gauger P. Surgical techniques for adrenal tumors.  Minerva Endocrinol . 
2009;34:185. [PMID: 19471241] 
CHAPTER 26 Endocrine Surgery     823
 Ilias I, Torpy DJ, Pacak K, Mullen N, Wesley RA, Nieman LK. Cushing’s syn-
drome due to ectopic corticotropin secretion: twenty years’ experience at the 
National Institutes of Health.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2005;90:4955. 
[PMID: 15914534] 
 National Institutes of Health. NIH state-of-the-science statement on management 
of the clinically inapparent adrenal mass (“incidentaloma”).  NIH Consensus 
State Sci Statements . 2002;19:1. [PMID: 14768652] 
 Sippel RS, Chen H. Subclinical Cushing’s syndrome in adrenal incidentalomas. 
 Surg Clin North Am. 2004;84:875. [PMID: 15145240] 
 Sturgeon C, Shen WT, Clark OH, Duh QY, Kebebew E. Risk assessment in 457 
adrenal cortical carcinomas: how much does tumor size predict the likeli-
hood of malignancy?  J Am Coll Surg . 2006;202:423. [PMID: 16500246] 
 Walz KM. Extent of adrenalectomy for adrenal neoplasm: cortical sparing (subto-
tal) versus total adrenalectomy.  Surg Clin North Am . 2004;84:743. [PMID: 
15145232] 
 Zarnegar R, Kebebew E, Duh QY, Clark OH. Malignant pheochromocytoma. 
 Surg Oncol Clin N Am . 2006;15:555. [PMID: 16882497] 
 The Endocrine Pancreas 
 Abood GJ, Go A, Malhotra D, Shoup M. The surgical and systemic management 
of neuroendocrine tumors of the pancreas.  Surg Clin North Am . 2009;89:249. 
[PMID: 19186239] 
 Anlauf M, Wieben D, Perren A, et al. Persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia in 
15 adults with diffuse nesidioblastosis: diagnostic criteria, incidence, and 
characterization of beta-cell changes.  Am J Surg Pathol . 2005;29:524. 
[PMID: 15767809] 
 Doherty GM. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1.  J Surg Oncol . 2005;89:143. 
[PMID: 15719382] 
 Ehehalt F, Saeger HD, Schmidt CM, Grützmann R. Neuroendocrine tumors of 
the pancreas.  Oncologist . 2009;14:456. [PMID: 19411317] 
 Fernandez-Cruz L, Martínez I, Cesar-Borges G. Laparoscopic surgery in patients 
with sporadic and multiple insulinomas associated with multiple endocrine 
neoplasia type 1.  J Gastrointest Surg . 2005;9:381. [PMID: 15749601] 
 Mazzaglia PJ, Berber E, Milas M, Siperstein AE. Laparoscopic radiofrequency abla-
tion of neuroendocrine liver metastases: a 10-year experience evaluating 
predictors of survival.  Surgery . 2007;142:10. [PMID: 17629995] 
 McLean AM, Fairclough PD. Endoscopic ultrasound in the localisation of pancre-
atic islet cell tumours.  Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2005;19:177. 
[PMID: 15763694] 
 Starke A, Saddig C, Mansfeld L, et al. Malignant metastatic insulinoma—postop-
erative treatment and follow-up.  World J Surg . 2005;29:789. [PMID: 
15880279] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This page intentionally left blank
825
(Continued)
Normal Hormone Reference Rangesa,b
Appendix 
     
Test
Source
Ages, 
Conditions, etc
Conventional 
Units
Conversion 
Factor
SI Units
Comments
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) stimulation test (cosyntropin test): 0.25 mg of synthetic ACTH1-24 (cosyntropin) is administered IV or IM, and 
serum cortisol is measured at 0, 30, and 60 min. Normal response: peak cortisol >20 μg/dL (>540 nmol/L). A dose of 1 μg of ACTH will give a 
similar response in the normal individual (see Chapter 9).
ACTH
Plasma
Men
Women
Children
 Prepubertal
 Postpubertal
Post-
dexamethasone 
suppression
7-50 pg/mL
5-27 pg/mL
7-28 pg/mL
2-49 pg/mL
2-5 pg/mL
0.222
1.55-11.1 pmol/L
1.11-6 pmol/L
1.55-6.2 pmol/L
0.44-10.78 pmol/L
0.4-1.1 pmol/L
Collect in silicone-coated 
EDTA-containing tubes. 
Keep iced. Avoid contact 
with glass during 
collection and separation. 
Process immediately. 
Separate and freeze 
plasma in plastic tube 
at −20°C.
Aldosterone
Serum
 (fasting)
Sodium intake 
300 mmol/d:
Adult
 Upright AM
 Upright PM
 Supine AM
Adrenal vein
–
<28 ng/dL
<21 ng/dL
3-16 ng/dL
200-400 ng/dL
27.7
<776 pmol/L
<582 pmol/L
83.1-443 pmol/L
5540-11,080 
 pmol/L
Levels in pregnant patients 
are three to four times 
higher.
 
Urine
Sodium diet 
(100-300 mmol/d) 
Children:
–
–
Collect 24-h specimen in 
10 g boric acid to maintain 
pH <7.5. 
Refrigerate 
during collection.
 2-7 y
 8-11 y
 12-16 y
Adult
Post-
fludrocortisone or 
intravenous 
saline infusion
≤5.7 μg/d
≤10.2 μg/d
≤15.6 μg/d
≤2.3-21 μg/d
≤5.0 μg/d
Alkaline 
 phosphatase, 
 bone specific
Serum
2-24 mo
6-9 y
10-13 y
 Males
 Females
14-17 y
 Males
 Females
Adult males
 18-29 y
 30-39 y
 40-49 y
 60-68 y
Adult females
 18-29 y
 30-39 y
 40-49 y
 50-76 y
25.4-124.0 μg/L
41-134.6 μg/L
43.8-177.4 μg/L
24.2-154.2 μg/L
13.7-128 μg/L
10.5-75.2 μg/L
8.4-29.3 μg/L
7.7-21.3 μg/L
7.0-18.3 μg/L
7.6-14.9 μg/L
4.7-17.8 μg/L
5.3-19.5 μg/L
5.0-18.8 μg/L
5.6-29 μg/L
–
–
IRMA; collect following an 
overnight fast; useful in 
Paget disease and osteopo-
rosis; assay also known as 
Ostase; increased levels 
seen in states of high bone 
turnover 
(Paget disease, 
hyperthyroidism, 
osteoporosis).
Test
Source
Ages, 
Conditions, etc
Conventional 
Units
Conversion 
Factor
SI Units
Comments
Alpha subunit
Serum
Men
Women
 Premenopausal
 Postmenopausal
Hypothyroid
Pregnant or hCG-
producing tumor
<0.6 ng/mL
<1.5 ng/mL
0.9-3.3 ng/mL
<3.7 ng/mL
1.8-360 ng/mL
–
–
RIA; used to assess gonado-
tropin hormone subunit 
secretion in pituitary 
adenomas.
3α-Androstenediol 
 glucuronide
Serum
Prepubertal 
 children
Tanner II-III
 Male
 Female
Adult
 Male
 Female
0.1-0.6 ng/mL
0.19-1.64 ng/mL
0.33-2.44 ng/mL
2.6-15 ng/mL
0.6-3.0 ng/mL
2.14
0.2-1.3 nmol/L
0.41-3.51 nmol/L
0.71-5.22 nmol/L
5.6-32.1 nmol/L
1.3-6.4 nmol/L
Freeze serum and store at 
−20°C.
Androstenedione
Serum
Men
 18-30 y
 31-50 y
 51-60 y
Women
 Follicular
 Midcycle
 Luteal
 Postmenopausal
Children
 1-12 mo
 1-4 y
 5-9 y
 10-13 y
 14-17 y
Tanner II-III
 Male
 Female
Tanner IV-V
 Male
 Female
50-220 ng/dL
40-190 ng/dL
50-220 ng/dL
35-250 ng/dL
60-285 ng/dL
30-235 ng/dL
20-75 ng/dL
6-78 ng/dL
5-51 ng/dL
6-115 ng/dL
12-221 ng/dL
22-225 ng/dL
17-82 ng/dL
43-180 ng/dL
57-150 ng/dL
7-68 ng/dL
3.49
175-768 nmol/L
140-663 nmol/L
175-768 nmol/L
122-873 nmol/L
209-995 nmol/L
105-820 nmol/L
70-262 nmol/L
21-272 nmol/L
17-178 nmol/L
21-401 nmol/L
42-771 nmol/L
77-785 nmol/L
59-286 nmol/L
150-628 nmol/L
199-523 nmol/L
24-237 nmol/L
Antidiuretic 
 hormone (ADH; 
 vasopressin)
Plasma
If serum osmolality 
 >290 mOsm/kg
1-13 pg/mL
0.925
0.9-12 pmol/L
Collect in EDTA tubes. Keep 
iced. Centrifuge refrigerated. 
Store at −70°C within 2 h.
1 μU = 2.5 pg
If serum osmolality 
 <290 mOsm/kg
<2 pg/mL
<1.85 pmol/L
Angiotensin II
Plasma
Adults
10-50 ng/L
 –
–
Collect in EDTA. Centrifuge 
refrigerated. Store frozen at 
−70°C.
C peptide of 
 insulin
Serum
Fasting
0.8-3.1 ng/mL
0.331
0.26-1.03 nmol/L
Freeze serum at −20°C; sta-
ble for 1 d at room temper-
ature and 1 wk at −20°C.
Calcitonin
Serum
Male
Female
Child
 <6 mo
 6 mo-3 y
 3-17 y
<10 pg/mL
<5 pg/mL
<41 pg/mL
<14 pg/mL
 <6 ng/mL
0.293
<2.93 pmol/L
<1.46 pmol/L
<12 pmol/L
<4.1 pmol/L
<1.76 pmol/L
Fasting, nonlipemic speci-
men. Refrigerate, spin 
down immediately. Store at 
−20°C.
Calcitonin stimulation test utilizing calcium infusion: 2 mg/kg of calcium in the form of calcium gluconate is administered IV over 1 min. Blood samples 
for calcitonin are obtained at 1, 2, 5, and 10 min after the infusion. Normal peak values for calcitonin 2 min after calcium infusion: female; <70 ng/L 
(<20.5 pmol/L); male: <491 ng/L (<144 pmol/L).
(Continued)
826    APPENDIX
Test
Source
Ages, 
Conditions, etc
Conventional 
Units
Conversion 
Factor
SI Units
Comments
Calcium, 24-h 
 urinary
Urine
Calcium
 Men
 Women
50-300 mg/24 h
50-250 mg/24 h
–
–
Collect in 25 mL of 6N HCl. 
Refrigerate during 
collection; elevated in pri-
mary hyperparathyroidism, 
Paget disease, multiple 
myeloma, vitamin D 
toxicity; reduced in rickets, 
osteomalacia, 
familial hypocalciuric 
hypercalcemia.
Calcium
 Men
 Women
30-210 mg/g 
 creatinine
30-275 mg/g 
 creatinine
–
–
Calcium, ionized
Serum
Adults
Children
 8 mo-10 y
 11-17 y
4.8-5.6 mg/dL
4.9-5.4 mg/dL
4.8-5.3 mg/dL
–
–
Refrigerated serum must be 
collected anaerobically in 
gel barrier tube; elevated in 
primary hyperparathyroid-
ism, vitamin D toxicity, can-
cer; reduced in pseudo-
hypoparathyroidism, 
hypoparathyroidism, and 
severe vitamin D 
deficiency.
Calcium, total
Serum
Adults
Children
 <1 mo
 1-11 mo
 1-3 y
 4-19 y
8.6-10.2 mg/dL
8.4-10.6 mg/dL
8.7-10.5 mg/dL
8.5-10.6 mg/dL
8.9-10.4 mg/dL
–
–
Overnight fasting preferred; 
used to diagnose parathy-
roid and vitamin D 
disorders; elevated in 
primary 
hyperparathyroidism, 
vitamin D toxicity; 
reduced in hypoparathy-
roidism and vitamin D 
deficiency.
Catecholamines 
 (fractionated by 
 HPLC)
Plasma
Adults:
 Norepinephrine
–
0.00591
–
Collect by intravenous 
catheter after patient has 
rested 30 min. Collect and 
centrifuge under refrigera-
tion; freeze in plastic tube 
at −20°C.
  Supine
112-658 
 pg/mL
0.66-3.89 
 nmol/L
  Ambulatory
212-1109 
 pg/mL
1.28-6.55 nmol/L
 Epinephrine
–
0.00546
–
  Supine
<50 pg/mL
<0.27 nmol/L
  Ambulatory
<95 pg/mL
<0.52 nmol/L
 Dopamine
–
0.00654
–
  Supine
<10 ng/mL
<0.065 
 nmol/L
  Ambulatory
<20 ng/mL
<0.13 
 nmol/L
 Total (N+E)
  Supine
  Upright
123-671 
 pg/mL
242-1125 
 pg/mL
0.00591
0.73-3.97 
 nmol/L
1.43-6.64
 nmol/L
Children 
 (age 3-15 y):
–
–
–
 Epinephrine
–
–
–
  Supine
<464 pg/mL
0.00546
<2.54 nmol/L
 Norepinephrine
–
 Supine
< 1251pg/mL
0.00591
< 7.4 nmol/L
 Dopamine
<60 pg/mL
0.00654
0.39 nmol/L
(Continued)
APPENDIX    827
Test
Source
Ages, 
Conditions, etc
Conventional 
Units
Conversion 
Factor
SI Units
Comments
Urine
Norepinephrine
–
5.91
–
24-h urine preservative: 
25 mL of 6N HCl. Freeze 
aliquot promptly at −20°C.
 3-8 y
 9-12 y
 13-17 y
 >17 y
5-41 μg/24 h
5-50 μg/24 h
12-88 μg/24 h
15-100 μg/24 h
–
29.5-242.3 
 nmol/24 h
29.5-295.8 
 nmol/24 h
70.9-526 nmol/24 h
89-591 nmol/24 h
Epinephrine
–
5.46
 3-8 y
 9-12 y
 13-17 y
 >17 y
1-7 μg/24 h
<8 μg/24 h
<11 μg/24 h
2-24 μg/24 h
–
5.46-38.2 nmol/24 h
<43.7 nmol/24 h
<60 nmol/24 h
11-131 nmol/24 h
Total (N + E)
 3-8 y
 9-12 y
 13-17 y
 >17 y 
9-51 μg/24 h 
9-71 μg/24 h
13-90 μg/24 h
26-121 μg/24 h
5.91
53-301 nmol/24 h
53-420 nmol/24 h
77-532 nmol/24 h
154-715 nmol/24 h 
Dopamine
6.54
 3-8 y
 9-12 y
 13-17 y
 >17 y
80-378 μg/24 h
51-474 μg/24 h
51-645 μg/24 h
52-480 μg/24 h
–
523-2472 nmol/24 h
334-3100 nmol/24 h
334-4218 nmol/24 h
340-3139 nmol/24 h
Cholecystokinin
Plasma 
 (fasting)
 
3.9 ng/mL
0.26
1 pmol/L
 –
Chorionic 
 gonadotropin, 
 beta subunit 
 (β-hCG)
Serum
Men
Women
 Premenopausal,
 Nonpregnant
 Postmenopausal
Females 
 postconception
<5 mIU/mL
<5 mIU/mL
<10 mIU/mL
1.00
<5 mIU/mL
<5 mIU/mL
<10 mIU/mL
See Chapter 16 for further 
details and interpretation.
 <1 wk
5-50 mIU/mL
5-50 mIU/mL
 1-2 wk
50-500 mIU/mL
–
50-500 mIU/mL
 2-3 wk
100-5000 
 mIU/mL
–
100-5000 mIU/mL
 3-4 wk
 4-5 wk
 5-6 wk
 6-8 wk
 
 2-3 mo
500-10,000 
 mIU/mL
1000-50,000 
 mIU/mL
10,000-100,000 
 mIU/mL
15,000-200,000 
 mIU/mL
10,000-100,000
 mIU/mL
–
500-10,000 mIU/mL
1000-50,000 
 mIU/mL
10,000-100,000 
 mIU/L
15,000-200,000 
 mIU/mL
10,000-100,000 
 mIU/mL
Chromogranin A
Serum
Adults
<36.4 ng/mL
1.00
<36.4 μg/L
– 
Collagen type 1
 C-telopeptide
 (CTx)
Serum
Adults
Men
 18-29 y
 30-39 y
 40-49 y
 50-68 y
Women
 18-29 y
 30-39 y
 40-49 y
–
87-100 pg/mL
70-780 pg/mL
60-700 pg/mL
 87-345 pg/mL
64-640 pg/mL
60-650 pg/mL
40-465 pg/mL
–
–
–
–
–
Frozen serum, collected 
between 8 AM and 10 AM. 
Used to evaluate osteopo-
rosis and Paget disease.
–
(Continued)
828    APPENDIX
Test
Source
Ages, 
Conditions, etc
Conventional 
Units
Conversion 
Factor
SI Units
Comments
Collagen cross-
 linked 
 N-telopeptide 
 (NTx), serum or 
 urine
1.0 mL 
 refrigerated 
 serum; 
 2 mL 
 refrigerated 
 urine
Men
–
–
Monitor response to 
treatment in patients with 
osteoporosis; diagnose 
high bone turnover state; 
possibly elevated in Paget 
disease of bone, 
hyperthyroidism, 
osteoporosis.
 Serum
 Second AM 
  voided urine
 18-29 y
 
30-59 y
24-h urine
Women
 Premenopausal
 Serum
Second AM
 Urine
24-h urine
10.7-22.9 nmol
 BCE/L
12-99 nmol
 BCE/mmol
 creatinine
9-60 nmol 
 BCE/mmol 
 creatinine
5-87 nmol 
 BCE/mmol 
 creatinine
8.7-19.8
 nmol BCE/L
4-64 nmol BCE/
 mmol
 creatinine
5-79 nmol 
 BCE/mmol 
 creatinine
Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) test: Ovine CRH in a dose of 1 μg/kg is administered IV. Blood samples for ACTH and cortisol determinations are 
taken at 15, 30, and 60 min. The peak ACTH response of >10 pg/mL (>2.2 pmol/L) occurs at 15 min. The peak cortisol response of >10 μg/dL (>280 nmol/L) 
occurs at 30-60 min (see Chapter 4).
Corticotropin-
 releasing 
 hormone
Plasma
Men and nonpreg-
 nant women
Pregnant women
<34 pg/mL
2.0
<68 pmol/L
Markedly elevated at term 
pregnancy.
 1st trimester
 2nd trimester
 3rd trimester
Cord blood
<40 pg/mL
<153 pg/mL
<847 pg/mL
<338 pg/mL
<80 pmol/L
<306 pmol/L
<1694 pmol/L
<676 pmol/L
Cortisol
Serum
Adult
Total
27.59
 
Collect and process under 
refrigeration. Spin down 
immediately. Salivary corti-
sol is in equilibrium with 
free cortisol and may be 
used as an index to free 
cortisol. Reference range 
may vary with method and 
laboratory.
 8-10 AM
 4-6 PM
 Peak post-ACTH
Children
 Premature
 (31-35 wk)
 Term Infants (3 d)
 1-17 y
5-21 μg/dL
2-14 μg/dL
>20 μg/dL
<15 μg/dL
<14 μg/dL
2-17 μg/dL
138-579.4 
 nmol/L
55.2-386.3 
 nmol/L
551.8 nmol/L
<414 nmol/L
<386 nmol/L
55-469 nmol/L
Free
 
AM
 
PM
0.4-1.92 μg/dL
0.2-0.9 μg/dL
11-53 nmol/L
5-25 nmol/L
Urine (free)
24-h specimen RIA
2.76
Collect 24-h specimen with 
8 g of boric acid or 10 mL 
of 6N HCl as preservative. 
Liquid chromatography/
tandem mass spectrometry.
Adults
Children
4-50 μg/24 h
11-138 nmol/24 h
 1-4.9 y
 5-9.9 y
 10-13.9 y
 14-17.9 y
0.9-8.2 μg/24 h
1-30 μg/024 h
1-45 μg/24 h
3-55 μg/24 h
2.5-22.6 
 nmol/24 h
2.8-82.8 
 nmol/24 h
2.8-124.2 
 nmol/24 h
8.3-151.8 
 nmol/24 h
(Continued)
APPENDIX    829
Test
Source
Ages, 
Conditions, etc
Conventional 
Units
Conversion 
Factor
SI Units
Comments
Dehydroepi-
  androsterone 
 (DHEA)
Serum 
 (fasting 
 preferred)
Men
Women
 Pregnancy
Post-ACTH 
 stimulation in
 men and women
Children
 Premature
 (31-35 wk)
 Term (1 wk)
Tanner II-III
 Male
 Female
Tanner IV-V
 Male
 Female
180-1250 ng/dL
130-980 ng/dL
135-810 ng/dL
545-1845 ng/dL
<3343 ng/dL
<761 ng/dL
25-300 ng/dL
69-605 ng/dL
100-400 ng/dL
165-690 ng/dL
0.347
62.5-433.8 nmol/L
45.1-340 nmol/L
46.8-281 nmol/L
189-640.2 nmol/L
<1160 nmol/L
<246 nmol/L
8.7-104 nmol/L
23.9-209.9 nmol/L
34.7-138.8 nmol/L
57.3-239.4 nmol/L
Separate serum 
immediately and store at 
−20°C.
Dehydroepi-
androster one 
sulfate (DHEAS)
Serum 
 (fasting 
 preferred)
Male
 0-1 mo
 1-6 mo
 7-12 mo
 1-3 y
 4-6 y
 7-9 y
 10-13 y
 14-17 y
 18-29 y
 30-39 y
 40-49 y
 50-59 y
 60-69 y
 70-90 y
<316 μg/dL
<58 μg/dL
<26 μg/dL
<15 μg/dL
<27 μg/dL
<91 μg/dL
<138 μg/dL
38-340 μg/dL
110-510 μg/dL
110-370 μg/dL
45-345 μg/dL
25-240 μg/dL
25-95 μg/dL
<75 μg/dL
0.0272
<8.6 μmol/L
<1.6 μmol/L
<0.7 μmol/L
<0.4 μmol/L
<0.7 μmol/L
<2.4 μmol/L
<0.6 μmol/L
1.0-9.2 μmol/L
3.0-13.9 μmol/L
3.0-10.1 μmol/L
1.2-9.4 μmol/L
0.7-6.5 μmol/L
0.7-2.6 μmol/L
<2.0 μmol/L
Stable 72 h at 40°C. Store at 
−20 °C.
Female
 0-1 mo
 1-6 mo
 7-12 mo
 1-3 y
 4-6 y
 7-9 y
 10-13 y
 14-17 y
 18-29 y
 30-39 y
 40-49 y
 50-59 y
 60-69 y
 70-90 y
15-261 μg/dL
<74 μg/dL
<26 μg/dL
<22 μg/dL
<34 μg/dL
<92 μg/dL
<148 μg/dL
37-307 μg/dL
45-320 μg/dL
40-325 μg/dL
25-220 μg/dL
15-170 μg/dL
<185 μg/dL
<90 μg/dL
0.0272
0.4-7.1 μmol/L
<2.0 μmol/L
<0.7 μmol/L
<0.6 μmol/L
<0.9 μmol/L
<2.5 μmol/L
<4.0 μmol/L
1.0-10.1 μmol/L
1.2-8.7 μmol/L
1.1-8.8 μmol/L
0.7-6.0 μmol/L
0.4-4.6 μmol/L
<5.0 μmol/L
<2.5 μmol/L
Deoxycorticos-
terone (DOC)
Serum 
 (fasting 
 preferred)
Male
 Adult
Female
 Follicular phase
 Luteal phase
Pregnancy
 1st trimester
 2nd trimester
 3rd trimester
Children
 <1 y
 1-5 y
 6-12 y
  Male
  Female
3.5-11.5 ng/dL
1.5-8.5 ng/dL
3.5-13 ng/dL 
5-25 ng/dL
10-75 ng/dL
30-110 ng/dL
7-57 ng/dL
4-49 ng/dL
9-34 ng/dL
2-13 ng/dL 
30.26
106-333 pmol/L
45-257 pmol/L
91-393
151-757 pmol/L
303-2270 pmol/L
908-3329 pmol/L
212-1725 pmol/L
121-1483 pmol/L
272-1029 pmol/L
61-393 pmol/L
Process immediately. Store 
at −20 °C.
(Continued)
830    APPENDIX
Test
Source
Ages, 
Conditions, etc
Conventional 
Units
Conversion 
Factor
SI Units
Comments
11-Deoxycortisol
Serum
Male
 18-29 y
 30-39 y
 40-49 y
 50-59 y
Female
 18-29 y
 30-39 y
 40-49 y
 50-66 y
Children
 Cord blood
Premature infants
Full-term infants
 1-12 mo
 1-4 y
 5-9 y
 10-13 y
 14-17 y
<119 ng/dL
<135 ng/dL
<76 ng/dL
<42 ng/dL
<107 ng/dL
<51 ng/dL
<62 ng/dL
<37 ng/dL
295-554 ng/dL
<235 ng/dL
<170 ng/dL
10-200 ng/dL
7-210 ng/dL
<122 ng/dL
<245 ng/dL
<302 ng/dL
0.02887
<3.4 nmol/L
<3.9 nmol/L
<2.2 nmol/L
<1.2 nmol/L
<3.1 nmol/L
<1.5 nmol/L
<1.8 nmol/L
<1.1 nmol/L
8.5-16 nmol/L
<6.8 nmol/L
<4.9 nmol/L
0.3-5.8 nmol/L
0.2-6.1 nmol/L
<3.5 nmol/L
<7.1 nmol/L
<8.7 nmol/L
Process immediately. Store 
at −20°C. Early morning 
specimen preferred.
Dexamethasone suppression test (low dose) for the diagnosis of Cushing syndrome (see Chapter 9): Obtain a baseline serum cortisol at 0700-0800 h. 
Administer 1 mg dexamethasone orally at 2300 h that evening and obtain another serum cortisol at 0700-0800 h the following morning. Interpretation: A 
normal response (normal suppressibility) is a reduction of the post-dexamethasone serum cortisol to <1.8 μg/dL (<50 nmol/L).
Dexamethasone suppression test (high dose) for the differential diagnosis of Cushing syndrome (see Chapter 9): Obtain a baseline serum cortisol at 
0700-0800 h. Administer 8 mg dexamethasone orally at 2300 h that evening and obtain another serum cortisol at 0700-0800 h the following morning. 
Interpretation: A reduction of the post-dexamethasone serum cortisol to <50% of the baseline cortisol indicates suppressibility.
Dexamethasone-CRH test: Administer dexamethasone, 0.5 mg every 6 h orally for eight doses, followed by CRH, 1 μg/kg IV 2 h after the last dose of dex-
amethasone. Plasma cortisol is obtained 15 min after CRH. Normal: <1.4 μg/dL (<38.6 nmol/L). (See Chapter 9.)
Dihydrotesterone 
 (male)
Serum
Cord blood
1-6 mo
Prepubertal
Tanner II-III
Tanner IV-V
Adult
<2-8 ng/dL
12-85 ng/dL
<5 ng/dL
3-33 ng/dL
22-75 ng/dL
25-75 ng/dL
0.0344
<0.07-0.28 nmol/L
<0.41-2.9 nmol/L
<0.2 nmol/L
0.1-1.1 nmol/L
0.8-2.6 nmol/L
0.9-2.6 nmol/L
Separate serum within 1 h 
after collection and store at 
−20°C.
Dihydrotesterone 
 (female)
Serum
Cord blood
1-6 mo
Prepubertal
Tanner II-III
Tanner IV-V
Adult
<2-5 ng/dL
<5 ng/dL
<5 ng/dL
5-19 ng/dL
3-30 ng/dL
5-30 ng/dL
0.0344
<0.07-0.17 nmol/L
<0.2 nmol/L
<0.2 nmol/L
0.2-0.7 nmol/L
0.1-1 nmol/L
0.2-1 nmol/L
Erythropoietin
Serum
Adult
Child
4.1-19.5 mU/mL
1.00
4.1-19.5 mU/mL
 3 wk-2 mo
 3 mo-16 y
5.0-13.0 mU/mL
9.0-28.0 mU/mL
5.0-13.0 mU/mL
9.0-28.0 mU/mL
Estradiol
Serum
Male
3.67
 1-9 y
 10-11 y
 12-14 y
 15-17 y
 >17 y
Female
<4 pg/mL
<12 pg/mL
<24 pg/mL
<31 pg/mL
<29 pg/mL
<15 pmol/L
<44 pmol/L
<88 pmol/L
<114 pmol/L
<106 pmol/L
 1-9 y
 10-11 y
 12-14 y
 15-17 y
 Follicular
 Midcycle peak
 Luteal
 Postmenopausal
<16 pg/mL
<65 pg/mL
<142 pg/mL
<283 pg/mL
39-375 pg/mL
96-762 pg/mL
48-440 pg/mL
<10 pg/mL
<59 pmol/L
<239 pmol/L
<521 pmol/L
<1039 pmol/L
143-1376 pmol/L
352-2797 pmol/L
176-1614 pmol/L
<37 pmol/L
 
(Continued)
APPENDIX    831
Test
Source
Ages, 
Conditions, etc
Conventional 
Units
Conversion 
Factor
SI Units
Comments
Estradiol, free
Adult male
Adult female
 Follicular
 Midcycle
 Luteal
 Postmenopausal
<0.45 pg/mL
0.43-5.03 pg/mL
0.72-5.89 pg/mL
0.40-5.55 pg/mL
<0.38 pg/mL
3.67
<1.7 pmol/mL
1.6-18.5 pmol/mL
2.6-21.6 pmol/mL
1.5-20.4 pmol/mL
<1.4 pmol/mL
Estrone
Serum
Adult male
Postpubertal female
<68 ng/L
3.70
<251 pmol/L
 
 Follicular phase
 Midcycle
 Luteal phase
 Postmenopausal
10-138 ng/L
49-268 ng/L
16-173 ng/L
<65 ng/L
37-511 pmol/L
181-992 pmol/L
59-640 pmol/L
<240 pmol/L
Follicle-
 stimulating
 hormone
Serum or 
 plasma 
 (heparin)
Adult males (>18 y)
Adult females 
 (>18 y)
1.6-8 IU/L
1.00
1.6-8 IU/L
 Follicular phase
 Midcycle peak
 Luteal phase
 Postmenopausal
Boy
2.5-10.2 IU/L
3.1-17.7 IU/L
1.5-9.1 IU/L
23-116 IU/L
2.5-10.2 IU/L
3.1-17.7 IU/L
1.5-9.1 IU/L
23-116 IU/L
 0-9 y
 10-13 y
 14-17 y
<3.0 IU/L
0.3-4.0 IU/L
0.4-7.4 IU/L
<3.0 IU/L
0.3-4.0 IU/L
0.4-7.4 IU/L
Girls
 0-8 y
 9-13 y
 14-17 y
0.5-4.5 IU/L
0.4-6.5 IU/L
0.8-8.5 IU/L
0.5-4.5 IU/L
0.4-6.5 IU/L
0.8-8.5 IU/L
Gastrin
Serum
Adults
Children 5-7 y
<100 pg/mL
13-64 pg/mL
0.475
<48 pmol/L
6.2-30 pmol/L
Overnight fast required. 
Store at −20°C.
Glucagon
Plasma
Adults
Children
 Cord blood
 Day 1
 Day 2
 Day 3
 Day 4-14
<60 pg/mL
<215 pg/mL
<240 pg/mL
<400 pg/mL
<420 pg/mL
<148 pg/mL
0.287
<17.2 pmol/L
<62 pmol/L
<69 pmol/L
<115 pmol/L
<121 pmol/L
<42 pmol/L
Centrifuge immediately 
under refrigeration. Store in 
plastic vial with 0.5 mL 
aprotinin (10,000 KIU/mL) 
at −20°C. Overnight fast 
required.
Growth hormone
Serum
Fasting
46.5
Store at −20°C. Note: GH 
values fluctuate widely, and 
functional tests must be 
utilized for diagnosis of GH 
deficiency or excess. See 
Chapter 4 for details of sup-
pression and stimulation 
tests for GH excess or defi-
ciency.
 Children
 Adults
Post-75-g 
 glucose load
<13 ng/mL
<10 ng/mL
<1 ng/mL
<604 pmol/L
<465 pmol/L
<46 pmol/L
Growth hormone–
 binding protein
Serum
Adults
Children
400-4260 
 pmol/L
1.0
400-4260 pmol/L
Store at −20°C.
 3-8 y
 9-13 y
 14-17 y
320-3820 pmol/L
240-2890 pmol/L
290-3140 pmol/L
320-3820 pmol/L
240-2890 pmol/L
290-3140 pmol/L
Growth hormone–
 releasing 
 hormone
Plasma
Adults
Children (4-14 y)
<49 pg/mL
6.8-19 pg/mL
1.0
<49 pg/mL
6.8-19 pg/mL
Store at −20°C.
Hemoglobin A1C
Whole blood
Nondiabetic
<6%
Collection in EDTA. Keep 
refrigerated.
Homovanillic acid
Urine
3-8 y
9-12 y
13-17 y
>17 y
0.5-6.7 mg/24 h
1.1-6.8 mg/24 h
1.4-7.2 mg/24 h
1.6-7.5 mg/24 h
5.49
2.7-36.8 μmol/24 h
6.0-37.3 μmol/24 h
7.7-39.5 μmol/24 h
8.8-41.2 μmol/24 h
Preservative: 10 mL of 6N 
HCl. Avoid alcohol, coffee, 
tea, tobacco, and strenuous 
exercise for 2 wk pretest.
(Continued)
832    APPENDIX
Test
Source
Ages, 
Conditions, etc
Conventional 
Units
Conversion 
Factor
SI Units
Comments
17-Hydroxy-
corticoids
Urine
Males, age 1-20 y
Adult males
0.5-10 mg/24 h
3-10 mg/24 h
2.76
1.4-28 μmol/24 h
8.3-28 μmol/24 h
Preservative: 10 mL of
6N HCl
Females, age 1-20 y
Adult females
0.5-7 mg/24 h
2-6 mg/24 h
1.4-19 μmol/24 h
5.5-16.6 μmol/24 h
5-Hydroxyindole-
acetic
Urine
Age 2-10 y
Age >10 y
<8 mg/24 h
<6 mg/24 h
5.23
<41.8 μmol/24 h
<31.4 μmol/24 h
Preservative: 10 mL of 6N 
HCl. Refrigerate during 24-h 
collection. For 48 h prior to 
and during collection, avoid 
avocados, and alcohol.
18-Hydroxy-
corticosterone
Serum
Adult
Supine (8-10 AM)
4-37 ng/dL
27.51
110-1018 pmol/L
Refrigerate.
Ambulatory
   (8-10 AM)
5-80 ng/dL
138-2201 pmol/L
Children
 Premature infants 
 (31-35 wk)
<380 ng/dL
<10,454 pmol/L
 Term infants (3 d)
<942 ng/dL
<25,914 pmol/L
17-Hydroxy-
pregnenolone
Serum
Adults
 Post-ACTH
20-450 ng/dL
290-910 ng/dL
0.0301
0.6-13.5 nmol/L
8.7-27.4 nmol/L
Process immediately. Store 
at −20°C.
Children
 Premature infants
 Term infants
 1-12 mo
 1-5 y
 6-12 y
Tanner II-III
 Males
 Females
Tanner IV-V
 Males
 Females
<2409 ng/dL
<830 ng/dL
14-830 ng/dL
10-100 ng/dL
11-190 ng/dL
20-360 ng/dL
58-450 ng/dL
32-300 ng/dL
53-540 ng/dL
<72.5 nmol/L
25 nmol/L
0.4-25 nmol/L
0.3-3 nmol/L
0.3-5.7 nmol/L
0.6-10.8 nmol/L
1.7-13.5 nmol/L
1-9 nmol/L
1.6-16.3 nmol/L
17-Hydroxy-
progesterone
Serum 
 (fasting 
 preferred)
Males
 18-30 y
 31-40 y
 41-50 y
 51-60 y
Females
 Follicular phase
 Midcycle phase
 Luteal phase
 Postmenopausal
Children
 Premature 
  infants
 Term infants
 1-12 mo
 1-4 y
 5-9 y
 10-13 y
 14-17 y
Post-ACTH
 1-12 mo
 1-5 y
  6-12 y
Tanner II-III
 Males
  Post-ACTH
 Females
  Post-ACTH
32-307 ng/dL
42-196 ng/dL
33-195 ng/dL
37-129 ng/dL
<185 ng/dL
<225 ng/dL
<285 ng/dL
<45 ng/dL
<360 ng/dL
<420 ng/dL
11-170 ng/dL
 4-115 ng/dL
<90 ng/dL
<169 ng/dL
16-283 ng/dL
85-465 ng/dL
50-350 ng/dL
75-220 ng/dL
12-130 ng/dL
69-310 ng/dL
18-220 ng/dL
80-420 ng/dL
0.0303
1-9.3 nmol/L
1.3-5.9 nmol/L
1-5.9 nmol/L
1.1-3.9 nmol/L
<5.6 nmol/L
<6.8 nmol/L
<8.6 nmol/L
<1.4 nmol/L
<10.9 nmol/L
<12.7 nmol/L
0.3-5.2 nmol/L
0.1-3.5 nmol/L
<2.7 nmol/L
<5.1 nmol/L
0.5-8.6 nmol/L
2.6-14.1 nmol/L
1.5-10.6 nmol/L
2.3-6.7 nmol/L
0.4-3.9 nmol/L
2.1-9.4 nmol/L
0.5-6.7 nmol/L
2.4-12.7 nmol/L
(Continued)
APPENDIX    833
Test
Source
Ages, 
Conditions, etc
Conventional 
Units
Conversion 
Factor
SI Units
Comments
Tanner IV-V
 Males
  Post-ACTH
 Females
  Post-ACTH
51-190 
 ng/dL
105-230 
 ng/dL
36-200 
 ng/dL
80-225 
 ng/dL
1.5-5.8 nmol/L
3.2-7 nmol/L
1.1-6.1 nmol/L
2.4-6.8 nmol/L 
Insulin, total 
 (free and bound)
Serum
Fasting
<20 μU/mL 
 (<0.8 ng/mL)
172.1 
 (ng/mL → 
 pmol/L)
<137.6 pmol/L
Cold centrifuge. Freeze at 
−20°C. Must always be 
evaluated in light of simul-
taneous plasma glucose 
measurement.
Insulin with oral 
 glucose 
 tolerance test
Serum
1 h
50-130 μU/mL 
 (2-5.2 ng/mL)
172.1 
 (ng/mL → 
 pmol/L)
344-895 pmol/L
Cold centrifuge. Freeze at 
−20°C.
2 h
<30 μU/mL (<1.2 
 ng/mL)
<207 pmol/L
Insulin-like growth 
 factor-I (IGF-I)
Serum
Male
 1-7 d
 8-14 d
 15 d-1 y
 1-2 y
 3-4 y
 5-6 y
 7-8 y
 9-10 y
 11-12 y
 13-14 y
 15-16 y
 17-18 y
 19-30 y
 31-40 y
 41-50 y
 51-60 y
 61-70 y
 71-80 y
 81-88 y
 >88 y
Male
<31 ng/mL
<43 ng/mL
25-265 ng/mL
45-222 ng/mL
36-202 ng/mL
32-259 ng/mL
65-278 ng/mL
52-330 ng/mL
80-723 ng/mL
142-855 ng/mL
176-845 ng/mL
152-668 ng/mL
126-382 ng/mL
106-255 ng/mL
86-220 ng/mL
87-225 ng/mL
75-228 ng/mL
31-187 ng/mL
68-157 ng/mL
Not established
1.0
<31 μg/L
<43 μg/L
25-265 μg/L
45-222 μg/L
36-202 μg/L
32-259 μg/L
65-278 μg/L
52-330 μg/L
80-723 μg/L
142-855 μg/L
176-845 μg/L
152-668 μg/L
126-382 μg/L
106-255 μg/L
86-220 μg/L
87-225 μg/L
75-228 μg/L
31-187 μg/L
68-157 μg/L
Not established
Store refrigerated. Elevated 
in acromegaly and gigan-
tism; reduced in isolated 
GH deficiency.
 Tanner stage I
 Tanner stage II
 Tanner stage III
 Tanner stage IV
 Tanner stage V
Female
59-296 ng/mL
56-432 ng/mL
135-778 ng/mL
230-855 ng/mL
181-789 ng/mL
59-296 μg/L
56-432 μg/L
135-778 μg/L
230-855 μg/L
181-789 μg/L
 1-7 d
 8-14 d
 15 d-1 y
 1-2 y
 3-4 y
 5-6 y
 7-8 y
 9-10 y
 11-12 y
 13-14 y
 15-16 y
 17-18 y
 19-30 y
 31-40 y
 41-50 y
<31 ng/mL
<43 ng/mL
25-265 ng/mL
99-254 ng/mL
36-202 ng/mL
57-260 ng/mL
97-352 ng/mL
49-461 ng/mL
101-580 ng/mL
199-658 ng/mL
236-808 ng/mL
165-526 ng/mL
138-410 ng/mL
126-291 ng/mL
88-249 ng/mL
<31 μg/L
<43 μg/L
25-265 μg/L
99-254 μg/L
36-202 μg/L
57-260 μg/L
97-352 μg/L
49-461 μg/L
101-580 μg/L
199-658 μg/L
236-808 μg/L
165-526 μg/L
138-410 μg/L
126-291 μg/L
88-249 μg/L
(Continued)
834    APPENDIX
Test
Source
Ages, 
Conditions, etc
Conventional 
Units
Conversion 
Factor
SI Units
Comments
 51-60 y
 61-70 y
 71-80 y
 81-88 y
 > 88 y
Female
92-190 ng/mL
87-178 ng/mL
25-171 ng/mL
31-162 ng/mL
Not established
92-190 μg/L
87-178 μg/L
25-171 μg/L
31-162 μg/L
Not established
 Tanner stage I
 Tanner stage II
 Tanner stage III
 Tanner stage IV
 Tanner stage V
45-358 ng/mL
111-426 ng/mL
169-644 ng/mL
297-627 ng/mL
142-868 ng/mL
45-358 μg/L
111-426 μg/L
169-644 μg/L
297-627 μg/L
142-868 μg/L
Insulin-like growth 
 factor-II (IGF-II)
Serum
Children
 0-4 y
 5-9 y
 10-13 y
 14-17 y
Adult
Not established
754-1216 ng/mL
610-1217 ng/mL
649-1225 ng/mL
1.0
Not established
754-1216 μg/L
610-1217 μg/L
649-1225 μg/L
Store refrigerated. Elevated 
in mesenchymal tumors 
with hypoglycemia; over-
night fasting preferred.
 18-30 y
 31-40 y
 41-50 y
 51-60 y
546-1260 ng/mL
460-1240 ng/mL
414-1230 ng/mL
414-1248 ng/mL
546-1260 μg/L
460-1240 μg/L
414-1230 μg/L
414-1248 μg/L
Insulin-like growth 
 factor–binding 
 protein-III 
 (IGFBP III)
Serum
1-7 d
8-15 d
16 d-1 y
2 y
3 y
4 y
5 y
6 y
7 y
8 y
9 y
10 y
11 y
12 y
13 y
14 y
15 y
16 y
17 y
18 y
19-20 y
21-40 y
41-60 y
61-70 y
71-80 y
81-85 y
Males
 Tanner I
 Tanner II
 Tanner III
 Tanner IV
 Tanner V
Females
 Tanner I
 Tanner II
 Tanner III
 Tanner IV
 Tanner V
< 0.7 mg/L
0.5-1.4 mg/L
0.7-3.6 mg/L
0.8-3.9 mg/L
0.9-4.3 mg/L
1.0-4.7 mg/L
1.1-5.2 mg/L
1.3-5.6 mg/L
1.4-6.1 mg/L
1.6-6.5 mg/L
1.8-7.1 mg/L
2.1-7.7 mg/L
2.4-8.4 mg/L
2.7-8.9 mg/L
3.1-9.5 mg/L
3.3-10 mg/L
3.5-10 mg/L
3.4-9.5 mg/L
3.2-8.7 mg/L
3.1-7.9 mg/L
2.9-7.3 mg/L
3.4-7.8 mg/L
3.3-6.9 mg/L
3.0-6.6 mg/L
2.5-5.7 mg/L
2.2-4.5 mg/L
1.4-5.2 mg/L
2.3-6.3 mg/L
3.1-8.9 mg/L
3.7-8.7 mg/L
2.6-8.6 mg/L
1.2-6.4 mg/L
2.8-6.9 mg/L
3.9-9.4 mg/L
3.3-8.1 mg/L
2.7-9.1 mg/L
1.0
<0.7 mg/L
0.5-1.4 mg/L
0.7-3.6 mg/L
0.8-3.9 mg/L
0.9-4.3 mg/L
1.0-4.7 mg/L
1.1-5.2 mg/L
1.3-5.6 mg/L
1.4-6.1 mg/L
1.6-6.5 mg/L
1.8-7.1 mg/L
2.1-7.7 mg/L
2.4-8.4 mg/L
2.7-8.9 mg/L
3.1-9.5 mg/L
3.3-10 mg/L
3.5-10 mg/L
3.4-9.5 mg/L
3.2-8.7 mg/L
3.1-7.9 mg/L
2.9-7.3 mg/L
3.4-7.8 mg/L
3.3-6.9 mg/L
3.0-6.6 mg/L
2.5-5.7 mg/L
2.2-4.5 mg/L
1.4-5.2 mg/L
2.3-6.3 mg/L
3.1-8.9 mg/L
3.7-8.7 mg/L
2.6-8.6 mg/L
1.2-6.4 mg/L
2.8-6.9 mg/L
3.9-9.4 mg/L
3.3-8.1 mg/L
2.7-9.1 mg/L
Separate serum within 1 h. 
Free serum in plastic vial at 
−20°C. Major carrier of IGFs, 
transporting ~95% of IGF-I 
and IGF-II. IGF-BP3 is 
GH-responsive and reflects 
GH actions: elevated in 
acromegaly and low in 
hypopituitarism and GH 
deficiency. Can be used to 
discriminate among causes 
of short stature.
(Continued)
APPENDIX    835
Test
Source
Ages, 
Conditions, etc
Conventional 
Units
Conversion 
Factor
SI Units
Comments
Islet cell antibody
 (ICA)
Serum
Adults and 
 children
Negative
 (<1.25 
 JDF units)
1.0
Negative
(<1.25 JDF units)
Refrigerated serum sample. 
ICA includes antibodies 
directed against GAD (glu-
tamic acid decarboxylase), 
IA-2, insulin, GM2-1, and 
other cell surface proteins. 
ICA is present during the 
prediabetic phase and pre-
dicts the development of 
type 1 diabetes. Titers are 
compared to a single inter-
national reference standard 
reported in JDF (Juvenile 
Diabetes Foundation) units.
17-Ketosteroids
Urine
Males
 17-20 y
 >20 y
Females
 >16 y
Children
 <1 y
 1-4 y
 5-8 y
 9-12 y
 13-16 y
9-22 mg/d
8-20 mg/d
6-15 mg/d
<1.0 mg/d
<2.0 mg/d
<3.0 mg/d
3-10 mg/d
5-12 mg/d
3.47
31.23-76.34 μmol/d
27.76-69.4 μmol/d
20.82-52.05 μmol/d
<3.47 μmol/d
<6.94 μmol/d
<10.41 μmol/d
10.41-34.7 μmol/d
17.35-41.64 μmol/d
Collect urine with 10 g of 
boric acid, 30 mL of 6N HCl 
or 25 mL 50% acetic acid 
and refrigerate during col-
lection.
Leptin
Serum
Adult males
(BMI 18-25)
Adult females 
(BMI 18-25)
Children
 Prepubertal 
  males
 Tanner II-III 
  males
 Tanner IV-V 
  males
 Prepubertal 
  females
 Tanner II-III
  females 
 Tanner IV-V 
  females
1.2-9.5 ng/mL
4.1-25.0 ng/mL
1.6-10.8 ng/mL
2.1-11.6 ng/mL
3.4-10.2 ng/mL
1.7-10.6 ng/mL
2.6-11.5 ng/mL
3.4-13.0 ng/mL
1.0
1.2-9.5 μg/L
4.1-25.0 μg/L
1.6-10.8 μg/L
2.1-11.6 μg/L
3.4-10.2 μg/L
1.7-10.6 μg/L
2.6-11.5 μg/L
3.4-13.0 μg/L
Refrigerated serum sample 
required for RIA. 
Luteinizing 
 hormone
Plasma or 
serum
Males
 1-7 y
 8-9 y
 10-11 y
 12-14 y
 15-17 y
 Adults
<0.10 mIU/mL
<0.44 mIU/mL
<2.28 mIU/mL
0.31-5.29 
 mIU/mL
0.15-5.33 
 mIU/mL
1.5-9.3 mIU/mL
1.0
<0.10 IU/L
<0.44 IU/L
<2.28 IU/L
0.31-5.29 IU/L
0.15-5.33 IU/L
1.5-9.3 IU/L
Test measures the sum of 
LH and hCG; high hCG lev-
els in pregnancy or tropho-
blastic disease cross-react 
in the assay, giving falsely 
high LH levels. Third-
generation LH assay is sen-
sitive to 0.03 mIU/mL and is 
more appropriate for use in 
children. Freeze specimen 
at −20°C.
Females
 1-7 y
 8-9 y
 10-11 y
 12-14 y
 15-17 y
 Adults
 Follicular phase
 Midcycle peak
 Luteal phase
 Postmenopausal
<0.45 mIU/mL
<3.36 mIU/mL
<5.65 mIU/mL
<11.00 mIU/mL
<15.80 mIU/mL
1.9-12.5 mIU/mL
8.7-76.3 mIU/mL
0.5-16.9 mIU/mL
5.0-52.3 mIU/mL
<0.45 IU/L
<3.36 IU/L
<5.65 IU/L
<11.00 IU/L
<15.80 IU/L
1.9-12.5 IU/L
8.7-76.3 IU/L
0.5-16.9 IU/L
5.0-52.3 IU/L
(Continued)
836    APPENDIX
Test
Source
Ages, 
Conditions, etc
Conventional 
Units
Conversion 
Factor
SI Units
Comments
Metanephrines, 
 fractionated, 
 urine
Urine
Metanephrines
 3 mo-4 y
 5-9 y
 10-13 y
 14-17 y
 18-29 y
 30-39 y
 40-49 y
 ≥50 y
25-117 μg/24 h
11-139 μg/24 h
51-275 μg/24 h
40-189 μg/24 h
25-222 μg/24 h
36-190 μg/24 h
58-203 μg/24 h
90-315 μg/24 h
5.07
126.8-593.2 
 nmol/24 h
55.8-704.7
 nmol/24 h
258.6-1394.3 
 nmol/24 h
202.8-958.2 
 nmol/24 h
126.8-1125.6 
 nmol/24 h
182.5-963.3 
 nmol/24 h
294.1-1029.2 
 nmol/24 h
456.3-1597.1 
 nmol/24 h
5 mL aliquot of urine; 
abstain from medication, 
tobacco, tea, and coffee for 
3 d prior to collection.
Normetanephrines
 3 mo-4 y
 5-9 y
 10-13 y
 14-17 y
 18-29 y
 30-39 y
 40-49 y
 ≥50 y
54-249 μg/24 h
31-398 μg/24 h
67-503 μg/24 h
69-531 μg/24 h
40-412 μg/24 h
35-482 μg/24 h
88-649 μg/24 h
122-676 μg/24 h
273.8-1262.4 
 nmol/24 h
157.2-2018 
 nmol/24 h
339.7-2550 
 nmol/24 h
349.8-2692 
 nmol/24 h
202.8-2089 
 nmol/24 h
177.4-2444 
 nmol/24 h
446.2-3290 
 nmol/24 h
618.5-3427 
 nmol/24 h
Metanephrines, 
total
 3 mo-4 y
 5-9 y
 10-13 y
 14-17 y
 18-29 y
 30-39 y
 40-49 y
 ≥50 y
79-345 μg/24 h
49-408 μg/24 h
110-714 μg/24 h
107-741 μg/24 h
94-604 μg/24 h
115-695 μg/24 h
182-739 μg/24 h
224-832 μg/24 h
400.5-1749 
 nmol/24 h
284.4-2069 
 nmol/24 h
557.7-3620 
 nmol/24 h
542.5-3757 
 nmol/24 h
476.6-3062 
 nmol/24 h
583.1-3524 
 nmol/24 h
922-3747
 nmol/24 h
1136-4218
 nmol/24 h
Metanephrines,
 fractionated, 
 plasma
Plasma
Metanephrine
Normetanephrine
Total metaneph-
rines
<57 pg/mL
<148 pg/mL
<205 pg/mL
<0.29 nmol/L
<0.75 nmol/L
<1.04 nmol/L
Assay by liquid chromatog-
raphy, tandem mass spec-
trometry (LC/MS/MS). 
Requires minimum of 
1.5 mL refrigerated EDTA 
plasma. Patient should
(Continued)
APPENDIX    837
Test
Source
Ages, 
Conditions, etc
Conventional 
Units
Conversion 
Factor
SI Units
Comments
refrain from alcohol, coffee,
tea, tobacco, and strenuous
exercise. Patient should be 
seated and relaxed before 
the sample is collected. 
Overnight fasting is recom-
mended. Increased in 
pheochromocytoma, neu-
roblastoma, and stress.
Metyrapone stimulation test: Metyrapone in a dose of 30 mg/kg is administered orally at midnight. The 8 AM plasma 11-deoxycortisol is >7 μg/dL 
(>0.2 nmol/L) and plasma ACTH is >100 pg/mL (22 pmol/L). (See Chapter 4.)
Osmolality
Serum
Urine
Random specimen
278-305 
 
mOsm/kg
50-1200 
 mOsm/kg
1.00
278-305 mOsm/kg
50-1200 mOsm/kg
0.2-mL room temperature 
serum.
1-mL refrigerated urine.
Osteocalcin
Serum
Males and females
1.0
Overnight fast preferred. 
Store refrigerated.
 6-9 y
 10-13 y
 14-17 y
40.2-108.0 ng/mL
35.8-165.5 ng/mL
40.2-108.0 ng/mL
35.8-165.5 ng/mL
 Males
 Females
27.8-194.1 ng/mL
16.3-68.7 ng/mL
27.8-194.4 ng/mL
16.3-68.7 ng/mL
Adults
Males
Females
11.3-35.1 ng/mL
7.2-27.9 ng/mL
11.3-35.4 ng/mL
7.2-27.9 ng/mL
Pancreatic 
 polypeptide 
Plasma
Adults
 18-29 y
 30-39 y
 40-49 y
 50-62 y
 >62 y
≤480 pg/mL
70-400 pg/mL
70-430 pg/mL
100-780 pg/mL
Not established
0.246
≤118.1 nmol/L
17.2-98.4 nmol/L
17.2-105.8 nmol/L
24.6-191.9 nmol/L
Not established
Collect with EDTA present, 
process immediately, and 
freeze plasma at −60°C.
Children
 Cord blood
  Term infants
  Preterm infants
 Term infants (6 d)
  1 mo-2 y
  3-7 y
  >7 y
≤163 pg/mL
≤180 pg/mL
≤276 pg/mL
≤644 pg/mL
≤685 pg/mL
80-270 pg/mL
≤40.1 nmol/L
≤44.3 nmol/L
≤67.9 nmol/L
≤158.4 nmol/L
≤168.5 nmol/L
19.7-66.4 nmol/L
Parathyroid 
 hormone 
Serum
Adults
Children
 6-9 y
 10-13 y
 14-17 y
10-65 pg/mL
9-59 pg/mL
11-74 pg/mL
9-69 pg/mL
0.100
1.0-6.5 pmol/L
Intact hormone measured 
by immunochemilumino-
metric assay. Freeze serum 
at −20°C.
Parathyroid 
 hormone-
 related protein
Plasma
<4.7 pmol/L 
Immunoradiometric assay. 
Collect blood in syringe 
and transfer to cold special 
collection tube and mix 
thoroughly. Centrifuge in 
refrigerated centrifuge and 
store plasma frozen.
Pregnanetriol
24-h urine
Males
Females
71-1000 mg/d
47-790 mg/d
2.97
211-2970 μmol/d
140-1436 μmol/d
Refrigerate urine during the 
collection and collect with-
out preservatives. Gas chro-
matography/mass 
spectrometry (GC/MS) 
method. Accumulates in 
urine when 17-hydroxypro-
gesterone levels are high.
Pregnenolone 
Serum
Adult males
Adult females
10-200 ng/dL
10-230 ng/dL
0.0318
0.3-6.4 nmol/L
0.3-7.3 nmol/L
Useful in the diagnosis of 
congenital adrenal hyper-
plasia and in virilizing adre-
nal tumors. 
(Continued)
838    APPENDIX
Test
Source
Ages, 
Conditions, etc
Conventional 
Units
Conversion 
Factor
SI Units
Comments
Progesterone
Serum
Adults
Males
 18-29
 30-39
 40-49
 50-59
Females
<0.3 ng/mL
<0.2 ng/mL
<0.2 ng/mL
<0.2 ng/mL
0.0318
<0.954 nmol/L
<0.636 nmol/L
<0.636 nmol/L
<0.636 nmol/L
Freeze at −20°C. Early 
morning specimen is pre-
ferred. Liquid chromatogra-
phy, tandem mass 
spectrometry (LC/MS/MS) 
method.
 Early follicular 
 phase
 Late follicular 
 phase
 Midcycle
 Luteal phase
 Postmenopausal
<0.6 ng/mL
<14.5 ng/mL
<16.1 ng/mL
<31.4 ng/mL
<0.2 ng/mL
<1.908 nmol/L
<46.11 nmol/L
<51.2 nmol/L
<99.9 nmol/L
<0.636 nmol/L
Children
Males
 5-9 y
 10-13 y
 14-17 y
Females
 5-9 y
 10-13 y
 14-17 y
<0.7 ng/mL
<1.2 ng/mL
<0.8 ng/mL
<0.6 ng/mL
<10.2 ng/mL
<11.9 ng/mL
<2.23 nmol/L
<3.82 nmol/L
<2.54 nmol/L
<1.908 nmol/L
<32.43 nmol/L
<37.84 nmol/L
Proinsulin
Serum
Adults
<18.8 pmol/L
1.0
<18.8 pmol/L
Radioimmunoassay on fro-
zen serum. Useful in the 
diagnosis of insulinoma.
Prolactin
Serum
Adult
 Men
 Women
  Nonpregnant
  Pregnant
  Postmeno-
   pausal
2.0-18.0 ng/mL
3.0-30.0 ng/mL
10.0-209.0 ng/mL
2.0-20.0 ng/mL
0.045
0.09-0.81 nmol/L
0.14-1.35 nmol/L
0.45-9.4 nmol/L
0.09-0.9 nmol/L
Freeze serum at −20°C.
Children
 Males
  Tanner I
  Tanner II-III
  Tanner IV-V
 Females
  Tanner I
  Tanner II-III
  Tanner IV-V
≤10 ng/mL
≤6.1 ng/mL
2.8-11.0 ng/mL
3.6-12.0 ng/mL
2.6-18.0 ng/mL
3.2-20.0 ng/mL
≤0.45 nmol/L
≤0.3 nmol/L
0.13-0.5 nmol/L
0.03-0.54 nmol/L
0.117-0.81 nmol/L
0.144-0.9 nmol/L
Renin
Plasma
Normal sodium 
 diet (75-150 
 mmol/d)
0.278
Draw in cold tube, separate 
plasma, and freeze in plas-
tic within 15 min after col-
lection.
 0800 recumbent
 1200 upright
 upright/sitting
0.3-3.0 μg/L/h
0.4-8.8 μg/L/h
0.65-5.0 μg/L/h
0.09-0.9 ng/L/s
0.12-2.7 ng/L/s
0.18-1.39 ng/L/s
Sex hormone–
 binding globulin
Serum
Adults
 Males
  18-29 y
  30-39 y
  40-49 y
  50-59 y
  60-69 y
  70-79 y
  80-91 y
7-49 nmol/L
8-48 nmol/L
9-45 nmol/L
18-47 nmol/L
17-54 nmol/L
23-65 nmol/L
20-63 nmol/L
1.0
7-49 nmol/L
8-48 nmol/L
9-45 nmol/L
18-47 nmol/L
17-54 nmol/L
23-65 nmol/L
20-63 nmol/L
Store refrigerated, collect 
room temperature serum 
sample. Immunochemi-
luminometric assay.
(Continued)
APPENDIX    839
Test
Source
Ages, 
Conditions, etc
Conventional 
Units
Conversion 
Factor
SI Units
Comments
 Females
  18-29 y
  30-39 y
  40-49 y
  50-59 y
  60-69 y
  70-79 y
  80-91 y
Children
 Males and
 females
  3-9 y
  10-13 y
  14-17 y
Tanner stage
 Males
  I
  II
  III
  IV
  V
 Females
  I
  II
  III
  IV
  V
6-112 nmol/L
14-102 nmol/L
11-100 nmol/L
17-78 nmol/L
17-95 nmol/L
21-90 nmol/L
26-77 nmol/L
18-136 nmol/L
17-123 nmol/L
11-71 nmol/L
39-155 nmol/L
33-135 nmol/L
21-72 nmol/L
11-92 nmol/L
11-54 nmol/L
38-114 nmol/L
24-90 nmol/L
22-112 nmol/L
22-69 nmol/L
18-76 nmol/L
6-112 nmol/L
14-102 nmol/L
11-100 nmol/L
17-78 nmol/L
17-95 nmol/L
21-90 nmol/L
26-77 nmol/L
18-136 nmol/L
17-123 nmol/L
11-71 nmol/L
39-155 nmol/L
33-135 nmol/L
21-72 nmol/L
11-92 nmol/L
11-54 nmol/L
38-114 nmol/L
24-90 nmol/L
22-112 nmol/L
22-69 nmol/L
18-76 nmol/L
Somatostatin 
Plasma
Adults
10-22 pg/mL
0.426
4.26-9.37 pmol/L
Draw in prechilled tube, 
separate plasma, and freeze 
immediately. 
Testosterone, total
Serum
Male
0.0347
Freeze at −20°C.
 Cord blood
 1-10 d
 1-3 mo
 3-5 mo
 5-7 mo
 7-12 mo
 1-5.9 y
 6-7.9 y
 8-10.9 y
 11-11.9 y
 12-13.9 y
 14-17.9 y
 Tanner stage I
 Tanner stage II
 Tanner stage III
 Tanner stage IV
 Tanner stage V
Adults
 18-69 y
 70-89 y
Female
 Cord blood
  1-10 d
  1-3 mo
  3-5 mo
  5-7 mo
  7-12 mo
  1-5.9 y
  6-7.9 y
  8-10.9 y
  11-17.9 y
17-61 ng/dL
≤187 ng/dL
72-344 ng/dL
≤201 ng/dL
≤59 ng/dL
≤16 ng/dL
≤5 ng/dL
<25 ng/dL
<42 ng/dL
<260 ng/dL
<420 ng/dL
<1000 ng/dL
<5 ng/dL
<167 ng/dL
21-719 ng/dL
5-70 ng/dL
110-975 ng/dL
250-1100 ng/dL
90-890 ng/dL
16-44 ng/dL
≤24 ng/dL
≤17 ng/dL
≤12 ng/dL
≤13 ng/dL
≤11 ng/dL
≤8 ng/dL
<20 ng/dL
<35 ng/dL
<40 ng/dL
0.59-2.11 nmol/L
≤6.49 nmol/L
2.5-11.9 nmol/L
≤6.97 nmol/L
≤2.05 nmol/L
≤0.56 nmol/L
≤0.17 nmol/L
<0.87 nmol/L
<1.46 nmol/L
<9.022 nmol/L
<14.57 nmol/L
<34.7 nmol/L
<0.17 nmol/L
<5.79 nmol/L
0.73-24.95 nmol/L
0.17-2.43 nmol/L
3.82-33.83 nmol/L
8.68-38.17 nmol/L
3.12-30.88 nmol/L
0.56-1.53 nmol/L
≤0.83 nmol/L
≤0.59 nmol/L
≤0.42 nmol/L
≤0.45 nmol/L
≤0.38 nmol/L
≤0.28 nmol/L
<0.69 nmol/L
<1.21 nmol/L
<1.38 nmol/L
(Continued)
840    APPENDIX
Test
Source
Ages, 
Conditions, etc
Conventional 
Units
Conversion 
Factor
SI Units
Comments
  Tanner stage I
  Tanner stage II
  Tanner stage III
  Tanner stage IV
  Tanner stage V
 Adult
  18-69 y
  70-94 y
  Pregnancy
  1st trimester
  2nd trimester
  3rd trimester 
 
<8 ng/dL
<24 ng/dL
<28 ng/dL
<31 ng/dL
<33 ng/dL
2-45 ng/dL
2-40 ng/dL
20-135 ng/dL
11-153 ng/dL
11-146 ng/dL
≤0.28 nmol/L
≤0.83 nmol/L
≤0.97 nmol/L
≤1.08 nmol/L
≤1.15 nmol/L
0.069-1.56 nmol/L
0.069-1.38 nmol/L
0.69-4.68 nmol/L
0.38-5.31 nmol/L
0.38-5.07 nmol/L
Testosterone, free
Serum
Male
 5-9 y
 10-13 y
 14-17.9 y
 Adults
  18-69 y
  70-89 y
Female
 5-9 y
 10-13 y
 14-17 y
 Adults
  18-69 y
  70-89 y
 Pregnancy
  1st trimester
  2nd trimester
  3rd trimester
<5.3 pg/mL
0.7-52.0 pg/mL
18.0-111 pg/mL
35-155 pg/mL
30-135 pg/mL
0.2-5.0 pg/mL
0.1-7.4 pg/mL
0.5-3.9 pg/mL
0.1-6.4 pg/mL
0.2-3.7 pg/mL
0.5-6.0 pg/mL
0.2-3.1 pg/mL
0.2-4.1 pg/mL
3.47
<18.4 pmol/L
2.4-180 pmol/L
62.5-385 pmol/L
121.4-5379 pmol/L
104.1-468.4 pmol/L
0.69-17.3 pmol/L
0.35-25.7 pmol/L
1.73-13.5 pmol/L
0.35-22.2 pmol/L
0.69-12.8 pmol/L
1.73-20.8 pmol/L
0.69-10.8 pmol/L
0.69-14.2 pmol/L
Freeze at −20°C. Tracer 
equilibrium dialysis.
Thyroglobulin
Serum
Adult
2.0-35 ng/mL
1.00
2.0-35 ng/mL
Freeze at −20°C. Presence 
of thyroglobulin autoanti-
bodies in the patient’s 
serum may falsely lower 
the result.
Thyroid antibodies
Serum
Thyroperoxidase 
 antibodies
Thyroglobulin 
 antibodies
<35 IU/mL
<20 IU/mL
Serum collected and refrig-
erated.
Thyroid-
 stimulating 
 hormone (TSH)
 ultra sensitive
Serum
Adult
Males and 
 nonpregnant
 females
Pregnant females
 1st trimester
 2nd trimester
 3rd trimester
0.40-4.50 mU/L
0.3-4.5 mU/L
0.5-4.6 mU/L
0.8-5.2 mU/L
–
0.40-4.50 mU/L
0.3-4.5 mU/L
0.5-4.6 mU/L
0.8-5.2 mU/L
Sensitivity: 0.01 mU/mL. 
TSH levels decline in first 
several weeks of life, 
although they remain ele-
vated in some infants. Free 
T4 is helpful in the interpre-
tation of TSH.
Children
 Term infants
  1-4 d
  5-6 d
  1-4 wk
  1-12 mo
  1-19 y
3.2-35.0 mU/L
Not established
1.7-9.1 mU/L
0.80-8.20 mU/L
0.5-4.30 mU/L
3.2-35.0 mU/L
Not established
Thyroid-
 stimulating 
 hormone 
 receptor 
 antibody (TSH-R 
 Ab [stim])
Serum
<125% of basal 
activity 
–
Assay based on cyclic AMP 
generation in CHO cells 
transfected with human 
TSH receptor gene.
(Continued)
APPENDIX    841
Test
Source
Ages, 
Conditions, etc
Conventional 
Units
Conversion 
Factor
SI Units
Comments
Thyroid uptake of 
 radioactive 
 iodine (RAIU) 
Activity over 
 thyroid 
 gland
Fractional uptake
 2 h
 6 h
 24 h
4%-12%
6%-15%
8%-30%
Ingestion or administration 
of iodide will decrease thy-
roid uptake of RAI.
Thyrotropin-
binding 
inhibitory 
immunoglobulin 
(TB-II)
Serum
Adults and 
 children
Graves disease
<16% inhibition
16%-100% 
 inhibition
–
–
Sensitivity: 2% inhibition. 
May be useful in Graves dis-
ease, neonatal hypothy-
roidism, and postpartum 
thyroid dysfunction.
Thyrotropin-
blocking 
antibody
Serum
Adults
≤10% inhibition
–
–
In vitro bioassay useful in 
diagnosis of transient hypo-
thyroidism in infants due to 
maternally transferred anti-
bodies; elevated in some 
forms of hypothyroidism.
Thyroxine-binding 
 globulin (TBG)
Serum
Men
Women
Children
 3-8 y
 9-13 y
 14-17 y
12.7-25.1 μg/mL
13.5-30.9 μg/mL
16.1-24.2 μg/mL
12.5-25.8 μg/mL
9.8-23.7 μg/mL
1.00
Quantifies TBG to differenti-
ate TBG abnormalities from 
thyroid dysfunction.
Thyroxine (T4)
Serum
Children
 1-8 y
 9-13 y
 14-17 y
5.9-11.5 μg/dL
4.7-10.4 μg/dL
5.0-9.8 μg/dL
12.87
75.9-148 nmol/L
60.5-133.8 nmol/L
64.3-126.1 nmol/L
Refrigerate serum. Fasting 
preferred. Elevated levels in 
pregnancy due to increased 
TBG.
Adults
Pregnancy
4.8-10.4 μg/dL
61.8-133.8 nmol/L
 First trimester
 Second trimester
 Third trimester
6.4-15.2 μg/dL
7.4-15.2 μg/dL
7.7-14.7 μg/dL
82.4-195.6 nmol/L
95.2-195.6 nmol/L
99.1-189.2 nmol/L
Thyroxine, 
 free (FT4)
Serum
Children (3-20 y) 
Adults (21-87 y)
Pregnancy
 1st trimester
 2nd trimester
 3rd trimester
1.0-2.4 ng/dL
0.8-2.7 ng/dL
0.9-2.0 ng/dL
0.8-1.5 ng/dL
0.8-1.7 ng/dL
12.87
12.87-30.9 pmol/L
10.3-34.7 pmol/L
11.6-25.7 pmol/L
10.3-19.3 pmol/L
10.3-23.6 pmol/L
Direct equilibrium dialysis 
and radioimmunoassay. 
Refrigerate serum.
Triiodothyronine 
 (T3), total
Serum
<1 y
1-9 y
10-13 y
14-18 y
Adult
Pregnancy
 1st trimester
 2nd and 3rd 
 trimester
Not established 
127-221 ng/dL
123-211 ng/dL
97-186 ng/dL
60-181 ng/dL
81-190 ng/dL
100-260 ng/dL
0.0154
Not established
1.96-3.4 nmol/L
1.89-3.25 nmol/L
1.49-2.86 nmol/L
0.92-2.79 nmol/L
1.25-2.93 nmol/L
1.54-4.00 nmol/L
Refrigerate serum. 
Immunochemiluminometric 
assay. Used to diagnose and 
monitor treatment of 
hyperthyroidism.
Free T3 (FT3)
Serum
Adults
Children
 <1 y
 1-9 y
 10-13 y
 14-18 y
230-420 pg/dL
Not established
337-506 pg/dL
335-480 pg/dL
287-455 pg/dL
15.4
3.5-6.47 pmol/L
Not established
5.19-7.79 pmol/L
5.16-7.79 pmol/L
4.42-7.01 pmol/L
Nondialysis; ICMA 
on refrigerated serum.
(Continued)
842    APPENDIX
Test
Source
Ages, 
Conditions, etc
Conventional 
Units
Conversion 
Factor
SI Units
Comments
FT3
Serum
Nonpregnant adults
Pregnant women
Children
 <1 y
 1-9 y
 10-13 y
 14-17 y
210-440 pg/dL
200-380 pg/dL
Not established
282-518 pg/dL
286-556 pg/dL
242-501 pg/dL
15.4
3.23-6.78 pmol/L
3.08-5.85 pmol/L
Not established
4.34-7.98 pmol/L
4.40-8.56 pmol/L
3.73-7.72 pmol/L
Tracer dialysis, RIA on 
refrigerated serum.
Reverse T3 (RT3)
Serum
0.11-0.32 ng/mL
0.0154
0.169-0.49 nmol/L
Radioimmunoassay to 
establish the cause of abnor-
mal thyroid function tests as 
due to nonthyroidal illness.
Vanillylmandelic 
 acid (VMA)
24-h urine 
Random or 
 spot urine
Adults
Children
 3-8 y
 9-12 y
 13-17 y
Children
 Birth-6 mo
 7-11 mo
 1-2 y
 3-8 y
 9-12 y
 13-17 y
Adults
≤6.0 mg/d
≤2.3 mg/d
≤3.4 mg/d
≤3.9 mg/d
5.5-26 mg/g Cr
6.1-20 mg/g Cr
2.5-21 mg/g Cr
1.7-6.5 mg/g Cr
1.4-5.1 mg/g Cr
1.5-3.6 mg/g Cr
1.1-4.1 mg/g Cr
5.88
0.573
≤13.5 nmol/d
≤20 nmol/d
≤22.9 nmol/d
≤35.3 nmol/d
3.2-14.9 mmol 
 VMA/mol Cr
3.5-11.5 mmol 
 VMA/mol Cr
1.4-12.0 mmol 
 VMA/mol Cr
0.97-3.7 mmol 
 VMA/mol Cr
0.80-2.9 mmol 
 VMA/mol Cr
0.86-2.1 mmol 
 VMA/mol Cr
0.63-2.3 mmol 
 VMA/mol Cr
10 mL aliquot of urine, 
HPLC detection; 24-h urine 
is collected with 25 mL of
6N HCl added. Patients 
should avoid alcohol, cof-
fee, tea, tobacco, nicotine, 
bananas, citrus fruit, and 
heavy exercise prior to the 
collection.
Vasoactive 
 intestinal peptide
Serum
<50 pg/mL
0.30
<15 pmol/L
Frozen EDTA plasma.
Vitamin D 
 (25-hydroxy)
Serum
20-100 ng/mL
2.50
50-250 nmol/L
Measures both D2 and D3. 
Freeze serum in plastic 
tube at −20°C. Liquid chro-
matography tandem mass 
spectrometry (LC/MS/MS)
Vitamin D 
 (1,25 dihydroxy)
Serum
Adults
Children
 3-7 y
15-60 pg/mL
27-71 pg/mL
2.50
32.5-167 pmol/L
22.5-135 pmol/L
Extraction, chromatogra-
phy, radioreceptor assay. 
Freeze serum in plastic 
tube at −20°C.
aAdapted from the Clinical Laboratories Manual of the University of California Hospital and Clinics, San Francisco, California, July 4, 2010; and, with permission, from Quest Diagnostics 
Nichols Institute normal values for endocrine tests. The Quest Diagnosis Manual. Endocrinology Test Selection and Interpretation. 4th ed. Fisher D, ed. 2007. The factors used in convert-
ing conventional units to SI units were derived in part from the CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics and conversion tables from other online resources. It is important to empha-
size that normal ranges vary among different laboratories, and the clinician must know the normal range for the test of interest in the laboratory performing the test.
bSemen analysis is discussed in Chapter 12.
BCE, bone collagen equivalent.
APPENDIX    843
This page intentionally left blank
845
845
A
Abetalipoproteinemia, recessive, 690
Ablation, RF, in pheochromocytoma/
paraganglioma management, 389
Absent puberty, 535
Absolute risk reduction (ARR), defined, 54
Acanthosis nigricans, 449
Acarbose, in type 2 diabetes management, 
611t, 615
ACCORD trial, 609
Accuracy
defined, 48
diagnostic, defined, 49
Acetohexamide, in type 2 diabetes
management, 611t, 612
ACHOIS (Australian Carbohydrate 
Intolerance Study in Pregnant 
Women) trial, 651
Acidosis(es)
hyperchloremic, during diabetic
ketoacidosis management, 631
lactic
diabetes mellitus and, See Lactic
acidosis
laboratory abnormalities in, 628t
Acquired growth hormone deficiency, 144t, 
149
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome 
(AIDS), endocrinopathies of,
787-802. See also specific disor-
ders, e.g. Thyroid disorders
adrenal disorders, 789-791, 790t
AIDS wasting syndrome, 794-795
fat distribution abnormalities associated 
with HIV, 795-796
glucose metabolism disorders, 796-799, 
797t, 798t
gonadal disorders, 792-794
lipid metabolism disorders, 798t, 799-801
pituitary disorders, 794
thyroid disorders, 787-789, 788t, 789t
Acquired nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, 120
Acromegaly, 105-109, 106t, 107f
causes of, 105
clinical features of, 106-108, 106t, 107f
described, 105
diagnosis of, 108
differential diagnosis of, 108
hypertension and, 342
imaging studies in, 107-108, 107f
laboratory findings in, 107
pathogenesis of, 105
pathology of, 105
pathophysiology of, 105
secondary hypertriglyceridemia associated 
with, 686
symptoms and signs of, 106-107, 106t, 
107f
treatment of, 108-109
follow-up care, 109
medical, 109
radiotherapy in, 109
response to, 109
surgical, 108-109
ACS (acute coronary syndrome),
pheochromocytomas and, 370
ACTH. See Adrenocorticotropic hormone
Active suppression, 32f, 33, 35
Acute coronary syndrome (ACS),
pheochromocytomas and, 370
Acute illness(es), thyroid function effects of, 
182-183, 182f, 182t
Acute renal failure, hypercalcemia due to,
252
Adaptive immunity, 31
Addison disease, 303-308
autoimmune, 40-41, 41t
causes of, 303-306, 304f, 305t
clinical features of, 306-308, 306t,
307t
consequences of, 295t-296t
diagnosis of, 308-310, 309f, 310f
drug-induced, 306
imaging studies in, 307
laboratory findings in, 307-308
pathology of, 303-306, 304f, 305t
pathophysiology of, 306
prognosis of, 312
symptoms and signs of, 306-307,
306t
Addisonian crisis, acute, treatment of,
310-311, 310f
Adenohypophysial pituitary hormones, 71t
Adenoma(s)
adrenal. See Adrenal adenomas
aldosterone-producing, 324
surgical treatment of, 339
cortisol-producing, 324
oxyphil, 215
pituitary, 99-113. See also Pituitary
adenomas
toxic, 206, 206f
Adenosine monophosphate protein kinase 
(AMPK), insulin effects on,
581-582, 582f
Adenylyl cyclase, 9, 9f
ADH (antidiuretic hormone), normal ranges
for, 842
ADHR (autosomal dominant hypophos-
phatemic rickets), 275
Adipokine(s), insulin resistance in type 2
diabetes and, 591
Adipose tissue
glucocorticoid effects on, 295t, 297
insulin effects on, 581, 581t
as obesity complication, 703-704
Adipose tissue secretions, metabolic effects of, 
708f
Adipsic hypothalamic diabetes insipidus, 119
Adolescence, constitutional delay in, 535, 536f
Adolescent(s)
Cushing syndrome in, 314
gynecomastia in, 549
hypothyroidism in, 193
Adrenal adenomas
clinical features of, 318-319
Cushing syndrome due to
pathophysiology of, 317
treatment of, 322
glucocorticoid-secreting, 315
in multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN 1), 
724-725
Adrenal androgens, 299-303
in AIDS patients with adrenal disorders, 
790
biosynthesis of, 287-289, 287f, 290t
circulation of, 292
conversions and excretion of, 294
described, 299
female effects of, 299
glucocorticoids and, 285-327
laboratory evaluation of, 299-303
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) 
stimulation test in, 302
androgen excess in, 303
corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) 
testing in, 303
dexamethasone suppression tests in,
301-302
insulin-induced hypoglycemia testing in, 
302-303
metyrapone testing in, 302
pituitary-adrenal reserve in, 302-303
plasma ACTH in, 300
plasma cortisol in, 300
plasma free cortisol in, 300-301
salivary cortisol in, 300
urinary corticosteroids in, 301
male effects of, 299
metabolism of, 292-294, 293f
production of, regulation of, ACTH effects 
on, 292
Adrenal carcinomas
Cushing disease due to, clinical features of, 
319
Cushing syndrome due to, 315
pathophysiology of, 317
treatment of, 322
Index
Page numbers followed by “f” and “t” indicate figures and tables, respectively.
846    Index
Adrenal cortex
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) effects 
on, 290
anatomy of, 286, 286f
microscopic, 286-287, 287f
described, 285
embryology of, 285-286
fetal, 562
maternal, during pregnancy, 561
uninvolved, Cushing syndrome due to, 315
Adrenal cortex-sparing surgery, in
pheochromocytoma/paragan-
glioma management, 386
Adrenal cortical carcinoma, 816-817
described, 816
diagnosis of, 816
surgical management of, 816-817
Adrenal crisis
acute, 307, 307t
treatment of, 310-311, 310f
prevention of, 312
Adrenal disorders
in AIDS patients, 789-791, 790t
adrenal androgens and, 790
glucocorticoid-related, 789-790
medication effects of, 789t, 790
mineralocorticoids and, 790, 790t
neoplasms, 789-790
opportunistic infections, 789-790
effects of, 285
maternal, Addison disease due to, 305
Adrenal failure, autoimmune, 40-41, 41t
Adrenal gland, 815-818, 818t
anatomy of, 815
blood supply of, 286, 286f
disorders of. See Adrenal disorders
embryology of, 815
location of, 286, 286f
in polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) 
pathogenesis, 448-449
surgery of, indications for, 815-818, 818t
adrenal cortical carcinoma, 816-817
adrenal incidentaloma, 817-818, 818t, 819f
hypercortisolism, 816
pheochromocytomas, 817
primary hyperaldosteronism,
815-816
sex steroid excess, 817
Adrenal hemorrhage
acute, 307, 307t, 308
Addison disease due to, 303-305, 305t
Adrenal hyperplasia
congenital, 340
nodular, treatment of, 322
Adrenal hypersecretion, in the elderly, 759
Adrenal hypoplasia, congenital, Addison
disease due to, 305
Adrenal incidentaloma, 817-818, 818t, 819f
described, 817
diagnosis of, 818
differential diagnosis of, 818t
treatment of, 818
Adrenal insufficiency
acute, 768-769, 768t
clinical setting of, 768
diagnosis of, 768
management of, 768-769, 768t
sepsis and, 769
anovulation and, 453
in the elderly, 759-760
hypercalcemia due to, 251
hypothalamic-pituitary axis in, 303, 304f
Adrenal mass(es)
incidental, 323-324
incidentally discovered, 381-382
Adrenal medulla, 345-393. See also 
Paraganglioma(s); 
Pheochromocytoma(s)
anatomy of, 346-347, 346f
blood supply to, 347
gross structure, 346
microscopic structure, 346-347
nerve supply to, 347
described, 345-346
disorders of, 355f, 357-358, 357t, 358f
epinephrine deficiency, 355f, 357-358, 
357t, 358f
norepinephrine deficiency, 355f,
357-358, 357t, 358f
embryology of, 346, 346f
hormones of, 347-357
catecholamines, 347-357. See also 
Catecholamine(s)
Adrenal percutaneous fine-needle aspiration 
biopsy, in pheochromocytoma
diagnosis, 382
Adrenal rest tissue, precocious puberty
associated with, 548
Adrenal steroids, biologic effects of, 294-299, 
295t-296t. See also 
Glucocorticoid(s)
Adrenal stimulation, in ACTH evaluation, 85
Adrenal tumors
Cushing disease due to, 316
Cushing syndrome due to, 315
pathophysiology of, 317
treatment of, 322
primary, 314
prognosis of, 323
Adrenal venous sampling (AVS), in primary aldos-
teronism diagnosis, 336-337, 338f
Adrenalectomy
laparoscopic, complications of, 818
needlescopic, in pheochromocytoma/
paraganglioma management, 386
technique of, 818, 819f
Adrenarche
premature, 549
during puberty, 534-535, 534t
Adrenocortical hyperplasia, Cushing
syndrome and, 314
Adrenocortical insufficiency. See also Addison 
disease
autoimmune, 303, 305t
diagnosis of, 308-310, 309f, 310f
partial ACTH deficiency assessment in, 
309-310
plasma ACTH levels in, 309, 310f
rapid ACTH stimulation test in,
308-309, 309f, 310f
disorders of, 303-312
Addison disease, 303-308
drug-induced, 306
primary, 303-308. See also Addison disease
prognosis of, 312
secondary, 304f, 308-312
causes of, 304f, 308
clinical features of, 308
laboratory findings in, 308
pathophysiology of, 308
treatment of, 310-312, 310t-312t
cortisol in, 311
intravenous fluids in, 311
maintenance therapy in, 311, 311t
response to, 311-312
steroid coverage for surgery in,
312, 312t
Adrenocortical steroids, structure of, 287f
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), 
76-78, 76f, 77f
adrenal cortex effects of, 290
androgen production regulation effects of, 
292
biosynthesis of, 76, 76f
evaluation of, 85-88
adrenal stimulation in, 85
hypersecretion in, 88
pituitary stimulation in, 85, 87-88
plasma levels, 77f, 85
function of, 76-77
measurement of, 77
normal ranges for, 825t
peptides related to, 76-78, 76f, 77f
pituitary adenomas in, 314
plasma
in adrenal androgen evaluation, 300
in Cushing syndrome, 320, 321f
levels of, in adrenocortical insufficiency 
diagnosis, 309, 310f
secretion of. See Adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH) secretion
steroidogenesis and, 291, 291f
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
deficiency
evaluation of, 85
hypopituitarism and, 96
treatment of, 97-98
partial, assessment of, in adrenocortical 
insufficiency diagnosis, 309-310
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) 
hypersecretion
in ACTH evaluation, 88
ectopic, 314
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)–
secreting pituitary adenomas,
109-111. See also Pituitary
adenomas, ACTH-secreting
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
secretion, 289-290
biosynthesis of, regulation of secretion in, 
289-292, 291f
ectopic, occult, in Cushing syndrome, 321
fast feedback inhibition of, 292
in neuroendocrine control, 291-292,
291f
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
stimulation test, 825t
in adrenal androgen evaluation, 302
Index     847
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
syndrome, ectopic, 315-318, 
715-717, 716t
causes of, 315-316, 316f
clinical features of, 318
pathophysiology of, 316-317
prognosis of, 323
treatment of, 322
Adrenoleukodystrophy, Addison disease due 
to, 305
Adrenomedullin (AM), secretion of,
pheochromocytomas and
paragangliomas in, 368
Adult Leydig cell failure, 412-413
Adult seminiferous tubule failure,
411-412
causes of, 411
clinical features of, 412
course of, 412
described, 411
differential diagnosis of, 412
laboratory findings in, 412
pathology of, 411-412
pathophysiology of, 411-412
prevention of, 412
prognosis of, 412
symptoms and signs of, 412
treatment of, 412
ADVANCE trial, 609
Adynamic bone disease, 281
Age
as factor in puberty, 529-530
skeletal, determination of, 143
Agenesis
gonadal, 443
Müllerian, 454
Aging
carbohydrate intolerance related to, 743, 
744f
endocrine system changes with, 456-457, 
457t
ovarian, 455, 456f
of population, 737
reproductive function changes in men 
related to, 760-761,
760f, 761f
thyroid function changes related to,
182
Agonadism, XY, 516
AHO (Albright hereditary osteodystrophy), 
255
AIDS. See Acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome
AIDS wasting syndrome, 794-795
AIS (androgen insensitivity syndrome), 454
Albright hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO), 
255
Albumin
androgens binding to, 292
cortisol binding to, 292
in thyroid hormone transport, 170-171
Alcohol ingestion
lipoprotein disorders associated with,
693
secondary hypertriglyceridemia associated 
with, 685-686
Aldosterone
adenoma due to, 324
surgical treatment of, 339
normal ranges for, 825t
in renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, 
331-332, 331f
Aldosteronism, primary, 332-340
clinical presentation of, 333
described, 332-333, 332t
diagnosis of, 333-338, 334f, 336f-338f
adrenal CT in, 335-336, 336f-338f
adrenal venous sampling (AVS) in,
336-337, 338f
case-detection tests in, 333-334, 334f
confirmatory tests in, 335
familial hyperaldosteronism type II 
assessment in, 338
glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism–
familial hyperaldosteronism type I 
assessment in, 337-338
intravenous saline infusion test in, 335
oral sodium loading test in, 335
subtype studies in, 335-338, 336f-338f
prevalence of, 333
treatment of, 339-340
Alimentary (reactive) hypoglycemia, 668-670, 
669t
Alkaline phosphatase, normal ranges for, 825t
Allergy(ies), insulin, 625-626
Alpha-adrenergic blockers, in
pheochromocytoma/paragan-
glioma management, 382-383
Alpha-adrenergic receptors, 352-354, 354f, 355f
Alpha-glucosidase inhibitors, in type 2 diabe-
tes management, 611t, 615-616, 
625
Alpha subunit, normal ranges for, 826t
Alpha subunit–secreting pituitary adenomas, 
112
Alpha2 receptors, 353, 355f
Alström syndrome, obesity due to, 703t
Aluminum, bone disease due to, 277
AM. See Adrenomedullin
Ambiguous genitalia, gonadal dysgenesis and, 
516
AME syndrome (apparent mineralocorticoid 
excess syndrome), 340-341
Amenorrhea, 436-445
assessment of patients with, 436, 437t, 438f
defined, 436
eating disorders and, 439-440
in female athlete, 439
hypothalamic, 437-440. See also 
Hypothalamic amenorrhea
ovarian, 442-445, 443f
pituitary, 440-442
primary
normal secondary sexual development 
and, hypergonadotropic
hypogonadism and, 542
versus secondary, 436, 437t, 438f
Amine precursor uptake and decarboxylation 
(APUD), neuroendocrine cell 
tumors and, 712
Aminoglutethimide, in ACTH-secreting pitu-
itary adenoma management, 111
Amiodarone, thyrotoxicosis due to, 207
AMPK. See Adenosine monophosphate
protein kinase 
Amplifier(s), in insulin secretion, 578, 579t
Amprenavir, glucose and lipid metabolism 
effects of, 797, 798t
Anabolic therapy, in osteoporosis
management, 460
Anabolism, insulin promoting, 581, 581t
Anaplastic carcinoma, of thyroid gland
pathology of, management of, 224
of thyroid gland, pathology of, 218
Androgen(s)
adrenal, 299-303. See also Adrenal
androgens
aging effects on, 457-458, 457t
disorders of, 514-516
gonadal, pharmacology of, 403-404
hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunction, 
99
in men, in hypothalamic pituitary
dysfunction, 99
in women, hypothalamic-pituitary
dysfunction, 99
dysgenetic 46,XX due to, 501-504, 502f, 
503t
excess of, in adrenal androgen evaluation, 
303
formation of, 426f, 432
maternal source of, 509-516
in osteoporosis management, 269
relative androgenic activity of,
427, 427t
resistance to, in men with normal male 
genitalia, 516
secretion of, autonomous, in boys, 547
synthesis of, in steroidogenesis, 289
testicular, biosynthesis of, pathways for, 
397, 398f
Androgen binding, 292
Androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS), 454
Androgen-secreting tumor, hyperandrogenism 
and, 452
3α-Androstenediol glucuronide, normal 
ranges for, 826t
Androstenedione
in female reproductive system, 432
normal ranges for, 826t
Anemia, hypothyroidism and, 194-195
Anergy, 32f, 33, 35
Anesthesia/anesthetics, in
pheochromocytoma/paragan-
glioma management, 385
Angiotensin, in renin-angiotensin-aldosterone 
system, 329-330, 331f
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
inhibitors, in pheochromocy-
toma/paraganglioma manage-
ment, 383
Angiotensin peptides, production of, renin-
angiotensin system in, 330, 331f
Angiotensin II
normal ranges for, 826t
in renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, 330
Angiotensinogen, in renin-angiotensin-
aldosterone system, 330, 331f
848    Index
Anorchia
bilateral, 407-408
causes of, 407
clinical features of, 407-408
differential diagnosis of, 408
imaging studies in, 408
laboratory findings in, 408
pathophysiology of, 407
symptoms and signs of, 407-408
testicular pathology of, 407
treatment of, 408
congenital, 516
hypergonadotropic hypogonadism and, 
540-541
Anorexia nervosa
amenorrhea and, 440
delayed puberty and, 539
secondary hypercholesterolemia associated 
with, 688-689
Anovulation, 445-452. See also Infertility
adrenal insufficiency and, 453
anovulation in, mechanism of, 447-449, 
447f-449f
in congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), 
451-452
Cushing syndrome and, 452
defined, 445
hyperandrogenism and, 445-452, 445t, 
447f-449f, 450t
polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) and, 
445-451. See also Polycystic
ovarian syndrome
thyroid disorders and, 453-454
unrelated to excess sex steroid production, 
453-454
Anterior pituitary hormones, 75-78
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and 
related peptides, 76-78, 76f, 77f
described, 75
Antibody(ies)
islet cell, normal ranges for, 836t
to sperm or seminal plasma, male
infertility–related, treatment of, 
415
thyroid, normal ranges for, 841t
thyrotropin-blocking, normal ranges for, 842t
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH), normal ranges 
for, 826t
Antigen(s), 27, 28t
Antigen-presenting cells (APCs), 29-31, 30f, 31f
Antihyperglycemic agents, in type 2 diabetes 
management, 625
Antimüllerian hormone, defects in synthesis, 
secretion, or response to, 516
Antioxidant(s), in lipoprotein disorders
management, 693-694
Antiresorptive agents, in osteoporosis
management, 267-269, 267t
Antiretroviral therapy, HIV infections and, 
800-801
APCs. See Antigen-presenting cells
Aphallia, 518
Aplasia(s)
germinal cell, 540
Leydig cell, 409
APO B-100, ligand-defective, familial, 688
APO B–containing lipoprotein deficiency, 
primary hypolipidemia due to,
690-691
Apolipoprotein(s)
B, in lipid transport, 676
C, in lipid transport, 676-677, 676t
Apoplexy, pituitary, 769
Apoptosis, 32f, 33, 35
Apparent mineralocorticoid excess (AME) 
syndrome, 340-341
Appetite
control of, hypothalamus in, 74-75
regulation of, leptin in, 700-701
APS-I. See Polyglandular syndromes,
autoimmune, APS-I
APS-II. See Polyglandular syndromes,
autoimmune, APS-II
APUD. See Amine precursor uptake and 
decarboxylation
ARH (autosomal recessive
hypercholesterolemia), 682
ARR (absolute risk reduction), 54
Arterial embolization, in pheochromocytoma/
paraganglioma management, 389
Asherman syndrome, 455
Asphyxiation, transient hyperinsulinism and, 
670, 670t
Atazanavir, glucose and lipid metabolism 
effects of, 797, 798t
Atazanavir/ritonavir, glucose and lipid
metabolism effects of, 797, 798t
Atherosclerosis, 675-676
antiretroviral therapy and, 800-801
mortality data, 675
reversal of, 676
risk factors for, 675-676
Athyreotic cretins, 212
Atrophy, genital, menopause and, 458-459
Australian Carbohydrate Intolerance Study in 
Pregnant Women (ACHOIS) 
trial, 651
Autoantibody(ies), 27, 28t
thyroid, measurement of, 190
in type 1 diabetes, 39
Autoimmune adrenocortical insufficiency, 
303, 305t
Autoimmune diseases/disorders. See also
specific types
inheritance pattern of, 36
prevalence of, 28
of thyroid gland, 37-38, 38f
spectrum of, 213, 213f
Autoimmune endocrinopathies, 27, 28t
Autoimmune hypoglycemia, 663
Autoimmune response
in thyroid disease, 37-38, 38f
in type 1 diabetes, 39-40
Autoimmune syndromes, single-gland, 28t, 
37-38, 38f
Autoimmunity
endocrine, 27-45
environmental factors in, 36-37
genetic factors in, 36-37
multifactorial nature of, 35-37
thyroid, 183-184
type 1 diabetes and, 588-589, 588t
Autonomic insufficiency, 355f, 357-358, 
357t, 358f
Autonomic nerves, divisions of, 345
Autonomic nervous system, response to
hypoglycemia, 659, 659t
Autonomic neuropathy, in diabetic patients, 
634t, 639-640
Autonomous androgen secretion, in boys, 547
Autoregulation, thyroidal, in thyroid function 
control, 177-178
Autosomal chromosomal disorders/
syndromes, 144t, 146
Autosomal dominant hypophosphatemia, 275
Autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic
rickets (ADHR), 275
Autosomal dominant pancreatic β cells, 
genetic defects of, 593-595, 594t
Autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia 
(ARH), 692
Autotransplantation, total parathyroidectomy 
with, versus subtotal parathyroi-
dectomy, 814
AVS. See Adrenal venous sampling
Axial osteomalacia, 277
B
B apolipoproteins, in lipid transport, 676
B cell(s)
activation and differentiation of, 31
tolerance of, 34f, 35
B lymphocyte(s), reactivation and
differentiation of, 29
Bardet-Biedl syndrome, 144t, 146
delayed puberty and, 539
obesity due to, 703t
Bariatric surgery
in obesity management, 707-708
in type 2 diabetes management, 625
BCR editing, 35
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, 161, 366
Beta-adrenergic blockers, in
pheochromocytoma/paragan-
glioma management, 383
Beta-adrenergic receptors, 354-355, 355f
Beta-blockers, in pheochromocytoma/
paraganglioma management, 385
Beta-cell defects, in type 2 diabetes,
590t, 592
Beta-cell tumors, pancreatic, 663-667, 665t, 
666f. See also Insulinoma(s)
Beta shift, 678
Biguanide(s), for type 2 diabetes, 746t
Bilateral nodular hyperplasia, Cushing
syndrome and, 315
Bile acid sequestrants, in hyperlipoproteinemia 
management, 694-695
Binding proteins, for vitamin D metabolites, 
236-237
Biochemical testing, for pheochromocytomas, 
372-376. See also 
Pheochromocytoma(s),
biochemical testing for
Biopsy(ies)
fine-needle aspiration, adrenal
percutaneous, in pheochromocy-
toma diagnosis, 382
Index     849
testicular, in testicular function evaluation, 
403
thyroid, 189-190
Birth
endocrine changes at, 532
preterm, 563-565, 564f. See also Preterm 
birth
Bisphosphonate(s)
in osteoporosis management, 268, 459, 
755-756
in Paget disease of bone management,
280
in pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma 
management, 389
Blood, thyroid hormones in, tests of,
184-185, 185f-186f, 186t
Blood cells, glucocorticoid effects on, 298
Blood glucose, in diabetes mellitus evaluation, 
602-603, 602t
Blood pressure, elevation of. See also 
Hypertension
pheochromocytomas and, 369-370
Blood supply
to adrenal glands, 286, 286f
to adrenal medulla, 347
to hypothalamus, 67f-69f, 68
to paraganglia, 347
to pituitary gland, 67f-69f, 68
to testes, 395
Blood–testis barrier, 395
BMD. See Bone mineral density
Body composition, during puberty, changes 
in, 528, 530f
Body fluids, calcium in, 228, 228t
Bone(s)
cells of, 259f-261f, 260-261
diabetes effects on, 634t, 641-642
disorders of, in AIDS patients, 789t,
791-792. See also Bone and min-
eral disorders, in AIDS patients
functions of, 258
glucocorticoid effects on, 295t, 297-298
hungry, 258, 778
mineral of, 260
physiology of, factors affecting, 751-752, 
752f, 753f
remodeling of, 261-262, 263f
resorption of, osteoclast-mediated, 260, 
261f
structure of, 259-261, 259f-261f
vitamin D actions in, 239-240
Bone age, determination of, 143
Bone disease(s). See also Osteoporosis; specific 
diseases, e.g., Hypercalcemia
adynamic, 281
calcium deficiency, 276
drugs causing, 277
hepatic osteodystrophy, 274
hypercalcemia, 242-252
hyperparathyroid, 246-248, 246f, 247f
hyperphosphatemia, hereditary forms of, 
281-282
hypocalcemia, 252-258
hypophosphatemic disorders, 274-276
metabolic, 227-284
nephrotic syndrome, 273-274
osteomalacia, 271-273, 272f-274f,
272t
drug-induced, 274
osteoporosis, 262-271
Paget disease of bone, 277-280, 278f, 279f, 
279t
primary disorders of bone matrix,
276-277
renal osteodystrophy, 280-281, 280f
rickets, 271-273, 272f-274f, 272t
Bone-forming agents, in osteoporosis
management, 269
Bone loss
in the elderly, 752, 753f
estrogen deficiency and, 264f, 265
in later life, 265
menopausal, 459
in osteoporosis, 263-265, 264f, 264t
Bone mass
delayed puberty effects on, treatment of, 
545
peak, reduced, disorders associated with, 
264, 264t
Bone matrix, primary disorders of,
276-277
Bone mineral density (BMD), 246-248, 247f
in osteoporosis, 266
Bone and mineral disorders. See also Bone(s); 
Mineral(s); specific disorders
in AIDS patients, 789t, 791-792
calcium homeostasis, 789t, 792
osteonecrosis, 792
osteopenia, 791
osteoporosis, 791
phosphate homeostasis, 789t, 792
Bonnevie-Ullrich syndrome, 541
Börjeson-Forssman-Lehman syndrome,
obesity due to, 703t
Brain, energy status and, 700-701, 701t
Brain death, 119
Breast(s), development of, 528, 528f
Breast cancer, hypercalcemia of malignancy 
and, 713-714, 714t
Bromocriptine, in prolactinoma management, 
103
Buffalo hump, 317
Bulimia, 440. See also Eating disorders
amenorrhea and, 440
Bupropion, in obesity management, 707t
C
C apolipoproteins, in lipid transport,
676-677, 676t
C peptide
in insulin biosynthesis, 577
of insulin, normal ranges for, 826t
Cabergoline, in prolactinoma management, 
103
CAH. See Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
Calcinosis, tumoral, 281-282
Calcitonin, 233-234, 233f, 234f
normal ranges for, 826t
in osteoporosis management, 268, 459, 
756
in Paget disease of bone management, 280
secreted by tumors, 719-720
Calcitonin stimulation test, utilizing calcium 
infusion, 826t
Calcitriol, in osteoporosis management, 267
Calcium
in body fluids, 228, 228t
deficiency of, bone disorders associated 
with, 276
fluxes of, 228, 228f
in glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis,
prevention and treatment, 270-271
intestinal transport of, vitamin D in, 239
loss of, glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis 
and, 270
metabolism of
cellular, 227-241
extracellular, 227-241
glucocorticoid effects on, 295t, 298
normal ranges for, 827t
in osteoporosis management, 267, 267t, 
460, 755
Calcium antagonists, for congenital
hyperinsulinism, 673
Calcium channel blockers, in
pheochromocytoma/paragan-
glioma management, 383, 384
Calcium homeostasis
in AIDS patients, 789t, 792
in the elderly, 750-757. See also 
Osteoporosis, in the elderly
Calculus(i), renal, in Cushing syndrome, 
317t, 318
Calorie(s), restriction of, in lipoprotein
disorders management, 693
Cancer(s)
breast, hypercalcemia of malignancy and, 
713-714, 714t
obesity effects on, 706
thyroid, 217-224, 217t, 219f-221f, 222t,
223f-224f, 743. See also
Thyroid cancer
Carbimazole, for Graves disease, 203
Carbohydrate(s)
metabolism of, thyroid hormone effects on, 
181
role of, 693
Carbohydrate intolerance
aging and, 743, 744f
in the elderly, 743-750
physiology of, 743, 744f
Carcinoma(s). See also Cancer(s); Neoplasm(s); 
specific types 
adrenal. See Adrenal carcinomas
anaplastic, of thyroid gland, 218, 224
follicular
pathology of, management of, 219-221, 
221f
of thyroid gland, pathology of, 218
papillary
pathology of, management of, 219-221, 
221f
of thyroid gland, pathology of,
217-218
pituitary, 113
renal cell, hypercalcemia of malignancy 
and, 714, 714t
thyroid, 207-208
850    Index
Carcinoma(s) (Cont.):
undifferentiated
pathology of, management of, 223
of thyroid gland, pathology of, 218
Cardiomyopathy(ies)
catecholamine, pheochromocytomas and, 
370
pheochromocytomas and, 370
Cardiovascular disease
atherosclerotic, menopause and, 460-461
diabetes in the elderly and, 745
Cardiovascular system
catecholamine effects on, 357
diabetes effects on, 634t, 640-641
glucocorticoid effects on, 296t, 298
hypothyroidism effects on, 193-194, 194f
obesity effects on, 705
thyroid hormone effects on, 179-180, 180f
Carney complex, multiple endocrine organ 
involvement in, 733-734
Carney-Stratakis syndrome, 365
Carney triad, 366
Carotid body, 345
tumors of, 360, 365
Carpal spasm, hypocalcemic tetany and, 253, 
253f
Carpal tunnel syndrome, in diabetic patients, 
642
Carpenter syndrome, obesity due to, 703t
Case-detection tests, in primary aldosteronism 
diagnosis, 333-334, 334f
Catabolism, insulin inhibiting, 581, 581t
Cataract(s)
in diabetic patients, 634t, 636
senile, 634t, 636
subcapsular, 634t, 636
Catch-up growth, 140
Catecholamine(s), 347-357
biosynthesis of, 347-349, 347f
cardiovascular effects of, 357
in counter-regulatory response to
hypoglycemia, 659
excretion of, 349, 351-352, 351f
extravascular smooth muscle effects of, 357
metabolism of, 349, 351-352, 351f
normal ranges for, 827t-828t
physiologic effects of, 357
plasma-fractionated, 374, 376t
secretion of, 349, 350f, 351t
storage of, 349
urine-fractionated, 374-375, 376t
venous sampling, of pheochromocytoma, 
367f, 381
Catecholamine cardiomyopathy,
pheochromocytomas and, 370
Catecholamine receptors, 352-357, 352t, 
353t, 354f, 355f, 356t, 357t
actions of, 352, 353t
alpha-adrenergic receptors, 352-354, 354f, 
355f
beta-adrenergic receptors, 354-355, 355f
circulating, actions of, 353t, 356-357,
356t
dopamine receptors, 356
location of, 352, 353t
metabolic effects of, 357, 357t
in sympathoadrenal activity regulation, 356
types/subtypes of, 352, 352t
CBG. See Corticosteroid-binding globulin
CBP (CREB–binding protein), 21, 24
Cell(s). See specific types
Cellular calcium metabolism, 227-241
Central nervous system (CNS)
disorders of
central precocious puberty–related,
546-547
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism,
536-537
glucocorticoid effects on, 296t, 299
hypothyroidism effects on, 195
insulin effects on, 581, 581t
Central nervous system (CNS) disorders, in 
Cushing syndrome, 317t, 318
Central precocious puberty, 545-547, 546f.
See also Puberty, precocious, central
Cerebral anoxia/brain death, 119
Cerebral edema, nonketotic hyperosmolar 
coma and, 775
Cerebral gigantism, 160-161
Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis, 692
CgA. See Chromogranin A 
Channel defects, in persistent
hyperinsulinism, 670t, 671
Cheiroarthropathy, diabetic, 634t, 641
Chemical(s)
diabetes due to, 599
environmental, reproductive disorders in 
males due to, 516
Chemical mediators, in intercellular
communication, 66, 66f
Chemodectoma(s), 365
Chemotherapy, in pheochromocytoma/
paraganglioma management,
389
Chief cell, 229
Children
hypothyroidism in, 193
pheochromocytomas in, manifestations of, 
371
weight loss in, 708
Chlorpropamide, in type 2 diabetes
management, 611t, 612
Cholecystokinin, normal ranges for, 828t
Cholera, pancreatic, 721
Cholera toxin, G proteins and, 11
Cholestasis, secondary hypercholesterolemia 
associated with, 689
Cholesterol
metabolism of, in steroidogenesis, 289
reduction of, in lipoprotein disorders
management, 693
uptake and synthesis of, in steroidogenesis, 
288
Cholesterol absorption inhibitors, in hyperli-
poproteinemia management,
697
Cholesterol economy, 679-680
Cholesteryl ester storage disease, 692
Cholesteryl ester transfer protein deficiency, 
692
Cholesterol 7α-hydroxylase deficiency, 688
Cholinergic nerves, 346
Cholinergic neurotransmitters, in
counterregulatory response to 
hypoglycemia, 660
Choriocarcinoma, 208
Chorionic gonadotropin
intramuscular, for cryptorchidism, 410
normal ranges for, 828t
Chorionic gonadotropin stimulation test, in tes-
ticular function evaluation, 402
Chromatin-positive seminiferous tubule
dysgenesis, variants of, 494-495
Chromogranin A (CgA)
normal ranges for, 828t
paragangliomas and, 375
secretion of, pheochromocytomas and
paragangliomas in, 368
Chromophobe(s), described, 70
Chromosomal sex, in human sex differentia-
tion, 480-485, 480f-483f
Chromosome(s)
abnormalities of, in fetal growth, 132
X, abnormalities of, gonadal dysgenesis 
and, 497
Chronic disease(s)
malnutrition and, delayed puberty and, 539
in postnatal growth, 140
short stature associated with, 144t, 146-147
thyroid function effects of, 182-183, 182f, 
182t
Chronic pyogenic infections of skin, in
diabetic patients, 641
Chronic thyroiditis, 212-214, 213f. See also 
Hashimoto thyroiditis
Chylomicron(s), secretion of, in lipid
transport, 677, 677f
Chylomicron retention disease, 691
CI (confidence interval), 49
Circadian rhythm, in neuroendocrine control, 
291-292, 291f
Circulating plasma glucose concentrations, 
described, 657
Circumventricular organs, 75, 75f, 76f
Clear cells, 286
Clitoris, size of, 519, 521t
Clomiphene test, in hypothalamic-pituitary 
function evaluation, 87t
Clonal deletion, 32f, 33
Clonidine suppression tests, in
pheochromocytoma testing, 375
CNS. See Central nervous system
Coagulation, during preterm birth (PTB), 
564-565, 564f
Cohen syndrome, obesity due to, 703t
Coital technique, poor, male infertility–
related, treatment of, 415
Collagen, normal ranges for, 828t-829t
Coma
described, 628
in diabetic patients, 628-634, 628t, 631t
diabetic ketoacidosis, 628-631, 628t, 
631t
hyperglycemic, hyperosmolar nonketotic 
state, 631-633
lactic acidosis, 633-634
hyperglycemic nonketotic, laboratory 
abnormalities in, 628t
Index     851
myxedema, 763-765, 764f, 764t. See also 
Myxedema coma
nonketotic hyperosmolar, 773-775. See also 
Nonketotic hyperosmolar coma
Communication, intercellular, chemical
mediators in, 66, 66f
Computed tomography (CT)
adrenal, in primary aldosteronism
diagnosis, 335-336, 336f-338f
of pheochromocytoma, 378, 378f
Conception, 553-555, 554f
Confidence interval (CI), 49
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), 340
clinical manifestations of, 503t
hyperandrogenism and, 451-452
testicular tumors and, 501-504,
502f, 503t
Congenital adrenal hypoplasia, Addison
disease due to, 305
Congenital anomalies, diabetes during
pregnancy, 646, 646t
Congenital anorchia, 516
Congenital growth hormone deficiency, 144t, 
148-149, 148f
Congenital hyperinsulinism, 670-673, 670t. 
See also Hyperinsulinism, con-
genital
Congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia,
509-510
Congenital nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, 120
Congenital outflow obstruction, 454-455
Connective tissue, glucocorticoid effects on, 
295t, 297-298
Constitutional delay, in growth and
adolescence, 535, 536f
treatment of, 543-544
Constitutional short stature, 144, 144t
Constitutional tall stature, 160
Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion 
(CSII), 620
Contraception, 464-476. See also 
Contraceptive(s)
emergency, 475-476
postcoital, 475
Contraceptive(s). See also Contraception
injectable, 470-472, 471f, 472t
combination, 471-472, 473f
progestin-only, 470-471, 471f, 472t
scheduling for, 472t
long-acting, 470-475, 471f, 472t, 473f, 
474f
injectable, 470-472, 471f, 472t
IUDs, 475
subdermal implants, 472-473
transdermal patch, 473-474, 474f
vaginal rings, 474
oral, 464-470, 465f-467f, 469f, 469t
combination pills, 464-468, 465f-467f
benefits of, 468
contraindications to, 468, 469t
risks associated with, 468, 469t
progestin-only pills, 469-470, 469f
Contracture(s), Dupuytren, in diabetic 
patients, 642
Contrasexual precocity, 545
incomplete
in boys, 547
in girls, 548
Conventional irradiation, in pituitary
adenoma management, 101
Copper deposition, hypoparathyroidism due 
to, 255
Corpus luteum, in menstrual cycle, 435
Cortex, adrenal. See Adrenal cortex
Corticosteroid(s), urinary, in adrenal
androgen evaluation, 301
Corticosteroid excess, secondary hypertriglyc-
eridemia associated with, 685
Corticosteroid-binding globulin (CBG)
androgens binding to, 292
cortisol binding to, 292
Corticotroph(s), described, 70, 71t
Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), 73
location of, 74f
normal ranges for, 829t
secretion of, in steroidogenesis, 289-290
structure of, 73t
Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH)
syndrome, ectopic, causes of,
315-316, 316f
Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) test, 
829t
in adrenal androgen evaluation, 303
in hypothalamic-pituitary function
evaluation, 87-88, 87t
Cortisol
adenoma due to, 324
in adrenocortical insufficiency
management, 311
biosynthesis of, 287-292, 287f-289f, 290t, 
291f
circulation of, 292
conversion and excretion of,
292-294, 293f
in counterregulatory response to
hypoglycemia, 660
in critical illness, Addison disease due to, 
306
free and bound, 292
metabolism of, 292-294, 293f
in neuroendocrine control, 291-292,
291f
normal ranges for, 829t
plasma, in adrenal androgen evaluation, 
300
plasma free, in adrenal androgen
evaluation, 300-301
salivary
late-night serum and, in Cushing
syndrome diagnosis, 319f, 320
levels of, in adrenal androgen evaluation, 
300
secretion of, in neuroendocrine control, 
291-292, 291f
synthesis of, in steroidogenesis, 288f,
289-290
thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), 
secretion effects of, 83
urine free, in Cushing syndrome diagnosis, 
319-320, 319f
Cortisol-corrected ratios, 336, 338f
Cortisol-cortisone shunt, 293-294, 293f
Cortisol resistance, Addison disease due to, 
305-306
Cost-effectiveness analysis, in decision analysis 
process, 58, 58t-60t
Cosyntropin test, 825t
in hypothalamic-pituitary function
evaluation, 86t
Counseling, preconception, for pregnant 
women with preexisting diabetes, 
648
Craniopharyngioma(s), 93
delayed puberty and, 536
CREB–binding protein (CBP), 21, 24
Cretin(s), athyreotic, 212
Cretinism, 193-195, 194f
CRH. See Corticotropin-releasing hormone 
Critical illness, cortisol, Addison disease due 
to, 306
Cryptorchidism, 409-410
causes of, 409
clinical features of, 409
complications of, 410
described, 409
differential diagnosis of, 409-410
hypergonadotropic hypogonadism and, 
540-541
imaging studies in, 409
laboratory findings in, 409
pathology of, 409
pathophysiology of, 409
prevention of, 410
sequelae of, 410
symptoms and signs of, 409
treatment of, 410
CSII (continuous subcutaneous insulin
infusion), 620
CT. See Computed tomography
Cushing disease, 109-111
causes of, 315
clinical features of, 110, 318
consequences of, 295t-296t
defined, 313
described, 109
diagnosis of, 110
gender predilection for, 314
pathogenesis of, 110, 315-316, 316f
pathology of, 109-110
pathophysiology of, 315f, 316-317,
316f
prevalence of, 314
prognosis of, 323
treatment of, 110-111, 321-322
medical, 111
radiotherapy in, 111
surgical, 110-111
versus Cushing syndrome, 313, 314
Cushing syndrome, 312-323
adrenal tumors and, 315
adrenocortical hyperplasia and, 314
causes of, 315-316, 316f
childhood, 314
classification of, 313-314, 314t
clinical features of, 317-318, 317t
described, 312-313
dexamethasone suppression test for, 49, 
51f, 831t
852    Index
Cushing syndrome (Cont.):
diagnosis of, 319-320, 319f
problems in, 320
differential diagnosis of, 320-321, 321f, 
322f
ECG findings in, 318
ectopic, 715-717, 716t
clinical features of, 717
diagnosis of, 715-717, 716t
differential diagnosis of, 715-717, 716t
food-dependent, 315
glucocorticoids and, 325
hyperandrogenism and, 452
hypertension and, 341-342
hypothalamic-pituitary axis in, 313, 313f
imaging studies of, 319
incidence of, 313-314, 314t
laboratory findings in, 318
pathogenesis of, 315-316, 316f
pathology of, 314-315
pathophysiology of, 313f, 316
prognosis of, 323
short stature associated with, 157
symptoms and signs of, 317-318, 317t
treatment of, 321-322
versus Cushing disease, 313, 314
CVD. See Cyclophosphamide, vincristine, 
dacarbazine
Cyclophosphamide, vincristine, dacarbazine 
(CVD), in pheochromocytoma/
paraganglioma management, 389
Cyst(s), follicular, precocious puberty
associated with, 547
Cytokine receptors, 7f, 14-16, 15f, 16f
D
D1-like family of receptors, 356
D2-like family of receptors, 356
Darunavir/ritonavir, glucose and lipid
metabolism effects of, 797, 798t
DCCT (Diabetes Control and Complications 
Trial), 606
Death
brain, 119
cerebral anoxia, 119
intrauterine, diabetes during pregnancy 
and, 647
Decidual hemorrhage, during preterm birth 
(PTB), 564-565, 564f
Decision analysis, in clinical epidemiology, 
54-58, 56f, 58t-60t. See also 
Epidemiology, clinical, decision
analysis in
Dehydration test, in diabetes insipidus,
120-121, 121f
7-Dehydrocholesterol, structure of, 235f
Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), normal 
ranges for, 830t
Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS), 
normal ranges for, 830t
Deiodinase(s), pituitary and peripheral, in 
thyroid function control, 177
Deiodination, intrathyroidal, in thyroid
hormone synthesis, 168, 170f
Delayed puberty, 535-545. See also Puberty, 
delayed
Deletion, clonal, 32f, 33
Demeclocycline, for hyponatremia in SIADH, 
125-126
Denosumab, in osteoporosis management, 
268-269, 756
Deoxycorticosterone (DOC), normal ranges 
for, 830t
Deoxycorticosterone (DOC)-producing 
tumor, 340
11-Deoxycortisol, normal ranges for, 831t
18F-Deoxyglucose (18FDG) PET/CT scan, of 
pheochromocytoma, 380-381, 
380f
Depo-Provera, MPA levels following injection 
of, 470-471, 471f
Depression, hypothalamic-pituitary axis
evaluation–related problems and, 
89
Dermopathy, thyroid, pathogenesis of, 199-
200, 199f, 200f
Desert hedgehog (DHH) gene, in testicular 
determination, 483f, 484
Desogestrel, chemical structure of, 465f
De Toni-Debré-Fanconi syndrome, 275-276
Development
fetal, thyroid hormone effects on, 179
glucocorticoid effects on, 298
Developmental defects. See also specific types
delayed puberty and, 537
Dexamethasone-CRH test, 831t
Dexamethasone suppression test, 831t
in adrenal androgen evaluation, 301-302
in Cushing syndrome, 49, 51f, 319, 319f, 831t
high-dose, in Cushing syndrome, 321
low-dose, in hypothalamic-pituitary
function evaluation, 87t
Dextrose, intravenous, in pheochromocy-
toma/paraganglioma manage-
ment, 386
DHEA (dehydroepiandrosterone), normal ranges 
for, 830t
DHEAS (dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate), 
normal ranges for, 830t
DHT. See Dihydrotestosterone
Diabetes. See also Diabetes insipidus; Diabetes 
mellitus; Gestational diabetes
clinical trials in, 606-609
hypoglycemia and, 661-662
infants of mothers with
tall stature and, 161
transient hyperinsulinism in, 670, 670t
neonatal, 598
permanent, 598
transient, 598
occult, late hypoglycemia of, 669
treatment of, 609-626. See also Diabetes 
mellitus, treatment of
type 1, autoimmune aspects of, 38-40
in animal models, 40
autoimmune response, 39-40
genes and environment, 39
maturity-onset diabetes of the young 
(MODY), 593-595, 594t
type(s) of, 593-599
drug- or chemical-induced, 599
endocrinopathies, 599
genetic defects of insulin action,
597-598
genetic defects of pancreatic β cells
autosomal dominant, 587t, 593-595
autosomal recessive, 595-596
genetic syndromes, 599
immune-mediated, uncommon forms of, 
599
infections causing, 599
ketosis-prone, 596-597
neonatal, 598
Diabetes Control and Complications Trial 
(DCCT), 606
Diabetes insipidus, 782-785
clinical setting of, 782-783
complications of, 785
deficient vasopressin and, 118-122
diagnosis of, 120-121, 121f, 783-784
genetic abnormalities of, 118
hypothalamic
adipsic, 119
familial, 118
management of, 121-122, 784-785
nephrogenic
acquired, 120
congenital, 120
pathologic lesions of, 118-119, 119f
pathophysiology of versus syndrome of 
inappropriate antidiuretic
hormone (SIADH), 127t
pituitary disorders and, 92
primary polydipsia and, 118
short stature associated with, 158
vasopressin increase in pregnancy and,
119-120
Diabetes mellitus, 587-652
adult-onset. See type 2 below
in AIDS patients, 796-799, 797t, 798t
classification of, 587, 587t
clinical features of, 599-609, 600t
clinical trials in, 606-609
Diabetes Control and Complications 
Trial (DCCT), 606
Diabetes Prevention Trial-1, 607
immune intervention trials in new-onset 
type 1 diabetes, 607
complications of
acute, 626-634, 626t-628t, 631t. See also 
specific types, e.g., Hypoglycemia
coma, 628-634, 628t, 631t
hypoglycemia, 626-627, 626t, 627t
chronic, 634-642, 634t
effects on bone and joint, 634t, 641-642
effects on cardiovascular, 634t, 640-641
dermatologic, 634t, 641
genetic factors in, 635-636
infections, 634t, 642
mucous membrane–related, 634t, 641
neurologic, 634t, 638-640
ophthalmologic, 634t, 636-637
prevalence of, 635
renal, 634t, 637-638
vascular diseases, 634-635
described, 587
in the elderly, 743-750
cardiovascular disease related to, 745
Index     853
Diabetes mellitus, in the elderly (Cont.):
complications of, 745
screening for, 749-750
diagnostic criteria for, 744, 744t
glycemic control for, 745-749,
746t-748t, 748f
goals of, 744-745
treatment strategies for achieving, 
745-749, 746t-748t, 748f
drugs, 746-749, 746t-748t, 748f
insulin, 747-749, 748f, 748t
lifestyle interventions, 746
oral hypoglycemic agents, 746t
in hospitalized patients, management of, 
642-644, 643t-645t, 750
prevalence of, 743
in hospitalized patients, management of, 
642-644, 643t-645t
glucose control in, 643-644
hypothalamic-pituitary axis evaluation–
related problems and, 89
insulin-treated, during surgery, manage-
ment of, 642, 643t, 644t
laboratory testing in, 601-606, 602t, 604t
blood glucose, 602-603, 602t
glycated HbAs, 604-605, 604t
insulin levels, 605
interstitial fluid glucose samples, 603
IVGTT, 605-606
lipoproteins, 606
microalbuminuria, 601-602
oral glucose tolerance test, 602t, 605
proteinuria, 601-602
serum fructosamine, 605
serum ketone determinations, 603
urine glucose, 601
urine ketone determinations, 603
non–insulin-dependent. See Diabetes
mellitus, type 2
pregnancy in patients with, 644, 646-652, 
646t, 649t-651t
fetal consequences of, 646-648, 646t
gestational diabetes, 650-652, 650t, 651t. 
See also Gestational diabetes
hormone and fuel balance during, 644, 646
management of, 648-650, 649t, 650t
fetal monitoring in, 649, 649t
glucose in, 648, 649, 650t
insulin in, 648, 649, 650t
neonatal management, 649-650
preconception counseling in, 648
route of delivery in, 649
timing of delivery in, 649
maternal consequences of, 646-648, 
646t
neonatal consequences of, 646-647, 646t
prevalence of, 646
secondary hypertriglyceridemia associated 
with, 685
short stature associated with, 158
treatment of, 609-626, 623t, 624t
diet in, 609-610
glucose control in, 643-644
hyperglycemic agents in, 610-617, 611t
acarbose, 611t, 615
DPP-4 inhibitors, 611t, 617
Diabetes mellitus, treatment of, hyperglyce-
mic agents in (Cont.):
drug combinations, 617
drugs acting on insulin target tissues, 
611t, 613-615
drugs acting on sulfonylurea receptor
complex, 611t, 612-613
drugs affecting glucose absorption, 
611t, 615-616
GLP-1 receptor agonists, 611t, 616-617
incretins, 611t, 616-617
meglitinide analogs, 611t, 613
metformin, 611t, 613-614
peroxisome proliferator–activated 
receptor agonists, 611t, 614-615
pramlintide, 611t, 617
sulfonylureas, 611t, 612-613
insulin in, 575-583, 576f-578f, 579t, 
580f-582f, 581t, 617-622. See 
also Insulin
laboratory diagnosis in, 622
patient education in, 622-623
patient history in, 622
physical examination in, 622
self-management training in, 622-623
specific therapy in, 623-625, 623t, 624t
type 1
autoimmune aspects of, 38-40, 588-589, 
588t
in animal models, 40
autoimmune response, 39-40
genes and environment, 39
clinical features of, 599-600, 600t
clinical trials in, DCCT, 606
complications of, chronic, prevalence of, 
635
described, 588t, 587-590, 587t
environmental factors in, 589-590
genetics of, 589
hypoglycemic unawareness in, 626, 626t
ketones in patients with, treatment of, 
631, 631t
MODY, 593-595, 594t
new-onset, immune intervention trials 
in, 607
symptoms and signs of, 599-600, 600t
treatment of
insulin in, 623-624, 623t
specific therapy in, 623-624, 623t, 
624t
typical patterns of overnight blood
glucose levels and serum-free 
immunoreactive insulin levels in, 
624, 624t
type 1b, 588
type 2
beta-cell defects in, 590t, 592
clinical features of, 600-601, 600t
clinical trials in, 607-609
ACCORD trial, 609
ADVANCE trial, 609
Diabetes Prevention Program, 608
Kumamoto study, 607
Steno-2 study, 608-690
UKPDS, 607-608
VADT, 609
Diabetes mellitus, type 2 (Cont.):
complications of, chronic, prevalence of, 
635
described, 590-593, 590t
diagnostic criteria for, 744, 744t
environmental factors in, 593
genetics of, 590t, 593
treatment of
insulin in, factors reducing response 
to, 590, 590t
insulin resistance in, 590t, 591-592
metabolic syndrome and, 592-593
obesity effects on, 590t, 591, 704-705
symptoms and signs of, 600-601, 600t
treatment of
antihyperglycemic agents in, 625
bariatric surgery in, 625
drugs in, 610-617, 611t
specific therapy in, 624-625
weight reduction in, 624-625
types of, diseases of exocrine pancreas,
598-599
vascular disease associated with,
classifications of, 634-635
Diabetes Prevention Program, 608
Diabetes Prevention Trial-1, 607
Diabetic cheiroarthropathy, 634t, 641
Diabetic gastroenteropathy, during pregnancy, 
647
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), 628-631, 628t, 
631t, 769-773, 770f, 771t
causes of, 628
clinical features of, 629
clinical setting of, 769-770
complications of, 631, 773
diagnosis of, 770-771, 770f
disposition to, 631, 631t
laboratory abnormalities in, 628t
laboratory findings in, 629
management of, 629-631, 771-773, 771t
pathogenesis of, 628-629
prognosis of, 631
symptoms and signs of, 629
Diabetic nephropathy, 634t, 637
during pregnancy, 647-648
Diabetic neuropathy, 634t, 638-640
autonomic, 634t, 639-640
described, 638
painful, 634t, 638-639
peripheral, 634t, 638-639
Diabetic retinopathy, 634t, 636
during pregnancy, 647
Diagnostic accuracy
in clinical epidemiology, 51
defined, 49
Diaphoresis, pheochromocytomas and, 371
Diazoxide
for congenital hyperinsulinism, 672-673
for insulinomas, 667
Diet
in diabetes management, 609-610
in obesity management, 706
universal, in lipoprotein disorders
management, 694
Dietary factors, in lipoprotein disorders
management, 693-694
854    Index
Dietary fat
absorption of, in lipid transport, 677, 677f
restriction of
effects of, 678-679
in lipoprotein disorders management, 693
Dietary fiber, in diabetes management, 610
Dietary iodine deficiency, inherited defects 
and, 168-169
Diethylpropion, in obesity management, 707t
Diffuse toxic goiter, 198-206. See also Graves 
disease
DiGeorge syndrome, hypoparathyroidism due 
to, 254
Dihydrotestosterone (DHT)
normal ranges for, 831t
synthesis of, 513
Disorders of sexual development (DSDs), 
491-493, 492t. See also Gonadal 
dysgenesis; Turner syndrome,
specific disorders 
causes of, 491, 493
classification of, 492t
45,X, 495-500, 496f
46,XX, 492t, 494-495, 498
androgen-induced, 501-508, 502f, 503t
familial and sporadic forms of, hypergo-
nadotropic hypogonadism and, 
542
46,XX and 46,XY, 498
46,XY, 492t, 499-500, 501t, 509, 516
familial and sporadic forms of, hypergonad-
otropic hypogonadism and, 542
gonadal neoplasms, 500-501, 501t
management of patients with, 518-522, 
519f, 520f, 521t
ovotesticular, 493, 500-501, 501t
sex chromosome, 491-493, 492t
Distal symmetric polyneuropathy, 634t, 638
Diuretic(s), thiazide, hypercalcemia due to, 251
DKA. See Diabetic ketoacidosis 
DNA recognition elements, for nuclear
hormone receptors, 20t
DOC (Deoxycorticosterone), normal ranges 
for, 830t
Donohue syndrome, 597
DOPA (dihydroxyphenylalanine)
conversion to dopamine, 348
tyrosine conversion to, 348
Dopamine, 72
actions of, 357
conversion to norepinephrine, 348
DOPA conversion to, 348
location of, 72
urine-fractionated, 374-375, 376t
Dopamine agonists, in prolactinoma
management, 103-104
Dopamine receptors, 356
Double sex Mab3-related transcription factor 
gene, in organogenesis of bipo-
tential gonad, 482f, 483
Doxazosin, in pheochromocytoma/paragan-
glioma management, 382-383
DPP-4 inhibitors, in type 2 diabetes
management, 611t, 617, 746t
DRIP complex. (vitamin D receptor–
interacting protein complex), 24
Drug(s)
Addison disease due to, 306
diabetes due to, 599
effects on AIDS patients with adrenal
disorders, 789t, 790
effects on AIDS patients with thyroid
disorders, 788-789, 789t
in glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis
prevention and treatment, 271
in hyperlipoproteinemia management,
694-698, 696t, 697t. See also 
Hyperlipoproteinemia(s),
treatment of, drugs in; specific 
drugs
hypoglycemia due to, 662-663
hypothalamic-pituitary function effects of, 
89-90
for male gonadal disorders, 403-404
misleading biochemical testing for pheochro-
mocytoma related to, 376, 376t
in obesity management, 707, 707t
osteomalacia due to, 274
prolactin secretion effects of, 82t
short stature related to, 144t, 147
in type 2 diabetes management, 610-617, 
611t
DSDs. See Disorders of sexual development
Ductal obstruction, male infertility–related, 
treatment of, 415
Dupuytren contractures, in diabetic
patients, 642
Dwarfism
hypopituitary, idiopathic, delayed puberty 
and, 538, 539f
psychosocial, 156, 156f
Dye(s), radiographic, renal decompensation 
after, in diabetic patients, 634t,
637-638
Dysbetalipoproteinemia, familial, 684-685
Dysgenesis
chromatin-positive seminiferous tubule, 
variants of, 494-495
gonadal. See Gonadal dysgenesis; Turner 
syndrome
Dyslipidemia, obesity and, 705
Dysplasia(s)
fibrous, 275
skeletal, 144t, 146
Dysrhythmia(s), pheochromocytoma effects 
on, 370
Dystrophy(ies), myotonic, 411
E
Eating disorders
amenorrhea associated with, 439-440
anorexia nervosa, 440
bulimia, 440
EBM. See Evidence-based medicine
Eclampsia, 569-570
described, 569
Ectopic ACTH syndrome, 715-717, 716t
Ectopic Cushing syndrome, 715-717, 716t. See 
also Cushing syndrome, ectopic
Ectopic hormone production, pheochromocy-
toma effects on, 371
Ectopic hormone syndromes, 711-712, 712t
Ectopic lipid storage, insulin resistance in 
type 2 diabetes and, 591
Ectopic receptor syndromes, 711-712, 712t
ED. See Erectile dysfunction
Edema, cerebral, nonketotic hyperosmolar 
coma and, 775
Editing, BCR, 35
Efavirenz, glucose and lipid metabolism 
effects of, 797, 798t
Effector(s), linked to G protein–coupled 
receptors, 9-11, 9f-11f
EGF. See Epidermal growth factor
Ejaculation, retrograde, male infertility–
related, treatment of, 415
Elderly
adrenal hypersecretion in, 759
adrenal insufficiency in, 759-760
architectural changes in, 752, 753f
bone loss in, 265, 752, 753f
calcium homeostasis in, 750-757. See also 
Osteoporosis, in the elderly
carbohydrate intolerance in, 743-750
cardiovascular disease in, diabetes and, 745
diabetes mellitus in, 743-750. See also 
Diabetes mellitus, in the elderly
endocrinologic disorders in, 737-762. See 
also Geriatric endocrinology;
specific disorders
erectile dysfunction (ED) in, 415-417, 
640, 761
hypernatremia in, 758
hyperparathyroidism in, 757
hyperthyroidism in, 739, 741t
hyponatremia in, 758
hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism in, 758
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis
disorders in, 759-760
male, reproductive function changes in, 
760-761, 760f, 761f
metabolic syndrome in, 744, 744t
multinodular goiter in, 742-743
osteoporosis in, 750-757. See also 
Osteoporosis, in the elderly
prevalence of, 737
stress in
abnormal response to, 759
glucocorticoids and, 758, 759f, 760f
thyroid cancer in, 743
thyroid function and disease in, 738, 739f, 
740f
thyroid gland disorders in, 738-743
thyroid nodules in, 743
vitamin D deficiency in, 751-752, 752f
water balance changes in, 757-758
Electrocardiography (ECG), in Cushing
syndrome, 318
Electrolyte replacement, for hyperglycemic, 
hyperosmolar nonketotic state in
diabetes mellitus, 632-633
Emergency(ies), endocrine, 763-786. See also spe-
cific disorders, e.g., Myxedema coma
acute adrenal insufficiency, 768-769, 768t
acute hypocalcemia, 777-779, 778t
amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis,
767-768, 767t
diabetes insipidus, 782-785
Index     855
diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), 769-773, 
770f, 771t
hypercalcemic crisis, 775-777, 776t
hyponatremia, 779-782, 780t, 781t
myxedema coma, 763-765, 764f, 764t
nonketotic hyperosmolar coma, 773-775
pituitary apoplexy, 769
thyroid storm, 765-766, 765t
thyrotoxic periodic paralysis, 766-767, 
766f, 767t
Empty sella syndrome, 92-93, 93f
causes of, 92
clinical features of, 92-93, 93f
diagnosis of, 93
incidence of, 92
Endocrine disorders. See also specific disorders
endocrine hypertension associated with, 
329-343. See also Hypertension
G protein–coupled receptor (GPCR) muta-
tions and, 12
male infertility–related, treatment of, 414
short stature–related, 144t, 147-148
tall stature–related, 161
Endocrine emergencies, 763-786. See also 
Emergency(ies), endocrine
Endocrine factors, in postnatal growth, 132, 
137-138, 138f
Endocrine function, neural regulation of, 
mechanisms in, 66, 66f
Endocrine function tests, pregnancy effects 
on, 559, 561t
Endocrine glands, described, 4
Endocrine hypertension, 329-343. See also 
Hypertension
Endocrine pancreas, 574, 818-822, 820t.
See also Pancreas
anatomy of, 574-575, 575f, 575t, 818-819
described, 574
embryology of, 818-819
histology of, 574-575, 575f, 575t
hormones of, insulin, 575-583, 576f-578f, 
579t, 580f-582f, 581t. See also 
Insulin
tumors of, surgery of, indications for,
819-822, 820t
gastrinomas, 820-821, 820t
glucagonoma, 821
insulinomas, 819-820
nonfunctioning pancreatic tumors,
821-822
somatostatinoma, 821
vipoma, 821
Endocrine surgery, 803-823. See also 
Hyperthyroidism; specific indica-
tions, e.g., Hyperparathyroidism
Endocrine system, thyroid hormone effects 
on, 181
Endocrine tumors, hypercalcemia due to, 251
Endocrinology
evidence-based, 58, 61-63, 61t, 62t. See also 
Evidence-based medicine EBM
fetal, 562-563
Endocrinopathy(ies)
autoimmune, 27, 28t
diabetes due to, 599
hypercalcemia due to, 251
Energy balance, leptin-melanocortin system 
of, 702, 702f
Energy expenditure, regulation of, 700
Energy homeostasis signals, central
integration of, 701-702, 702f
Energy status, informing brain of, 700-701, 701t
Enolase, neuron-specific, 368
Environment(s)
in autoimmune aspects of thyroid disease, 
37
in autoimmunity, 36-37
in type 1 diabetes, 39, 589-590
in type 2 diabetes, 593
Environmental chemicals, reproductive
disorders in males due to, 516
Epidemiology, clinical, 47-58
decision analysis in, 54-58, 56f, 58t-60t
cost-effectiveness analysis using, 58,
58t-60t
deciding on strategy, 57
in determining probability of each 
chance event, 57
discounting future events, 57-58
representative examples, 59t-60t
sensitivity analysis, 58
users’ guide to, 58, 58t
diagnostic testing in, 47-51, 49f-53f, 50t
approach to, 52-54, 53f
diagnostic accuracy, 51
likelihood ratio, 51, 53f
predictive values, 51, 52f
receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) 
curves, 50-51, 52f
sensitivity and specificity, 48-50, 50f, 
50t, 51f
principles applied to treatment decisions in, 
54, 55f
Epidermal growth factor (EGF), in fetal 
growth, 131-132
Epinephrine
actions of, 356
deficiency of, disorders causing, 357-358, 
357t
norepinephrine conversion to,
348-349
ER (event rate), defined, 54
Erectile dysfunction (ED), 415-417, 416t
autonomic neuropathy and, 640
causes of, 415-416, 416t
clinical features of, 416-417
defined, 415
in the elderly, 761
laboratory findings in, 417
pathophysiology of, 415-416
prevalence of, 415
symptoms and signs of, 416-417
treatment of, 417
Ergosterol, structure of, 235f
Erythrocyte(s), glucocorticoid effects on, 298
Erythropoietin, normal ranges for, 831t
Essential hypernatremia, 119
Estradiol
chemical structure of, 466f
ethinyl, chemical structure of, 465f
in folliculogenesis, 432
normal ranges for, 831t-832t
Estrogen(s)
aging effects on, 457, 457t
deficiency of, bone loss associated with, 
264f, 265
exogenous
administration of, precocious puberty 
associated with, 548
secondary hypertriglyceridemia associ-
ated with, 685
in hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunction, 99
levels of, in luteinizing hormone (LH) and 
follicle-stimulating hormone 
(FSH) evaluation, 89
in osteoporosis management, 267-268, 
459, 756
during pregnancy, 557f, 558-559
testicular, biosynthesis of, pathways for, 
397, 398f
thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) 
secretion effects of, 83
Estrone, normal ranges for, 832t
Ethinyl estradiol, chemical structure of, 465f
Etomidate, in ACTH-secreting pituitary
adenoma management, 111
Euglycemia, in postabsorptive state,
maintenance of, 660, 661t
Euthyroid Graves disease, 214
Euthyroid hyperthyroxinemia, causes of, 171t
Euthyroid hypothyroxinemia, causes of, 171t
Event rate (ER), defined, 54
Evidence, in EBM, hierarchies of, 61-62,
62t
Evidence-based medicine (EBM), 58,
61-63, 61t, 62t
applying results in practice and evaluating 
performance, 63
appraising evidence for its validity and
usefulness, 61-63, 61t, 62t
defined, 58
diagnostic testing in, 63
finding best evidence in, 61
U.S. Preventive Task Force (USPSTF) on, 
62, 62t
Exenatide, in type 2 diabetes management, 
611t, 616
Exendin, in type 2 diabetes management, 
611t, 616
Exercise
hyperinsulinism due to, 670t, 671
in obesity management, 707
in osteoporosis management, 755
Exocrine pancreas, diseases of, diabetes due 
to, 598-599
Exogenous estrogens
administration of, precocious puberty
associated with, 548
secondary hypertriglyceridemia associated 
with, 685
Exophthalmometer, Hertel, 200f
Extracellular calcium metabolism, 227-241
Extravascular smooth muscle, catecholamine 
effects on, 357
Eye(s)
glucocorticoid effects on, 299
Graves disease effects on, 200t
hypocalcemia effects on, 254
856    Index
Eye problems
cataracts, 634t, 636
diabetic retinopathy, 634t, 636
glaucoma, 634t, 636-637
F
Factitious hypoglycemia, 662
Familial benign hypocalciuric hypercalcemia, 
249-250
Familial combined hyperlipidemia, 684,
687-688
Familial dysalbuminemic hyperthyroxinemia, 
201
Familial dysbetalipoproteinemia, 684-685
Familial/genetic tall stature, 160
Familial glucocorticoid deficiency, Addison 
disease due to, 305
Familial hyperaldosteronism type I, assess-
ment of, in primary aldoster-
onism diagnosis, 337-338
Familial hyperaldosteronism type II, assess-
ment of, in primary aldoster-
onism diagnosis, 338
Familial hypercholesterolemia, 687
Familial hyperparathyroidism, 815
Familial hypoalphalipoproteinemia, 689-690
Familial hypobetalipoproteinemia, 691
Familial hypoparathyroidism, 254
Familial hypothalamic diabetes insipidus, 118
Familial ligand-defective APO B-100, 688
Familial paraganglioma/pheochromocytoma 
syndromes, 364-366, 366t
Familial paraganglioma syndrome type 2, 366
Familial short stature, 144-145, 144t
Fast feedback inhibition, of ACTH secretion, 
292
Fasting plasma glucose, normal lower limit of, 
657
Fat(s)
abnormal distribution of, HIV infection 
and, 795-796
dietary
absorption of, in lipid transport, 677, 677f
in lipoprotein disorders management, 693
restriction of, effects of, 678-679
Fatty acids
free, insulin resistance in type 2 diabetes 
and, 591
omega-3
in diabetes management, 610
in lipoprotein disorders management, 693
Fecundability, 461
Fecundity, 461
Feedback
negative, follicle-stimulating hormone 
(FSH) and luteinizing hormone 
(LH) secretion and, 84
positive, follicle-stimulating hormone  
(FSH) and luteinizing hormone 
(LH) secretion and, 84
Feedback inhibition, of ACTH and cortisol 
secretion, in neuroendocrine 
control, 291-292
Feeding center, 74
Female(s)
incomplete contrasexual precocity in, 548
incomplete isosexual precocious puberty in, 
547-548
primary hyperparathyroidism (PHP) in, 
492t, 501-508, 502f, 503t. See 
also Pseudohermaphroditism 
(PHP), female
pubertal changes in, 528, 528f, 529f
Female athlete triad, defined, 439
Female reproductive endocrinology, 423-477. See 
also Reproductive system, female
Fenofibrate, in hyperlipoproteinemia
management, 695-696
Fertilization, process of, 553-554
Fetal development, thyroid hormone effects 
on, 179
Fetal endocrinology, 562-563
Fetal growth
adult diseases related to, 132
chromosomal abnormalities effects on, 132
classic hormones of, 130
epidermal growth factor (EGF) in, 131-132
genetic factors in, 131
growth factors in, 130-131
insulin in, 131
malformation syndromes related to, 132
maternal factors in, 131
oncogenes in, 130
uterine factors in, 131
Fetal macrosomia, diabetes during pregnancy 
effects on, 647
Fetal monitoring, for pregnant women with 
preexisting diabetes, 649, 649t
Fetal-placental-decidual unit, 555
Fetus(es)
adrenal cortex of, 562
diabetes during pregnancy effects on,
646-648, 646t
endocrine changes in, 532
gonads of, 562-563
growth of. See Fetal growth
pituitary hormones of, 562
thyroid function in, 181
thyroid gland of, 562
Fever, pheochromocytomas and, 371
Fiber(s), dietary, in diabetes management, 610
Fibric acid derivatives, in hyperlipoproteine-
mia management, 695-696
Fibroblast growth factor, in fetal growth, 131
Fibrogenesis imperfecta ossium, 276
Fibrous dysplasia, 275
Fine-needle aspiration biopsy, adrenal
percutaneous, in pheochromocy-
toma diagnosis, 382
Fish oils, in diabetes management, 610
Fluid replacement
in adrenocortical insufficiency
management, 311
in diabetic ketoacidosis management, 630
for hyperglycemic, hyperosmolar nonketotic 
state in diabetes mellitus, 632
Fluoride, bone disease related to, 277
Fluoxetine, in obesity management, 707t
Follicle(s)
development of, 431-432, 431f
antral growth phase of, 434
early, 455
midluteal phase of, 434
growth of, 430-434, 430f, 431f, 433f
initiation of, 430, 430f
primordial, 424, 430
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), 83-84
biosynthesis of, 83-84
evaluation of, 89
function of, 84
measurement of, 84
normal ranges for, 832t
regulation of, 428
secretion of, 84
synthesis of, 429
Follicular carcinoma
pathology of, management of, 219-221, 221f
of thyroid gland, pathology of, 218
Follicular cysts, precocious puberty associated 
with, 547
Folliculogenesis, 436-445. See also specific types
estradiol in, 432
intraovarian factors in, 432
physiology of, 427-436
Food(s), misleading biochemical testing for 
pheochromocytoma related to, 
376, 376t
Food-dependent Cushing syndrome, 315
Food intake, regulation of, gastrointestinal 
and pancreatic peptides in, 701, 
701t
Foot (feet), gangrene of, in diabetic patients, 
634t, 641
46,XX DSDs, 492t
46,XY DSDs, 492t
Fracture(s), osteoporosis and, 262-263, 263t, 
750-751, 751f, 751t
Free fatty acids, insulin resistance in type 2 
diabetes and, 591
Free radical formation, thyroid hormone 
effects on, 179
Fructosamine, serum, in diabetes mellitus 
evaluation, 605
Fructose, in diabetes management, 610
FSH. See Follicle-stimulating hormone
Functional alimentary hypoglycemia, 669-670
Functional hypothalamic amenorrhea,
438-439
G
G protein(s)
disorders of, 11-12
identity of, defining of, 8
G protein α subunits (GNASIs), genetic 
mutations in, 12
G protein–coupled receptors (GPCRs), 7-8, 
7f
disorders of, 11-12
effectors linked to, 9-11, 9f-11f
mutations in, endocrine disorders related 
to, 12
G protein transducers, 8-9, 8f, 9t
Galactorrhea, prolactinomas and, 102
GALNT3, 281-282
Gamma knife radiosurgery, in pituitary
adenoma management, 101
Ganglioneuroblastoma(s), 360
Ganglioneuroma(s), 360
Index     857
Gangrene
of feet, in diabetic patients, 634t, 641
pheochromocytomas and, 370
Gastric banding, in type 2 diabetes
management, 265
Gastrin, normal ranges for, 832t
Gastrinoma(s), 820-821, 820t
described, 820
diagnostic tests for, 820, 820t
in multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) 1, 724
treatment of, 820-821
Gastroenteropathy, diabetic, during
pregnancy, 647
Gastrointestinal peptides, in food intake
regulation, 701, 701t
Gastrointestinal system
obesity effects on, 705-706
pheochromocytoma effects on, 371
thyroid hormone effects on, 181
Gastrointestinal tract, signals from, in
appetite regulation, 701, 701t
GDH gene (glutamate dehydrogenase gene), 
670t, 671
Gemfibrozil, in hyperlipoproteinemia
management, 695-696
Gene(s). See also specific types
in autoimmune aspects of thyroid disease, 37
glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH), 15, 670t
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) 
class II diabetes-susceptibility, 40
T-cell receptor (TCR), 28-29, 29f
thyroglobulin, 165-166, 167f
in type 1 diabetes, 39
Gene mutations, TSH receptor, 209
Genetic(s)
in autoimmunity, 36-37
in chronic complications of diabetes,
635-636
of multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) 2, 
729-730
of obesity, 702-703, 703t, 704t
of paragangliomas, 361-366, 361t, 363t, 
364t, 366t. See also 
Paraganglioma(s), genetic condi-
tions associated with
of pheochromocytomas, 361-366, 361t, 
363t, 364t, 366t. See also 
Pheochromocytoma(s), genetic
conditions associated with
in pseudohypoparathyroidism, 256
of type 1 diabetes, 589
of type 2 diabetes, 590t, 593
Genetic abnormalities, of neurohypophyseal 
neurons, 118
Genetic factors
in fetal growth, 131
in postnatal growth, 138, 139f
Genetic syndromes, diabetes due to, 599
Genital atrophy, menopause and, 458-459
Genital ducts, differentiation of, 486, 487f, 488f
Genital system, male, 395, 396f
Genital tract infections, male infertility–
related, treatment of, 415
Genitalia
ambiguous, gonadal dysgenesis and, 516
external, differentiation of, 486, 488f-491f
Genomic imprinting, maternal, 365
Geriatric endocrinology, 737-762. See also 
Elderly
adrenal hypersecretion, 759
adrenal insufficiency, 759-760
aging-related reproductive function changes 
in men, 760-761, 760f, 761f
carbohydrate intolerance, 743-750
described, 737, 738f
diabetes mellitus, 743-750
erectile dysfunction (ED), 415-417, 640, 
761
glucocorticoids and, 758, 759f, 760f
hypernatremia, 758
hyperparathyroidism, 757
hyponatremia, 758
hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism, 758
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis
disorders, 759-760
osteopororsis, 750-757
stress, 758, 759f, 760f
abnormal response to, 759
thyroid cancer, 743
thyroid function and disease, 738, 739f, 
740f
thyroid gland disorders, 738-743
thyroid nodules, 743
water balance changes, 757-758
Germ cell tumors
in 46,XY DSDs, 500, 501t
testicular, 420-422
Germinal cell aplasia, 540
Gestational diabetes, 650-652, 650t, 651t
defined, 650
diagnosis of, 650-651, 650t
follow-up care, 652
prevalence of, 650
risk factors for, 650, 650t
treatment of, 651-652
GH. See Growth hormone
Ghrelin, 586
GHRH. See Growth hormone–releasing
hormone
GHRH-arginine infusion test, in hypothalamic-
pituitary function evaluation, 86t
GHRs. See Growth hormone receptor(s) 
GHSR (growth hormone secretagogue
receptor), 586
Gigantism, 105-109. See also Acromegaly
causes of, 105
cerebral, 160-161
described, 105
pituitary, 161
Glaucoma, in diabetic patients, 634t, 636-637
Gliclazide, in type 2 diabetes management, 
611t, 613
Glimepiride, in type 2 diabetes management, 
611t, 613
Glipizide, in type 2 diabetes management, 
611t, 613
Globulin(s)
corticosteroid-binding, androgens binding 
to, 292
sex hormone–binding, 397
normal ranges for, 839t-840t
thyroxione-binding, normal ranges for, 842t
Glomus jugulare paragangliomas, 360, 365
Glomus tympanicum, 360
Glomus tympanicum paragangliomas, 365
GLP-1 receptor agonists, in type 2 diabetes 
management, 611t, 616-617
Glucagon, 583-585, 583f, 585t
action of, 584
biochemistry of, 583-584, 583f
for congenital hyperinsulinism, 673
in counter-regulatory response to
hypoglycemia, 659-660, 659f
normal ranges for, 832t
peptides related to, 584-585, 585t
secretion of, 584
Glucagon stimulation test
in growth hormone (GH) evaluation, 88
in hypothalamic-pituitary function
evaluation, 86t
Glucagonoma, 821
Glucocorticoid(s)
actions of, 295t-296t
administration of, 325
adrenal adenomas and, 315
adrenal androgens and, 285-327
agonists, 294, 297
in AIDS patients with adrenal disorders, 
789-790
antagonists, 294, 297
biologic effects of, 294
Cushing syndrome due to, 325
deficiency of, familial, Addison disease due 
to, 305
defined, 294
function-related effects of, 295t-296t,
297-299
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis
suppression due to, 325
intermediary metabolism of, 295t-296t, 297
molecular mechanisms of, 294, 295t-296t
for nonendocrine disorders, 324-325
ocular effects of, 299
osteoporosis due to, 270-271. See also 
Osteoporosis, glucocorticoid-
induced
in postnatal growth, 138
side effects of, 325
stress in the elderly due to, 758, 759f, 760f
synthetic, for nonendocrine disorders,
325
tissue effects of, 295t-296t, 299
withdrawal of, 325
Glucocorticoid receptor gene mutation, in 
female primary hyperparathy-
roidism (PHP), 508
Glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism–
familial hyperaldosteronism type I, 
assessment of, in primary aldoster-
onism diagnosis, 337-338
Glucocorticoid-secreting adrenal adenomas, 
Cushing syndrome due to, 315
Glucose
absorption of, drugs affecting, in type 2 
diabetes management, 611t,
615-616
blood, in diabetes mellitus evaluation,
602-603, 602t
858    Index
Glucose (Cont.):
hepatic, low output of, disorders associated 
with, 670-673, 670t
plasma
circulating concentrations of, 657
fasting, 657
for pregnant women with preexisting
diabetes, 648, 649, 650t
urine, in diabetes mellitus evaluation, 601
Glucose control, in hospitalized diabetic 
patients, 643-644
Glucose growth hormone suppression test, in 
hypothalamic-pituitary function
evaluation, 86t
Glucose metabolism, disorders of, in AIDS 
patients, 796-799, 797t, 798t
Glucose suppression, in acromegaly diagnosis, 
108
Glucose transporter proteins (GLUT), insulin 
and, 580f, 582-583
Glucosidase inhibitors, for type 2 diabetes, 
746t
GLUT. See Glucose transporter proteins
Glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH) gene, 670t, 
671
Glyburide
in gestational diabetes management, 651
in type 2 diabetes management, 611t,
612-613
Glycemic index, in diabetes management, 610
Glycogen storage disease, secondary hypertri-
glyceridemia associated with, 686
GNASIs. See G protein α subunits 
GnRH. See Gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
Goiter
diffuse toxic, 198-206. See also Graves disease
multinodular
in the elderly, 206-207, 207f, 742-743
toxic, 206-207, 207f
nontoxic, 209-211, 209t, 210f, 211f.
See also Nontoxic goiter
surgery for, 805
Gonad(s)
bipotential, genes involved in organogene-
sis of, 481-483, 482f-483f
dysgenetic. See Gonadal dysgenesis
fetal, 562-563
function of, glucocorticoid effects on, 299
Gonadal agenesis, 443
Gonadal differentiation, disorders of, 492t
Gonadal disorders
in AIDS patients, 792-794
ovarian function–related, 793-794
testicular function–related, 792-793
in Cushing syndrome, 317t, 318
male
clinical, 405, 405t
treatment of, drugs in, 403-404
GnRH, 405
gonadotropins, 405
prolactinomas and, 102
Gonadal dysgenesis, 443. See also Disorders of 
sexual development (DSDs); 
Turner syndrome
ambiguous genitalia due to, 516
complete or partial, 499-500
diagnosis of, 495-496
45,X, 495-500, 496f
46,XX, 498
familial and sporadic forms of, hypergonad-
otropic hypogonadism and, 542
46,XX and 46,XY, 498
46,XY, 499-500
familial and sporadic forms of, hypergo-
nadotropic hypogonadism and, 
542
mixed, 443
short stature in, 495
syndrome of, 495-500, 496f
hypergonadotropic hypogonadism and, 
541
treatment of, 544-545
treatment of, 496-497
X chromatin–negative variants of,
497-498
X chromatin–positive variants of, 497
Gonadal function, male, evaluation of,
400-403, 401f, 402t
clinical, 400, 401f
genital examination in, 401
testicular function, laboratory tests for, 
401-403, 402t
Gonadal steroids, in male reproductive
system, 397-399, 398f, 399f, 
399t
Gonadal tumors, in dysgenetic gonads,
500-501, 501t
Gonadotroph(s), described, 70, 71t
Gonadotropin(s), 83-84. See also Luteinizing 
hormone (LH); specific types, e.g., 
Follicle-stimulating hormone 
(FSH)
chorionic
intramuscular, for cryptorchidism, 410
normal ranges for, 828t
in hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunction, 99
increase in, peripubertal, 532-533
for male gonadal disorders, pharmacology 
of, 405
measurements of, in testicular function 
evaluation, 402, 402t
Gonadotropin deficiency
hypopituitarism and, 96
isolated, delayed puberty and, 537-538,
538f
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), 73
intranasal, for cryptorchidism, 410
location of, 74f
for male gonadal disorders, pharmacology 
of, 405
in reproduction, 427-429
structure of, 73t
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)
deficiency, isolated, hypothalamic 
amenorrhea due to, 437-440
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) 
stimulation, during puberty, 533
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) test
in hypothalamic-pituitary function
evaluation, 87t
in luteinizing (LH) and follicle-stimulating 
(FSH) evaluation, 89
Gonadotropin-secreting pituitary adenomas, 
112
Gonadotropin-secreting tumors, in boys, 547
Gonadotropin secretion
midchildhood nadir of, 532
by tumors, 720
GPCRs. See G protein–coupled receptors
Granulomatous diseases/disorders, 119
hypercalcemia due to, 250-251
Graves disease, 198-206
causes of, 198-199
clinical features of, 200-201, 200f-202f,
200t
complications of, 202-203
treatment of, 204-206
course of, 206
dermopathy of, 199, 199f
described, 198
euthyroid, 214
eye changes in, classification of, 200t
laboratory findings in, 201
pathogenesis of, 199-200, 199f, 200f
prognosis of, 206
symptoms and signs of, 200-201,
200f-202f, 200t
treatment of, 203-206
carbimazole in, 203
complications-related, 204-206
duration of, 203
medical, 204
methimazole in, 203
options in, 204
propylthiouracil (PTU) in, 203
radioactive iodine therapy in, 203-204
surgical, 204
Growth, 129-162
abnormalities of, causes of, 144, 144t
catch-up, 140
constitutional delay in, 535, 536f
deceleration in, in Cushing syndrome, 
317t, 318
described, 129
disorders of, 144-161. See also Growth
disorders
fetal. See Fetal growth
glucocorticoid effects on, 298
intrauterine
normal, 129-130
retardation of, in diabetic patients, 647
measurement of, 140-143, 142f
height, 140-141
technique of, 141, 143
weight, 143
normal, 129-143
classic hormones of, 130
insulin-like growth factor (IGF)
receptors in, 130-131
insulin-like growth factor binding
proteins (IGFBPs) in, 130-131
insulin-like growth factors (IGF[s])
in, 130-131
intrauterine, 129-130
measurement of, 140-143, 142f
placenta in, 130
postnatal, 132-140, 133f-136f,
138f, 139f
Index     859
chronic disease in, 140
described, 132, 133f-136f
endocrine factors in, 132, 137-138, 138f
genetic factors in, 138, 139f
measurement of, 140-143, 142f
nutritional factors in, 140
psychologic factors in, 140
socioeconomic factors in, 138, 140
Growth disorders, 144-161
prematurity and, 144t, 145
short stature. See Short stature
tall stature, 160-161. See also Tall stature
Growth factor(s)
in fetal growth, 130
during pregnancy, 558
Growth factor dependent pathway, 13-14, 14f
Growth factor receptor(s), 13-14, 13f, 14f
Growth hormone (GH), 78-80, 78t-80t, 81f
biosynthesis of, 78
in counter-regulatory response to
hypoglycemia, 660
deficiency of. See Growth hormone
deficiency
evaluation of, 88
function of, 78, 78t, 79t, 81f
in hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunction, 99
measurement of, 78-79
metabolic effects of, 78t
normal ranges for, 832t
in postnatal growth, 132, 137-138, 138f
replacement of, in GH deficiency, 151-155, 
151t, 152f-154f
Growth hormone-binding protein, normal 
ranges for, 832t
Growth hormone (GH) deficiency
in absence of defined anatomic organic 
defects, delayed puberty and, 
538, 539f
acquired, 144t, 149
congenital, 144t, 148-149, 148f
delayed puberty and, treatment of, 544
diagnosis of, 150-151
familial/genetic, 160
hypopituitarism and, 96
short stature associated with, 144t,
147-155, 148f, 151t, 152f-154f
treatment of, 151-155, 151t, 152f-154f
GH replacement in, 151-155, 151t, 
152f-154f
psychologic management of, 155
variants of, short stature associated with, 144t, 
147-155, 148f, 151t, 152f-154f
Growth hormone (GH) hypersecretion
causes of, 108
in GH evaluation, 88
Growth hormone (GH) insensitivity, primary 
IGF-I deficiency due to, 144t,
149-150
Growth hormone receptor(s) (GHRs)
cytokine-related, 14-15, 15f
signaling by, 14-15, 15f
Growth hormone-releasing hormone 
(GHRH), 71, 73t
in GH secretion, 79
location of, 71, 74f
normal ranges for, 832t
Growth hormone-releasing hormone 
(GHRH) arginine test, in ACTH 
evaluation, 88
Growth hormone-releasing hormone 
(GHRH) secretion
ectopic, 108
by tumors, 719
Growth hormone secretagogue(s), in GH 
secretion, 79
Growth hormone secretagogue receptor 
(GHSR), 586
Growth hormone (GH) secretion
ectopic, 108
factors affecting, 79-80, 80t, 81f
metabolic control of, 79-80
neural control in, 79, 81f
by tumors, 719
Growth retardation, intrauterine, in diabetic 
patients, 647
Growth spurt, during puberty, 530-531
Guanylyl cyclase–linked receptors, 16-17, 17f, 
18f
Gut hormones, 721
Gynecologic system, obesity effects on, 706
Gynecomastia, 417-420, 418t, 419f
adolescent, 549
causes of, 417-418, 418t
clinical features of, 419
complications of, 419
course of, 420
differential diagnosis of, 419
laboratory studies of, 419, 419f
pathology of, 418
pathophysiology of, 417
prevalence of, 417
prognosis of, 420
sequelae of, 419
symptoms and signs of, 419
treatment of, 419-420
H
HAART (highly active antiretroviral therapy), 
787
Hair, pubic, development of, stages of, 528, 
529f, 530f
Hamburger thyrotoxicosis, 208
Hashimoto thyroiditis, 27, 212-214, 213f
causes of, 212-213
clinical features of, 213
complications of, 213-214
course of, 214
differential diagnosis of, 213
forms of, 214
pathogenesis of, 212-213
prognosis of, 214
sequelae of, 213-214
treatment of, 214
HbAs. See Hemoglobin assays
hCG. See Human chorionic gonadotropin
HDLs. See High-density lipoproteins
HDR syndrome, hypoparathyroidism due to, 
254
Head-neck paragangliomas, 365
Heart
hypocalcemia effects on, 253-254
pheochromocytoma effects on, 370-371
Heart disease
in diabetic patients, 634t, 640-641
hypothyroidism and, 196-197
myxedema with, treatment of, 198
Heat production, thyroid hormone effects on, 179
Height
measurement of, 140-141
midparental, growth rate related to, 139f, 
141, 142f
target, 139f, 141, 142f
Hematologic malignancies, hypercalcemia of 
malignancy and, 714-715, 714t
Hematopoietic system, thyroid hormone 
effects on, 181
Hemochromatosis, hypopituitarism and, 95
Hemoglobin A1C, normal ranges for, 832t
Hemoglobin assays (HbAs), glycated, in
diabetes mellitus evaluation, 
604-605, 604t
Hemorrhage
adrenal
acute, 307, 307t, 308
Addison disease due to, 303-305, 305t
decidual, during preterm birth (PTB), 
564-565, 564f
Hepatic glucose metabolism, glucocorticoid 
effects on, 295t, 297
Hepatic osteodystrophy, 274
Hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets, with 
hypercalciuria, 275-276
Hereditary vitamin D–resistant rickets, 
hypocalcemia due to, 257
Hermaphrodites, true, 443
Hernia(s), cryptorchidism and, 410
Hertel exophthalmometer, 200f
Heterogeneity
tissue, in insulin resistance, in type 2
diabetes, 592
treatment effect, defined, 63
High-density lipoproteins (HDLs)
catabolism of, 679
deficiency of, primary hypolipidemia due 
to, 689-690
metabolism of, in lipid transport, 679
sources of, 679
Highly active antiretroviral therapy 
(HAART), 787
Hip protectors, in osteoporosis management, 
756
Hirsutism, 323
causes of, 446-447, 448f
in Cushing syndrome, 317, 317t
hyperandrogenism and, 446, 448f
management of, 451
prevalence of, 446
Histiocytosis, Langerhans cell, 119
hypopituitarism and, 95
HIV infection
adrenal hormones in, pattern of,
790, 790t
antiretroviral therapy related to, 800-801
endocrinopathies of, 787-802
fat distribution abnormalities associated 
with, 795-796
secondary hypertriglyceridemia associated 
with, 685
860    Index
HLA. See Human leukocyte antigen
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors, in
hyperlipoproteinemia
management, 696-697, 696t
Homeostasis
calcium
in AIDS patients, 789t, 792
in the elderly, 750-757. See also 
Osteoporosis, in the elderly
phosphate, in AIDS patients,
789t, 792
Homocystinuria, 160-161
Homovanillic acid, normal ranges
for, 832t
Hormone(s), 1-26. See also specific types
actions of, 2, 3f
of adrenal medulla, 347-357. See also 
Catecholamine(s)
binding of, in plasma, in hormone level 
regulation in plasma, 4, 5f
biologic activity of, 5-6, 6f
biosynthesis of, in hormone level regulation 
in plasma, 4
chemical nature of, 3-4
deficiencies of, isolated from other pituitary 
damage, hypopituitarism and, 96
described, 2, 3f
ectopic, production of, pheochromocytoma 
effects on, 371
of fetal growth, 130
function of, physiology of, 115-117, 116f
GH secretion effects of, 80, 80t
glucocorticoid effects on, 296t, 299
in glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis
prevention and treatment, 271
growth-related. See Growth hormone (GH)
gut, 721
hypothalamic, 70-75, 72t, 73t, 74f, 75f. 
See also Hypothalamic hormones
levels of, in plasma, regulation of, 4-5, 5f
metabolism of, in hormone level regulation 
in plasma, 4-5
ovarian, 426
of pregnancy, 555, 556f-557f
of paraganglia, 347-357. See also 
Catecholamine(s)
precursors of, processing of, in hormone 
level regulation in plasma, 4
during pregnancy, in patients with diabetes, 
balance of, 644, 646
prolactin secretion effects of, 82, 82t
relationship to nervous system, 2-3
release of
anatomy of, 117
in hormone level regulation in
plasma, 4
secreted by tumors, 719-720
steroid, during pregnancy, 558-559
synthesis of, anatomy of, 117
Hormone receptor(s), 5-6, 6f
Hormone-sensitive lipase, insulin effects on, 
581, 581t
HRPT2 (hyperparathyroidism 2), 245
Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), 70
during pregnancy, 555, 557f
production of, 554-555, 554f
in testicular function evaluation, 402
testicular unresponsiveness to, 509
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
infection. See HIV infection
Human leukocyte antigen (HLA),
components of, 29-30, 30f, 31f
Human placental lactogen, during pregnancy, 
555, 557f, 558
Hungry bones, 778
Hungry bones syndrome, 258
Hydatidiform mole, 208
17-Hydroxycorticoid(s), normal ranges
for, 833t
18-Hydroxycorticosterone, normal ranges for, 
833t
5-Hydroxyindoleacetic, normal ranges for,
833t
11β-Hydroxylase deficiency, 340
17α-Hydroxylase deficiency, 340,
511-512
18-Hydroxypregnenolone, normal ranges for, 
833t
17-Hydroxyprogesterone, normal ranges for, 
833t-834t
3β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 
gamma5-isomerase deficiency, 
511
17β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-3
deficiency, 512-513
Hyperaldosteronism
primary, 815-816
diagnostic tests for, 815
prevalence of, 815
surgical management of, 815-816
type I, familial, assessment of, in primary 
aldosteronism diagnosis,
337-338
type II, familial, assessment of, in primary 
aldosteronism diagnosis, 338
Hyperandrogenism
anovulation and, 445-452, 445t,
447f-449f, 450t
clinical signs of, 446
congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) and, 
451-452
Cushing syndrome and, 452
diagnosis of, 446, 448f
PCOS and, 445-451. See also Polycystic 
ovarian syndrome
Hypercalcemia, 242-252
causes of, 243, 243t
clinical features of, 242, 243f
differential diagnosis of, 244, 244f
disorders causing, 244-252. See also specific 
disorders, e.g., Primary
hyperparathyroidism (PHP)
acute renal failure, 252
endocrine tumors, 251
endocrinopathies, 251
granulomatous disorders, 250-251
hypercalcemia, malignancy-associated, 
250
milk-alkali syndrome, 252
primary hyperparathyroidism (PHP), 
244-250, 246f, 247f, 811-814
sarcoidosis, 250-251
familial benign hypocalciuria, 249-250
immobilization and, 252
infantile, 692
malignancy-associated, 250, 712-715,
714t
diagnosis of, 715
hematologic malignancies associated with, 
714-715, 714t
humoral mediators in, 712-713
pathogenesis of, 712
prevalence of, 712
solid tumors associated with, 713-714
treatment of, 715
mechanisms of, 243, 243f
neonatal severe, 250
prevalence of, 712
thiazide diuretics and, 251
treatment of, 252
vicious cycle of, 243, 243f
vitamin A and, 252
vitamin D and, 251
Hypercalcemic crisis, 775-777, 776t
clinical setting of, 775-776, 776t
diagnosis of, 776
management of, 776-777, 776t
pathogenesis of, 776, 776t
Hypercalciuria, hereditary hypophosphatemic 
rickets with, 275-276
Hyperchloremic acidosis, during diabetic 
ketoacidosis management, 631
Hypercholesterolemia(s)
autosomal recessive, 692
familial, 687
primary, 687-688
cholesterol 7α-hydroxylase deficiency, 
688
familial combined hyperlipidemia,
687-688
familial hypercholesterolemia, 687
familial ligand-defective APO B-100,
688
Lp(a) hyperlipoproteinemia, 688
secondary, 688-689
anorexia nervosa, 688-689
cholestasis, 689
hypothyroidism, 688
immunoglobulin disorders, 688
nephrosis, 688
Hypercortisolism, 816
described, 816
diagnostic tests for, 816
surgical management of, 816
Hyperdeoxycorticosteronism, 340
Hypergastrinemia, causes of, 820t
Hyperglycemia
in diabetes mellitus, treatment of, 610-617, 
611t. See also Diabetes mellitus, 
treatment of, hyperglycemic 
agents in
micro- and macrovascular damage associ-
ated with, molecular mechanisms 
in, 635
Hyperglycemic, hyperosmolar nonketotic state, 
diabetes mellitus and, 631-633
clinical features of, 632
complications of, 633
Index     861
described, 632
disposition to, 633
laboratory findings in, 632
pathogenesis of, 632
prognosis of, 633
symptoms and signs of, 632
treatment of, 632-633
Hyperglycemic nonketotic coma, laboratory 
abnormalities in, 628t
Hyperinsulinemia, polycystic ovarian syn-
drome (PCOS) and, 449-450, 
449f, 450t
Hyperinsulinism
congenital, 670-673, 670t
causes of, 670, 670t
clinical presentation of, 672
described, 670
diagnosis of, 672
outcome of, 673
persistent, 670-672, 670t
channel defects in, 670t, 671
metabolic defects in, 670t, 671
transient, 670
treatment of, 672-673
types of, 670, 670t
exercise-induced, 670t, 671
in insulinomas, 665-666
Hyperlipidemia(s)
familial combined, 684, 687-688
treatment of, 692-693
Hyperlipoproteinemia(s)
Lp(a), 688
treatment of, drugs in, 694-698,
696t, 697t
bile acid squestrants, 694-695
cholesterol absorption inhibitors, 697
combined drug therapy, 697-698,
697t
fibric acid derivatives, 695-696
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors,
696-697, 696t
niacin, 695
type III, primary hypertriglyceridemia
associated with, 684-685
Hypernatremia
in the elderly, 758
essential, 119
Hyperosmolar coma, nonketotic, 773-765. 
See also Nonketotic hyperosmolar 
coma
Hyperparathyroid bone disease, 246-248, 
246f, 247f
Hyperparathyroid kidney disease, 248
Hyperparathyroidism
in the elderly, 757
familial, 815
in multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) 2, 
730
during pregnancy, 569
primary, 244-250, 811-814, 812f, 813t, 
814f. See also Primary
hyperparathyroidism (PHP)
secondary, 814-815
Hyperparathyroidism 2 (HRPT2), 245
Hyperphosphatemia, hereditary forms of, 
281-282
Hyperplasia(s)
adrenal
congenital. See Congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia (CAH)
congenital lipoid, 509-510
nodular, treatment of, 322
adrenocortical, Cushing syndrome and, 
314
bilateral nodular, Cushing syndrome and, 
315
in Cushing disease, 314
unilateral, surgical treatment of, 339
Hyperprolactinemia, 440-441
persistent, prolactinomas and, 441
Hypersecretion, adrenal, in the elderly, 759
Hypertension
acromegaly and, 342
causes of
adrenocortical, 332-333, 332t
endocrine-related, 329, 330t
Cushing syndrome and, 317-318, 317t, 
341-342
defined, 369
endocrine, 329-343
pheochromocytomas and, 369-370
pregnancy effects on, 341
prevalence of, 329
thyroid dysfunction and, 342
thyroid gland and, 342
Hypertensive crisis, pheochromocytomas and, 
369
Hyperthyroidism, 804-805
anovulation and, 453-454
causes of, 804
diagnostic tests for, 804
in the elderly, 739-741, 741t, 742f
clinical features of, 739, 741t
diagnosis of, 739, 741, 742f
treatment of, 741
management of, surgical, 804-805
during pregnancy, 567
subclinical, 201
Hyperthyroxinemia
euthyroid, causes of, 171t
familial dysalbuminemic, 201
Hypertriglyceridemia(s), 681-687
atherogenicity in, 681
clinical signs of, 681-682, 682f
laboratory measurements of, 682-683
pancreatitis associated with, causes of, 681
primary, 683-685
deficiency of lipoprotein lipase (LPL) 
activity, 683
endogenous and mixed lipemias,
683-684
familial combined hyperlipemia, 684
familial dysbetalipoproteinemia,
684-685
secondary
acromegaly, 686
alcohol ingestion, 685-686
corticosteroid excess, 685
diabetes mellitus, 685
exogenous estrogens, 685
glycogen storage disease, 686
HIV infection, 685
hypopituitarism, 686
hypothyroidism, 686
immunoglobulin–lipoprotein complex 
disorders, 686-687
nephrosis, 686
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease 
(NAFLD), 686
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), 686
uremia, 685
Hypervitaminosis A, hypercalcemia due to, 
252
Hypervitaminosis D, hypercalcemia due to, 
251
Hypoalbuminemia, hypocalcemia due to, 258
Hypoaldosteronism, hyporeninemic, in the 
elderly, 758
Hypoalphalipoproteinemia, familial, 689-690
Hypobetalipoproteinemia, familial, 691
Hypocalcemia, 252-258, 253f, 253t, 255f, 
256t
acute, 258, 777-779, 778t
clinical setting of, 777-778
diagnosis of, 778-779, 778t
management of, 779
symptoms and signs of, 778t
cardiac effects of, 253-254
causes of, 254-258, 255f, 256t. See also
specific causes, e.g., 
Pseudohypoparathyroidism
hereditary vitamin D–resistant rickets, 
257
hypoalbuminemia, 258
hypoparathyroidism, 254-255
pseudohypoparathyroidism, 255-256, 
255f, 256t
pseudovitamin D deficiency, 257
vitamin D deficiency, 256-257
chronic, 258
classification of, 252-253, 253t
clinical features of, 253-254, 253f
dermatologic effects of, 254
neuromuscular manifestations of, 253, 253f
ophthalmologic effects of, 254
treatment of, 258
Hypocalcemic tetany, carpal spasm due to, 
253, 253f
Hypofunction, primary versus secondary, in 
hypopituitarism diagnosis, 97
Hypoglycemia
alimentary, 668-670, 669t
functional, 669-670
autoimmune, 663
autonomic nervous system response to, 
659, 659t
counter-regulatory response to, 659-660, 
659f
catecholamines in, 659
cholinergic neurotransmitters in, 660
cortisol in, 660
glucagon in, 659-660, 659f
growth hormone (GH) in, 660
insulin in, 660
diabetes mellitus and, 626-627, 626t, 627t
coma related to, 628-634, 628t, 631t
counter-regulatory responses to, 627, 627t
treatment of, 627
862    Index
Hypoglycemia (Cont.):
disorders of, 657-674. See also 
Hypoglycemic disorders
factitious, 662
insulin-induced, 85, 87
in growth hormone (GH) evaluation, 88
testing of, in adrenal androgen
evaluation, 302-303
laboratory abnormalities in, 628t
neonatal, in diabetic patients, 647
nonislet cell tumor–induced, 667-668, 
718-719
reactive, 668-670, 669f
symptoms of, 747, 747t
Hypoglycemic disorders, 657-674. See also 
Hypoglycemia; specific disorders
alimentary (reactive) hypoglycemia,
668-670, 669t
classification of, 661, 661t
diabetes, 661-662. See also Diabetes
insipidus; Diabetes mellitus; 
Gestational diabetes
drugs and, 662-663
insulinomas, 663-664
nonislet cell tumor-induced hypoglycemia 
(NICTH), 667-668
Hypoglycemic unawareness, in type 1 diabetes 
mellitus, 626, 626t
Hypogonadism, 535-540, 793
hypergonadotropic, 540-542
anorchia and, 540-541
cryptorchidism in, 540-541
gonadal dysgenesis in, 541
Klinefelter syndrome in, 540
Noonan syndrome in, 542
Turner syndrome in, 541
hypogonadotropic
anorexia nervosa in, 539
Bardet-Biedl syndrome in, 539
chronic disease in, 539
CNS disorders in, 536-537
described, 535
hypothyroidism in, 540
idiopathic hypopituitary dwarfism in, 
538, 539f
increased physical activity in, 539
isolated gonadotropin deficiency in,
537-538, 538f
Laurence-Moon syndrome in, 539
malnutrition in, 539
Prader-Willi syndrome in, 538-539
male
classification of, 405, 405t
evaluation for, 403, 404f
permanent, treatment of, 544
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, 535-540. 
See also Hypogonadism,
hypogonadotropic
Hypolipidemia(s)
primary, 689-691
APO B–containing lipoprotein
deficiency and, 690-691
HDL deficiency and, 689-690
secondary, 691
Hyponatremia, 779-782, 780t, 781t
classification of, 779, 780t
clinical setting of, 779-780, 780t
complications of, 782
diagnosis of, 780-781, 781t
differential diagnosis of, 122, 122t
in the elderly, 758
management of, 781-782
in syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic 
hormone (SIADH)
pathophysiology of, 123-124, 123f
treatment of, 125-126
symptoms of, 124
Hypoparathyroidism
autoimmune, 41-42
causes of, 254-255
described, 254
familial, 254
hypocalcemia due to, 254-255
idiopathic, 254
during pregnancy, 569
surgical, 254
Hypophosphatasia, 276
Hypophosphatemia
autosomal dominant, 275
disorders of, 274-276
X-linked, 275
Hypophosphatemic rickets
autosomal dominant, 275
hereditary, with hypercalciuria, 275-276
Hypophysiotropic hormones, 70-73, 72t, 73t, 
74f. See also specific hormones, e.g., 
Somatostatin
Hypophysitis
autoimmune, 41
lymphocytic, 41
Hypopituitarism, 94-99, 98f
causes of, 94-96
iatrogenic, 95-96
idiopathic, 96
immunologic, 95
infarction, 94-95
infectious, 96
infiltrative, 95
injuries, 95
invasive, 94
isolated, 96
clinical features of, 96-97
described, 94
diagnosis of, 97, 98f
laboratory findings in, 97
secondary hypertriglyceridemia associated 
with, 686
treatment of, 97-99
Hypopituitary dwarfism, idiopathic, delayed 
puberty and, 538, 539f
Hypoplasia(s)
adrenal, congenital, Addison disease due to, 
305
Leydig cell, testicular unresponsiveness to, 509
Hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism, in the 
elderly, 758
Hypospadias, 517
Hypotension, pheochromocytomas and, 370
Hypothalamic amenorrhea, 437-440
anatomic causes of, 440
eating disorders and, 439-440
endocrine causes of, 438-440
functional, 438-439
genetic origin of, 437-438
isolated GnRH deficiency and, 437-440
Hypothalamic diabetes insipidus, familial, 118
Hypothalamic disorders, 91-94
causes of, 91-93
clinical features of, 93-94
diagnosis of, 94
manifestations of, 94
treatment of, 94
Hypothalamic hormones, 70-75, 72t, 73t, 
74f, 75f
hypophysiotropic hormones, 70-73, 72t, 
73t, 74f
secretion of, 69f
structure of, 73t
Hypothalamic nuclei, functions of, 72t
Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, 77f
disorders of, in the elderly, 759-760
Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis suppres-
sion, glucocorticoids and, 325
Hypothalamic-pituitary axis
in adrenal insufficiency, 303, 304f
in Cushing syndrome, 313, 313f
evaluation of
adrenal stimulation, 85
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), 
85-88, 86t
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) 
hypersecretion, 88
endocrinologic, 85-89, 87t-88t
follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), 89
growth hormone (GH), 88
luteinizing hormone (LH), 89
pituitary stimulation, 85, 87-88
problems associated with, 89
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), 88
in menstrual cycle, 428
Hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunction
causes of, 91-92
manifestations of, 91-92
Hypothalamic-pituitary function. See also 
Hypothalamic-pituitary
dysfunction
drug effects on, 89-90
endocrine tests of, 86t-87t, 90
evaluation of, neuroradiologic, 90, 91f
Hypothalamic-pituitary-Leydig cell axis, in
testicular function control, 399-
400, 399f
Hypothalamic-pituitary-seminiferous tubular 
axis, in testicular function
control, 399f, 400
Hypothalamic system, aging effects on, 458
Hypothalamus, 65-114
anatomy of, 66-68, 67f, 68f
in appetite control, 74-75
blood supply to, 67f-69f, 68
embryology of, 66-68, 67f, 68f
as part of larger system, 73-74
Hypothyroidism, 191-198, 192t, 194f-196f, 
197t
anovulation and, 454
causes of, 191-192, 192t
classification of, 191
clinical presentations of, 193-195, 194f
Index     863
complications of, 195-197
defined, 191
delayed puberty and, 540
diagnosis of, 195, 195f, 196f
in the elderly, 741-742
causes of, 741
clinical features of, 741
diagnosis of, 741-742
treatment of, 742
heart disease and, 196-197
hypertension and, 342
incidence of, 191-192
neuropsychiatric disease and, 197
pathogenesis of, 193
precocious puberty associated with, 548
during pregnancy, 567
secondary hypercholesterolemia associated 
with, 688
secondary hypertriglyceridemia associated 
with, 686
short stature associated with, 156-157
subclinical, 195
treatment of, 197-198, 197t
adverse effects of, 198
course of, 198
levothyroxine in, 197, 197t
prognosis of, 198
Hypothyroxinemia, euthyroid, causes
of, 171t
I
IAPP. See Islet amyloid polypeptide
ICA. See Islet cell antibody
IDF (International Diabetes Federation),
705
Idiopathic hypoparathyroidism, 254
Idiopathic hypopituitary dwarfism, delayed 
puberty and, 538, 539f
IGFBPs. See Insulin-like growth factor–
binding proteins
IGFs. See Insulin-like growth factor(s)
Ignorance, 33
Imaging. See also specific modalities
in Addison disease, 307
of benign thyroid nodules, 216, 216f
in diabetes insipidus, 121
in nontoxic goiter, 210-211
of thyroid gland, 188-189, 188f, 189f
Immobilization, hypercalcemia due to, 252
Immune deviation, 32f, 33
Immune insulin resistance, 626
Immune response, described, 31
Immune system
components of, 27, 29f
glucocorticoid effects on, 295t-296t, 298
recognition and response in, 28-31, 30f, 
31f
Immunity
adaptive, 31
innate, 31
Immunodeficiency, polyendocrinopathy, and 
enteropathy, X-linked (IPEX)
syndrome, 44
Immunoglobulin disorders, secondary
hypercholesterolemia associated 
with, 688
Immunoglobulin–lipoprotein complex
disorders, secondary hypertrig-
lyceridemia associated with,
686-687
Immunoradiometric assay, for parathyroid 
hormone (PTH), clinical utility 
of, 244f
Implant(s), subdermal, in contraception,
472-473
Implantation, after conception, 553-555, 554f
Impotence, in the elderly, 761
Inborn errors of testosterone biosynthesis, 
509-512, 510f
Incidental adrenal mass, 323-324
Incidentally discovered adrenal masses, 381-382
Incidentaloma(s), adrenal, 817-818, 818t, 
819f. See also Adrenal incidenta-
loma
Incomplete contrasexual precocity
in boys, 547
in girls, 548
Incretin(s)
in insulin secretion, 578-579, 579t
in type 2 diabetes management, 611t,
616-617
Indinavir, glucose and lipid metabolism 
effects of, 797, 798t
Infant(s), of diabetic mothers, tall stature 
related to, 161
Infant Turner syndrome, 541
Infantile hypercalcemia, 692
Infarction, hypopituitarism due to, 94-95
Infection(s)
Addison disease due to, 305
diabetes due to, 599
in diabetic patients, 634t, 642
hypopituitarism and, 96
during preterm birth (PTB), 564, 564f
Inferior petrosal sinus sampling, in Cushing 
syndrome, 321
Infertility, 423-477, 461-464
cryptorchidism and, 410
defined, 461
described, 461
diagnosis of, 461-463
Klinefelter syndrome and, 493
male, 413-415, 414t
causes of, 413-414, 414t
clinical features of, 404f, 414
course of, 415
imaging studies in, 414
laboratory findings in, 404f, 414
pathophysiology of, 413-414, 414t
prevalence of, 413
prognosis of, 415
symptoms and signs of, 414
treatment of, 414
male factor, 463
management of, 464
management of couple with, 463-464, 464t
obesity-related, polycystic ovarian
syndrome (PCOS) and, 706
ovulatory disorders and, 461-462
management of, 463
pelvic disorders and, 462-463
management of, 463
unexplained, 463
management of, 464, 464t
Inflammation
insulin resistance in type 2 diabetes and, 
591-592
during preterm birth (PTB), 564, 564f
Infundibulohypophysitis, lymphocytic, 119
Inherited defects, dietary iodine deficiency 
and, 168-169
Innate immunity, 31
111-In-octreotide, somatostatin receptor 
imaging with, of pheochromocy-
toma, 381
Insulin, 575-583, 576f-578f, 579t, 580f-582f, 
581t, 617-622
action of, 579-580, 580f, 581f
genetic defects related to, 597-598
adipose tissue effects of, 581, 581t
administration of, 620-622
CSII in, 620
inhalation in, 621
injection sites for, 620-621
islet cell transplantation in, 621-622
pancreas transplantation in, 621
pen injector devices for, 621
pumps for, 620
syringes and needles for, 620
allergy to, 625-626
anabolism promotion by, 581, 581t
bioavailability of, 618-619, 618f, 618t
biochemistry of, 575-577, 576f
biosynthesis of, 575, 576f
C peptide of, normal ranges for, 826t
catabolism inhibition by, 581, 581t
CNS effects of, 581, 581t
composition of, 576f, 577
in counter-regulatory response to
hypoglycemia, 659
in diabetes management, 617-622
immunopathology of, 625-626
in diabetic ketoacidosis management,
630
in fetal growth, 131
Insulin, endocrine effects of, 581, 581t
for gestational diabetes, 651
GLUT and, 580f, 582-583
human production of, 617-618
for hyperglycemic, hyperosmolar
nonketotic state in diabetes
mellitus, 633
hypoglycemia due to, 85, 87
inhaled, 621
injectable, 618, 618t
sites for, 620-621
in insulinoma diagnosis, 665
islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP) and, 583
lipodystrophy at, 626
levels of, in diabetes mellitus evaluation, 605
metabolic effects of, 580-582, 581t, 582f
adenosine monophosphate protein 
kinase (AMPK), 581-582, 582f
endocrine effects, 581, 581t
nutrient-related, 581-582, 582f
paracrine effects, 580
muscle effects of, 581
normal ranges for, 834t
864    Index
Insulin (Cont.):
for pregnant women with preexisting
diabetes, 648, 649, 650t
preparations of, 618-620, 618f, 618t
available in U.S., 618, 618t
long-acting, 619-620
mixtures, 620
short-acting, 619
regular, 619
secretion of, 577-579, 577f, 578f, 579t
amplifiers in, 578, 579t
incretins in, 578-579, 579t
stimulants in, 578, 579t
subcutaneous, in diabetic ketoacidosis 
management, 631
during surgery, management of, 642, 643t, 
644t
for type 1 diabetes, 39
for type 2 diabetes, 747-749, 748f, 748t
factors reducing response to, 590, 590t
types of, duration of action of, 618, 618f
Insulin allergy, 625-626
Insulin analogs, rapidly acting, 619
Insulin aspart, 619
Insulin detemir, 620
Insulin glargine, 619-620
Insulin glulisine, 619
Insulin hypoglycemia test, in hypothalamic-
pituitary function evaluation, 85, 
86t
Insulin-induced hypoglycemia testing, in 
adrenal androgen evaluation,
302-303
Insulin-like growth factor(s) (IGFs)
deficiency of, IGF-I, primary, GH
insensitivity and, 144t, 149-150
described, 130-131
hypersecretion of, causes of, 108
IGF-I
metabolic effects of, 78, 78t
normal ranges for, 834t-835t
IGF-II, normal ranges for, 835t
measurement of, in acromegaly diagnosis, 108
in postnatal growth, 132, 137-138, 138f
IGF-I, 137-138
IGF-II, 137-138
Insulin-like growth factor–binding protein(s) 
(IGFBPs)
described, 130-131
IGF-III, normal ranges for, 835t
Insulin-like growth factor (IGF) receptors, 
described, 130-131
Insulin pumps, in insulin administration, 620
Insulin receptor(s), 579-580, 580f, 581f
Insulin release, regulation of, 578-579, 579t
Insulin resistance
in AIDS patients, 796-799, 797t, 798t
immune, 626
measurements of, 450, 450t
obesity effects on, 704-705
in type 2 diabetes, 590t, 591-592
causes of, 590t, 591-592
clinical causes of, 592
tissue heterogeneity in, 592
Insulin secretagogues, short-acting, for type 2 
diabetes, 746t
Insulin signaling
deactivation of, 580
downstream, 579, 580f
outline of, 579, 580f
Insulin-signaling pathway, in transcriptional 
regulation, 579-580, 581f
Insulin target tissues, drugs acting on, in
type 2 diabetes management, 
611t, 613-615
Insulinoma(s), 663-667, 665t, 666f, 819-820
clinical findings in, 664
described, 663-664, 819
diagnosis of, 664-667, 665t, 666f, 819
home blood glucose monitor in, 664
insulin in, 665
patient history in, 664
72-hour fast in, 664-665, 665t
stimulation tests in, 665
tumor localization studies in, 666-667, 
666f
hyperinsulinism associated with, 665-666
in multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) 1, 
724
treatment of, 667, 820
Insulinoma syndrome, 819
Intercellular communication, chemical
mediators in, 66, 66f
International Conference on Management of 
Intersex, 489
International Diabetes Federation (IDF), 705
International Obesity Task Force, 699
Interstitial cells, 395
Interstitial fluid glucose samples, in diabetes 
mellitus evaluation, 603
Intestinal calcium transport, vitamin D in, 239
Intestinal peristalsis, hypothyroidism and, 194
Intrathyroidal deiodination, in thyroid
hormone synthesis, 168, 170f
Intrauterine death, diabetes during pregnancy 
and, 647
Intrauterine devices (IUDs), 475
Intrauterine growth, 129-130
Intrauterine growth retardation, in diabetic 
patients, 647
Intravenous dextrose, in pheochromocytoma/
paraganglioma management, 386
Intravenous fluids, in adrenocortical
insufficiency management, 311
Intravenous glucose tolerance test (IVGTT), 
in diabetes mellitus evaluation,
605-606
Intravenous saline infusion test, in primary 
aldosteronism diagnosis, 335
Iodide transport, in thyroid hormone
synthesis, 166f, 167, 167f
Iodination, of thyroglobulin
processes of, 166, 167f
in thyroid hormone synthesis, 167-168
Iodine
dietary, deficiency of, inherited defects and, 
168-169
excess of, hormone biosynthesis effects of, 
169
metabolism of, 164-169, 166f-170f
in coupling of iodotyrosyl residues, 168, 
168f
in intrathyroidal deiodination, 168, 170f
in iodide transport, 166f, 167, 167f
in proteolysis of thyroglobulin and
thyroid hormone secretion, 167f, 
168, 169f
in thyroglobulin, 165-166, 167f
in thyroid hormone synthesis and secre-
tion, 164-168, 166f-170f
in thyroid peroxidase (TPO), 167
radioactive
for Graves disease, 203-204
thyroid uptake of, normal ranges for, 842t
thyroid
biosynthetic activity of, 187-188, 187f
metabolism of, assessment of, 187-188, 
187f
Iodothyronine deiodinase, types and
characteristics of, 171-172, 172t
Iodotyrosyl residues, coupling of, in thyroid 
hormone synthesis, 168, 168f
Ionizing radiation, thyroid gland effects of, 
214-215
IPEX syndrome (immunodeficiency,
polyendocrinopathy, and 
enteropathy, X-linked syn-
drome), 44
Irradiation, conventional, in pituitary ade-
noma management, 101
Islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP), insulin and, 
583
Islet cell antibody (ICA), normal ranges for, 836t
Islet cell transplantation, in insulin
administration, 621-622
Islets of Langerhans, cell types of, 574, 575t
Isolated peripheral neuropathy, 634t, 638
Isophane, 619
Isosexual precocity, 545
IUDs (intrauterine devices), 475
IVGTT. See Intravenous glucose tolerance test 
J
Joint(s), diabetes effects on, 634t, 641-642
K
Kallmann syndrome
delayed puberty and, 537-538, 538f
X-linked, 537
Ketoacidosis, diabetic, 628-631, 628t, 631t, 
769-773, 770f, 771t. See also 
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA)
Ketoconazole, in ACTH-secreting pituitary 
adenoma management, 111
Ketone(s)
serum, determination of, in diabetes melli-
tus evaluation, 603
in type 1 diabetes mellitus, treatment of, 
631, 631t
urine, determination of, in diabetes
mellitus evaluation, 603
Ketosis-prone diabetes, 596-597
17-Ketosteroid(s), normal ranges for, 836t
Kidney(s)
in euglycemia maintenance in
postabsorptive state, 660
glucocorticoid effects on, 295t-296t,
298-299
Index     865
pheochromocytoma effects on, 371
vitamin D actions in, 240
Kidney disease, hyperparathyroid, 248
KIF1B gene mutations, 366
Klinefelter syndrome, 161, 405-407, 406f
causes of, 406
clinical features of, 406-407, 406f
course of, 407
described, 493-494
diagnosis of, 494
differential diagnosis of, 407
hormonal levels in, 493
hypergonadotropic hypogonadism and, 540
laboratory findings of, 407
male infertility associated with, 493
pathophysiology of, 406
prevalence of, 493
prognosis of, 407
symptoms and signs of, 406-407, 406f
testicular pathology of, 406
treatment of, 407, 494
variants of, 494
Köbberling-Dunningan syndrome, 691
Kumamoto study, 607
Kyphoplasty, in osteoporosis management, 756
L
Labor, preterm, management of, 565
Labor and delivery, insulin and glucose
management during, in diabetic 
patients, 649, 650t
Lactation, 566
oxytocin during, 126
Lactic acidosis
diabetes mellitus and, 633-634
clinical features of, 633-634
described, 633
laboratory findings in, 633-634
pathogenesis of, 633
symptoms and signs of, 633
treatment of, 634
laboratory abnormalities in, 628t
Lactogen, human placental, during pregnancy, 
555, 557f, 558
Lactotroph(s), described, 69, 71t
LADA (latent autoimmune diabetes of
adulthood), 588
Langerhans cell histiocytosis, 119
hypopituitarism and, 95
Laparoscopic adrenalectomy, complications 
of, 818
Laparoscopy, in pheochromocytoma/
paraganglioma management, 
385-386
Laparotomy, open, in pheochromocytoma/
paraganglioma management,
386
Late dumping syndrome, 668-669, 669t
Late hypoglycemia of occult diabetes. See 
Noninsulinoma pancreatogenous 
hypoglycemia syndrome 
(NIPHS)
Latent autoimmune diabetes of adulthood 
(LADA), 588
Laurence-Moon syndrome, 144t, 146
delayed puberty and, 539
Laws of mass action, 5-6
LBDs. See Ligand-binding domains
LDLs. See Low-density lipoproteins
Lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase, deficiency 
of, 690
Leprechaunism syndrome, 597
Leptin
in appetite regulation, 700-701
normal ranges for, 836t
during puberty, 533-534
resistance to, in obesity, 702
short-term gastrointestinal signals and, 
700-701, 701t
Leptin-melanocortin system
of energy balance, 702, 702f
gene mutations related to, monogenic
obesity due to, 703, 704t
Leukemia(s), hypercalcemia of malignancy 
and, 714-715, 714t
Leukocyte(s), glucocorticoid effects on, 298
Levonorgestrel
chemical structure of, 465f
in emergency contraception, 475-476
Levothyroxine, in hypothyroidism
management, 197, 197t
Leydig cell(s), 395
failure of, in adults, 412-413
Leydig cell aplasia, 409
Leydig cell hypoplasia, testicular
unresponsiveness to, 509
Leydig cell tumors, testicular, 420-422
LH. See Luteinizing hormone
Liddle syndrome, 341
Lidocaine, in pheochromocytoma/
paraganglioma management, 385
Ligand-binding domains (LBDs), crystallo-
graphic structures of, 21, 22f
Ligand–receptor complex, kinase-dependent 
desensitization of, 10, 11f
Liganded growth factor receptors, 13-14, 14f
Likelihood ratio, in clinical epidemiology,
51, 53f
Lipase, hormone-sensitive, insulin effects on, 
581, 581t
Lipemia(s)
endogenous, 683-684
mixed, 683-684
Lipid(s)
laboratory analyses of, 680
metabolism of
disorders of, in AIDS patients, 798t, 
799-801
thyroid hormone effects on, 181
storage of, ectopic, insulin resistance in 
type 2 diabetes and, 591
transport of. See Lipid transport
Lipid transport
absorption of dietary fat in, 677, 677f
B apolipoproteins in, 676
C apolipoproteins in, 676-677, 676t
cholesterol economy in, 679-680
chylomicron secretion and, 677, 677f
high-density lipoprotein (HDL) metabo-
lism in, 679
low-density lipoprotein (LDL) catabolism 
in, 679
metabolism of triglyceride-rich lipoproteins 
in plasma in, 677-679
overview of, 676-680, 676t, 677f, 678f
plasma lipoproteins in, 676, 676t, 677f
very low-density lipoprotein (VLDL)
formation in, 677, 678f
Lipodystrophy(ies), 691-692
congenital and acquired forms of, 597
disorders associated with, 691-692
familial, of limbs and trunk, 691
generalized, familial, 691
insulin, at injection sites, 626
Lipoprotein(s)
in diabetes mellitus evaluation, 606
half-lives of, 678
high-density. See High-density lipoproteins 
(HDLs)
laboratory analyses of, 680
low-density. See Low-density lipoproteins 
(LDLs)
metabolism of, disorders of, 675-698.
See also Lipoprotein disorders; 
specific disorders
plasma
abnormal patterns of, clinical
differentiation of, 680-681
in lipid transport, 676, 676t, 677f
triglyceride-rich, metabolism of
in lipid transport, 677-679
in plasma, 677-679
very low-density, formation of, in lipid 
transport, 677, 678f
Lipoprotein disorders, 675-698. See also
specific disorders
abnormal patterns of plasma lipoproteins in, 
clinical differentiation of,
680-681
alcohol ingestion effects on, 693
atherosclerosis, 675-676
autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia 
(ARH), 692
case examples, 681
cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis, 692
cholesteryl ester storage disease, 692
cholesteryl ester transfer protein deficiency, 
692
differentiation of, 680-681
hypercholesterolemias
familial, 687-688
primary, 687-688
secondary, 688-689
hyperlipoproteinemias, treatment of, drugs 
in, 694-698, 696t, 697t
hypertriglyceridemias, 681-687
hypolipidemias
primary, 689-691
secondary, 691
infantile hypercalcemia, 692
laboratory analyses of, 680
lipodystrophies, 691-692
management of, dietary factors in,
693-694
antioxidants, 693-694
calorie restriction, 693
carbohydrates, 693
cholesterol reduction, 693
866    Index
Lipoprotein disorders, management of, 
dietary factors in (Cont.):
fat restriction, 693
omega-3 fatty acids, 693
universal diet, 694
vitamin B, 694
Niemann-Pick disease, 692
PCSK9 variants, 692
phytosterolemia, 692
progeria, 692
rare disorders, 692
sphingolipidosis, 692
Werner syndrome, 692
Wolman disease, 692
Lipoprotein lipase (LPL)
activity of, deficiency of, primary hypertri-
glyceridemia associated with, 683
biologic regulation of, 677-678
hydrolysis of, 677
Lipoprotein remnants
fate of, 678
formation of, 678
Liraglutide, in type 2 diabetes management, 
611t, 616-617
Lithium therapy, primary hyperparathyroidism 
effects on, 250
Liver, in euglycemia maintenance in
postabsorptive state, 660
Lopinavir/ritonavir, glucose and lipid
metabolism effects of, 797, 798t
Low-density lipoproteins (LDLs), catabolism 
of, in lipid transport, 679
Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test, in 
hypothalamic-pituitary function
evaluation, 87t
Lp(a) hyperlipoproteinemia(s), 688
LPL. See Lipoprotein lipase
Lumone(s), 74
Luteal-follicular transition, in women,
endocrinology of, 428, 429f
Luteinizing hormone (LH), 83-84
biosynthesis of, 83-84
evaluation of, 89
function of, 84
measurement of, 84
normal ranges for, 836t
regulation of, 428
secretion of, 84
synthesis of, 429
testicular unresponsiveness to, 509
Luteolysis, 435
17,20-Lyase deficiency, 512-513
Lymph nodes, in thyroid cancer, management 
of, 808, 809f
Lymphocyte(s), B, reactivation and
differentiation of, 29
Lymphocytic hypophysitis, 41
Lymphocytic infundibulohypophysitis, 119
Lymphocytic thyroiditis, 212-214, 213f
Lymphoma(s)
hypercalcemia of malignancy and,
714-715, 714t
thyroid
pathology of, 218
surgery for, 808
Lyon Diet Heart Study, 610
M
Macroadenoma(s)
MRI of, 90
primary, defined, 99
treatment of, 104-105
Macrosomia, fetal, diabetes during pregnancy 
effects on, 647
Macrovascular disease, diabetic, 635
Magnesium depletion, hypoparathyroidism 
due to, 255
Magnesium sulfate, in pheochromocytoma/
paraganglioma management,
385
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
in hypothalamic-pituitary function
evaluation, 90, 91f
of pheochromocytoma, 378-379
pituitary, in Cushing syndrome, 320-321
Major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
class II diabetes-susceptibility genes, 40
class II molecules, in type 1 diabetes,
40
components of, 29-31, 30f, 31f
gene organization of, 29, 30f
Male(s)
adrenal androgen effects on, 299
androgens in, in hypothalamic-pituitary 
dysfunction, 99
genital system of, 395, 396f
gonadal function in, evaluation of,
400-403, 401f, 402t. See also 
Gonadal function, male
incomplete contrasexual precocity in,
547
infertility in, 413-415, 414t. See also 
Infertility, male
isosexual precocious puberty in, 547
with normal male genitalia, androgen
resistance in, 516
primary hyperparathyroidism (PHP) in, 
509
prolactinomas in, gonadal dysfunction 
related to, 102
pubertal changes in, 528, 530f
reproduction system of. See Reproductive 
system, male
reproductive disorders in, environmental 
chemicals and, 516
reproductive function in, changes in, aging 
and, 760-761, 760f, 761f
Turner syndrome in, 410-411. See also 
Noonan syndrome
Male factor infertility, 463
management of, 464
Male pseudohermaphroditism, 492t, 509
Malformation syndromes, in fetal growth, 
132
Malignancy(ies). See also Cancer(s); 
Carcinoma(s); Neoplasm(s);
specific types
humoral manifestations of, 711-722
hypercalcemia of, 250, 712-715, 714t.
See also Hypercalcemia of
malignancy
pheochromocytomas and, manifestations 
of, 372
Malnutrition
chronic disease and, delayed puberty and, 
539
short stature associated with,
144t, 147
Mammosomatotroph(s), described, 70
Marfan syndrome, 160
Maternal genomic imprinting, 365
Maturity-onset diabetes of the young 
(MODY), 593-595, 594t
Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser syndrome, 
454
McCune-Albright syndrome, 315
multiple endocrine organ involvement in, 
734
precocious puberty associated with,
548
MCT. See Medullary carcinoma of thyroid
Medroxyprogesterone acetate, chemical
structure of, 466f
Medulla, adrenal, 345-393. See also Adrenal 
medulla
Medullary carcinoma
pathology of, management of, 223-224
of thyroid. See Medullary carcinoma of
thyroid (MCT)
Medullary carcinoma of thyroid (MCT),
241-242, 241t, 242t
pathology of, 218
Meglitinide analogs, in type 2 diabetes
management, 611t, 613
Meiotic maturation, control of, 434,
434f
Melatonin
described, 75
formation and metabolism of, 76f
MEN. See Multiple endocrine neoplasia
Menarche
mean age of, 436
premature, 548
during puberty, 534
MENIN, 245
Menopause, 455-461
atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease
associated with, 460-461
bone loss associated with, 459
consequences of, 458-461, 461t
endocrine system changes related to,
456-457, 457t
genital atrophy associated with, 458-459
oocyte depletion during, 455-456, 456f
osteoporosis associated with, 459-460
vasomotor symptoms associated with,
458
Menstrual cycle
hypothalamic-pituitary axis in, 428
ovaries, role in, 430-435
physiology of, 427-436
pituitary gland in, 428-429
regulation of, 427-428, 429f
uterus in, 435-436
Menstrual disturbances. See also Amenorrhea, 
Anovulation
obesity-related, 452-453
Mestranol, chemical structure of, 465f
Metabolic bone disease, 227-284
Index     867
Metabolic syndrome
in the elderly, 744, 744t
obesity and, 705
type 2 diabetes and, 592-593
Metabolism
adipose tissue secretions influencing,
708f
catecholamine effects on, 357, 357t
cellular calcium, 227-241
hepatic glucose, glucocorticoid effects on, 
295t, 297
hormone, in hormone level regulation in 
plasma, 4-5
insulin effects on, 580-582, 581t, 582f
obesity effects on, 704-705
pubertal effects on, 535
Metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG),
131-I-MIBG therapy, in
pheochromocytoma/paragan-
glioma management, 390-391, 
390f
Metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) scanning, 
of pheochromocytoma, 379-380, 
379f, 379t
Metanephrine(s)
deconjugated, 373
free
plasma, 374
plasma-fractionated, 373-374, 376t
normal ranges for, 837t-838t
in pheochromocytoma testing, 373-374,
376t
total, 373
24-hour urine-fractionated, 374
Metastasis(es), thyroid, surgery for, 808
Metformin
in gestational diabetes management, 651
in type 2 diabetes management, 611t,
613-614, 625, 746-747, 746t
Methimazole, for Graves disease, 203
α-Methylparatyrosine, in pheochromocy-
toma/paraganglioma manage-
ment, 383-384
Metyrapone, in ACTH-secreting pituitary 
adenoma management, 111
Metyrapone stimulation test, 838t
in adrenal androgen evaluation, 302
in hypothalamic-pituitary function
evaluation, 86t, 87
Metyrosine, in pheochromocytoma/paragan-
glioma management, 383-384
MHC. See Major histocompatibility complex
MIBG. See Metaiodobenzylguanidine 
(MIBG)
Microadenoma(s)
MRI of, 90
primary, defined, 99
treatment of, 104-105
Microalbuminuria, in diabetes mellitus evalu-
ation, 601-602
Micropenis, 517-518, 517t, 518t
Microvascular disease, diabetic, 634
Miglitol, in type 2 diabetes management, 
611t, 616
Milk-alkali syndrome, hypercalcemia due to, 
252
Mineral(s)
bone, 260
disorders of, in AIDS patients, 789t,
791-792. See also Bone and min-
eral disorders, in AIDS patients
homeostasis of, control of, vitamin D and 
PTH in, 241-258
Mineralization, inhibitors of, 277
Mineralocorticoid(s), in AIDS patients with 
adrenal disorders, 790, 790t
Mineralocorticoid excess, forms of, 340-341, 341f
Mitchell-Riley syndrome, 595
Mitiglinide, in type 2 diabetes management, 
611t, 613
Mitochondrial DNA mutations, 596
Mitotane, in ACTH-secreting pituitary
adenoma management, 111
Mixed gonadal dysgenesis, 443
MODY (maturity-onset diabetes of the 
young), 593-595, 594t
Mole(s), hydatidiform, 208
MRI. See Magnetic resonance imaging
Mucous membrane, diabetes effects on, 634t, 
641
Müllerian agenesis, 454
Müllerian duct syndrome, persistent, 516
Multinodular goiter, in the elderly, 206-207, 
207f, 742-743
Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN), 673, 
723-735
Carney complex and, 733-734
McCune-Albright syndrome and, 734
MEN 1, 723-729, 724t, 725f, 726f, 728f
adrenal adenomas in, 724-725
clinical manifestations of, 723, 724t
described, 723-725, 724t
diagnosis of, 724
insulinomas in, 724
pathogenesis of, 725-726, 725f
pituitary adenomas, 724
prevalence of, 723
screening for, 727-729, 728f
sporadic, 723
syndromes, 245
treatment of, 726-727
MEN 2, 729-733, 729f-731f, 729t
clinical manifestations of, 729, 729t
described, 729-730, 729f, 729t
diagnosis of, 730
genetics of, 361-362, 361t, 729-730
hyperparathyroidism in, 730
pathogenesis of, 730-732, 731f
phenotypic features in, 730
prevalence of, 729
screening for, 732-733
treatment of, 732
MEN 2A, syndromes, 245
MEN X, 734
neurofibromatosis type 1 and, 734
syndromes, 245, 250
von Hippel-Lindau disease and, 734
Multiple myeloma, hypercalcemia of
malignancy and, 714, 714t
Multisystem crisis, pheochromocytomas and, 
370
Muscle(s), insulin effects on, 581
Muscle weakness, in Cushing syndrome, 317t, 
318
Mutation(s). See specific types
Myeloma(s)
multiple, hypercalcemia of malignancy and, 
714, 714t
osteosclerotic, 44-45
Myotonic dystrophy, 411
Myxedema
with heart disease, treatment of, 198
pretibial, 199-200, 199f, 200f
Myxedema coma, 763-765, 764f, 764t
clinical setting of, 763
diagnosis of, 763-764, 764f
hypothyroidism and, 195-196
treatment of, 197-198
treatment of, 764-765, 764t
N
NAFLD. See Nonalcoholic fatty
liver disease
NASH. See Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis
Nateglinide, in type 2 diabetes management, 
611t, 613
National Cholesterol Education Program 
(NCEP)–Adult Treatment Panel 
III, 705
Necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum, 641
Necrotizing papillitis, in diabetic patients, 
634t, 637
Needle(s), in insulin administration, 620
Needle biopsy, of benign thyroid nodules, 
216-217
Needlescopic adrenalectomy, in pheochromo-
cytoma/paraganglioma manage-
ment, 386
Negative feedback, follicle-stimulating hor-
mone (FSH) and luteinizing hor-
mone (LH) secretion and, 84
Nelfinavir, glucose and lipid metabolism 
effects of, 797, 798t
Nelson syndrome, 111-112
clinical features of, 111-112
diagnosis of, 112
incidence of, 111
pathogenesis of, 111
treatment of, 112
Neonatal diabetes, 598
Neonatal hypoglycemia, in diabetic patients, 
647
Neonatal severe hypercalcemia, 250
Neonate(s)
gestational diabetes effects on, 646-647, 
646t
of pregnant women with preexisting diabe-
tes, management of, 649-650
Neoplasia(s), multiple endocrine, 723-735. 
See also Multiple endocrine
neoplasia (MEN)
Neoplasm(s)
in AIDS patients
with adrenal disorders, 789-790
with pituitary disorders, 794
with thyroid disorders, 788
cryptorchidism and, 410
gonadal, 500-501, 501t
868    Index
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, 120
Nephropathy(ies), diabetic, 634t, 637
during pregnancy, 647-648
Nephrosis
seondary hypercholesterolemia associated 
with, 688
secondary hypertriglyceridemia associated 
with, 686
Nephrotic syndrome, 273-274
Nervous system, hormone relationship to, 2-3
Neuroblastoma(s), 360, 377
Neuroendocrine cell tumors, amine precursor 
uptake and decarboxylation 
(APUD) concept of, 712
Neuroendocrine control, mechanisms of,
291-292, 291f
Neuroendocrine messengers, 65-66, 66t
Neuroendocrine tumors, pancreatic
exploration for, technique of, 822
Neuroendocrinology, 73-74
Neurofibromatosis type 1, multiple endocrine 
organ involvement in, 734
Neuroglycopenia, counter-regulatory response 
to, pathophysiology of, 658-661, 
658f, 659f, 659t, 661t
Neurohypophyseal neurons
genetic abnormalities of, 118
pathologic lesions of, 118-119, 119f
Neurohypophysis, 115-128
Neurologic system, pheochromocytoma 
effects on, 371
Neuromuscular system
hypothyroidism effects on, 195
thyroid hormone effects on, 181
Neuron(s)
neurohypophyseal
genetic abnormalities of, 118
pathologic lesions of, 118-119, 119f
parvicellular, 74
Neuron-specific enolase (NSE), secretion of, 
pheochromocytomas and
paragangliomas in, 368
Neuropathy(ies)
diabetic, 634t, 638-640. See also Diabetic 
neuropathy
peripheral, isolated, 634t, 638
Neuropeptide Y (NPY), secretion of,
pheochromocytomas and
paragangliomas in, 368
Neuropharmacologic agents, GH secretion 
effects of, 80, 80t
Neuropsychiatric disease, thyroid function in, 197
Neurotransmitter(s)
actions of, 2, 3f
cholinergic, in counter-regulatory response 
to hypoglycemia, 660
Neurotransmitter receptors, 6-7, 7f, 7t
Neutral Protamine Hagedorn (NPH), 619
Nevirapine, glucose and lipid metabolism 
effects of, 797, 798t
Newborn(s)
hypothyroidism in, 193
transient hyperinsulinism in, 670
NF-1. See von Recklinghausen
neurofibromatosis
NF-1 gene mutation, 364, 364t
Niacin, in hyperlipoproteinemia management, 
695
Nicotionic acid, in hyperlipoproteinemia 
management, 695
NICTH. See Nonislet cell tumor–induced 
hypoglycemia 
Niemann-Pick disease, 692
Nifedipine, in pheochromocytoma/paragan-
glioma management, 383
NIPHS (noninsulinoma pancreatogenous hypo-
glycemia syndrome), 669
Nitric oxide (NO), guanylyl cyclase–linked 
receptors activated by, 16-17, 
17f, 18f
Nitroglycerin, in pheochromocytoma/
paraganglioma management, 385
Nitroprusside, in pheochromocytoma/
paraganglioma management, 385
NNT (number needed to treat), 54
NO. See Nitric oxide
Nodular adrenal hyperplasia, treatment of, 322
Nodule, thyroid, 209, 209t, 215-217, 215t, 
216f, 217f. See also Thyroid
nodules
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)
obesity and, 705-706
secondary hypertriglyceridemia associated 
with, 686
Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH),
secondary hypertriglyceridemia
associated with, 686
Nonchromaffin paragangliomas, 365
Nonchromaffin parasympathetic paragan-
gliomas, 360
Nonendocrine disorders, glucocorticoids for, 
324-325
Nonfunctional pituitary adenomas, 112-113
Nonfunctioning pancreatic tumors, 821-822
Noninsulinoma pancreatogenous hypoglyce-
mia syndrome (NIPHS), 669
Non-islet cell tumor–induced hypoglycemia 
(NICTH), 667-668, 718-719
Nonketotic hyperosmolar coma, 773-775
clinical setting of, 773-774
complications of, 775
diagnosis of, 774
management of, 774-775
Nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibi-
tors, glucose and lipid metabo-
lism effects of, 797, 798t
Nonproliferative retinopathy, 634t, 636
Nontoxic goiter, 209-211, 209t, 210f, 211f
causes of, 209, 209t
clinical features of, 209-211, 210f
course of, 211
differential diagnosis of, 211
imaging studies in, 210-211
laboratory findings in, 210
pathogenesis of, 209
prognosis of, 211
symptoms and signs of, 209-210, 210f
treatment of, 211, 211f
Noonan syndrome, 144t, 145, 410-411
clinical features of, 411
differential diagnosis of, 411
hypergonadotropic hypogonadism and, 542
incidence of, 410
laboratory findings in, 411
symptoms and signs of, 411
treatment of, 411
Norepinephrine
conversion to epinephrine, 348-349
deficiency of, disorders causing, 357-358, 
357t
Norethindrone, chemical structure of, 465f
Norethynodrel, chemical structure of, 465f
Norgestimate, chemical structure of, 465f
NPH (Neutral Protamine Hagedorn), 619
NPY. See Neuropeptide Y 
NRs. See Nuclear receptor(s)
NSE. See Neuron-specific enolase
Nuclear receptor(s) (NRs), 18-25
DNA recognition elements for, 20t
posttranslational modification of, 24
steroid receptor family, 18-21, 19f,
20f, 20t
thyroid receptor family, 21-25, 22f, 23f
Nucleus(i), hypothalamic, functions of, 72t
Number needed to treat (NNT), defined, 54
Nutrient(s), insulin effects on, 581-582, 582f
Nutritional factors, in postnatal growth, 140
O
Obesity, 452-453, 699-709
adverse health events related to, 452
causes of, syndromes in, 703t
complications of
adipose tissue as endocrine organ,
703-704
cancer, 706
cardiovascular, 705
dyslipidemia, 705
gastrointestinal, 705-706
gynecologic, 706
insulin resistance, 704-705
mechanisms underlying, 703-704
metabolic syndrome, 705
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease 
(NAFLD), 705-706
pulmonary, 705
reproduction-related, 706
screening and prevention of, 706
type 2 diabetes, 704-705
in Cushing syndrome, 317, 317t
defined, 699, 700
described, 452
epidemiology of, 699-700
genetics of, 702-703, 703t, 704t
health consequences of, 703-706
hypothalamic-pituitary axis evaluation–
related problems and, 89
increased rates of, possible explanations for, 
700
leptin resistance in, 702
management of, 452-453, 706-708, 707t, 
708f
exercise in, 707
screening and prevention of
complications in, 706
weight loss in, 706-708, 707t, 708f
bariatric surgery in, 707-708
in children, 708
Index     869
dietary interventions in, 706
drugs in, 707, 707t
physical activity in, 707
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB) 
procedure in, 708
monogenic, gene mutations related to
leptin-melanocortin system and, 
703, 704t
pathophysiology of, 700-703, 701t, 702f
pregnancy effects of, 568-569
prevalence of, 699-700
projections for, 699-700
type 2 diabetes and, 590t, 591
Octreotide, in pheochromocytoma/
paraganglioma management,
384
Omega-3 fatty acids
in diabetes management, 610
in lipoprotein disorders management, 693
OMI (oocyte maturation inhibitor), 434
Oncogene(s), in fetal growth, 130
Oncogenic osteomalacia, 720-721
Onycholysis, 201, 201f
Oocyte(s), depletion of, during menopause, 
455-456, 456f
Oocyte maturation inhibitor (OMI), 434
Oophoritis, autoimmune, 41
Open laparotomy, in pheochromocytoma/
paraganglioma management, 386
Ophthalmopathy. See also Eye(s); Eye
problems
hypothyroidism and, treatment of, 205
Opportunistic infections, in AIDS patients
with adrenal disorders, 789-790
with pituitary disorders, 794
with thyroid disorders, 788
Oral glucose tolerance test, in diabetes
mellitus evaluation, 602t, 605
Oral hypoglycemic agents, for type 2 diabetes, 
746t
Oral sodium loading test, in primary
aldosteronism diagnosis, 335
Orchitis, autoimmune, 41
Orlistat
in obesity management, 707t
in type 2 diabetes management, 624-625
Orthostasis, pheochromocytomas and, 370
Osmolality, normal ranges for, 838t
Osteitis deformans, 277-280, 278f, 279f, 279t. 
See also Paget disease of bone
Osteoblast(s), 260, 260f
Osteocalcin, normal ranges for, 838t
Osteoclast(s), 260-261, 260f, 261f
Osteocyte(s), 259f, 260
Osteodystrophy(ies)
Albright hereditary, 255
hepatic, 274
renal, 280-281, 280f. See also Renal
osteodystrophy
Osteogenesis imperfecta, 276
Osteomalacia, 271-273, 272f-274f, 272t
axial, 277
calcium deficiency and, 276
causes of, 272t
clinical features of, 272-273, 272f
defined, 271
diagnosis of, 271-272
drug-induced, 274
imaging studies in, 273, 273f
laboratory findings in, 272-273
oncogenic, 720-721
pathogenesis of, 271, 272t
symptoms and signs of, 272, 272f
treatment of, 273
tumor-induced, 275
Osteonecrosis, in AIDS patients, 792
Osteopenia, 266
in AIDS patients, 791
Osteoporosis, 262-271
in AIDS patients, 791
bone mineral density (BMD) in, 266
bone gain in, 263-264, 264f, 264t
bone loss in, 263-265, 264f, 264t
estrogen deficiency and, 264f, 265
bone maintenance in, 263-264,
264f, 264t
bone physiology in, factors affecting,
751-752, 752f, 753f
in Cushing syndrome, 317t, 318
defined, 750
described, 262-263
diagnosis of, 265-266, 265f
in the elderly, 750-757
architectural changes and, 752, 753f
bone loss and, 752, 753f
evaluation of, 753-755, 754f, 755f
treatment of, 755-757
bisphosphonates in, 755-756
calcitonin in, 756
calcium in, 755
denosumab in, 756
estrogen in, 756
exercise in, 755
hip protectors in, 756
kyphoplasty in, 756
selective estrogen receptor modolators 
(SERMs) in, 756
teriparatide in, 756
vertebroplasty in, 756
vitamin D in, 755
deficiency and, 751-752, 752f
fractures related to, 262-263, 263t,
750-751, 751f, 751t
glucocorticoid-induced, 270-271
described, 270
pathophysiology of, 270
prevention of, 270-271
treatment of, 270-271
menopause and, 459-460
prevalence of, 262
primary, 262
risk factors for, 751, 751f, 751t
secondary, 262, 263t
treatment of, 266-270, 266t, 267t, 459
androgens in, 269
antiresorptive agents in, 267-269, 267t
bisphosphonates in, 268
bone-forming agents in, 269
calcitonin in, 268
calcitriol in, 267
calcium in, 267, 267t
denosumab in, 268-269
estrogen in, 267-268
nonpharmacologic, 269-270
pharmacologic approaches to, 266t
RANK-L inhibition in, 268-269
selective estrogen receptor modolators 
(SERMs) in, 268
vitamin D in, 267
Osteosclerotic myeloma, 44-45
Outflow tract disorders, 454-455
Ovarian amenorrhea, 442-445, 443f
described, 442-443
Ovarian determination, genes involved in, 
483f, 484-485
Ovarian differentiation, 485-489, 485f,
487f-491f
Ovarian failure
diagnosis of, 442-443
primary, hypergonadotropic hypogonadism 
and, 541-542
Ovarian function, disorders of, in AIDS 
patients, 793-794
Ovarian hormones, 426
of pregnancy, 555, 556f-557f
Ovary(ies)
aging of, 455, 456f
anatomy of, 424-425
embryology of, 424-425
follicular development in, 431-432, 431f
hormones secreted by, 426
in menstrual cycle, 430-435, 430f, 431f, 
433f, 434f
polycystic, 446
steroidogenesis of, 426-427, 426f, 427t, 428t
Ovotesticular DSDs, 493, 500-501, 501t
Ovulation
progestin effects on, 466, 467f
during puberty, 534
timing of, 553
Ovulation induction, in hypothalamic-
pituitary dysfunction, 99
Ovulatory disorders, infertility and, 461-462
management of, 463
Oxygen consumption, thyroid hormone 
effects on, 179
Oxyphil adenomas, 215
Oxyphil cell, 229
Oxytocin, 126
actions of, 126
during lactation, 126
during parturition, 126, 563
P
Paget disease of bone, 277-280, 278f, 279f, 
279t
causes of, 277
clinical features of, 278
complications of, 278-279, 279t
described, 277
genetic forms of, 277-278
imaging studies in, 278, 278f, 279f
laboratory findings in, 278
pathogenesis of, 277
pathology of, 277
symptoms and signs of, 278
treatment of, 279-280
Painful diabetic neuropathy, 634t, 638-639
870    Index
Painless thyroiditis, 213
Pancreas
anatomy of, 574-575, 575f, 575t, 818-819
described, 574
embryology of, 818-819
endocrine, 574, 818-822, 820t. See also 
Endocrine pancreas
histology of, 574-575, 575f, 575t
hormones of, 575-586. See also specific 
types, e.g., Insulin
ghrelin, 586
glucagon, 583-585, 583f, 585t
insulin, 575-583, 576f-578f, 579t,
580f-582f, 581t
pancreatic polypeptide, 586
somatostatin, 585-586, 586f
maternal, during pregnancy, 559, 561
Pancreas transplantation, in insulin
administration, 621
Pancreatic β cell(s)
autosomal dominant, 593-595, 594t
genetic defects of, 595-596
autosomal dominant, 593-595, 594t
Pancreatic β-cell tumors, 663-667, 665t, 666f
Pancreatic cholera, 721
Pancreatic peptides, in food intake regulation, 
701, 701t
Pancreatic polypeptides, 586
normal ranges for, 838t
Pancreatic surgery, complications of, 822
Pancreatic tumors, nonfunctioning, 821-822
Pancreatitis, hypertriglyceridemias and, causes 
of, 681
Papillary carcinoma
pathology of, management of, 219-221, 
221f
of thyroid gland, pathology of, 217-218
Papillitis, necrotizing, in diabetic patients, 
634t, 637
PAR (pseudoautosomal region), 480
Paracrine effects, of insulin, 580
Paraganglia, 345-393. See also 
Paraganglioma(s); 
Pheochromocytoma(s)
anatomy of, 346-347, 346f
blood supply to, 347
gross structure, 346
microscopic structure, 346-347
nerve supply to, 347
described, 345-346
disorders of, 355f, 357-358, 357t, 358f
epinephrine deficiency, 355f, 357-358, 
357t, 358f
norepinephrine deficiency, 355f,
357-358, 357t, 358f
embryology of, 346, 346f
hormones of, 347-357
catecholamines, 347-357. See also 
Catecholamine(s)
Paraganglioma(s), 358-391
cardiac, 371
defined, 346-347
described, 358-359
genetic conditions associated with,
361-366, 361t, 363t, 364t, 366t
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, 366
Carney triad, 366
familial paraganglioma syndrome type 2, 
366
familial paraganglioma/pheochromocy-
toma syndromes, 364-366, 366t
KIF1B gene mutations, 366
MEN 2, 361-362, 361t
NF-1, 364, 364t
PHD2 gene mutations, 366
von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease,
362-364, 363t
glomus jugulare, 360, 365
glomus tympanicum, 365
head-neck, 365
incidence of, 359-360, 359f, 359t
management of, 382-386
medical, 382-384
manifestations of, 368-372, 369t
metastatic, 387-391, 387t, 390f
nonchromaffin, 365
nonchromaffin parasympathetic, 360
normotension despite high plasma levels of 
norepinephrine with, 372
pathology of, 387
pathophysiology of, 366-367, 367f
peptide secretion by, 367-368, 367t
prognosis of, 391
screening for, 360-361, 361t
vagal, 365
in von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease, 364
Paralysis, periodic, thyrotoxic, 201-202,
766-767, 766f, 767t. See also 
Thyrotoxic periodic paralysis
Parasympathetic preganglionic nerves, 345
Parathyroid disease, during pregnancy, 569
Parathyroid gland
anatomy of, 228-229, 811
embryology of, 228-229, 811
maternal, during pregnancy, 559, 560f-561f
surgery of
complications of, 815
indications for, hyperparathyroidism
familial, 815
primary, 811-814, 812f, 813t
secondary, 814-815
thyroidectomy, 811-815, 812f, 813t, 
814f
Parathyroid hormone (PTH), 228-234,
229f-234f
assays of, 231-232
biologic effects of, 232
clearance and metabolism of, 231
immunoradiometric assay for, clinical
utility of, 244f
mechanism of action of, 232-233
in mineral homeostasis control, 241-258
normal ranges for, 838t
PTHrP, 233
secretion of, 229-230, 229f
synthesis and processing of, 230-231, 231f, 
232f
Parathyroid hormone (PTH)–related protein, 
normal ranges for, 838t
Parathyroidectomy
bilateral versus unilateral approach to,
813-814
conduct of, 813
rationale and guidelines for, 812-813,
813t
subtotal versus total, with autotransplanta-
tion, 814
Paroxysm(s), pheochromocytomas and, 369
Partial ACTH deficiency, assessment of, in 
adrenocortical insufficiency diag-
nosis, 309-310
Parturition. See also Labor and delivery
endocrine control of, 563
oxytocin during, 126
Parvicellular neurons, 74
Pathologic uterine distention, during preterm 
birth (PTB), 564, 564f
Patient education, in diabetes mellitus
management, 622-623
PCOS. See Polycystic ovarian syndrome
PCSK9 variants, 692
Peau d’orange, 201
Pelvic disorders, infertility and, 462-463
management of, 463
Pemberton sign, 210, 210f
Pen injector devices, in insulin
administration, 621
Penis
anatomic defects of, male infertility–
related, treatment of, 415
development of, 528, 530f
micropenis, 517-518, 517t, 518t
Peptic ulcer, glucocorticoid effects on, 299
Peptide(s)
ACTH-related, 76-78, 76f, 77f. See also 
Adrenocorticotropic hormone
angiotensin, production of, renin-
angiotensin system in, 330, 331f
of insulin, normal ranges for, 826t
in insulin biosynthesis, 577
gastrointestinal, in food intake regulation, 
701, 701t
glucagon-related, 584-585, 585t
pancreatic, in food intake regulation, 701, 
701t
secretion of, pheochromocytomas and 
paragangliomas in, 367-368, 367t
vasoactive intestinal, normal ranges for, 
843t
Peptide hormone receptors, 6-7, 7f, 7t
Peptide hormones, nuclear action of, 18
Periodic paralysis, thyrotoxic, 201-202,
766-767, 766f, 767t. See also 
Thyrotoxic periodic paralysis
Peripheral B cell tolerance, 34f, 35
Peripheral deiodinases, in thyroid function 
control, 177
Peripheral glucose metabolism, glucocorticoid 
effects on, 295t, 297
Peripheral neuropathy
in diabetic patients, 634t, 638-639
isolated, 634t, 638
Peripheral vascular disease, in diabetic 
patients, 634t, 641
Peripheral vasospasm, pheochromocytomas 
and, 370
Peripubertal gonadotropin increase, 532-533
Peristalsis, intestinal, hypothyroidism and, 194
Index     871
Permanent neonatal diabetes (PMDM), 598
Peroxisome proliferator–activated receptor 
agonists, in type 2 diabetes
management, 611t, 614-615
Persistent hyperinsulinism, 670-672, 670t.
See also Hyperinsulinism, con-
genital, persistent
Persistent hyperprolactinemia, prolactinomas 
and, 441
Persistent Müllerian duct syndrome, 516
Pertussis toxin, G proteins and, 12
PET. See Positron emission tomography
P450 aromatase deficiency, 508-509
P450 oxidoreductase, 508
P450c11 hydroxylase deficiency, 506
P450c17 deficiency, 511-512
P450c21 hydroxylase deficiency, 504-506
nonclassic, 505-506
with virilization alone, 504-505
with virilization and salt loss, 504
P450scc, 510-511
PHD2 gene mutations. See Prolyl hydroxylase 
domain 2 (PHD2) gene mutations
Phenoyxbenzamine, in pheochromocytoma/
paraganglioma management, 
382-383
Phentermine, in obesity management, 707t
Phentolamine, in pheochromocytoma/paragan-
glioma management, 384-385
γ-Phenylalanine derivative, in type 2 diabetes 
management, 611t, 613
Pheochromocytoma(s), 324, 358-391, 817
biochemical testing for, 372-376
catecholamines, 374-375, 376t
CgA, 375
described, 372-373
dopamine, 374-375, 376t
metanephrines, 373-374, 376t
misleading, factors causing, 376, 376t
plasma renin activity, 375
suppression and stimulation testing, 375
urine VMA, 375
black, 359
characteristics of, 817
in children, 371
defined, 346-347
described, 358-359, 817
diagnosis of, 817
adrenal percutaneous fine-needle aspira-
tion biopsy in, 382
differential diagnosis of, 376-377, 377t
genetic conditions associated with,
361-366, 361t, 363t, 364t,
366t
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, 366
Carney triad, 366
familial paraganglioma/pheochromocy-
toma syndromes, 364-366, 366t
familial paraganglioma syndrome type 2, 
366
KIF1B gene mutations, 366
MEN 2, 361-362, 361t
NF-1, 364, 364t
PHD2 gene mutations, 366
von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease,
362-364, 363t
incidence of, 359-360, 359f, 359t
incidentally discovered, 381-382
localization studies for, 377-381
CT, 378, 378f
MIBG scanning, 379-380, 379f, 379t
MRI, 378-379
PET, 380-381, 380f
somatostatin receptor imaging with
111-In-octreotide, 381
ultrasound, 381
venous sampling for catecholamines, 
367f, 381
malignant, manifestations of, 372
management of, 382-386
activities to avoid in, 384
anesthesia in, 385
drugs to avoid in, 385
foods to avoid in, 384
medical, 382-384
resection in, therapy for shock occurring 
after, 386
surgical, 384-386, 817
manifestations of, 368-372, 369t
in MEN 2, 730
metastatic, 387-391, 387t, 390f
bisphosphonates in, 389
growth rate assessment of, 388
management of, 389-391, 390f
arterial embolization in, 389
chemotherapy in, 389
131-I-MIBG therapy in, 390-391, 390f
radiation therapy in, 389
RF ablation in, 389
sites of, 387t, 388
surveillance of, 388-389
non–head-neck, 359-360, 359f
normotension despite high plasma levels of 
norepinephrine with, 372
pathology of, 387
pathophysiology of, 366-367, 367f
peptide secretion by, 367-368, 367t
postoperative long-term surveillance of, 391
during pregnancy, 372, 386-387
prognosis of, 391
screening for, 360-361, 361t
unsuspected, death in patients with, causes 
of, 359, 359t
in women, manifestations of, 372
Phosphate, in diabetic ketoacidosis
management, 630-631
Phosphate homeostasis, in AIDS patients, 
789t, 792
Phosphatonin, 275
Phospholipase A2, 10
Phospholipase D, 10
PHP. See Primary hyperparathyroidism
Physical activity
in glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis
prevention and treatment, 271
increased, delayed puberty and, 569
in obesity management, 707
Phytosterolemia, 692
Pineal gland, circumventricular organs, 75, 
75f, 76f
Pioglitazone, in type 2 diabetes management, 
611t, 614-615
Pituitary adenomas, 99-113. See also specific 
types
acromegaly, 105-109, 106t, 107f
ACTH-secreting, 109-111
clinical features of, 110
described, 109
diagnosis of, 110
pathogenesis of, 110
pathology of, 109-110
treatment of, 110-111
medical, 111
radiotherapy in, 111
surgical, 110-111
α subunit–secreting, 112
in Cushing disease, 314
described, 99-100, 100t
diagnosis of, 441
gigantism, 105-109, 106t, 107f
gonadotropin-secreting, 112
in MEN 1, 724
Nelson syndrome, 111-112
nonfunctional, 112-113
prolactinomas, 101-105
thyrotropin-secreting, 112
treatment of, 100-101, 103-105
follow-up care, 101
medical, 101
radiotherapy in, 100-101
surgical, 100
types of, 99-113
Pituitary-adrenal reserve, in adrenal androgen 
evaluation, 302-303
Pituitary amenorrhea, 440-442
anatomic causes of, 442
endocrine causes of, 440-442
genetic causes of, 440
Pituitary apoplexy, 769
clinical setting of, 769
diagnosis of, 769
management of, 769
Pituitary carcinoma, 113
Pituitary deiodinases, in thyroid function 
control, 177
Pituitary disorders, 91-92
in AIDS patients, 794
causes of, 91-92
manifestations of, 91-92
during pregnancy, 567-568
Pituitary function
anterior, in AIDS patients,
794
posterior, in AIDS patients, 794
Pituitary gigantism, 161
Pituitary gland, 65-114
aging effects on, 458
anatomy of, 66-68, 67f, 68f
anterior, in Cushing disease, 314
blood supply to, 67f-69f, 68
development of, 68-70, 70f, 71t
embryology of, 66-68, 67f, 68f
histology of, 68-70, 70f, 71t
maternal, during pregnancy, 559
in menstrual cycle, 428-429
posterior, 115-128
pathophysiology of, 117-118
venous drainage of, 69f
872    Index
Pituitary hormones
adenohypophysial, 71t
anterior, 75-78, 76f, 77f
fetal, 562
in puerperium, 566
Pituitary hypersecretion, pituitary disorders 
and, 92
Pituitary insufficiency, pituitary disorders and, 
92
Pituitary stimulation, in ACTH evaluation, 
85, 87-88
Placenta, in growth, 130
Placental bed, microanatomy of, 554f
Plasma
hormone binding in, in hormone level
regulation in plasma, 4, 5f
hormone levels in, regulation of, 4-5, 5f
seminal, antibodies to, male infertility–
related, treatment of, 415
Plasma ACTH levels, in adrenocortical
insufficiency diagnosis,
309, 310f
Plasma-binding proteins
androgens and, 292
cortisol and, 292
Plasma-fractionated free metanephrines, in pheo-
chromocytoma testing, 373-374, 
376t
Plasma free cortisol, in adrenal androgen
evaluation, 300-301
Plasma free metanephrine, levels of, 374
Plasma lipoproteins
abnormal patterns of, clinical
differentiation of, 680-681
in lipid transport, 676, 676t, 677f
Plasma renin activity, in pheochromocytoma 
testing, 375
Plasma steroids, in women, production-, 
secretion-, and metabolic clear-
ance rates of, 427, 428t
PLC beta (PLCβ), 9-10, 10f
Plummer disease, 206-207, 207f
PMDM (permanent neonatal diabetes),
598
POEMS syndrome, 44-45
POF. See Premature ovarian failure
Polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS),
445-451, 445t, 447f-449f,
450t
biochemical abnormalities associated with, 
450
characteristics of, 447
diagnosis of, 445-446, 445t
hyperandrogenism and, 446-447, 447f,
448f
hyperinsulinemia and, 449-450, 449f,
450t
management of, 450-451
obesity-related infertility associated with, 
706
pathogenesis of
adrenal gland in, 448-449
intraovarian modulators in, 448,
449f
prevalence of, 445
risks associated with, 450
Polydipsia, primary, ingestion of excess fluid 
and normal urine excretion and, 
118
Polyglandular failure syndrome, 195
Polyglandular syndromes, autoimmune, 
42-44, 43t
APS-I, 42-43, 43t
APS-II, 43-44, 43t
management of, 44
Polyhydramnios, diabetes during pregnancy 
effects on, 646-647
Polyneuropathy, distal symmetric, 634t, 638
Polypeptide(s), pancreatic, 586
normal ranges for, 838t
Polypeptide hormones
benign and malignant tumors and their 
associated endocrinopathies and, 
712, 712t
during pregnancy, 555-558, 556f-557f
chorionic, 558
human placental lactogen, 555, 557f, 
558
Polyuria, in Cushing syndrome, 317t, 318
Positive feedback, FSH and LH secretion and, 
84
Positron emission tomography (PET), of 
pheochromocytoma, 380-381, 
380f
Postabsorptive state, euglycemia in,
maintenance of, 660, 661t
Postcoital contraception, 475
Posterior pituitary, 115-128
Postnatal growth, 132-140. See also Growth, 
postnatal
Postpartum thyroiditis, 213
Postprandial syndrome, 669-670
Postterm pregnancy, 565-566
management of, 565-566
Posttherapy scan, 220
Potassium, in diabetic ketoacidosis
management, 630
Potassium-aldosterone feedback loop, 329, 
330f
Prader-Willi syndrome, 144t, 145-146
delayed puberty and, 538-539
obesity due to, 703t
Pramlintide, in type 2 diabetes management, 
611t, 617
Prealbumin, thyroxine-binding, in thyroid 
hormone transport, 170
Precocious puberty, 554-551. See also Puberty, 
precocious
Precocity
contrasexual, 545
incomplete
in boys, 547
in girls, 548
isosexual, 545
sexual, 554-551. See also Puberty,
precocious
Preconception counseling, for pregnant 
women with preexisting diabetes,
648
Predictive values, in clinical epidemiology, 51, 
52f
Preeclampsia, 569-570
clinical features of, 570
described, 569
pathophysiology of, 569-570
risk factors for, 569
symptoms and signs of, 569
Preganglionic nerves
parasympathetic, 345
sympathetic, 345-346
Pregnancy
conception in, 553-555, 554f
in diabetic patients, 644, 646-652, 646t, 
649t-651t. See also Diabetes mel-
litus, pregnancy in patients with
eclampsia in, 569-570
endocrine changes associated with, 553
endocrine disorders during, 567-569
endocrine function tests effects of,
559, 561t
endocrinology of, 553-571
estrogens during, 557f, 558-559
fertilization in, 553-554
fetal-placental-decidual unit in, 555
growth factors during, 558
hyperparathyroidism in, 569
hypertension effects of, 341
hyperthyroidism in, 567
hypoparathyroidism in, 569
hypothyroidism in, 567
implantation in, 554-555, 554f
maternal adaptation to, 559-562,
560f-561f, 561t
adrenal cortex, 561
pancreas, 559, 561
parathyroid gland, 559, 560f-561f
pituitary gland, 559
thyroid gland, 559, 560f-561f
maternal serum hormone changes during, 
556f-557f
obesity effects on, 568-569
ovarian hormones of, 555, 556f-557f
parathyroid disease and, 569
pheochromocytomas during, 372,
386-387
pituitary disorders in, 567-568
polypeptide hormones during, 555-558, 
556f-557f. See also Polypeptide
hormones, during pregnancy
postterm, 565-566
management of, 565-566
preeclampsia in, 569-570
progesterone during, 558
steroid hormones during, 558-559
symptoms and signs of, 555
thyroid function in, 181-182
thyrotoxicosis during, treatment of,
205-206
after treatment for unexplained infertility, 
464, 464t
unplanned, prevalence of, 464
vasopressin increase during, diabetes
insipidus due to, 119-120
Pregnanetriol, normal ranges for, 838t
Pregnenolone, normal ranges for,
838t
Premature adrenarche, 549
Premature menarche, 548
Index     873
Premature ovarian failure (POF), 443-445,
443f
autoimmune origin of, 444
defined, 443
genetic origin of, 443-444, 443f
iatrogenic causes of, 444
resistant ovary syndrome and, 444
Premature thelarche, 548
Prematurity, SGA and, 144t, 145
Preproinsulin, 575, 576f
Preproparathyroid hormone, structure of, 
230, 230f
Pre-T cells, 28-29
Preterm birth (PTB), 563-565, 564f
decidual hemorrhage and coagulation
during, 564-565, 564f
described, 563-564, 564f
fetal stress during, 564, 564f
maternal stress during, 564, 564f
mechanistic pathways leading to, 564, 564f
pathologic uterine distention during, 564, 
564f
Preterm labor, management of, 565
Pretibial myxedema, 199-200, 199f, 200f
Primary adrenal tumors, 314
Primary cortisol resistance, 340
Primary hyperaldosteronism, 815-816
Primary hyperparathyroidism (PHP),
244-250, 246f, 247f, 811-814, 
812f, 813t, 814f
causes of, 244-245
clinical features of, 245-248, 246f, 247f
described, 244
diagnostic tests for, 812, 812f
hypercalcemia due to, 244-250, 246f, 247f
laboratory findings in, 248
nonspecific features of, 248
pathogenesis of, 244-245
persistent, 814, 814f
prevalence of, 811
recurrent, 814, 814f
symptoms and signs of, 243f, 245-248, 
246f, 247f, 811-812
treatment of, 248-249
surgical, 812-814, 813t
variants of, 249-250
Primary macroadenomas, defined, 99
Primary microadenomas, defined, 99
Primary polydipsia, ingestion of excess fluid 
and normal urine excretion and, 
118
Primordial follicles, 424, 430
Progeria, 692
Progesterone
aging effects on, 457, 457t
chemical structure of, 466f
in hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunction, 99
normal ranges for, 839t
during pregnancy, 558
Progestin(s)
injectable, in contraception, 470-471, 471f, 
472t
ovulation effects of, 466, 467f
steroidogenesis effects of, 466, 467f
Progestin-only pills, contraceptive, 469-470, 
469f
Progestogen(s), maternal source of,
509-516
Proinsulin, 575-576
composition of, 575, 576f
normal ranges for, 839t
Prolactin, 80-82, 82t
biosynthesis of, 80
deficiency of, hypopituitarism and, 96
evaluation of, 88
in hypopituitarism diagnosis, 97
function of, 80-81
hypersecretion of, 101
measurements of, 81
indications for, 101, 101t
in testicular function evaluation, 402, 
402t
normal ranges for, 839t
in puerperium, 566
secretion of
episodic, 81-82, 82t
factors affecting, 81-82, 82t
Prolactin receptors, cytokine-related, 14-15, 
15f
Prolactin-releasing factors, 72
in prolactin secretion, 81, 82t
Prolactinoma(s), 101-105
clinical features of, 101-102
diagnosis of, 103
differential diagnosis of, 102-103
pathology of, 101
persistent hyperprolactinemia due to, 441
treatment of
dopamine agonists in, 103-104
radiotherapy in, 104
selection of, 104-105
surgical, 104
Proliferative retinopathy, 634t, 636
Prolyl hydroxylase domain 2 (PHD2) gene 
mutations, 366
Prostaglandin(s), during parturition, 563
Protease inhibitors, glucose and lipid
metabolism effects of, 797, 798t
Protein(s). See also specific types
binding, for vitamin D metabolites,
236-237
CREB–binding, 21, 24
GH binding, normal rages for, 832t
glucose transporter, insulin and, 580f,
582-583
plasma-binding
androgens and, 292
cortisol and, 292
PTH–related, normal ranges for, 838t
Proteinuria, in diabetes mellitus evaluation, 
601-602
Proteolysis
of thyroglobulin secretion, 167f,
168, 169f
of thyroid hormone secretion, 167f, 168, 
169f
Proton stereotactic radiotherapy, in pituitary 
adenoma management, 101
Protooncogene(s), RET, in MEN 2, 361-362, 
361t
Pseudoautosomal region (PAR), 480
Pseudo-Cushing syndrome, 320
Pseudohermaphroditism
female, 492t, 501-508, 502f, 503t
congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) 
and, 501-504, 502f, 503t
feto-placental source in, 508
glucocorticoid receptor gene mutation 
in, 508
P450c21 hydroxylase deficiency and, 
503-506. See also P450c21
hydroxylase deficiency
treatment of, 506-508
male, 492t, 509
Pseudohypoparathyroidism
clinical features of, 255-256, 255f
described, 255
diagnosis of, 256
genetics of, 256
hypocalcemia due to, 255-256, 255f, 256t
pathophysiology of, 255-256, 256t
short stature associated with, 157-158
type 1, 12
Pseudoshock, pheochromocytomas and, 370
Pseudo-Turner syndrome, 144t, 145
hypergonadotropic hypogonadism and, 542
Pseudovaginal perineoscrotal hypospadias, 
peripheral, 513
Pseudovitamin D deficiency, hypocalcemia 
due to, 257
Psychologic disturbances, in Cushing
syndrome, 317t, 318
Psychologic factors, in postnatal growth, 140
Psychologic management, of GH deficiency, 
155
Psychosexual differentiation, 489
Psychosocial dwarfism, 156, 156f
PTB. See Preterm birth
PTH. See Parathyroid hormone
PTHrP, 233
propylthiouracil (PTU), for Graves disease, 203
Puberty, 527-552
absent, 535
adrenarche during, 534-535, 534t
delayed, 535-545
classification of, 535, 535t
constitutional delay in, 356f, 535
defined, 535
differential diagnosis of, 542-543, 542t
hypergonadotropic hypogonadism in,
540-542. See also Hypogonadism, 
hypergonadotropic
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism in, 535-
540. See also Hypogonadism, 
hypogonadotropic
radiation therapy and, 537
treatment of, 543-545
bone mass–related, 545
coexisting GH deficiency–related, 544
constitutional delay–related, 543-544
permanent hypogonadism–related, 544
described, 527
development during, variations in, 548-549
endocrine changes in, 531-534
GnRH stimulation, 533
sex steroid secretion, 533
leptin and, 533-534
menarche in, 534
874    Index
Puberty (Cont.):
metabolic changes during, 535
ovulation in, 534
physical changes associated with, 527-531, 
528f-531f
age at onset of, 529-530
body composition–related, 528, 530f
in females, 528, 528f, 529f
growth spurt, 530-531
in males, 528, 530f
physiology of, 527-535
precocious, 545t, 546f, 550t, 554-551
adrenal rest tissue and, 548
central, 545-547, 546f
CNS disorders, 546-547
constitutional or familial, 546-547
idiopathic, 546, 546f
treatment of, 549-551
virilizing syndrome, 547
classification of, 545, 545t
described, 545
differential diagnosis of, 549, 550t
follicular cysts and, 547
hypothyroidism and, 548
incomplete, 545
treatment of, 551
isosexual
in girls, 547-548
incomplete, in boys, 547
McCune-Albright syndrome and, 548
tall stature related to, 161
treatment of, 549-551
variations in, 548-549
Pubic hair, development of, stages of
in females, 528, 529f
in males, 528, 530f
Puerperium
endocrine changes in, 566
endocrinology of, 566
physiologic and anatomic changes of,
566
uterine changes in, 566
Pulmonary system
hypothyroidism effects on, 194
obesity effects on, 705
pheochromocytoma effects on, 371
thyroid hormone effects on, 180-181
Pyogenic infections of skin, chronic, in
diabetic patients, 641
Q
QALYs (quality-adjusted life years), 57
Quality-adjusted life years (QALYs), 57
R
Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome, 597
Rachitic rosary, 271
Radiation, ionizing, thyroid gland effects of, 
214-215
Radiation therapy. See Radiotherapy
Radioactive iodine
for Graves disease, 203-204
thyroid uptake of, normal ranges for, 842t
Radiofrequency (RF) ablation, in
pheochromocytoma/paragan-
glioma management, 389
Radiographic dyes, renal decompensation after, 
in diabetic patients, 634t, 637-638
Radionuclide imaging, of thyroid gland,
188-189, 188f, 189f
Radiosurgery, gamma knife, in pituitary
adenoma management, 101
Radiotherapy
in acromegaly management, 109
in ACTH-secreting pituitary adenoma 
management, 111
delayed puberty related to, 537
in pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma 
management, 389
in pituitary adenoma management,
100-101
in prolactinoma management, 104
protein stereotactic, in pituitary adenoma 
management, 101
RAIU (radioactive iodine uptake), 842
Raloxifene, in osteoporosis management,
459-460
RANK-L inhibition, in osteoporosis
management, 268-269
Rapid ACTH stimulation test
in adrenocortical insufficiency diagnosis, 
308-309, 309f, 310f
in hypothalamic-pituitary function
evaluation, 86t
Ratio(s)
cortisol-corrected, 336, 338f
likelihood, in clinical epidemiology, 51, 53f
Reactive hypoglycemia, 668-670, 669t
Recalcification tetany, 778
Receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) 
curves, in clinical epidemiology, 
50-51, 52f
Recessive abetalipoproteinemia, 691
5α-Reductase-2 deficiency, enzyme defects 
affecting, 513
Reifenstein syndrome, 515-516
Relative risk reduction (RRR), defined, 54
Remodeling process, 262
Renal calculi, in Cushing syndrome, 317t, 
318
Renal cell carcinoma, hypercalcemia of
malignancy and, 714, 714t
Renal failure, acute, hypercalcemia due to, 
252
Renal function, hypothyroidism effects on, 
194
Renal osteodystrophy, 280-281, 280f
clinical features of, 281
pathogenesis of, 280-281, 280f
treatment of, 281
Renal system, diabetes effects on, 634t,
637-638
Renal tubular ionic transport, abnormal, 341
Renin(s)
described, 329
normal ranges for, 839t
in renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, 
329-330, 331f
Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone feedback loop, 
329, 330f
Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system,
329-332, 330f, 330t, 331f
aldosterone in, 331-332, 331f
angiotensin in, 329-330, 331f
angiotensin II in, 330
angiotensinogen in, 330, 331f
Renin-angiotensin system, angiotensin
peptides production by, steps in,
330, 331f
Repaglinide, in type 2 diabetes management, 
611t, 613
Reproducibility, defined, 48
Reproductive system
female
anatomy of, 424-425, 424f, 425f
embryology of, 424-425, 424f, 425f
endocrinology of, 423-477
hypothyroidism effects on, 195
male, 397-400, 398f, 399f, 399t
changes in, aging and, 760-761, 760f, 
761f
gonadal steroids in, 397-399, 398f, 399f, 
399t
testicular function in, 399-400, 399f
obesity effects on, 706
Resistant ovary syndrome, 444
RET mutations
clinical presentations resulting from, 241, 
241t
frequency of, 242, 242t
RET protooncogene, in MEN 2, 361-362, 
361t
Rete testis, 397
Retinopathy(ies)
diabetic, 634t, 636
during pregnancy, 647
nonproliferative, 634t, 636
proliferative, 634t, 636
Retrograde ejaculation, male infertility–
related, treatment of, 415
RF ablation (radiofrequency ablation), 389
Rickets, 271-273, 272f-274f, 272t
clinical features of, 272-273, 272f
defined, 271
hypophosphatemic
autosomal dominant, 275
hereditary, with hypercalciuria, 275-276
imaging studies in, 273, 273f
laboratory findings in, 272-273
pathogenesis of, 271, 272t
symptoms and signs of, 272, 272f
treatment of, 273
vitamin D–resistant, hereditary, 257
Riedel thyroiditis, 212
Ritonavir, glucose and lipid metabolism 
effects of, 797, 798t
ROC curves. See Receiver-operating
characteristic (ROC) curves
Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser syndrome, 542
Rosiglitazone, in type 2 diabetes management, 
611t, 614-615
Roux-en-Y banding, in type 2 diabetes
management, 625
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB) procedure, 
in obesity management, 708
RRR (relative risk reduction), 54
RSPO1 gene, in ovarian determination, 483f, 
484-485
Index     875
Rudimentary testes syndrome, 516
Ruffled border, 261, 261f
RYGB procedure. See Roux-en-Y gastric 
bypass (RYGB) procedure
S
Saccharin, in diabetes management, 610
Salivary cortisol
late-night serum and, in Cushing syndrome 
diagnosis, 319f, 320
levels of, in adrenal androgen evaluation,
300
Sandwich assay, 184
Saquinavir, glucose and lipid metabolism 
effects of, 797, 798t
Sarcoidosis
hypercalcemia due to, 250-251
hypopituitarism and, 95
Satiation, 701
Satiety, 701
Satiety center, 74
Saxagliptin, in type 2 diabetes management, 
611t, 617, 748
Scatchard equation, 6, 6f
SDHB gene mutations, 365
SDHC gene mutations, 365
SDHD gene mutations, 365
Secondary hyperparathyroidism, 814-815
Seip-Berardinelli syndrome, 691
Selective estrogen receptor modulators 
(SERMs), in osteoporosis
management, 268, 459-460, 756
Self-management training, in diabetes
mellitus management, 622-623
Sella turcica, enlarged, pituitary disorders and, 
92
Sellar masses, parasellar masses vs., 100t
Semen analysis, in testicular function
evaluation, 401-402
Semen washing, 792-793
Seminal plasma, antibodies to, male
infertility–related, treatment of, 
415
Seminiferous tubule(s). See specific types
Seminiferous tubule dysgenesis
chromatin-positive, variants of,
494-495
syndrome of, hypergonadotropic
hypogonadism and, 540
Seminiferous tubule failure, in adults,
411-412. See also Adult seminif-
erous tubule failure
Sensitivity
defined, 48
testing of, in clinical epidemiology, 48-50, 
50f, 50t, 51f
Sensitivity analysis, 58
in decision analysis process, 58
Sepsis, acute adrenal insufficiency and, 769
SERMs. See Selective estrogen receptor
modulators
Serpentine receptors, 6-7, 7f, 7t
Sertoli cell only syndrome, 540
Sertoli cell tumors, testicular, 420-422
Serum fructosamine, in diabetes mellitus
evaluation, 605
Serum ketone determinations, in diabetes 
mellitus evaluation, 603
Serum T4 and T3 measurements, 185-187, 
187t
Serum thyroxine determinations, abnormal, 
in euthyroid individuals, 171t
“Seven-transmembrane-domain” receptors, 
6-7, 7f, 7t
72-hour fast, in insulinoma diagnosis,
664-665, 665t
Sex, chromosomal, in human sex differentia-
tion, 480-485, 480f-483f
Sex determination, disorders of, 479-525
classification and nomenclature of, 489, 
491-493, 492t
Sex differentiation. See also specific types, e.g., 
Testicular differentiation
disorders of, 479-525
of external genitalia, 486, 488f-491f
of genital ducts, 486, 487f, 488f
human, 480-485, 480f-483f
chromosomal sex, 480-485, 480f-483f
ovarian, 485-489, 485f, 487f-491f
psychosexual, 489
testicular, 485-489, 485f, 487f-491f
Sex hormone–binding globulin (SHBG), 397
normal ranges for, 839t-840t
Sex steroids
for delayed puberty, 543-544
excess of, 817
described, 817
diagnostic tests for, 817
surgical management of, 817
during parturition, 563
in postnatal growth, 139
secretion of, during puberty, 533
Sexual development
abnormal
in females, unclassified forms of, 518
in males, unclassified forms of, 517-518, 
517t, 518t
disorders of. See Disorders of sexual
development (DSDs)
secondary, normal, primary amenorrhea 
associated with, 542
Sexual precocity, 546f, 545t, 550t, 554-551. 
See also Puberty, precocious
SGA. See Small-for-gestational age
SHBG. See Sex hormone–binding globulin
Shock
after pheochromocytoma resection,
management of, 386
pheochromocytomas and, 370
Short-acting insulin secretagogues, for type 2 
diabetes, 746t
Short stature
chronic disease associated with, 144t,
146-147
constitutional, 144, 144t
diagnosis of, 158-160, 159t
endocrine disorders and, 144t, 147-148, 
156-158
Cushing syndrome, 157
diabetes insipidus, 158
diabetes mellitus, 158
hypothyroidism, 156-157
pseudohypoparathyroidism, 157-158
psychosocial dwarfism, 156, 156f
vitamin D metabolism disorders, 158
evaluation of, 158-160, 159t
familial, 144-145, 144t
gonadal dysgenesis and, 495-500, 496f
malnutrition and, 144t, 147
medications effects on, 144t, 147
nonendocrine causes of, 144-147, 144t
syndromes of, 144t, 145-146
autosomal chromosomal disorders/
syndromes, 144t, 146
Bardet-Biedl syndrome, 144t, 146, 539, 
703t
GH deficiency, 144t, 147-155, 148f, 
151t, 152f-154f. See also Growth
hormone (GH) deficiency
Laurence-Moon syndrome, 144t, 146
Noonan syndrome, 144t, 145
Prader-Willi syndrome, 144t, 145-146
pseudo-Turner syndrome, 144t, 145
skeletal dysplasia, 144t, 146
Turner syndrome, 144t, 145
Shunt(s), cortisol-cortisone, 293-294, 293f
SIADH. See Syndrome of inappropriate 
antidiuretic hormone
Sibutramine
in obesity management, 707t
in type 2 diabetes management, 624
Sick euthyroid syndrome, 201
Signaling, insulin. See Insulin signaling
Signaling pathways, insulin, in transcriptional 
regulation, 579-580, 581f
Silent thyroiditis, 207, 213
Sipple syndrome, genetics of, 362
Sitagliptin, in type 2 diabetes management, 
611t, 617, 748
Skeletal (bone) age, determination of, 143
Skeletal dysplasias, 144t, 146
Skeletal system, thyroid hormone effects on, 
181
Skeleton, glucocorticoid effects on, 270
Skin
chronic pyogenic infections of, in diabetic 
patients, 641
Cushing syndrome effects on,
317, 317t
diabetes effects on, 634t, 641
hypocalcemia effects on, 254
Skin spots, in diabetic patients, 641
Sleep, effect on prolactin secretion,
81-82, 82t
Small-for-gestational age (SGA)
prematurity and, 144t, 145
transient hyperinsulinism in, 670, 670t
Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome, 512
Smoking, atherosclerosis due to, 676
Smooth muscle, extravascular, catecholamine 
effects on, 357
Socioeconomic factors, in postnatal growth, 
138, 140
Sodium bicarbonate, in diabetic ketoacidosis 
management, 630
Somatostatin, 71-72, 585-586, 586f
in GH secretion, 79
location of, 71, 74f
876    Index
Somatostatin (Cont.):
normal ranges for, 840t
in thyrotropin secretion, 83
Somatostatin analogs, for congenital
hyperinsulinism, 673
Somatostatinoma, 821
Somatotroph(s), described, 69, 71t
SOX9 gene, in testicular determination, 483f, 
484
Spasm(s), carpal, hypocalcemic tetany and, 
253, 253f
Specificity
in clinical epidemiology, 48-50, 50f, 50t, 51f
defined, 48
Sperm, antibodies to, male infertility–related, 
treatment of, 415
Spermatogenesis
defects of, male infertility–related, treatment 
of, 414-415
in hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunction, 99
Sphingolipidosis(es), 692
Squamous cell carcinoma, hypercalcemia of 
malignancy and, 713, 714t
SRY gene, in testicular determination,
483-484, 483f
StAR (steroidogenic acute regulatory
protein), 426
Starvation, hypothalamic-pituitary axis evalu-
ation–related problems and, 89
Stavudine, glucose and lipid metabolism 
effects of, 797, 798t
Steatohepatitis, nonalcoholic, secondary 
hypertriglyceridemia associated 
with, 686
Steno-2 study, 608-690
Steroid(s)
adrenal, biologic effects of, 294-299,
295t-296t. See also 
Glucocorticoid(s)
adrenocortical, structure of, 287f
in adrenocortical insufficiency
management, 312, 312t
gonadal, in male reproductive system,
397-399, 398f, 399f, 399t
measurements of, in testicular function 
evaluation, 402, 402t
plasma, in women, production-,
secretion-, and metabolic clear-
ance rates of, 427, 428t
in puerperium, 566
sex. See Sex steroids
Steroid hormone(s)
nongenomic effects of, 25
during pregnancy, 558-559
Steroid hormone receptor resistance
syndromes, 25-26
Steroid receptor complex, signaling through, 
19, 19f
Steroid receptor family, 18-21, 19f, 20f, 20t
Steroid receptor molecule, structural
schematic of, 19f
Steroidogenesis, 287-289, 287f, 290t
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) 
and, 291, 291f
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) 
secretion in, 289-290
androgen synthesis in, 289
cholesterol in
metabolism of, 289
uptake and synthesis of, 288
cortisol synthesis in, 288f, 289-290
corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) 
secretion in, 289-290
intraovarian factors in, 432
ovarian, 426-427, 426f, 427t, 428t
progestin effects on, 466, 467f
zones and, 288, 288f
Steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR), 
426
Steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR) 
deficiency, 509-510
Steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1) gene, in
organogenesis of bipotential 
gonad, 482f, 483
Steroidogenic pathway, components of,
290t
Stiff person syndrome, autoimmune diabetes 
and, 588-589
Stimulation tests, in hypopituitarism
diagnosis, 97
Stimulus-secretion coupling, 229
Stress
ACTH and cortisol secretion and, 291
in the elderly
abnormal response to, 759
glucocorticoids and, 758, 759f, 760f
fetal, during PTB, 564, 564f
maternal, during PTB, 564, 564f
Struma ovarii, 207
Study of Women’s Health Across the Nation 
(SWAN), 458
Subacute thyroiditis, 207, 211-212, 212f.
See also Thyroiditis, subacute
Subclinical hyperthyroidism, 201
Subclinical hypothyroidism, 195
Subdermal implants, in contraception,
472-473
Subfertility, 461
Succinate dehydrogenase gene mutations, 
364-366, 366t
Sulfonylurea(s), in type 2 diabetes manage-
ment, 611t, 612-613,
625, 746t
Sulfonylurea receptor complex, drugs acting 
on, in type 2 diabetes manage-
ment, 611t, 612-613
Sunitinib, in pheochromocytoma/
paraganglioma management, 389
Suppression, active, 32f, 33, 35
Suprarenal gland. See Adrenal gland
SWAN (Study of Women’s Health Across the 
Nation), 458
Sweetener(s), in diabetes management, 610
Sympathetic nervous system, thyroid
hormone effects on, 180
Sympathetic preganglionic nerves, 345-346
Sympathoadrenal activity, regulation of,
catecholamine receptors in, 356
Syndrome of complete androgen resistance, 
514-515
Syndrome of gonadal dysgenesis. See Gonadal 
dysgenesis
Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic
hormone (SIADH), 122-126, 
122t, 123f, 125t
causes of, 124, 125t
clinical syndromes of, 124-125, 125t
described, 122-123, 122t
hyponatremia in
pathophysiology of, 123-124, 123f
treatment of, 125-126
pathophysiology of, vs. diabetes insipidus, 
127t
Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic
hormone (SIADH) secretion,
717-718, 718t
causes of, 718, 718t
clinical features of, 718
described, 717
laboratory features of, 718
pathogenesis of, 718
Syndrome of inappropriate thyroid-stimulat-
ing hormone secretion, 208
Syndrome of partial androgen resistance,
515-516
Syringe(s), in insulin administration, 620
T
T cell(s)
activation of, 29-31, 30f, 31f
antigen recognition by, 30, 30f
pre-, 28-29
tolerance of, 31-35, 32f, 34f
T3. See Triiodothyronine (T3)
T4. See Thyroxine (T4)
Tall stature, 160-161
cerebral gigantism, 160-161
constitutional, 160
endocrine disorders and, 161
familial, 160
nonendocrine causes of, 160
syndromes of, 160-161
Tangier disease, 689
TBG. See Thyroxine-binding globulin
TB-II. See Thyrotropin-binding inhibitory 
immunoglobulin
T-cell receptor (TCR) genes, 28-29, 29f
TCR genes. See T-cell receptor (TCR) genes
10% tumor. See Pheochromocytoma(s)
Tenofovir, glucose and lipid metabolism 
effects of, 797, 798t
Teriparatide, in osteoporosis management, 756
Testicular biopsy, in testicular function
evaluation, 403
Testicular determination, genes involved in, 
483-484, 483f
Testicular differentiation, 485-489, 485f, 
487f-491f
Testicular dysgenesis syndrome, 516
Testicular failure, primary, hypergonadotropic 
hypogonadism and, 540
Testicular function
control of, 399-400, 399f
disorders of, in AIDS patients, 792-793
evaluation of, laboratory tests in, 401-403, 
402t
in male reproductive system, control of, 
399-400, 399f
Index     877
Testicular regression syndrome, 516
Testicular tumors, 420-422
causes of, 420
clinical features of, 420-421
course of, 422
differential diagnosis of, 421
imaging studies in, 421
incidence of, 420
laboratory findings in, 421
pathology of, 420
prevalence of, 420
prognosis of, 422
symptoms and signs of, 420-421
treatment of, 421-422
Testis(es), 395-422. See also specific disorders 
e.g., Anorchia, bilateral
accessory structures, 397
anatomy of, 395-397, 396f
blood supply to, 395
components of, 395
rete, 397
structure-function relationships of,
395-397, 396f
in testosterone biosynthesis, enzyme defects 
primarily affecting, 512-513
Testosterone
biosynthesis of
inborn errors of, 509-512, 510f
testes in, enzyme defects primarily
affecting, 512-513
levels of, in LH and FSH evaluation, 89
normal ranges for, 840t-841t
Tetany
hypocalcemic, carpal spasm due to, 253, 
253f
recalcification, 778
TGF (transforming growth factor), 429
TGF-β receptors. See Transforming growth 
factor beta (TGF-β) receptors
THBR (thyroid hormone–binding ratio), 185
Thelarche, premature, 548
Thiamine-responsive megaloblastic anemia 
syndrome, 596
Thiazide diuretics, hypercalcemia due to, 251
Thiazolidinedione(s), in type 2 diabetes man-
agement, 611t, 614-615, 625, 
746t
Thiocarbamide inhibitors, of thyroidal iodide 
organification, 169f
Thirst, in Cushing syndrome, 317t, 318
Thromboembolic events, nonketotic
hyperosmolar coma and, 775
Thyroglobulin
coupling of iodotyrosyl residues in, in thyroid 
hormone synthesis, 168, 168f
described, 165-166, 167f
iodination of
processes of, 166, 167f
in thyroid hormone synthesis, 167-168
iodine content of, 165
normal ranges for, 841t
secretion of, proteolysis of, 167f, 168, 169f
in thyroid hormone synthesis, 165-166, 167f
Thyroglobulin gene, 165-166, 167f
Thyroid antibodies, normal ranges for,
841t
Thyroid cancer, 217-224, 217t, 219f-221f, 222t, 
223f-224f, 806-808, 806t, 807t
differentiated, 219
course of, 221-224, 222t, 223f-224f
management of, 221-224, 222t, 223f-224f
prognosis of, 221-224, 222t, 223f-224f
surgery for, 806-807, 806t, 807t
in the elderly, 743
lymph nodes in, management of, 808, 809f
management of, 219-224, 221f, 222t, 
223f-224f
surgical, 806-808, 806t, 807t
medullary, surgery for, 807-808
metastatic, surgery for, 808
molecular biology of, 218-219, 219f, 220f
pathology of, 217-219, 217t, 219f, 220f
recurrent, surgery for, 808
undifferentiated, surgery for, 808
Thyroid carcinoma, 207-208
Thyroid cell, function of, TSH effects on, 
176-177
Thyroid dermopathy, pathogenesis of,
199-200, 199f, 200f
Thyroid diseases/disorders, 190-214. See also 
specific disorders
in AIDS patients, 787-789, 788t, 789t
described, 787-788
medication effects, 788-789, 789t
neoplasms, 788
opportunistic infections, 788
prevalence of, 787
thyroid function tests in, alterations in, 
788, 788t
anovulation and, 453-454
autoimmune aspects of, 37-38, 38f
in animal models, 38, 38f
autoimmune response, 37-38
genes and environment, 37
in the elderly, 738-743, 739f, 740f
Graves disease, 198-206
history of, 190-191
hyperthyroidism, 198-209
hypothyroidism, 191-198, 192t, 194f-196f, 
197t
nontoxic goiter, 209-211
physical examination of, 191, 192f
thyroid cancer, 217-224, 217t, 219f-221f, 
222t, 223f-224f
thyroid hormone resistance syndromes, 
208-209
thyroid nodules, 209t, 215-217
thyroiditis, 211-214
thyrotoxicosis, 198-209
Thyroid function tests
in AIDS patients with thyroid disorders, 
alterations in, 788, 788t
in HIV-infected patients, 788, 788t
Thyroid gland, 163-226
abnormalities of, developmental, surgery 
for, 804
anatomy of, 163, 164f, 165f, 803-804
autoantibodies of, measurement of, 190
autoimmune disease of, spectrum of, 213, 213f
autoimmunity of, 183-184
biopsy of, 189-190
biosynthesis of, iodine excess effects on, 169
biosynthetic activity of, 187-188, 187f
cancer metastatic to, pathology of, 218
disorders of, 190-214. See also Thyroid
disorders; specific disorders
dysfunction of, hypertension and, 342
embryology of, 163, 803-804
examination of, 191, 192f
tests in
biopsy, 189-190
imaging tests, 188-189, 188f, 189f
in measurement of thyroid autoanti-
bodies, 190
of peripheral thyroid hormone 
actions, 190
fetal, 562
functions of
acute and chronic illness effects on,
182-183, 182f, 182t
aging effects on, 182
control of, 173-181
in fetus, 181
glucocorticoid effects on, 295t, 299
physiologic changes in, 181-183, 182f, 182t
pituitary and peripheral deiodinases, 177
in pregnancy, 181-182
serum TSH in, 177
tests of, 184-190
serum T4 and T3 measurements,
185-187, 187t
serum TSH measurements, 184-185,
185f-186f, 186t
in thyroid iodine metabolism assess-
ment, 187-188, 187f
thyroid-releasing hormone (TRH) in, 
172t, 173-175, 174f
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) in, 
175-176, 175f, 176f
thyroid stimulators, 177
thyrotropin in, 175-176, 175f, 176f
histology of, 163, 166f
imaging of, 188-189, 188f, 189f
iodine metabolism in, 164-169, 166f-170f. 
See also Iodine, metabolism of
ionizing radiation effects on, 214-215
maternal, during pregnancy, 559, 560f-561f
medullary carcinoma of, 241-242, 241t, 
242t. See also Medullary carci-
noma of thyroid (MCT)
physiology of, 163, 166f
release of, abnormalities in, 168-169
structure of, 163, 166f
surgery of
indications for, 804-811, 804t, 806t, 
807t, 809f-811f
cancer, 217-224, 806-808, 806t, 807t.
See also Thyroid cancer
developmental thyroid abnormalities, 804
goiter, 805
hyperthyroidism, 804-805
thyroid nodules, 805-806
thyroiditis, 805
resections in, types of, 804t
synthesis of, 163, 166f
abnormalities in, 168-169
inherited defects and, 168-169
veins of, 804
878    Index
Thyroid hormone(s)
actions of, 178-181, 178f-180f
control of, 173-181
in blood, tests of, 184-187, 185f-186f, 
186t, 187t
serum T4 and T3 measurements,
185-187, 187t
serum TSH measurement, 184-185, 
185f-186f, 186t
metabolism of, 171-172, 172f, 172t, 173f
peripheral, actions of, test of, 190
physiologic effects of, 179-181, 180f
in postnatal growth, 139
secretion of, 164-168, 166f-170f
synthesis of, 164-168, 166f-170f
thyroidal autoregulation, 177-178
Thyroid hormone-binding ratio (THBR), 185
Thyroid hormone receptor(s) (THRs),
mechanisms of action of,
178-179, 178f, 179f
Thyroid hormone receptor (THR) resistance 
syndromes, 25-26
Thyroid hormone resistance syndromes,
208-209
Thyroid hormone secretion, proteolysis of, 
167f, 168, 169f
Thyroid hormone transport, 169-171, 170f, 
171f, 171t
albumin in, 170-171
thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG) in,
169-170, 171t
transthyretin in, 170
Thyroid iodine
biosynthetic activity of, 187-188, 187f
metabolism in, assessment of, 187-188, 187f
Thyroid lymphoma
pathology of, 218
surgery for, 808
Thyroid metastases, surgery for, 808
Thyroid nodules, 209t, 215-217, 215t, 216f, 
217f
benign, 215-217
causes of, 209, 209t, 215
versus malignant lesions, 215-217, 215t
clinical features in, 216
in elderly, 743
history of, 215
imaging studies in, 216, 216f
malignant, versus benign lesions, 215-217, 
215t
management of, 217, 217f
surgical, 805-806
needle biopsy in, 216-217
serum factors in, 216
Thyroid peroxidase (TPO), in thyroid
hormone synthesis, 167
Thyroid receptor family, 21-25, 22f, 23f
Thyroid-releasing hormone (TRH), in
thyrotropin secretion, 82-83, 83t
Thyroid-releasing hormone (TRH) test
in hypothalamic-pituitary function
evaluation, 86t
in TSH evaluation, 88
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
in control of thyroid function, 175-176, 
176f, 175f
evaluation of, 88
function of, thyroid cell effects on,
176-177
hypopituitarism and, treatment of, 98-99
measurement of, 184-185, 185f-186f, 186t
normal ranges for, 841t
serum, in control of thyroid function, 177
Thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor (TSHR), 
normal ranges for, 841t
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) receptor 
gene mutations, 209
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
secretion
pituitary, control of, 177
syndrome of inappropriate, 208
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)–TSH-R 
complex, schematic configura-
tion of, 175-176, 175f, 176f
Thyroid-stimulation hormone (TSH), deficiency 
of, hypopituitarism and, 96
Thyroid stimulators
in control of thyroid function, 177
inhibitors of, 177
Thyroid storm, 202-203, 765-766, 765t
clinical setting of, 765, 765t
diagnosis of, 765
management of, 204-205, 765-766, 765t
Thyroid uptake of radioactive iodine (RAIU), 
normal ranges for, 842t
Thyroidal autoregulation, in thyroid function 
control, 177-178
Thyroidal iodide organification,
thiocarbamide inhibitors of, 169f
Thyroidectomy
complications of, 809, 811, 815
conduct of, 809-811, 810f, 811f
indications for, 804-811
Thyroiditis, 211-214
chronic, 27, 212-214, 213f. See also 
Hashimoto thyroiditis
lymphocytic, 212-214, 213f
painless, 213
postpartum, 213
Riedel, 212
silent, 207, 213
subacute, 207, 211-212, 212f
clinical features of, 211-212, 212f
course of, 212
differential diagnosis of, 212
prognosis of, 212
treatment of, 212
surgery for, 805
Thyrotoxic crisis, 202-203
treatment of, 204-205
Thyrotoxic periodic paralysis, 201-202,
766-767, 766f, 767t
clinical setting of, 766
diagnosis of, 766, 766f
management of, 766-767, 767t
Thyrotoxicosis, 198-209
amiodarone-induced, 207, 767-768, 767t
clinical setting of, 767
management of, 767-768, 767t
conditions associated with, 198, 198t
forms of, 206-208, 206f, 207f
rare, 207-208
hamburger, 208
during pregnancy, treatment of, 205-206
T3, 201
tall stature and, 161
Thyrotoxicosis factitia, 207
Thyrotroph(s), described, 69-70, 71t
Thyrotropin, 82-83, 83f
biosynthesis of, 82
function of, 82
measurement of, 82
secretion of, 82-83, 83t
neural control of, 83
in thyroid function control, 175-176, 175f, 
176f
Thyrotropin-binding inhibitory immunoglob-
ulin (TB-II), normal ranges for, 
842t
Thyrotropin-blocking antibody, normal 
ranges for, 842t
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), 73
chemical structure of, 174f
location of, 74f
structure of, 73t
in thyroid function control, 172t, 173-175, 
174f
Thyrotropin-secreting pituitary adenomas, 112
Thyroxine (T4)
measurement of, 185-187, 187t
metabolism of, pathways of, 171, 172f
normal ranges for, 842t
Thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG), normal 
ranges for, 842t
Thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG), in thy-
roid hormone transport,
169-170, 171t
Thyroxine-binding prealbumin, in thyroid 
hormone transport, 170
Tipranavir/ritonavir, glucose and lipid
metabolism effects of, 797, 798t
Tissue(s)
adipose, glucocorticoid effects on, 295t, 297
connective, glucocorticoid effects on, 295t, 
297-298
Tissue heterogeneity, in insulin resistance, in 
type 2 diabetes, 592
TNDM (transient neonatal diabetes), 598
TNF receptors. See Tumor necrosis factor 
(TNF) receptors
Tolazamide, in type 2 diabetes management, 
611t, 612
Tolbutamide, in type 2 diabetes management, 
611t, 612
Tolerance, T-cell, 31-35, 32f, 34f
Topiramate, in obesity management,
707t
Torsion, cryptorchidism and, 410
Total metanephrines, 373
Toxic adenoma, 206, 206f
Toxic multinodular goiter, 206-207,
207f
Toxin(s)
cholera, G proteins and, 11
pertussis, G proteins and, 12
TPO. See Thyroid peroxidase
Transcription factors, in early development of 
mouse pituitary, 70f
Index     879
Transcriptional regulation, insulin-related, 
579-580, 581f
Transdermal patch, in contraception,
473-474, 474f
Transducer(s), G protein, 8-9, 8f, 9t
Transforming growth factor (TGF), 429
Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β) 
receptors, cytokine-related, 15, 
16f
Transient neonatal diabetes (TNDM), 598
Transplantation(s)
islet cell, in insulin administration,
621-622
pancreas, in insulin administration, 621
Transthyretin, in thyroid hormone transport, 
170
TR–associated protein (TRAP) complex,
24
TRAP complex (TR–associated protein 
(TRAP) complex, 24
Trauma, cryptorchidism and, 410
Treatment effect heterogeneity, defined, 63
TRH. See Thyrotropin-releasing hormone
Triiodothyronine (T3)
measurement of, 185-187, 187t
normal ranges for, 842t-843t
True hermaphrodites, 443
TSH. See Thyroid-stimulating hormone
TSH-R. See Thyroid-stimulating hormone 
receptor
Tumor(s). See also specific tumors
adrenal
Cushing disease due to, 316
Cushing syndrome due to, 315
pathophysiology of, 317
treatment of, 322
primary, 314
prognosis of, 323
androgen-secreting, hyperandrogenism and, 
452
carotid body, 360, 365
DOC-producing, 340
endocrine, hypercalcemia due to, 251
germ cell
in 46,XY DSDs, 500, 501t
testicular, 420-422
gonadal, 500-501, 501t
gonadotropin-secreting, in boys, 547
hormones secreted by, 719-720
Leydig cell, testicular, 420-422
localization of, in acromegaly diagnosis,
108
neuroendocrine, pancreatic exploration for, 
technique of, 822
neuroendocrine cell, APUD concept of, 
712
osteomalacia due to, 275
pancreatic, nonfunctioning, 821-822
pancreatic β-cell, 663-667, 665t, 666f. See 
also Insulinoma(s)
progression of, prolactinomas and, 102
10%. See Pheochromocytoma(s)
testicular, 420-422. See also Testicular 
tumors
Tumor localization studies, in insulinoma 
diagnosis, 666-667, 666f
Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptors, 
15-16, 16f, 33
Tumoral calcinosis, 281-282
Turner syndrome, 144t, 145, 495-497, 496f. 
See also Gonadal dysgenesis
anomalies associated with, 495, 496f
diagnosis of, 495-496
hypergonadotropic hypogonadism and, 
541
infant, 541
male, 410-411. See also Noonan syndrome
premature ovarian failure (POF) in, 443
prevalence of, 495
short stature in, 495
treatment of, 496-497
24-hour urine-fractionated metanephrines, 
374
Tyrosine, catecholamines synthesized from, 
348
Tyrosine kinase–containing growth factor 
receptors, signaling by, 13, 13f
U
UKPDS. See United Kingdom Prospective 
Diabetes Study
Ulcer(s), peptic, glucocorticoid effects on, 
299
Ullrich syndrome, hypergonadotropic
hypogonadism and, 542
Ultrasonography
of pheochromocytoma, 381
of thyroid gland, 189, 189f
Undifferentiated (anaplastic) carcinoma
pathology of, management of, 224
of thyroid gland, pathology of, 218
Unilateral hyperplasia, surgical treatment of, 
339
United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study 
(UKPDS), 607-608
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force 
(USPSTF), on shortcomings of 
EBM approach, 62, 62t
Universal diet, in lipoprotein disorders
management, 694
Uremia, secondary hypertriglyceridemia
associated with, 685
Urine free cortisol, in Cushing syndrome 
diagnosis, 319-320, 319f
Urine glucose, in diabetes mellitus evaluation, 
601
Urine ketone determinations, in diabetes
mellitus evaluation, 603
Urine vanillymandelic acid (VMA), in pheo-
chromocytoma testing, 375
USPSTF. See U.S. Preventive Services
Task Force
Uterine distention, pathology of, during PTB, 
564, 564f
Uterine factors, in fetal growth, 131
Uterus
anatomy of, 425, 425f
components of, 425, 425f
embryology of, 425, 425f
formation of, 425, 425f
location of, 425
in menstrual cycle, 435-436
V
VADT (Veterans Administration Diabetes 
Trial), 609
Vagal paragangliomas, 365
Vagina
anatomy of, 425, 425f
embryology of, 425, 425f
formation of, 425, 425f
Vaginal rings, in contraception, 474
Validity, of evidence in EBM, 61-63, 61t, 62t
Value(s), predictive, in clinical epidemiology, 
51, 52f
Vanillylmandelic acid (VMA), normal ranges 
for, 843t
Vanishing testes syndrome, 407-408, 516. See 
also Anorchia, bilateral
Varicocele(s), male infertility–related,
treatment of, 415
Vascular disease(s)
diabetic, classifications of, 634-635
peripheral, in diabetic patients, 634t, 641
Vasoactive intestinal peptide, normal ranges 
for, 843t
Vasomotor symptoms, menopause and, 458
Vasopressin. See also Antidiuretic hormone 
(ADH)
abnormal synthesis and secretion of, 118
decreased end organ response to, 120
deficient, diabetes insipidus due to, 118-122
excess, 122-126, 122t, 123f, 125t. See also 
Syndrome of inappropriate
antidiuretic hormone (SIADH)
increased metabolism of, in pregnancy,
diabetes insipidus due to,
119-120
lack of. See Diabetes insipidus
secretion of, 115, 116f
Vasospasm(s), peripheral,
pheochromocytomas and, 370
Verner-Morrison syndrome, 721, 821
Vertebroplasty, in osteoporosis management, 
756
Very low density lipoproteins (VLDLs),
formation of, in lipid transport, 
677, 678f
Veterans Administration Diabetes Trial 
(VADT), 609
VHL disease. See von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) 
disease
VHL gene, in MEN 2, 362-364, 363t
Vildagliptin, in type 2 diabetes management, 
611t, 617
Vipoma(s), 821
Virilism, 323
Virilizing syndrome, central precocious 
puberty–related, 547
Visual field defects, pituitary disorders and, 
92
Vitamin A, hypercalcemia due to, 252
Vitamin B, in lipoprotein disorders
management, 694
Vitamin D, 234-241
actions of, 239-241
in bone, 239-240
in kidney, 240
analogs of, 235t
880    Index
Vitamin D (Cont.):
cutaneous synthesis of, 236
deficiency of. See Vitamin D deficiency
dietary sources of, 236
in glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis
prevention and treatment,
270-271
hypercalcemia due to, 251
intestinal absorption of, 236
in intestinal calcium transport, 239
mechanisms of action of, 238-241, 239f
metabolism of, 237-238, 237f, 238f
disorders of, short stature associated 
with, 158
metabolites of, 235t
binding proteins for, 236-237
in mineral homeostasis control, 241-258
nomenclature associated with, 234-235, 
235f, 235t, 236t
normal ranges for, 843t
in osteoporosis management, 267,
460, 755
Vitamin D deficiency, 256-257
clinical features of, 257
in the elderly, 751-752, 752f
laboratory findings in, 272-273
pathogenesis of, 256-257, 271, 272t
rickets due to, 271, 272t
treatment of, 257, 273
Vitamin D receptor–interacting protein 
(DRIP) complex, 24
Vitamin D–resistant rickets, hereditary, 257
VLDLs. See Very low density lipoproteins
VMA. See Vanillylmandelic acid
von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease, 362-364, 
363t
clinical diagnosis of, 363
genetic testing for, 363
multiple endocrine organ involvement in, 
734
pheochromocytomas in, 364
prevalence of, 363
types/subtypes of, 363
von Recklinghausen disease, multiple endo-
crine organ involvement in, 734
von Recklinghausen neurofibromatosis 
(NF-1), 364, 364t
W
Water balance, in the elderly, changes in,
757-758
Weight, measurement of, 143
Weight loss
in obesity management, 706-708, 707t, 
708f. See also Obesity, manage-
ment of, weight loss in
in type 2 diabetes management, 624-625
Wermer syndrome, 723-729. See also Multiple 
endocrine neoplasia (MEN), 
MEN 1
Werner syndrome, 692
WHI (Women’s Health Initiative), 460
WHO. See World Health Organization
Wilms tumor gene (WT1), in organogenesis 
of bipotential gonad, 481-482, 
482f
Wnt pathway, 263
Wnt4 gene, in ovarian determination, 483f, 
484
Wolcott-Rallison syndrome, 596
Wolfram syndrome, 596
Wolman disease, 692
Women. See also Female(s)
adrenal androgen effects on, 299
androgens in, in hypothalamic-pituitary 
dysfunction, 99
luteal-follicular transition in, endocrinology 
of, 428, 429f
pheochromocytomas in, manifestations of, 
372
plasma steroids in, production-, secretion-, 
and metabolic clearance rates of, 
427, 428t
prolactinomas and, gonadal dysfunction in, 
102
Women’s Health Initiative (WHI), 460
World Health Organization (WHO), 699, 
705, 750, 750t
X
X chromatin–negative variants of gonadal 
dysgenesis, 497-498
X chromatin–positive variants of gonadal
dysgenesis, 497
X chromosome, abnormalities of, gonadal 
dysgenesis and, 497
Xanthomatosis, cerebrotendinous, 692
XLH (X-linked hypophosphatemia), 275
X-linked hypophosphatemia (XLH), 275
X-linked Kallman syndrome, 537
XXY seminiferous tubule dysgenesis,
405-407, 406f. See also 
Klinefelter syndrome
XY agonadism, 516
XYY syndrome, 161
Z
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, 820-821, 820t
Zona glomerulosa, steroid biosynthesis in, 
289, 289f
Zonisamide, in obesity management, 707t
