CASES IN CLINICAL 
MEDICINE
Senior Content Strategist: Pauline Graham
Content Development Specialist: Fiona Conn
Project Manager: Sukanthi Sukumar
Designer: Miles Hitchen
Illustration Manager: Jennifer Rose
Illustrator: Ethan Danielson
CASES IN CLINICAL 
MEDICINE
3rd edition
PARVEEN KUMAR
CBE BSC MD DM (HC) FRCP FRCP (Edin)
Professor of Medicine and Education, Barts and The London School
of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary, University of London, and
Honorary Consultant Physician and Gastroenterologist, Barts and the 
London NHS Trust and Homerton University Hospital NHS Foundation 
Trust, London, UK
MICHAEL CLARK
MD FRCP
Honorary Senior Lecturer, Barts and The London School of Medicine 
and Dentistry, Queen Mary, University of London, and Consultant 
Physician, Princess Grace Hospital, London, UK
Edinburgh  London  New York  Oxford 
Philadelphia  St Louis  Sydney  Toronto 2013
© 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, 
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and 
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek 
permission, further information about the Publisher’s permissions policies and our 
arrangements with organizations such as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright 
Licensing Agency, can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by 
the Publisher (other than as may be noted herein).
First edition 2000
Second edition 2006
Third edition 2013
ISBN 978-0-7020-3138-0
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and 
experience broaden our understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices, 
or medical treatment may become necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in 
evaluating and using any information, methods, compounds, or experiments described 
herein. In using such information or methods they should be mindful of their own safety 
and the safety of others, including parties for whom they have a professional responsibility.
With respect to any drug or pharmaceutical products identified, readers are advised to check 
the most current information provided (i) on procedures featured or (ii) by the manufacturer 
of each product to be administered, to verify the recommended dose or formula, the method 
and duration of administration, and contraindications. It is the responsibility of practitioners, 
relying on their own experience and knowledge of their patients, to make diagnoses, to 
determine dosages and the best treatment for each individual patient, and to take all 
appropriate safety precautions.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or 
editors, assume any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a 
matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any 
methods, products, instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.
Working together to grow 
libraries in developing countries
www.elsevier.com  |  www.bookaid.org  |  www.sabre.org
The  
publisher’s 
policy is to use
paper manufactured 
from sustainable forests
Printed in China
v
Contents
Preface  xi
Acknowledgements  xiii
 1 
Infectious Diseases 
1
Pyrexia of unknown origin (PUO)	
1
Septicaemia	
4
Meningococcal meningitis and septicaemia	
7
Pseudomembranous colitis	
9
Food poisoning: E. coli 0157	
11
Typhoid	
13
The returning traveller	
14
Shingles	
16
Epstein–Barr virus	
18
 2 
Sexually Transmitted Infections 
21
HIV/AIDS	
21
 3 
Nutrition 
27
Feeding the patient	
27
 4 
Gastroenterology 
31
Vomiting	
31
Hiccups	
33
Weight loss	
34
Dysphagia	
35
Constipation	
36
Diarrhoea	
37
Abdominal pain	
43
Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD)	
45
Barrett’s oesophagus	
46
Peptic ulcer disease	
46
Iron deficiency anaemia	
50
Rectal bleeding	
52
Family history of colon cancer	
53
Functional bowel disease	
55
 5 
Liver and Biliary Tract Disorders 
57
Abnormal liver biochemistry	
57
Jaundice	
59
Acute liver disease	
63
Ascites	
64
Haematemesis and melaena	
66
Liver failure	
70
Excess alcohol use	
71
Cholecystitis	
73
vi
Contents
﻿
 6 
Haematology and Oncology 
77
Microcytic and macrocytic anaemia	
77
Haemolytic anaemia	
83
Sickle-cell disease	
86
Types of sickle-cell disease	
89
Elevated haemoglobin (polycythaemia)	
92
Elevated white blood cell count	
97
Elevated platelet count	
98
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency	
100
Bleeding disorders	
105
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)	
109
Platelet disorders	
112
Thrombosis	
116
Splenomegaly, splenectomy and hyposplenism	
121
Blood transfusion	
125
Haematological oncology	
131
Anaemia in rheumatoid arthritis	
140
Anaemia in cancer	
142
Infection/sepsis	
144
 7 
Care of the Elderly 
149
Blackouts	
149
Falls in the elderly	
151
Delirium	
153
Dementia	
156
Depression	
159
Non-specific presentation of illness in the elderly	
161
Appropriate assessment scales	
163
Stroke	
163
Heart disease in the elderly	
172
Transient ischaemic attack	
174
Hypothermia	
175
Pressure ulcers	
177
Urinary tract infection and incontinence	
179
Arteritis	
181
Acute hot joint	
182
Parkinson’s disease	
184
Drug treatment in older people/drug treatment as a 
cause of illness and admission to hospital	
186
Drugs as a cause of illness and delayed discharge	
186
Do not attempt resuscitation (DNAR) 
decision-making	
188
 8 
Rheumatology 
191
Osteoarthritis (OA)	
191
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA)	
197
SLE and vasculitis	
200
Acute autoimmune rheumatic disease	
202
Thrombosis and the anti-phospholipid syndrome	
206
Crystal arthritis	
209
vii
Contents
﻿
Polymyalgia rheumatica/cranial arteritis	
212
Acute back pain	
213
Severe back pain/osteoporosis	
215
Osteomyelitis	
218
Septic arthritis	
219
 9 
Kidney and Urinary Tract Disease 
223
Presentation of kidney and urinary tract disease	
223
Fluid balance and electrolytes: assessing fluid status	
223
Fluid balance and electrolytes: sodium problems	
227
Patient stopped passing urine	
230
Acute heart failure	
233
Hyperkalaemia	
238
The acidotic patient	
241
Acute kidney injury	
245
Chronic kidney disease	
246
Multisystem vasculitis/acute glomerulonephritis	
251
Intercurrent illness in dialysis and transplant patients	
254
Nephrotic syndrome	
257
Haematuria without albuminuria	
259
Urinary tract infection (UTI)	
260
Renal and ureteric colic	
262
 10 
Cardiology 
265
Syncope	
265
A clinical approach to patients with tachycardia	
268
Atrial fibrillation	
274
Bradycardia and pacing	
277
Cardiac arrest and basic life support	
280
Chest pain and acute coronary syndromes	
284
Thrombolysis	
286
Acute myocardial ischaemia – who needs acute 
intervention?	
291
Cardiogenic shock	
292
Right ventricular infarction	
295
Heart failure following an MI	
297
Post-infarction arrhythmias and heart block	
298
Myocardial infarction – secondary prevention	
301
Heart failure recognition and acute management	
303
Valvular heart disease	
306
Infective endocarditis	
309
Pulmonary hypertension	
312
Cardiomyopathies	
315
Hypertension (HT)	
317
The swollen/painful leg	
323
 11 
Respiratory Disorders 
325
Acute breathlessness	
325
Cough	
326
Breathlessness and wheeze	
328
Hyperventilation	
332
viii
Contents
﻿
Haemoptysis	
333
Chest pain	
336
Respiratory failure	
338
COPD – acute exacerbation	
344
Pneumonia	
350
Lung abscess	
357
Tuberculosis	
358
Pleural effusion	
363
Pulmonary embolism (and deep vein thrombosis)	
366
Pneumothorax	
369
Carcinoma of the bronchus	
372
Sarcoidosis	
378
 12 
ITU 
383
Shock	
383
Acute lung injury/Acute Respiratory Distress 
Syndrome (ARDS)	
390
 13 
Poisoning 
395
Self-poisoning	
395
Paracetamol (acetaminophen) poisoning	
398
Salicylate overdose	
402
Cocaine	
404
Gammahydroxybutyric acid (GHB)	
407
Insect stings and bites	
408
Anaphylactic shock	
408
 14 
Endocrinology and Diabetes 
411
Diabetes mellitus	
411
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA)	
413
Hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic state	
418
Hypoglycaemic coma	
420
Sick diabetic patient	
422
Management of new type 2 diabetic presenting for surgery	
424
Urgent surgery in patients with diabetes	
426
Diabetic foot	
427
Diabetes in pregnancy	
429
Cushing’s syndrome	
430
Hyperthyroidism	
432
Amiodarone and thyroid function	
439
Hypothyroidism	
440
Addison’s disease	
442
Patients on steroids for surgery	
444
Hypercalcaemia	
446
Severe hypercalcaemia	
448
Hypocalcaemia	
449
Phaeochromocytoma (catecholamine crisis)	
452
Hypopituitarism	
454
Diabetes insipidus	
457
Syndrome of inappropriate anti-diuretic hormone (SIADH)	
459
ix
Contents
﻿
 15 
Neurology 
461
Diplopia	
461
Loss of vision	
466
Bell’s palsy	
468
Vertigo	
469
Stroke	
472
Subdural haemorrhage	
477
Parkinson’s disease	
478
Multiple sclerosis (MS)	
480
Encephalitis	
482
Falls	
485
Traumatic brain injury	
486
General management of traumatic injuries	
487
Severe brain injury	
489
Meningitis	
491
Fits and faints	
496
Difficulty walking	
499
Headaches	
501
Movement disorders	
504
Guillain–Barré syndrome	
506
Spinal cord compression	
507
 16 
Psychiatry 
509
Delirium	
509
Drugs and poisons as causes of delirium	
513
Drugs causing delirium	
513
Dementia	
516
Delirium tremens (DT)	
519
Depression	
522
Suicide and deliberate self-harm (DSH)	
527
Acute anxiety	
532
Opiate dependence	
534
The disturbed patient	
537
 17 
Dermatology 
541
A swollen red leg	
541
Erythema nodosum	
543
Urticaria and angio-oedema	
545
Sun-induced rash	
548
Generalised rash or eruption	
550
Pruritus	
551
Cutaneous adverse drug reactions (ADR)	
553
HIV and the skin	
559
Index  565
This page intentionally left blank
xixi
Preface
Medical education has changed enormously over the last two decades. 
From the traditional didactic, lecture-based approach we have moved to 
an environment where the student takes greater responsibility for their 
study through self-directed learning and small group interactions. Various 
curriculum models have been employed in medical schools, incorporating 
different teaching methodologies such as problem-based, task-based 
and outcome-based learning. Fundamental to all medical training is that 
the practice of medicine should be evidence-based as far as is possible. 
This requires a sound knowledge base and a constant desire to keep 
up-to-date.
We all, of course, learn in different ways, but what is essential is that 
there is a defined structure which can guide us to learn effectively, effi­
ciently and sensibly. Getting the right emphasis will help senior medical 
students and junior doctors define problems correctly and instigate appro­
priate management and treatment in a clinical setting.
‘Learning how to learn’ has become quite an art, beloved of all medical 
educationalists. However, there are basic rules that have to be absorbed 
prior to being able to ‘drive’ one’s own learning effectively. The plethora 
of facts a doctor needs to know in order to practise medicine efficiently 
needs to be broken down into easily assimilated chunks and presented in 
the context of a clinical problem.
Over the last decade, problem-based learning (PBL) has become a more 
formalised approach to medical education. The Maastricht seven-step 
method of PBL gives a helpful structure to tackling a clinical problem:
1.	 identify and clarify unfamiliar terms
2.	 define the problem(s)
3.	 brainstorm with a scribe recording the discussion
4.	 ‘sift and sort’ to review steps 2 and 3
5.	 formulate learning objectives
6.	 engage in private study
7.	 come back to the group to share what has been learned.
The objective is to come up with an evidence-based solution to the prob­
lems set, with the tutor checking the outcome. The problem is usually 
focused around a clinical case and stimulates the learner to consult the full 
range of learning resources available to them (libraries, textbooks, journals, 
online and digital sources). It encourages students to be self-directed in 
their learning, think critically, and work in a team to solve the problem 
themselves in lively, informal and interactive sessions.
Our book is designed to support this approach to clinically contextual­
ised learning. In our first edition we set out to formulate an approach to 
what was then called ‘service-based learning’, pioneered by Professor Janet 
Grant at the Open University Centre for Education in Medicine in response 
to the General Medical Council’s aim to create an MRCP-level guide to 
learning on the job. Following research into clinical problem solving, stu­
dents expressed their wish to have graded clinical experiences, the ability 
xii
Preface
﻿
to assess their own learning, and to have on-the-spot performance 
feedback.
In the first edition we used clinical cases where the histories of patients 
and their investigations were gradually revealed as time progressed and 
bits of data were added to the scenario, rather like a detective story! These 
cases were based on the real-life challenges commonly presenting in a 
hospital setting. All students will experience these when they encounter 
patients, and will have to sift through their knowledge to find facts that 
are applicable to the case in hand.
We included self-assessment questions in the previous editions of the 
book, but as these can be found elsewhere, we have removed them this 
edition and instead have devoted the space to more clinical scenarios to 
test your knowledge and problem solving abilities. The material has been 
completely updated and we have added more figures and tables to further 
facilitate your learning.
We hope we have managed to present this in a fun way and stimulate 
you to consult the bigger texts such as Kumar and Clark’s Clinical Medicine 
or our new handbook Kumar & Clark’s Medical Management and Therapeu­
tics. These books have been written in response to your requests and we 
hope you will continue to inform us of your needs.
We wish you a happy read!
Parveen Kumar and Michael Clark
xiii
xiii
Acknowledgements
This edition is based on the original contributions of skilled clinicians who 
were regularly on take for acute general medicine: their expertise is 
warmly acknowledged.
We would like to thank the original contributors:
Jane Anderson PhD FRCP
Simon Aylwin MA MB BChir PhD MRCP
Mark Caulfield MB MD FRCP FAHA
Charles R A Clarke MA FRCP MB BCh
David P D’Cruz MD FRCP
Ramesh C Joshi MD FRCP
Karim Meeran MD FRCP
David G Paige MA MB BS FRCP
Drew Provan MD FRCP FRCPath
M J Raftery MD FRCP
G S Rai MD MSc FRCP
A Sefton MB BS MSc MD FRCP(Edin) FRCPath
David Watson BSc (Hons) MB BS FRCA
Mark Weaver MBBS MRCPsych
James R Wilkinson MRCP (UK) MB BS BSc (Hons)
Mahummad M Yaqoob MD FRCP
This page intentionally left blank
1
Infectious Diseases 1 
PYREXIA OF UNKNOWN ORIGIN (PUO)
Pyrexia of unknown origin (sometimes called fever of unknown origin, 
FUO) is best defined as a fever persisting for more than 2 weeks with no 
clear diagnosis despite intelligent and intensive investigation.
Not all cases of PUO are due to infection. In recent-onset PUO, approxi­
mately two-thirds of cases are due to infection, compared with only about 
one-third of cases with long-standing PUO. Other causes include malig­
nancy and autoimmune rheumatic disorders (Table 1.1).
Case history
A 25-year-old male is seen in the A&E department, at the request 
of his doctor, with a history of fever, anorexia and malaise. He had 
returned the previous week from a month’s backpacking trip 
around India, where he had lost 5 kg in weight. The casualty 
officer asks you to see this patient with PUO. The preliminary 
blood investigations by the GP were normal.
On examination, the patient was found to be febrile with a 
temperature of 39.5°C. He had no lymphadenopathy or pallor of 
mucous membranes.
BP 110/70; pulse 90; heart sounds normal.
Chest: clinically clear.
Examination of abdomen: slight generalised tenderness. Liver, 
kidneys and spleen not palpable. Examination of CNS: 
unremarkable.
Where would you manage this patient?
Admit to a MAU side room until an infectious aetiology has been ruled 
out.
What questions should you specifically ask when you see a 
patient with PUO (in addition to routine questions)?
	 Full travel history, including exactly where patient has been and the 
type of accommodation stayed in
	 Vaccination/prophylaxis history
	 Contact with animals/sick people
	 Occupation: exactly what does the patient do?
	 Water exposure: occupational/recreational
	 Food history: eating shellfish, drinking dirty water, reheated/raw foods
	 Risk behaviour: IV drug usage, unprotected sex
	 Factors that might predispose to infection.
2
Infectious Diseases
1 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
What initial investigations should you perform in a patient 
presenting with PUO?
Perform minimally invasive tests before highly invasive and expensive 
ones. It is always worth repeating previously performed tests (see 
Investigations box).
Infections (see below)
Neoplasms, especially lymphomas, renal cell carcinoma
Autoimmune rheumatic disease
Vasculitides, e.g. giant cell arteritis
Others, e.g. granulomatous disease, drug reactions, factitious
Infective causes
General
Abscesses, e.g. liver, abdomen, pelvis, ear, sinus or dental infection
Infective endocarditis
Urinary tract infection
Specific
Bacterial
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Salmonella typhi or S. paratyphi
Brucella spp.
Leptospirosis
Lyme disease
Viral
Epstein–Barr
Hepatitis
Cytomegalovirus
HIV
Dengue fever
Protozoal diseases
Malaria
Amoebiasis
Leishmaniasis
Toxoplasmosis
Trypanosomiasis
Rickettsial diseases
Typhus
Q fever
Chlamydophila
Psittacosis
Table 1.1  Causes of PUO
Investigations for a PUO
•	 FBC
•	 CRP / ESR
•	 U&Es
3
Pyrexia of unknown origin (PUO)
1 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Results in this patient
	 WCC: slightly raised at 12 000 × 109/L
	 ALT: 92 iu/L (normal range 5–40 iu/L)
	 Alkaline phosphatase: 190 iu/L (normal range 25–115 iu/L)
	 All other initial investigations were normal.
What should you do now?
	 Recheck his history of travel
	 Recheck his risk factors for hepatitis and HIV
	 Send blood for viral markers for hepatitis
	 Arrange a liver ultrasound.
The ultrasound shows a liver abscess in the right lobe and, in view of 
his travel, an amoebic abscess is a strong possibility. Fortunately, you had 
sent off an amoebic CFT sample and you ring the reference laboratory 
urgently. The test is positive (usually positive with an amoebic liver 
abscess).
Treatment
Treat with metronidazole 800 mg × 3 daily for 10 days followed by diloxa­
nide furoate 500 mg × 3 daily for 10 days. Aspiration of the abscess is only 
required with failure of medical therapy.
Investigations for a PUO—cont’d
•	 Liver biochemistry
•	 Blood cultures – repeated
•	 Urine analysis and microscopy, culture and sensitivity
•	 CXR
•	 Sputum (if producing any) for microscopy, culture and 
sensitivity, and for acid-fast bacilli
•	 Stools for ova, cysts and parasites and culture and sensitivity
•	 Store serum for future serological tests if required
•	 Wounds: take swabs for culture
•	 Screen for autoimmune rheumatic disorders
•	 Additional investigations in this man because of travel abroad: 
thick and thin blood films for malaria
Remember
•	 Take a careful history: always repeat
•	 Examine the patient thoroughly: always repeat
•	 Initial investigations often give a clue to the diagnosis: often 
need repeating
•	 Be patient and don’t give antibiotics until diagnosis is made 
unless the patient is very sick
•	 Perform invasive and/or expensive investigations only when 
appropriate, e.g. echo, CT scan/MRI, bone marrow and culture, 
lymph node/liver biopsy.
4
Infectious Diseases
1 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
•	 Progress.  This man responded quickly to therapy with loss of 
pain, improvement in appetite and he became apyrexial after 4 
days. A repeat ultrasound 3 weeks later still showed a small residual 
cavity.
Further reading
WHO. 
Infectious 
diseases. 
http://www.who.int/topics/infectious
diseases/en
SEPTICAEMIA
Septicaemia and bacteraemia should be differentiated. In bacteraemia there 
is a transient presence of live organisms in the blood which do not cause 
symptoms; it can occur in healthy patients.
In septicaemia there are signs and symptoms of a systemic inflammatory 
response syndrome (SIRS) to a localized primary site of infection. SIRS is 
defined as the presence of two or more of: heart rate > 90/min; WCC > 12 
× 109/L or < 4 × 109/L; a temperature > 38°C or < 36°C and a respiratory 
rate > 20 min or a PaCO2 < 4.3 κPa (<32 mmHg).
Case history
A 70-year-old woman was admitted to hospital with fever, 
confusion and hypotension. She lived on her own and was unable 
to give a history.
On examination, she was clinically dehydrated, confused and 
had cold clammy peripheries. Pulse rate 108/min, respiratory rate 
22 min.
She was also hypotensive with a BP 90/50 and had a 
temperature of 39°C.
Diagnosis: Septic shock.
What are the most common causes of septicaemia 
in patients presenting from the community?
The most common organisms isolated are Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus 
aureus, Streptococcus pneumoniae and pyogenic streptococci – especially 
group A streptococci. Neisseria meningitidis should not be forgotten as a 
possible cause of community-acquired sepsis.
In hospital, coagulase-negative staphylococci can also cause sepsis in 
immunosuppressed patients with IV lines in situ. Wounds, the respiratory 
tract (especially in ventilated patients) and the urinary tract (in catheterised 
patients) are other sources of sepsis in hospitalised patients.
What factors predispose to septicaemia?
In both Gram-positive and Gram-negative septicaemia, impaired host 
defences, surgery or instrumentation (including intravenous cannulae, 
urinary catheters and mechanical ventilation) predispose to septicaemia 
(Table 1.2).
5
Septicaemia
1 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
What is the differential diagnosis of septic shock?
Non-infective disorders, such as acute myocardial infarction, pulmonary 
embolism or drug reactions, must be excluded. Toxic shock (e.g. toxic 
shock syndrome) can also present in a similar manner.
What would be your initial management of this woman and 
what investigations would you do?
This patient required supportive therapy (e.g. fluid replacement) because 
she was dehydrated and oxygen was given and inotropes. Broad-spectrum 
antibiotics were started after blood and urine cultures had been taken. The 
antibiotic therapy varies according to local hospital policy and the likely 
focus of infection. This severely shocked patient was transferred to HDU/
ITU (see p. 383).
Gram-negative sepsis
Gram-positive sepsis
Urinary tract infections
IV catheters
Hospital acquired pneumonia, 
especially ventilator associated
Skin/wound infections
Bone and joint infections
Pre-existing abdominal sepsis, 
biliary tract infections
IV drug usage
Severe burns
Respiratory tract infections/
pneumonia
Obstetric or neonatal infections
Obstetric or neonatal infections
Meningococcal septicaemia
Meningitis, endocarditis
Table 1.2  Predisposing factors for septicaemia
Investigations
•	 FBC and differential
•	 U&Es, blood sugar, liver biochemistry
•	 ESR/CRP
•	 Blood cultures
•	 Blood gases
•	 Urine for microscopy, culture and sensitivity
•	 Sputum (if any produced) for microscopy, culture and sensitivity
•	 Swabs of any infected-looking lesions (including throat swab if 
throat appears inflamed)
•	 Pus (if present) for microscopy, culture and sensitivity
•	 High vaginal swab in women
•	 NAAT (nuclear acid amplification test)
•	 CXR
•	 ECG
If a urinary tract infection is thought to be the likely source, a broad-
spectrum cephalosporin is often appropriate (e.g. cefuroxime) or a qui­
nolone (e.g. ciprofloxacin).
6
Infectious Diseases
1 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
If there is no obvious focus of infection, blind therapy must be broad 
spectrum and cover streptococci, staphylococci and coliforms.
Suitable choices are:
	 A broad-spectrum cephalosporin such as IV cefuroxime or IV cefotax­
ime or IV ceftriaxone.
	 Metronidazole should be added if an anaerobic infection is considered 
likely.
	 A broad-spectrum penicillin with β-lactamase inhibitor (e.g. piperacillin/
tazobactam). Gentamicin can be added if the patient is very ill.
	 A carbapenem (e.g. imipenem, although this is a restricted antibiotic in 
many hospitals).
•	 Progress.  The patient had already been given IV cefuroxime and 
was continued on this. On admission she was also given a single dose 
of gentamicin. The following day both her urine and blood cultures 
grew an E. coli that was susceptible to cefuroxime and gentamicin 
but resistant to amoxicillin. She made a good recovery.
Remember
Many hospitals have specific guidelines for antibiotic usage: 
always check or get microbiological advice.
Remember
•	 If you give gentamicin, remember that you need to monitor 
serum levels. Combining it with a cephalosporin can potentiate 
its nephrotoxicity.
•	 Cefuroxime, ceftriaxone and cefotaxime have fairly good activity 
against staphylococci and streptococci, as well as against many 
Gram-negative rods; they have poor activity against 
Pseudomonas spp. Ceftazidime has poor activity against 
streptococci and staphylococci but excellent activity against 
Pseudomonas spp. and other Gram-negative organisms. No 
cephalosporins are active against Enterococcus spp.
•	 Cephalosporins are associated with C. difficile diarrhoea and 
should be avoided if possible.
•	 If a patient develops sepsis while in hospital it is possible that 
this is due to resistant organisms, e.g. methicillin-resistant S. 
aureus (MRSA) or resistant Gram-negative rods.
•	 If MRSA infection is considered likely and the patient is very 
sick, add IV vancomycin 1 g × 2 per day (assuming normal renal 
function) given over at least 100 minutes while awaiting culture 
results.
A urine sample was obtained from this patient. Microscopy found 
it to contain 1000 WCC/mm3 and ++ bacteria.
7
Meningococcal meningitis and septicaemia
1 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
In your hospital, do you know the approximate percentage 
of organisms causing urinary tract infections that are 
susceptible to commonly used antibiotics?
In many areas, approximately 50% of E. coli causing urinary tract infection 
are resistant to amoxicillin and 20–30% are resistant to trimethoprim. More 
than 90% are susceptible to cefuroxime, ciprofloxacin and gentamicin. You 
need to know local resistance patterns.
MENINGOCOCCAL MENINGITIS AND SEPTICAEMIA
Case history
An 18-year-old woman is brought into A&E ‘collapsed’. The 
previous day she had apparently been well apart from symptoms 
of a minor upper respiratory tract infection. She woke up feeling 
very unwell and asked her flat-mate to call the emergency doctor. 
The flat-mate noted that her friend had a couple of spots on her 
chest but by the time the doctor arrived she was developing a 
more widespread petechial rash. The emergency doctor 
transferred her immediately to hospital after giving her a single 
dose of benzylpenicillin.
The patient was febrile with a temperature of 38°C.
A petechial rash was present (Fig. 1.1).
The patient was hypotensive and shocked.
There was minimal neck stiffness.
Figure 1.1  Meningococcal rash (from Fuller, Neurology Illustrated Colour Text, 
with permission). 
What do you think is the most likely diagnosis?
This young woman has fulminant meningococcaemia, which has a worse 
prognosis than meningococcal meningitis and usually has an extremely 
rapid downhill course.
What should the immediate management be?
Take blood and throat cultures and then start antibiotics immediately. Give 
intravenous benzylpenicillin, initially 2.4 g 4-hourly or IV cefotaxine 2 g × 
6-hourly or IV ceftriaxone 2 g × 2 daily for presumed meningococcal 
meningitis/septicaemia.
8
Infectious Diseases
1 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
What investigations should be performed?
Relevant investigations are shown in the box. Other causes of meningitis/
septicaemia should be excluded.
Remember
The first doctor to see a patient suspected of having 
meningococcal septicaemia or meningitis should immediately give 
benzylpenicillin IM injection before immediate transfer to hospital.
Investigations
•	 FBC and differential
•	 U&E
•	 Liver function tests
•	 ESR or CRP
•	 Blood cultures: always before starting antibiotics
•	 Throat swab to look for meningococcal carriage
•	 Culture of petechial lesions is sometimes performed
•	 Lumbar puncture is not indicated in meningococcal septicaemia
Who should be informed and what further action should be 
taken?
The consultant (or his/her deputy) in charge of communicable disease 
control (CCDC) should be informed immediately by telephone if a clinical 
diagnosis of meningococcal disease is made. Formal notification should 
then be done in writing. Notification books should be kept on all wards. 
Rifampicin prophylaxis can then be arranged for any close contacts.
Contacts who should receive prophylaxis
	 People who live in the same household as the case or who have lived 
there in the previous week
	 Sexual partners
	 Work fellows sharing a small office, i.e. an office for two
	 Staff carrying out mouth-to-mouth resuscitation on the patient or ‘spe­
cialing’ the patient, especially in the first 24 h
	 The patient herself at the end of her parenteral therapy
	 School contacts if more than one case in a school.
Once the CCDC has been informed, he/she will usually arrange for che­
moprophylaxis (Table 1.3), but might ask the hospital doctor to do this for 
the patient’s relatives.
Remember
The patient should have rifampicin 600 mg × 2 daily for 2 days 
after she has finished her parenteral antibiotics to eradicate 
carriage of N. meningitidis from her nasopharynx.
9
Pseudomembranous colitis
1 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
What should you tell people who are taking rifampicin 
prophylaxis?
	 That it might interfere with the effectiveness of the oral contraceptive if 
they are taking this. Hence they should take additional contraceptive 
measures for the remainder of the cycle.
	 That their secretions (e.g. tears) might turn orangey-pink and that their 
soft contact lenses will also be permanently stained unless they remove 
them!
Overall management
This patient was treated with intravenous ceftriaxone 2 g IV twice per day 
in the intensive care unit. After a stormy course she made a full recovery. 
There were no secondary cases.
Further reading
Quagliarello V. Dissemination of Neisseria meningitidis. New England 
Journal of Medicine 2011; 364: 1573–1575.
PSEUDOMEMBRANOUS COLITIS
This is the condition caused by Clostridium difficile; a pseudomembrane is 
seen on sigmoidoscopy.
First choice
Rifampicin
Adults and children over 
12 years
600 mg × 2 daily for 2 days
Children 1–12 years
10 mg/kg × 2 daily for 2 days (maximum 
dose 600 mg × 2 daily for 2 days)
Infants, 12 months
5 mg/kg × 2 daily for 2 days
Other options
Ciprofloxacin
Adults
500 mg single dose
Children
Not recommended
Pregnancy/breastfeeding 
mothers
Not recommended
Ceftriaxone
Adults
250 mg IM as a single dose
Children, 12 years
125 mg IM as a single dose
Table 1.3  Recommended chemoprophylaxis of meningococcal 
meningitis
10
Infectious Diseases
1 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
What other questions do you want to ask?
You would want to know:
	 What the diarrhoea is like: are the stools liquid or bloody?
	 How long has the patient been on broad-spectrum antibiotics?
	 Has any other patient/member of the staff got diarrhoea? (One of the 
ITU nurses informs you that another patient did have loose stools and 
you need to ascertain if this is really the case and if there were any 
obvious reasons for this.)
What is your differential diagnosis?
This would include:
	 Antibiotic-associated diarrhoea, particularly pseudomembranous colitis
	 Diarrhoea due to enteral feeding
	 Other bacterial causes, e.g. Salmonella spp., Shigella spp., Campylobacter 
spp., E. coli 0157; these are less likely because patient hasn’t been eating 
but could occur as a result of cross-infection
	 Viral gastroenteritis.
What investigations would you perform?
You would need to send a stool from the patient to the microbiology labo­
ratory (and also from any other patient/staff member with diarrhoea) for 
microscopy, culture and sensitivity. If several patients/members of staff 
are affected, stools should also be sent to the virology department to look 
for a viral aetiology, e.g. small round viruses. In addition, you would 
specifically need to request an examination for Clostridium difficile (toxin) 
– the organism responsible for the toxin of pseudomembranous colitis. Do 
a sigmoidoscopy to look for the typical pseudomembrane seen in pseu­
domembranous colitis and to exclude inflammatory bowel disease by 
rectal biopsy.
The patient was thought, on clinical grounds, to have pseudomembra­
nous colitis. This was later confirmed by the microbiology department, 
which found the stool to be positive for C. difficile toxin.
Case history
A 40-year-old man who had been on the intensive care unit for 3 
weeks with a head injury following a road traffic accident 
developed severe diarrhoea. He was on a ventilator and currently 
was finishing a course of a third-generation parenteral 
cephalosporin for hospital acquired pneumonia. According to the 
nurses, one other patient on the ITU currently also has diarrhoea.
Remember
Culture of C. difficile itself in a stool is insufficient evidence that a 
patient has pseudomembranous colitis; only toxin-producing 
strains cause this.
11
1 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Food poisoning: E. coli 0157
How would you manage the patient?
The patient should be isolated in a side room if possible to prevent cross-
infection. You need to ensure that the patient is adequately hydrated. In 
patients with antibiotic-associated diarrhoea, if it is at all possible, any 
broad-spectrum antibiotics that the patient is taking should be stopped. If 
it is not possible to stop all antibiotics, try and change to a narrow-spectrum 
agent (discuss with microbiology). Specific first-line therapy for pseu­
domembranous colitis is oral metronidazole 400 mg × 3 for 7–10 days. Oral 
vancomycin 125–250 mg × 4 for 7–10 days is used if no response to met­
ronidazole. Fidaxomicin 200 mg is also effective.
Note: you do not need to do vancomycin levels in patients receiving oral 
vancomycin because it is not systemically absorbed.
Normally, metronidazole is tried first because there is a worry that use 
of oral vancomycin might predispose to the development of vancomycin-
resistant enterococci in the gastrointestinal tract; in some parts of the 
world, enterococcal vancomycin resistance is becoming a major problem.
•	 Progress.  This patient initially responded to metronidazole but after 
8 days his diarrhoea returned (up to 30% of cases relapse) and he was 
switched to vancomycin, to which he responded.
He was eventually weaned from the ventilator and made a good physical 
recovery but with impaired cognitive function.
Remember
Prevention
Infection control relies on:
•	 Responsible use of antibiotics.
•	 Hygiene, which should involve all health workers, as well as 
patients and relatives.
•	 Washing hands thoroughly using soap and water is essential as 
alcohol disinfectants do not kill C. difficile spores.
•	 Hospital cleaning of surfaces should be performed regularly to 
try and reduce transmission from fomites.
•	 Isolation of patients with C. difficile.
Further reading
Kupers ES, Surawicz CM. Clostridium difficile infection. Lancet 2008; 371: 
1486–1488.
FOOD POISONING: E. COLI 0157
Enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli (EHEC)
EHEC (usually serotype O157:H7, and also known as verotoxin-producing 
E. coli, or VTEC) is a well recognised cause of gastroenteritis in man. It is 
a zoonosis usually associated with cattle, with the organism being found 
in the intestines of herbivores. There have been a number of major out­
breaks (notably in Scotland and Japan) associated with contaminated food. 
Run off water from where cattle have been grazing is used in irrigation 
and therefore salads and vegetables are a source of infection, as well as 
milk and underdone beef, e.g. hamburgers.
12
Infectious Diseases
1 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
EHEC secretes a toxin (Shiga-like toxin 1) which affects vascular 
endothelial cells in the gut and in the kidney. After an incubation period 
of 12–48 hours it causes diarrhoea (frequently bloody), associated with 
abdominal pain and nausea. Some days after the onset of symptoms the 
patient may develop thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura or haemolytic 
uraemic syndrome (HUS). This is more common in children, and may lead 
to permanent renal damage or death. Treatment is mainly supportive: 
there is evidence that antibiotic therapy might precipitate HUS by causing 
increased toxin release.
Investigations
Should include:
•	 FBC, including platelets
•	 U&E (E. coli 0157 can cause haemolytic uraemic syndrome)
•	 Blood culture
•	 Stools for microscopy, culture and sensitivity
Full clinical details should be put on the form accompanying the 
stool
Case history
A 15-year-old girl is admitted to hospital with bloody diarrhoea; 
her parents and her three siblings are well. They have apparently 
all eaten the same food during the last week except on a single 
occasion when the patient ate a beef-burger cooked at a local 
party. The mother remembers that it looked rather raw inside. The 
girl had eaten chicken at least three times during the previous 
week. She looked slightly dehydrated and had a temperature of 
37.8°C. Her abdomen was soft but generally tender, bowel sounds 
were increased.
What is the differential diagnosis in this patient?
Infectious gastroenteritis with bloody diarrhoea due to:
	 Campylobacter spp. (chicken the likely source)
	 E. coli 0157 (beef the likely source)
	 Shigella spp.
	 Salmonella spp.
	 Onset of inflammatory bowel disease.
Remember
•	 Most laboratories routinely look for E. coli 0157 in people with 
bloody diarrhoea
•	 Abdominal X-rays and sigmoidoscopy might also be required if 
inflammatory bowel disease is considered a likely diagnosis.
13
Typhoid
1 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
What would your initial management be?
The patient should be admitted to MAU and put into excretion–secretion 
isolation (assuming a probable infective aetiology). Ensure adequate 
hydration. Oral/IV antibiotics can have a place in treating severe infections 
due to Salmonella spp., Campylobacter spp. and Shigella spp.; they should 
not be used in infections caused by E. coli 0157. The disease should be 
notified to the CCDC both by telephone immediately and in writing when 
the diagnosis has been made. Rapid notification is required if the patient 
works in the food industry or with the very young, the elderly or the 
immunosuppressed.
•	 Progress.  This patient had E. coli 0157 and did not get HUS. She 
made an uneventful recovery.
Information
Features of haemolytic uraemic syndrome (HUS)
•	 Intravascular haemolysis with red cell fragmentation 
(microangiopathic haemolysis)
•	 Thrombocytopenia
•	 Acute kidney injury
Mortality is high in the elderly; treatment is by plasma exchange, 
with some patients requiring haemofiltration dialysis.
TYPHOID
This is the typical form of enteric fever and is caused by Salmonella typhi. 
Enteric fever is an acute systemic illness with fever, headache and abdomi­
nal discomfort.
Case history
A 35-year-old Asian male presents with a 1-week history of fever, 
headache, a dry cough and constipation. He is resident in the UK 
and has just returned from a 6-week holiday in Bangladesh, where 
he was visiting relatives. He works as a chef in a local restaurant. 
While he was away, one of the relatives he was staying with had a 
high fever and severe diarrhoea.
On examination, the patient had a fever of 39.5°C with a pulse 
rate of only 85/minute. Examination of the cardiovascular, 
respiratory and central nervous systems was unremarkable.
The abdomen was slightly tender.
Investigations
•	 FBC, routine chemistry, CXR and blood cultures taken
•	 FBC shows a slight leucopenia
•	 Gram-negative rods are seen in a film of the blood cultures 
taken after 24-h incubation
14
Infectious Diseases
1 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
What is the most likely diagnosis?
S. typhi (this was later confirmed as being the definitive diagnosis).
How would you manage this patient?
The patient should be nursed in a side room with excretion–secretion 
precautions used (consult your local infection control manual). The control 
of infection officer should be alerted, as should your local CCDC, as soon 
as a definite diagnosis is made. Your CCDC should be alerted immediately 
by telephone and also via the formal notification book, which should be 
available on every ward. This is particularly necessary because this patient 
is a food handler. If the patient subsequently develops diarrhoea, adequate 
fluids are required to avoid dehydration. Pending antibiotic sensitivity 
testing, the patient should be commenced on ciprofloxacin 500–750 mg 
× 2 daily for 10 days.
NB. Cefuroxime, although frequently used for treating Gram-negative 
sepsis, is not effective against S. typhi, which is an intracellular pathogen.
Remember
Ciprofloxacin is extremely well absorbed and so can be given by 
the oral route 500 mg 12-hourly as long as the patient is not 
vomiting. After starting ciprofloxacin the patient started to feel 
better very quickly but it took 3–6 days for the temperature to 
settle.
•	 Progress.  The patient was discharged after 6 days, feeling well and 
with no fever. He needed a follow-up appointment to ensure that he 
does not become a carrier of S. typhi. He must remain away from his 
job as a food handler until he is known to have negative stool cultures 
for S. typhi.
THE RETURNING TRAVELLER
Case history
A 20-year-old student returns from a 6-week backpacking tour of 
Africa. Two weeks after his return he goes to A&E complaining of 
fever, headache and malaise of 7 days’ duration.
On examination, the patient is thin and febrile with a 
temperature of 38°C. There are no other abnormal findings.
What further questions do you want to ask this man?
It is essential – as always – to take a full detailed history. Particular note 
should be taken about exactly where the patient has travelled, what vac­
cinations he had prior to his trip, whether he took anti-malarial prophy­
laxis regularly and, if so, what he took. Did he remember being bitten by 
any insects? Did he have close contact with anyone who was obviously 
15
The returning traveller
1 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
unwell? What sort of food did he eat? Did he have unprotected sex with 
any strangers while travelling?
Differential diagnosis is shown in Table 1.4.
Developing countries
Specific geographical areas (see text)
Malaria
Histoplasmosis
Schistosomiasis
Brucellosis
Dengue
World-wide
Tick typhus
Influenza
Typhoid
Pneumonia
Tuberculosis
URTI
Dysentery
UTI
Hepatitis A
Traveller’s diarrhoea
Amoebiasis
Viral infection
Sexually transmitted diseases
WHO advises that fever occurring in a traveller 1 week or more after entering 
a malaria risk area and up to 3 months after departure is a medical 
emergency.
URTI, upper respiratory tract infection; UTI, urinary tract infection.
Table 1.4  Causes of febrile illness in travellers returning from the 
tropics and world-wide
Remember
Just because someone has been travelling, it does not mean that 
they can’t have a common type of infection such as influenza, a 
common cold or a sexually transmitted infection. Holidays are 
notorious for people picking up STIs.
•	 Investigations.  Start with simple, cheap and relatively non-invasive 
investigations whenever possible. Perform other investigations as 
appropriate, depending on symptoms, signs and results of initial 
investigations, e.g. imaging (CT scan, ultrasound or MRI) aspiration 
or needle biopsy.
Investigations
•	 FBC
•	 Routine blood chemistry
•	 Urine analysis
•	 Blood cultures
•	 Stool cultures
•	 CXR
•	 Thick and thin blood films for malarial parasites: × 3
•	 Store blood for serology and take a second sample 2 weeks 
later
16
Infectious Diseases
1 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
•	 Diagnosis.  Thick and thin blood films showed that this patient had 
malaria with a 5% parasitaemia. His malaria was due to Plasmodium 
falciparum. This is a serious infection and requires immediate emer­
gency treatment in an HDU/ITU.
How would you manage the patient?
P. falciparum is resistant to chloroquine. Artesunate 2.5 mg/kg intrave­
nously is very effective and is first line therapy. Alternatively patients with 
this disease should be commenced on intravenous quinine sulfate 20 mg/
kg infused over 4 hours followed by 10 mg/kg infused over 4 hours 
8-hourly until the switch to oral therapy (quinine salt 600 mg 8-hourly) can 
be made. Total dose is for 7 days. Both treatments are followed by a single 
dose in adults of 3 tablets of pyrimethamine with sulfadoxine (Fansidar). 
Doxycycline 200 mg once daily for 7 days can be used as an alternative to 
pyrimethamine and sulfadoxine. Intravenous quinine might potentiate 
hypoglycaemia and patients on it should have their blood sugar monitored 
regularly. Ideally, they should also be on cardiac monitors.
•	 Progress.  This young man made a full recovery. He admitted that 
he had not taken his malaria prophylaxis regularly.
Further reading
WHO new guidelines. www.who.int/topics/malaria/en/
SHINGLES
Varicella zoster virus causes a primary infection – chickenpox, usually in 
children.
The virus remains latent in dorsal root and cranial nerve ganglia and 
reactivation results in shingles.
Case history
A 75-year-old man presents to his GP with severe right-sided 
chest pain for the previous 2 days. In the past 24 hours he has 
noted a rash on the right side of his chest, in the distribution of 
T5–T6.
What do you think the likely diagnosis is?
Shingles.
What question would you like to ask the patient?
Have you had chickenpox?
Remember
Not everyone who has antibodies to Varicella zoster virus 
remembers having the primary disease.
The FDA in the USA recommends that all people over the age 
of 65 years should have prophylactic varicella inoculation.
17
Shingles
1 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
What investigations might you perform?
The disease is usually diagnosed clinically. It can be confirmed by exami­
nation of the vesicular fluid under an electron microscope to look for 
herpes virus. Serology can also be performed.
How would you manage the patient?
This patient requires admission to hospital (see below). He should be 
nursed in a side room and only by nurses who are known to have antibod­
ies against varicella zoster virus. (If he had remained at home, he must 
avoid contact with people who have no history of having had 
chickenpox.
As the patient has had the rash for less than 3 days he should be com­
menced on aciclovir. Alternative anti-viral agents active against varicella 
zoster virus include famciclovir or valaciclovir. The usual adult dose of 
aciclovir for treatment of shingles is 800 mg five times per day by mouth 
or 5 mg/kg three times per day if given intravenously.
Remember
Modification of the dose of aciclovir might be required if the 
patient has renal impairment
•	 Patients should be prevailed upon not to scratch their lesions 
as this can predispose to secondary infection
•	 Calamine lotion can help. Patients are likely to require 
analgesia.
•	 Progress.  The patient was admitted to hospital because he lives on 
his own. He was started on oral aciclovir 200 mg × 5 daily. 24 h later 
he developed a high fever. A nurse noticed that one of the lesions 
had an inflamed area around it.
What do you think has happened? How would you manage 
the patient?
Secondary infection of the shingles lesions has occurred. The most likely 
pathogens to cause this are Streptococcus pyogenes or S. aureus. Swabs 
should be taken and sent to Microbiology for microscopy, culture and 
sensitivity and blood cultures should also be taken. The patient was com­
menced on IV benzylpenicillin (active against Strep. pyogenes) and IV flu­
cloxacillin (active against S. aureus) and switched to oral therapy after 3 
days. His infected area settled but on discharge after 6 days he still had a 
painful area of shingles on his chest with some new lesions. His aciclovir 
was therefore continued for 10 days.
He was also given amitriptyline 10 mg at night for pain. He remained 
unwell for 3 weeks but after 2 months his pain had settled and he made a 
full recovery.
18
Infectious Diseases
1 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Further reading
Gnann JW Jr, Whitley RJ. Clinical practice. Herpes zoster. New England 
Journal of Medicine 2002; 347 (5): 340–346.
EPSTEIN–BARR VIRUS
This virus causes an acute febrile illness, usually in teenagers or young 
adults and is known as infective mononucleosis (glandular fever). It is 
transmitted by saliva or aerosol.
Case history
A 19-year-old college student presents to his doctor with a 1-week 
history of severe sore throat, fever and extreme fatigue.
On examination, the patient is found to have a fever of 38.8°C, 
and cervical, axillary and inguinal lymphadenopathy.
The tonsils appear enlarged and his pharynx erythematous with 
palatal petechiae present.
The spleen is just palpable.
Information
Ophthalmic herpes is infection of the 1st division of the Vth nerve 
and can lead to corneal scarring and secondary panophthalmitis. 
Ramsay Hunt syndrome is due to herpes infection of the 
geniculate ganglia. It causes a facial palsy with vesicles on the 
pinna of the ear. Post-herpetic neuralgia is a burning continuous 
pain in the area of the previous eruption. It is common in the 
elderly and accompanied by depression. It is difficult to treat.
What is the likely diagnosis in this patient?
The most likely diagnosis in a person of this age with a short history of 
fever, malaise, general lymphadenopathy and severe sore throat is infec­
tious mononucleosis (glandular fever).
Streptococcal sore throats can mimic infectious mononucleosis clini­
cally, although hepatosplenomegaly and inguinal and axillary lymphaden­
opathy will be absent.
Cytomegalovirus infections and toxoplasmosis also present in a similar 
fashion, although the sore throat is usually less severe. Viral hepatitis can 
also sometimes present with fever, lymphadenopathy, malaise and an 
atypical lymphocytosis. HIV seroconversion can also present as a 
glandular-fever-like illness. Lymphomas and leukaemia occasionally 
present in this way.
How would you confirm the diagnosis?
A full blood count should be performed. In over two-thirds of patients this 
will show a mononuclear lymphocytosis with atypical lymphocytes 
19
Epstein–Barr virus
1 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
present. A mild neutropenia is frequently present and platelet counts are 
commonly slightly decreased. Serum aminotransferases are usually raised.
Heterophile antibodies that agglutinate sheep red blood cells (the Paul–
Bunnell test) usually become positive during the second week of 
infection.
The Monospot test (a rapid screening test) will be positive in glandular 
fever in 85% of cases. In addition, EBV-specific antibodies can be looked 
for in Paul–Bunnell-negative ‘glandular fever’ or in atypical cases, but 
these are generally not performed. Ask your local virology laboratory for 
further details, if required.
Treatment
Generally supportive. Contact sports should be avoided while splenome­
galy is present. Aspirin helps relieve the sore throat and reduce fever. 
Occasionally, the tonsils can be so swollen that airway obstruction seems 
imminent: in these cases a short course of steroids is helpful, usually com­
mencing with approximately 60 mg prednisolone/day in individual cases 
and stopping within 1–2 weeks. Corticosteroids are also indicated in cases 
with marked thrombocytopenia, haemolysis or CNS involvement.
Remember
About 90% of patients with infectious mononucleosis who are 
given ampicillin and amoxicillin will develop a rash.
If the diagnosis is unclear, if it is suspected that the patient might have 
a sore throat due to S. pyogenes or if a secondary streptococcal infection is 
suspected, the patient should be commenced on intravenous benzylpeni­
cillin (if in hospital) pending culture and serology results. If the patient is 
not admitted, high-dose oral penicillin is an alternative.
•	 Prognosis.  This student’s sore throat and fever settled after 5–6 days 
but he still felt unwell for a further 3 weeks.
This page intentionally left blank
21
21
Sexually Transmitted Infections 2 
HIV/AIDS
What are the likely diagnoses and the immediate 
management?
Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia commonly has an insidious onset, often 
with worsening shortness of breath and deteriorating exercise tolerance; 
the cough is usually non-productive.
	 Examination of the chest can yield few signs other than tachypnoea and 
tachycardia. Fine inspiratory crackles might be heard.
	 The CXR is often normal or shows little, although bilateral perihilar 
interstitial shadowing with a bat-wing appearance is the characteristic 
abnormality.
	 High-resolution CT of the lungs shows a characteristic ground glass 
appearance even when there is little to see on the plain CXR.
	 Oxygen saturation characteristically falls on exercise. Arterial blood 
gas analysis might show hypoxia with a normal carbon dioxide 
and pH.
	 The diagnosis is made on broncho-alveolar lavage.
The introduction of highly active anti-retroviral therapy (HAART) in HIV-
infected people has led to a significant decline in pneumocystis and the 
infection is now most commonly seen in those not previously recognised 
as HIV infected. Pneumocystis infection occurs most frequently in the 
context of significant immunosuppression, when the CD4 count is < 200 
cells/mm3. There may be clinical markers of poor immune function, such 
as candidiasis, as in this patient.
Primary prophylaxis (cotrimoxazole is first line) is recommended in 
those who are aware of their HIV status if their CD4 count falls into this 
range. This intervention alone has reduced the incidence of pneumocystis 
infection in HIV-infected populations. Pneumocystis pneumonia is an 
AIDS-defining diagnosis.
Case history
A 35-year-old European man is newly diagnosed HIV positive. He 
was tested because he had been feeling generally unwell over a 
6-month period and had lost weight. He presents with a persistent 
cough, which has developed and worsened over the preceding 2 
weeks.
On examination he has a temperature of 39°C, his pulse is 
100/min and he has a respiratory rate of 20/minute.
There are signs of oral candidiasis. He is on no regular 
medication. You are the medical SHO on acute take.
22
Sexually Transmitted Infections
2 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
How would you treat this patient?
IV cotrimoxazole (trimethoprim 15 mg/kg/day + sulfamethoxazole 
75 mg/kg/day) is the preferred first-line treatment, although a significant 
proportion of patients will develop allergy. IV pentamidine or dapsone 
plus pyramethamine are also used.
Treatment is given for 3 weeks. Systemic corticosteroids (IV methyl­
prednisolone 40 mg × 4 daily for 5 days) are added in severe cases (PO2 
less than 8 kPa). Patients with pneumocystis infection can develop respira­
tory failure and require ventilatory support. Pneumothorax is a further 
complication of pneumocystis.
The organism is not cleared by treatment and secondary prophylaxis 
(usually cotrimoxazole) is recommended. This can be withdrawn later if 
the patient starts HAART and the CD4 count remains consistently > 200 
cells/mm3.
In a patient not already on HAART, initiation of therapy should be 
discussed with a specialist physician.
What other chest conditions are associated with HIV?
Mycobacteria tuberculosis (MTB)
An organism of high pathogenicity, MTB can develop relatively early in 
the course of HIV infection. It is particularly common in those who have 
lived in areas of the world with a high incidence of MTB, e.g. sub-Saharan 
Africa. Pulmonary infection presents with a cough (usually productive) 
and chest pain but, in the context of HIV infection, presentation is often 
insidious and non-specific, with fever, sweats, malaise and weight loss. 
History of contact with MTB should always be sought, along with details 
of any previous anti-tuberculous therapy, because in such patients there 
is a risk of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDRTB). There might be 
generalised lymph node enlargement or hepatomegaly in addition to signs 
in the chest. In some cases pulmonary infection is coupled with CNS 
involvement – either TB meningitis or tuberculoma. The chest radiological 
changes are few and are frequently atypical, with lower zone changes 
without cavitation. Other radiological findings include hilar lymphaden­
opathy, pleural effusion or lobar consolidation.
In patients with HIV, the usual immunological reactions to MTB might 
be blunted or absent, making diagnosis more difficult. Mantoux tests are 
rarely helpful because immunosuppressed patients do not produce a 
normal delayed hypersensitivity reaction. Granuloma formation can be 
compromised, leading to atypical histological changes. Sputum smears 
may be negative in up to 50% of those with culture-proven TB. Diagnosis 
relies heavily on clinical suspicion backed by positive cultures from, e.g. 
sputum, broncho-alveolar lavage, blood, bone marrow, lymph nodes, as 
appropriate.
Treatment of TB in HIV co-infected patients presents specific challenges 
and requires input from a specialist physician. Treatment is similar to that 
for HIV-negative patients, although intermittent and short-course regi­
mens are not advised.
Therapy should be initiated with four drugs – isoniazid, rifampicin, 
pyrazinamide and ethambutol – for 2 months. Once sensitivities are con­
firmed, pyrazinamide and ethambutol can be withdrawn and the other 
two drugs continued for 4 months, although this might be extended in 
some circumstances. The drug–drug interactions between anti-retroviral 
23
HIV/AIDS
2 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
and anti-tuberculous medications are complex and are a consequence of 
enzyme induction or inhibition. There are interactions between rifampicin 
derivatives and the protease inhibitor class of anti-retroviral agents, 
leading to an increase in rifampicin toxicity and reduced protease efficacy. 
The non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase class also interacts variably with 
rifampicin, requiring dose alterations. Additionally, there are overlapping 
toxicities between HAART regimens and anti-tuberculous drugs, in par­
ticular hepatotoxicity, peripheral neuropathy and gastrointestinal side 
effects.
Remember
Any patient in whom the suspicion of TB is great enough to start 
anti-tuberculous therapy MUST be notified to the local consultant 
in communicable disease control (CCDC).
Paradoxical inflammatory reactions (e.g. immune reconstitution inflam­
matory syndrome, IRIS), which include exacerbation of symptoms, new or 
worsening clinical signs and deteriorating radiological appearances, have 
been associated with improvement of immune function. IRIS is most com­
monly seen in the first few weeks after initiation of HAART in patients 
recovering from MTB, and can last several weeks or months. The syn­
drome does not reflect inadequate TB therapy and is not confined to any 
particular combination of anti-retroviral agents. It is important to exclude 
new pathology in this situation.
Bacterial chest infection
Several respiratory infections are more common in patients with HIV 
infection, in particular Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae and 
Moraxella catarrhalis. The onset is usually rapid, with a productive cough. 
Signs of consolidation occur and radiological changes of consolidation or 
infiltration might be present. Diagnosis is based on sputum and blood 
cultures and management is with appropriate broad-spectrum antibiotics 
(e.g. cefotaxime).
Other infective conditions
Cytomegalovirus, Cryptococcus neoformans, Aspergillus fumigatus, Histo­
plasma capsulatum and Nocardia asteroides can all cause fever, cough and 
dyspnoea in association with advanced HIV infection. The clinical signs 
and radiological findings are usually non-diagnostic. The diagnosis 
depends on broncheo-alveolar lavage.
Malignancy
The incidence of Kaposi’s sarcoma (KS) has declined significantly since 
the widespread introduction of HAART. It is a vascular tumour that is 
associated with human herpes virus type 8 (HHV8). Although most com­
monly found on the skin, KS can infiltrate the lungs to cause cough and 
shortness of breath. On examination, other KS lesions are usually found 
on the skin or in the mouth, but in rare cases the lungs alone may be 
involved.
Radiological changes are of diffuse lung infiltration often with a nodular 
appearance. Pleural effusion might be present. Lesions are visualised on 
24
Sexually Transmitted Infections
2 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
bronchosocopy. Treatment is with systemic chemotherapy. Anti-retroviral 
therapy should be initiated if the patient is not already on treatment.
Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma can also cause lung infiltration. Patients 
additionally present with systemic ‘B’ symptoms. On examination lym­
phadenopathy and splenomegaly might be found. Hilar lymphadenopa­
thy seen on the CXR and CT scan indicate widespread lymph node 
enlargement in the chest and abdominal cavities. The diagnosis is made 
on the histological appearance of lymph node biopsy. Such lymphomas 
are often aggressive. Treatment is with chemotherapy (see Kumar and 
Clark, Clinical Medicine 6th edn, p. 510).
How would you manage an HIV-positive patient with chest 
problems?
The differential diagnosis in an HIV-infected patient presenting with res­
piratory symptoms is wide. There is considerable advantage in establish­
ing a specific diagnosis rather than treating symptoms empirically. Factors 
that impact on diagnosis and management include the clinical presenta­
tion, the level of immunosuppression of the individual, lifetime exposure 
to infective agents and current medication.
Remember
In HIV-infected patients:
•	 Common conditions can have unusual presentations
•	 Uncommon conditions occur more frequently
•	 Many different conditions can present in similar ways – clinically 
and radiologically
•	 Those standard investigations that depend on an intact immune 
system will not be useful
•	 A tissue or culture diagnosis is frequently required.
Pathology in HIV-infected patients is related to:
•	 Their degree of immunosuppression
•	 The virulence of the organism
•	 The microbiological repertoire to which an individual has been 
exposed
•	 The multiple pathology that is frequently encountered
•	 The medication that the patient is taking.
Assessment
	 Full history and examination: including details of travel, previous infec­
tions, previous or existing HIV-related pathology, current surrogate 
marker data (if known), current therapy including anti-retroviral drugs 
and anti-microbial prophylaxis.
	 Assess the degree of immunosuppression by looking for clinical signs 
such as oral candidiasis, hairy oral leukoplakia, and seborrhoeic derma­
titis. Look for pathology in all systems, including examination of the 
mouth and fundi.
	 Chest X-ray, exercise oximetry, blood gases, blood cultures, sputum 
examination for acid-fast bacilli (AFB), and microscopy, culture and 
sensitivity. Full blood count, liver and renal function.
25
HIV/AIDS
2 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Treatment
If the patient is clinically immunosuppressed, has a previous AIDS-
defining illness or is known to have a CD4 count < 200/mm3 and has chest 
X-ray abnormalities or desaturates on exercise, or has a hypoxic blood gas 
picture suggestive of pneumocystis infection, institute therapy pending 
bronchoscopy. Organisms will still be found several days into treatment.
Remember
•	 Drug allergies
•	 Bone marrow suppression with high-dose cotrimoxazole
•	 Hypotension/hypoglycaemia with IV pentamidine
•	 CD4 counts and HIV viral load measurements are altered in the 
face of any acute infection and might not accurately reflect the 
underlying situation.
If the patient has a history of TB or of exposure to TB, or has clinical 
and radiological findings consistent with TB, isolate the patient and inves­
tigate. Do not initiate empirical anti-tuberculous therapy without an expert 
opinion, as this will have long-lasting and far-reaching consequences for 
the patient and for future management.
If the patient has sputum smear positive for AFB or has culture-proven 
TB, isolate and start anti-tuberculous therapy with four drugs. Notify and 
seek expert opinion.
If the patient has clinical or radiological signs of bacterial infection, 
institute therapy with broad-spectrum antibiotics, e.g. amoxicillin or 
azithromycin.
Remember
If the patient does not respond as detailed:
•	 Reconsider the diagnosis
•	 Suspect multiple pathology.
Further reading
Skolnik PR. HIV therapy. New England Journal of Medicine 2003; 349 (24): 
2351–2352.
This page intentionally left blank
27
27
Nutrition 3 
FEEDING THE PATIENT
Case history
A surgical colleague phones you to ask about parenteral nutrition 
for a 70-year-old man who had an oesophago-gastrectomy 5 days 
previously. Postoperative care had been straightforward and no 
prior provision for parenteral nutrition had been made. It now 
seems likely that he has an anastomotic leak.
Remember
•	 It is better to predict (if possible) whether some form of 
supplementary nutrition is likely to be required before an event
•	 Over 10% of patients in hospital are said to be malnourished.
What should you advise?
Parenteral nutrition is never an emergency therapy. It can always wait 
until expert advice is available next day. You say that you will bring your 
consultant along the following morning.
How do you assess the nutritional state?
This can be done simply by looking at the patient! Does he look malnour­
ished? Other parameters that can help are:
	 Weight loss > 10%
	 Serum albumin < 35 g/L
	 Serum transferrin < 1.5 g/L
	 Body mass index (BMI) = (kg) ÷ height (m2); the normal range is 18.5 to 
24.9.
An evaluation of the nutritional status can be done using the MUST criteria 
(Fig 3.1).
Nutrition will be necessary for
	 All severely malnourished patients on admission to hospital
	 Moderately malnourished patients who are not expected to eat for 3–5 
days because of their illness
	 Normally nourished patients not expected to eat for 7–10 days.
28
Nutrition
3 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Figure 3.1  ‘Malnutrition Universal Screening Tool’ (‘MUST’). Reproduced with 
permission from the British Association for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition 
(BAPEN): www.bapen.org.uk.
Step 1
BMI score
BMI kg/m2    Score
>30 
= Obese
>20 
= 0
18.5–20 
= 1
<18.5 
= 2
Step 2
Weight loss score
Unplanned weight loss
in past 3–6 months
% 
   Score
<5 
= 0
10–20 
= 1
>0 
= 2
Step 4
Overall risk of malnutrition
Add scores together to calculate overall risk of malnutrition
Score 0 = Low Risk        Score 1 = Medium Risk        Score 2 or more = High Risk
Step 5
Management guidelines
• Repeat screening
 Hospital – weekly
 Care Homes – monthly
 Community – annually
 for special groups
 e.g. those >75 years
0 = Low Risk
Routine clinical care
1 = Medium Risk
Observe
2 or more = High Risk
Treat*
• Document dietary intake
 for 3 days if subject in
 hospital or care home
• If adequate – little 
 concern – repeat 
 screening: – Hospital 
 – weekly – Care home 
 – at least monthly      
 – Community – at least 
 2–3 monthly
 
• If inadequate – clinical 
 concern – follow local 
 policy, set goals, improve 
 and increase overall 
 nutritional intake, monitor 
 and review care plan 
 regularly 
• Refer to dietitian, 
 Nutrition Support Team 
 or implement local policy
• Set goals, improve and 
 increase overall nutritional 
 intake 
• Monitor and review 
 care plan: 
 – Hospital – weekly 
 – Care home – monthly 
 – Community – monthly
* Unless detrimental or no
 benefit is expected from
 nutritional support
 e.g. imminent death
Step 3
Acute disease effect score
If patient is acutely ill
and there has been or is
likely to be no nutritional
intake for >5 days
Score 2
All risk categories:
• Treat underlying condition and provide
 help and advice on food choices,
 eating and drinking when necessary.
• Record malnutritional risk category.
• Record need for special diets and
 follow local policy.
Obesity:
• Record presence of obesity.
 For those with underlying conditions,
 these are generally controlled before
 the treatment of obesity.
29
Feeding the patient
3 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Always feed enterally rather than parentally if possible
Information
Standard enteric diet providing 8.4 MJ per day (2000 kcal)
Energy:
•	 Carbohydrate as glucose polymers (49–53% of total energy)
•	 Fat as triglycerides (30–35% of total energy)
Nitrogen
Whole protein (6–7 g of nitrogen/L)
Other
Additional electrolytes, vitamins and trace elements.
This provides:
ratio of energy : nitrogen kJ : g = 620 : 1 (ratio of energy kcal: 
nitrogen : g = 150 : 1).
Osmolality = 285–300 mOsmol/kg.
See current National Formularies for ready-made formulations.
Methods of enterally feeding
	 By mouth
	 By fine-bore nasogastric tube (check position with pH paper and if in 
doubt, X-ray. Feeding tubes are usually placed endoscopically)
	 Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG; refer to gastroenterologist 
for insertion) for prolonged period, i.e. > 30 days.
Methods of parenteral nutrition
Peripheral nutrition is the initial preferred option. Peripheral cannulas are 
inserted into the mid arm vein. Each catheter will last 5 days and the 
procedure has fewer complications than a central venous catheter.
Central nutrition. A cannula is inserted via an intra-clavicular approach 
into the subclavian vein in theatre. Infusions include nitrogen for protein 
synthesis, calories, electrolytes, vitamins and trace elements. Complica­
tions include sepsis, thrombosis, pneumothorax and embolism.
Most hospitals have nutrition teams to advise on the nutritional regi­
mens that are required.
Remember
Remember to monitor carefully with:
•	 daily plasma electrolytes
•	 daily glucose
•	 weekly assessments of nutritional status.
• Progress.  This patient was not suitable for enteral nutrition because 
of his gastrointestinal surgery; thus parenteral nutrition is 
appropriate.
He was started with peripheral nutrition via a mid arm cannula. However, 
after 5 days it was felt he required longer-term nutrition and a central 
30
Nutrition
3 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
catheter was inserted. The leak settled on conservative management and 
he was able to return home on soft foods 4 weeks later.
Further reading
The Journal of Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition (JPEN). www.
nutritioncare.org/wcontent.aspx?id=172
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Nutrition support in 
adults. Clinical Guideline 2006; 32: www.nice.org.uk
Singer P, Berger MM, Van den Berghe G, et al. ESPEN guidelines on 
parenteral nutrition: intensive care. Clin Nutr 2009; 28: 387–400.
31
31
Gastroenterology 4 
Any gastrointestinal disease
Infections
Viruses (influenza, norovirus)
Bacterial (pertussis, urinary infection)
Central nervous system disease
Raised intracranial pressure
Vestibular disturbance
Migraine
Metabolic
Uraemia
Hypercalcaemia
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Drugs
Antibiotics
Chemotherapy
Digoxin
Immunotherapy
Incretins
Levodopa
Opiates
Reflex
Myocardial infarction
Biliary colic
Psychogenic
Pregnancy
Alcohol excess
Table 4.1  Causes of vomiting
Case history
A 70-year-old man was admitted with a 2-week history of repeated 
vomiting. He had lost more than 6 kg in weight. He had recently 
developed colicky abdominal pain and constipation without 
passage of wind.
On examination, his abdomen was distended and he was 
tender in the epigastrium.
You call for surgical advice. The surgeon, in addition to your 
findings, notes that there are increased bowel sounds. The 
patient’s hernial orifices and rectal examination show no 
abnormality.
Remember
Non-gastrointestinal causes are possible: a full examination is 
therefore necessary. Note: look at the fundi for papilloedema.
VOMITING
Vomiting centres are located on the lateral reticular formation of the 
medulla and are stimulated by chemoreceptors trigger zones on the floor 
of the 4th ventricle and also by vagal afferents from the GI tract.
Causes of vomiting are shown in Table 4.1.
32
Gastroenterology
4 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Information
Small intestinal obstruction: differential diagnosis:
•	 Adhesions (80% in adults)
•	 Hernia
•	 Crohn’s disease
•	 Intussusception
•	 Obstruction due to extrinsic involvement by cancer
Investigations
•	 Haematological:
–	 FBC, ESR, CRP
•	 Radiological:
–	 Abdominal X-ray
–	 Chest X-ray
•	 Biochemical:
–	 Electrolytes
–	 Urea/creatinine/eGFR
–	 LFTs
–	 Calcium
–	 Amylase
	 Chest X-ray (CXR). Normal. Look for evidence of air under the dia­
phragm (perforation), signs of pneumonia, hilar mass (tumour).
	 Abdominal X-ray (AXR). Normal. With a history of this length, a 
normal X-ray would suggest that large or small bowel obstruction is 
unlikely. High obstruction in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, i.e. in the 
oesophagus or stomach, is possible. Investigate for non-GI causes (meta­
bolic, neurological – exclude brainstem lesion), occasionally severe 
depression.
•	 Abnormal. Might show evidence of small or large bowel obstruction 
or gastric distension.
In this patient, the AXR showed small bowel obstruction (Fig. 4.1). The 
differential diagnosis is shown in the Information box.
Management
The ultimate goal is to relieve obstruction. In the interim:
	 Infuse glucose/saline to maintain electrolyte balance (with additional 
K+ 20 mmol per litre).
	 Insert nasogastric tube (on continuous drainage).
	 Contact surgeons, await instruction as to further investigations (such as 
CT scan to localise obstructive lesion).
• Progress.  At operation, a carcinoma of the ascending colon was 
found and resected.
33
Hiccups
4 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Valvulae smaller and fewer
Prominent valvulae conniventes
Jejunum
Ileum
Figure 4.1  Small bowel obstruction, showing dilated loops of small bowel. 
HICCUPS
Hiccups are due to involuntary diaphragmatic contractions with closure 
of the glottis. They are very common and usually not sinister, even if 
persistent.
Case history
You are called by the surgical SHO because he is concerned that 
a 70-year-old man has had continuous hiccups for 48 h, a fever, 
malaise and right hypochondrial pain. Ten days ago he had been 
admitted with intestinal obstruction (see case above) and a 
laparotomy for a carcinoma of the ascending colon had been 
performed. This is a classic situation for a subphrenic abscess 
occurring post-surgery in an elderly person.
How would you investigate?
Check Hb, WBC and liver biochemistry. An urgent ultrasound was 
performed and confirmed the diagnosis of a subphrenic abscess. Blood 
cultures were taken as he was febrile.
Treatment and prognosis of the abscess
He had drainage under ultrasound control and antibiotics were started. 
The bacteria causing abscesses are usually Bacteroides spp. and/or E. coli 
34
Gastroenterology
4 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
and he was therefore treated with a cephalosporin and metronidazole. His 
hiccups were controlled with chlorpromazine 50 mg or diazepam 5 mg as 
necessary.
Other causes of hiccups
	 Metabolic, e.g. uraemia
	 Neurological, e.g. brainstem tumour
	 Other abdominal pathology
	 No pathological cause.
WEIGHT LOSS
Weight loss is often a perceived symptom by patients but does need to be 
verified. It is a general symptom, which can reflect disease in any part of 
the body.
Always make sure that the patient has a sufficient calorie intake for his/
her requirements, bearing in mind the amount of exercise taken. In a young 
female, think of anorexia nervosa.
Reduced calorie intake can be due to intentional dieting but can also be 
a symptom of generalised disease due to anorexia.
Case history
A 40-year-old man has been admitted with a fever, tremor and 
10 kg weight loss. He has previously been counselled for alcohol 
misuse.
What should you do?
You need to consider a number of diagnoses and this might be helped by 
additional history and examination:
	 Hyperthyroidism: check for symptoms and signs of hyperthyroidism 
(see p. 434).
	 Alcoholic liver disease (see p. 70).
	 Malnutrition: check by asking the patient’s family. Perhaps there is a 
psychiatric history?
	 Underlying cancer, particularly lung, bowel and pancreas.
	 Biochemical investigations: should help determine underlying meta­
bolic or renal disease.
	 Malabsorption: often causes anorexia, which contributes to weight 
loss.
This patient had no major signs of chronic liver disease but did admit to 
recurrent episodes of upper abdominal pain radiating through to his back. 
These tended to occur on Monday, following his weekend binges. This 
suggests pancreatic disease resulting from his heavy alcohol intake.
What initial investigations are appropriate?
	 FBC, LFTs, calcium, blood alcohol
	 Plain X-ray of the abdomen for pancreatic calcification
	 Abdominal ultrasound to assess the pancreas for cysts and potential 
masses.
35
Dysphagia
4 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
This patient was admitted in a malnourished, hyperdynamic state due to 
acute alcohol withdrawal (see p. 72). Treat this initially and further inves­
tigate the pancreas later.
Case history
A 55-year-old patient has been referred urgently because of acute 
dysphagia. She gave a history of reflux for years and increasing 
dysphagia for 6 months. She had been eating an orange, which 
became lodged in her gullet and all efforts to dislodge it were 
unsuccessful. The underlying diagnosis is likely to be food bolus 
obstruction on an already present oesophageal stricture.
Further investigations
•	 CT scan of the pancreas:
•	 MRCP: this is non-invasive and of value in assessment of the 
pancreas and biliary tree
•	 ERCP to delineate the biliary and pancreatic ducts (if MRCP is 
unavailable)
•	 Endoscopic ultrasound: can help define pancreatic cysts and 
masses
• Progress.  This man was treated initially with benzodiazepine and 
IV thiamine (p. 527) and made a good recovery from his acute with­
drawal state. Further investigations showed chronic pancreatitis; he 
was referred to the Gastroenterology Clinic.
DYSPHAGIA
Dysphagia is difficulty in swallowing. It is an immediate, obstructive sen­
sation during the passage of liquid or solid through the pharynx or 
oesophagus.
What should you do?
Refer for an urgent endoscopy. The endoscopy findings were of a stricture 
in the mid-oesophagus with no obvious malignant lesion. Biopsies were 
taken and the stricture dilated.
Remember
Submucosal cancer can look like a benign lesion.
Unfortunately, this woman developed severe chest pain immediately after 
the dilatation and surgical emphysema could be felt in her neck. Clinically, 
an oesophageal tear is suspected.
36
Gastroenterology
4 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
A CXR with a water soluble contrast agent orally, confirms an oesopha­
geal rupture.
• Diagnosis.  The underlying cause is more likely to be oesophageal 
cancer because careful dilatation of benign lesions rarely causes a 
tear.
Initial management
	 Nil by mouth
	 IV line for fluids
	 Antibiotic prophylaxis
	 Surgical referral.
Small tears in a peptic stricture can resolve in a few days on conservative 
management. Large tears generally need surgery in a dedicated thoracic 
unit. Endoscopic stenting is used initially for tears in malignant lesions but 
again surgery may be required.
Biopsies later confirmed a squamous carcinoma.
Management will include assessment for surgery with:
	 Blood count, liver biochemistry
	 CXR
	 ECG
	 Respiratory function tests
	 Abdominal US, CT scan to assess operability
	 Endoscopic ultrasound is an accurate way of staging lesion and any 
local lymph nodes
	 PET scan to look for distant metastases.
Discussion should take place at an MDT to decide on the patient’s 
treatment.
As investigations showed no distant metastases, surgery with neo-
adjuvant (preoperative) and adjuvant (postoperative) chemoradiation 
treatment was given.
CONSTIPATION
This is the infrequent passage of stools, < 3 per week + straining and the 
passage of hard stools.
Case history
Your house officer asks you what she should prescribe for an 
elderly man who hasn’t opened his bowels for 5 days. The patient, 
who was previously well and active, had been admitted a week 
ago with a chest infection. Rectal examination revealed a loaded 
colon with no local lesion.
Should this patient be investigated?
Not initially because it seems likely that constipation is due to immobility. 
A barium enema may be necessary if there is no improvement.
37
Diarrhoea
4 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Treatment
	 Initially, the patient will require a laxative to ‘get things moving’. Glyc­
erol suppositories are useful. Oral magnesium sulphate, an osmotic 
purgative, is effective and cheaper than the more usually prescribed 
osmotic laxative lactulose.
	 Do not use stimulant laxatives.
	 Stop ‘constipating’ drugs if possible.
	 Faecal impaction might require digital extraction followed by small-
volume phosphate enemas.
	 Advise the patient regarding high-fibre diets and fluid intake.
Information
Causes of constipation:
•	 Simple/idiopathic
•	 Intestinal obstruction
•	 Colonic disease, e.g. carcinoma
•	 Painful anal conditions
•	 Drugs, e.g. codeine, iron, verapamil, tricyclic anti-depressants, 
opiates
•	 Hypothyroidism, hypercalcaemia
•	 Depression
•	 Immobility
DIARRHOEA
Increased frequency of defecation can, even in a previously fit patient, 
produce dehydration and severe electrolyte depletion. Diarrhoea can 
also be a recurrent problem in patients with established gastrointestinal 
disease.
What should you do in a case of diarrhoea presenting 
in A&E?
In the history, ascertain whether the patient has eaten suspect food or 
travelled overseas. Check for drug history, e.g. antibiotics. Ask about 
accompanying symptoms, e.g. abdominal pain, weight loss. It is essential 
to:
	 Establish history of onset.
	 Determine frequency, consistency, content of stool, presence of blood.
	 Determine the state of hydration and electrolyte balance.
	 Send stool for culture, parasites (ova or cysts) and C. difficile toxin (if the 
patient has previously been hospitalised or been on antibiotics).
	 Perform a rectal examination; sigmoidoscopy (if bloody diarrhoea) 
should be done by the gastroenterology team.
	 Do blood cultures in severe cases with a temperature.
	 Do a plain abdominal X-ray.
38
Gastroenterology
4 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Management
This will depend on the case scenario (see below) but most diarrhoeal 
illnesses are self-limiting and short lived; 1–10% might persist for a 
month. Identification of the pathogen will determine specific therapy (see 
Chapter 1).
Case history (1)
A 24-year-old returned from travelling for 3 months, during which 
he passed through several countries. He was fairly well on his 
return but after 3 days he developed severe diarrhoea which has 
now been present for 2 weeks.
On admission to MAU he is dehydrated and has lost over 5 kg 
in weight.
Information
Likely pathogens causing diarrhoea
Bacteria (50%):
•	 E. coli
•	 Campylobacter spp.
•	 Salmonella spp.
•	 Shigella spp.
Viruses (1% but seldom produce severe diarrhoea in adults):
•	 Rotavirus
•	 Noravirus
Protozoa:
•	 Giardia
•	 Entamoeba histolytica
•	 Cryptosporidium
Helminths (e.g. Strongyloides):
Some cases have no pathogens or multiple pathogens found (this 
occurs in 20–50% of cases).
What immediate action would you take?
	 FBC, U&Es, LFTs.
	 Send stools for ova, cysts and culture.
	 Rehydration with oral glucose/electrolyte solutions initially. IV fluids 
are usually not necessary.
	 Vomiting might need to be treated with an anti-emetic (metoclopramide 
10 mg × 3/day).
Diagnosis
This is not acute diarrhoea due to a viral/bacterial cause as the patient did 
not have diarrhoea when he returned to the UK. Viral/bacterial diarrhoea 
usually starts in the country where the infection occurred and generally 
clears up within 7 days. Possible causes are shown in the Information box.
39
Diarrhoea
4 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Stool samples showed no abnormal findings.
• Progress.  Giardiasis is very likely in this patient and treatment with 
metronidazole 2 g a day for 3 successive days was given, with dra­
matic improvement.
Case history (2)
A 30-year-old, white, Caucasian, female patient presented with a 
2-week history of passing six to ten motions a day. The stools 
were loose and contained blood. She felt tired and had lost about 
5 kg in weight.
On admission to MAU she was not dehydrated but had a fever 
and was very lethargic.
Information
Causes of non-acute diarrhoea in a returning traveller:
•	 Giardiasis
•	 Cryptosporidiosis
•	 Amoebiasis
•	 Tropical sprue (SE Asia, Caribbean)
•	 Schistosomiasis
•	 Strongyloidiasis
What is the differential diagnosis?
	 Infective diarrhoea. Send specimens for microbiological testing.
	 First presentation of inflammatory bowel disease (most likely in this 
woman).
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
In any case of persistent diarrhoea presenting in A&E in developed coun­
tries, IBD is a possible cause. A previous history of intermittent diarrhoea 
or recurrent abdominal pain is often present. In developing countries, 
infective causes are more likely and must be excluded.
What should you do?
General
	 Take blood for FBC, ESR, CRP, urea and electrolytes, liver 
biochemistry.
	 Check plain abdominal X-ray for presence of stool, mucosal oedema, 
bowel dilatation or perforation.
	 Sigmoidoscopy: the presence of an inflamed, friable mucosa with loss 
of vascular pattern or a patchy inflammation indicates inflammatory 
bowel disease. Take a rectal biopsy.
	 Stool cultures (NB: Infective gastroenteritis must always be ruled out). 
C. difficile toxin assay – 4 stool specimens (90% sensitivity).
In this patient you have ruled out infective gastroenteritis as three stool 
cultures were negative. Taking into account the history and the 
40
Gastroenterology
4 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
sigmoidoscopic finding, you presume this must be inflammatory bowel 
disease. Her Hb was 100 g/L and CRP 84 mg/L.
Acute colitis is associated with diarrhoea, abdominal pain, fever and 
systemic disturbance. There is blood in the stools in ulcerative colitis but 
Crohn’s disease patients only have bloody diarrhoea with Crohn’s colitis. 
To assess severity, check the factors shown in Table 4.2.
Always look for the presence of:
	 Toxic dilatation: colon > 5 cm diameter and mucosal islands on plain 
abdominal X-ray (Fig. 4.2).
	 Perforation (on abdominal X-ray).
How would you manage this acute situation?
	 IV fluids with glucose/saline.
	 IV therapy with steroids (IV hydrocortisone 100 mg × 4/day) followed 
by oral therapy (enteric coated prednisolone 40 mg per day) if patient 
improves.
	 IV antibiotics (metronidazole/cephalosporin).
	 Further management: refer 
to 
gastroenterologists; 
consult 
GI 
surgeons.
Remember
In acute severe ulcerative colitis, at 3 days post treatment and 
CRP > 45 mg/L or stool frequency > 8/day gives an 85% chance 
of needing a colectomy.
Haemoglobin
↓
< 100 g/L
Albumin
↓
< 30 g/L
Fever
↑
> 37.5°C
Stool frequency
↑
> 6/day
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
↑
> 30 mm per hour
Pulse rate
↑
> 90 bpm
Platelets
↑
White blood cells
↑
Table 4.2  Findings in severe attack of ulcerative colitis
Progress and management
There was no response to treatment at 3 days (see Information box). She 
was started on infliximab 5 mg/kg as ‘rescue therapy’ to avoid immediate 
colectomy. Ciclosporin 2 mg/kg/day is an alternative.
This patient responded to infliximab and is being followed closely in 
the Colitis Clinic, continuing on infliximab therapy on a protocol, lasting 
up to 46 weeks.
Has this patient got Crohn’s disease or ulcerative colitis?
Both can produce an acute colitis. The differentiation is by colonoscopy 
and histological appearance (see Table 4.3).
41
Diarrhoea
4 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Mucosal islands
Gross dilatation of colon
Colon
a
b
Figure 4.2  (a) Toxic dilatation of the colon; (b) plain abdominal X-ray showing 
toxic dilatation in ulcerative colitis. 
42
Gastroenterology
4 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Information
Crohn’s disease:
•	 Affects any part of GI tract, from mouth to anus
•	 70% of cases affect the terminal ileum
•	 Can be controlled but not cured
Ulcerative colitis:
•	 Confined to colon
•	 Cured by colectomy
•	 Can affect the: rectum alone (proctitis), sigmoid and descending 
colon (left-sided colitis) or the whole colon (extensive colitis)
Both
•	 Extra-gastrointestinal manifestations, e.g. pyoderma 
gangrenosum (see Table 4.4 and Figure 4.3)
Eyes
Uveitis
Episcleritis, conjunctivitis
Joints
Type I (pauci-articular) arthropathy
Type II (polyarticular) arthropathy
Arthralgia
Ankylosing spondylitis
Inflammatory back pain
Skin
Erythema nodosum
Pyoderma gangrenosum (see Fig. 4.3)
Liver and biliary tree
Sclerosing cholangitis
Fatty liver
Chronic hepatitis
Cirrhosis
Gallstones
Nephrolithiasis
Venous thrombosis
Table 4.4  Extra-gastrointestinal manifestations of inflammatory 
bowel disease
Histological findings
Crohn’s disease
Ulcerative colitis
Inflammation
Deep (transmural), 
patchy
Superficial (mucosal) 
continuous
Granulomas
+ +
Rare
Goblet cells
Present
Depleted
Crypt abscesses
+
+ +
Table 4.3  Differentiating between Crohn’s disease and 
ulcerative colitis
43
Abdominal pain
4 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
a
b
Figure 4.3  Pyoderma gangrenosum (courtesy of David Paige). 
Further reading
Mowat C, et al. Management of Inflammatory bowel disease in adults. 
GUT 2011; 60: 571–607 (BSG Guidelines).
ABDOMINAL PAIN
Most diseases of the GI tract are associated with abdominal pain but pain 
can also be referred to the chest or back. The characteristics of the pain can 
help in the diagnosis.
Case history
A 40-year-old man presents with epigastric and central abdominal 
cramping pain. For 48 h the pain has been continuous, severe and 
associated with vomiting. The pain does not radiate but it is 
getting worse by the hour.
On examination he has a temperature of 38°, pulse rate of 
98 bpm. He has tenderness across the upper abdomen but no 
other signs. Bowel sounds are normal. He has no alteration of 
bowel habit and no loss of weight.
Immediate investigations
	 Haematological: Hb, WCC, ESR
	 Biochemical: U&Es, liver biochemistry, amylase
	 Radiological: initial AXR for obstruction. CXR in acute pain for intesti­
nal perforation.
44
Gastroenterology
4 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Management
Develop the management plan to include:
	 Symptomatic relief.
	 Information for patient and relatives.
	 Further investigations (endoscopy, ultrasound, CT and MRI as neces­
sary to exclude perforation, obstruction, stones, calcification, cancer and 
ascites).
	 Consultation with surgical colleagues.
In this case, abdominal pain situated in the epigastrium and central 
abdomen, and of the severity described, is always due to organic disease. 
Your differential diagnosis should include the following:
	 An acute surgical cause:
•	 Aortic aneurysm dissection
•	 Appendicitis (even occasionally with upper abdominal pain)
•	 Perforation
•	 Intestinal obstruction.
	 Acute pancreatitis:
•	 Severe pain
•	 Often associated with heavy alcohol use, gallstones, viral infection 
(e.g. mumps)
•	 ↑ Serum amylase (> 5 × normal)
•	 Gastric retention and vomiting
•	 Ultrasonographic changes and contrast-enhanced dynamic CT (best 
investigation) show pancreatic swelling, necrosis and peripancreatic 
fluid collection.
Remember
Acute pancreatitis
Assessment of severity and poor prognosis (first 48 h):
•	 Age > 55 years
•	 Blood glucose > 10 mmol/L
•	 Serum urea > 16 mmol/L
•	 Serum calcium < 2 mmol/L
•	 Serum LDH > 600 U/L
•	 PaO2 <8kPa
•	 WCC > 15 × 109/L
•	 Serum albumin < 30 g/L
•	 Serum AST > 200 U/L.
Symptom relief
Symptom relief depends on diagnosis. Use anti-spasmodics (hyoscine 
20–40 mg × 4/day). Minor analgesics (paracetamol) can help and NSAIDs 
are useful in some cases. When prescribing opiates (morphine, codeine) 
remember they can increase constipation and cause spasm in the sphincter 
of Oddi. Anti-emetics (metoclopramide 10 mg × 2/day or prochlorpera­
zine 5 mg × 2/day) as necessary.
Patient information
This depends on diagnosis but should be delivered to both patients and 
relatives sensitively and with an understanding of underlying pathology.
45
Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD)
4 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
• Diagnosis and progress.  In this case, the 40-year-old patient turned 
out to have acute pancreatitis, with a serum amylase of 1000 units. 
He quickly settled by being nil by mouth and having IV fluids. The 
aetiology was never established but was thought to have perhaps 
been viral.
GASTRO-OESOPHAGEAL REFLUX DISEASE (GORD)
Gastro-oesophageal reflux occurs normally. GORD occurs when the anti-
reflux mechanism fails, allowing acidic gastric contents to make prolonged 
contact with the oesophageal mucosa.
Case history
A 48-year-old man was admitted with severe epigastric pain 
radiating up into his chest. He thought he had had a heart attack 
(see p. 284).
Investigations
•	 FBC, liver biochemistry, serum amylase
•	 ECG, repeated after 1 hour
•	 CXR
•	 Cardiac markers, e.g. troponins and CPK
What investigations would you do on admission?
It is critical to exclude life-threatening conditions, such as myocardial 
infarction, pulmonary embolism and pneumothorax before labelling such 
pain as due to reflux.
In this patient, two ECGs, CXR and cardiac markers (e.g. CPK, 
troponins) were normal. Additional features in the history included:
	 Long history of reflux (GORD)
	 Burning nature of the pain
	 Flatulence
	 A relationship of the present pain to previous similar pain
	 A food-related element
	 Exacerbation of pain with drinking hot liquids.
Features of gastro-oesophageal reflux
	 Burning pain produced by bending, stooping or lying down
	 Pain seldom radiates to the arms
	 Pain precipitated by drinking hot liquids or alcohol
	 Pain relieved by antacids.
Features of myocardial ischaemia
	 Gripping or crushing pain
	 Pain radiates into neck, shoulders and both arms
	 Pain produced by exercise
	 Accompanied by breathlessness.
Diagnosis of GORD was made in this patient from the history.
46
Gastroenterology
4 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Progress and management
He was given liquid Gaviscon (10 mL) and a proton pump inhibitor (PPI, 
e.g. omeprazole 20 mg × 2 daily for 6 weeks, reducing to 10 mg) to control 
the symptoms. Endoscopy will need to be performed in this man in view 
of his age.
Remember
•	 Reflux can be difficult to diagnose and although it is often 
associated with a hiatus hernia, more formal investigation might 
be necessary, e.g. endoscopy followed by oesophageal pH, 
impedance and pressure monitoring if necessary
•	 At endoscopy, assess degree of oesophagitis and check for 
Barrett’s oesophagus (including biopsies).
BARRETT’S OESOPHAGUS
This occurs as a result of longstanding reflux. It consists of columnar 
epithelium with intestinal metaplasia extending upwards into the lower 
oesophagus and replacing normal squamous epithelium. Barrett’s 
oesophagus (even short segment < 3 cm) is pre-malignant for adenocarci­
noma. Risk factors for progression are male sex, age > 45 years, length of 
segment > 8 cm, early age of onset and duration of symptoms of GORD, 
the presence of ulceration and stricture and a family history. Dysplasia is 
patchy and biopsies from all four quadrants (every 2 cm) of the Barrett’s 
segment must be performed. There is no evidence that treatment with PPIs 
or surgery leads to Barrett’s regression. Patients without dysplasia do not 
require surveillance. Low-grade dysplasia requires regular endoscopic 
surveillance. High-grade dysplasia is now treated with radiofrequency 
ablation using the HALO system, but endoscopic ablation therapy with 
photodynamic therapy or laser is also used.
PEPTIC ULCER DISEASE
Case history (1)
In the clinic you see a 40-year-old man with epigastric pain that 
has been present on and off for a number of years. The doctor’s 
letter indicates that the man has been a regular attender and has 
received antacids, H2 receptor antagonists and a PPI at some 
time over the last 5 years. In 2005 the patient was found to have 
H. pylori antibodies in his serum and was given eradication 
therapy.
What should you do?
The history of intermittent epigastric pain is highly suggestive of peptic 
ulcer disease and you note there are no alarm features in the history. The 
patient has been given H. pylori eradication therapy but the GP has not 
47
Peptic ulcer disease
4 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
indicated the drugs that were used. The patient remembers taking two 
different tablets for 1 week. You ask about smoking (which delays ulcer 
healing) and also take a drug history. There is no history of NSAID or 
aspirin use.
Remember
Alarm features:
•	 Weight loss
•	 Anorexia
•	 Dysphagia
•	 Protracted vomiting
•	 Haematemesis or malaena
In the absence of alarm features it is reasonable to try a proton 
pump inhibitor if the history is suggestive of reflux, e.g. heartburn 
worse on bending.
What would you do next?
You would need to establish whether the patient has had successful H. 
pylori eradication.
Tests for Helicobacter pylori
	 Serological IgG antibodies (useful in the community but does not dis­
tinguish between past or current infections).
	 Urea breath tests (for current infections) measuring 13CO2 (Fig. 4.4).
Breath test
13CO2
Ingest 13C-urea
(for breath test)
IgG Antibodies
to HP
Urease
(HP)
Blood
Urea
Stool
for HP
antigen
2NH3
+
13CO2
NH2
NH2
13C = O + H2O
Biopsy of
antral mucosa
→ Rapid
 
urease test
→ Histology
→ Culture
Figure 4.4  Metabolism of urea by Helicobacter pylori showing the different tests 
that are available for the detection of H. pylori. 
48
Gastroenterology
4 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Antral biopsy: either for histology or for CLO (urease) testing (for 
current infections).
	 Stool antigen test (current infection).
This patient’s urea breath test is positive, indicating continuing H. pylori 
infection.
Treatment of H. pylori infection
Patients with peptic ulcer disease who are H. pylori positive should be 
given combination eradication therapy:
	 Clarithromycin 500 mg twice daily for 1 week
	 Amoxicillin 1 g twice daily for 1 week
	 Omeprazole 20 mg twice daily for 2 weeks.
With increasing resistance to clarithromycin, quadruple therapy is now 
being used, as in this patient. He was given omeprazole 20 mg × 2, tri-
potassium di-citrato bismuthate 120 mg × 4, tetracycline 500 mg × 4 and 
metronidazole 500 mg × 3 – all daily for 2 weeks.
• Progress.  This patient has had no further problems since his quad­
ruple therapy and a stool antigen test was negative for H. pylori.
Case history (2)
You are asked by the cardiologists to see a man with epigastric 
pain. He has been admitted for urgent percutaneous coronary 
intervention (PCI). He is already on aspirin 75 mg daily. He has 
had many similar episodes of pain over the years. In 1988 he had 
an endoscopy and was told that he had an ulcer and was given 
Zantac. He points with one finger to his epigastrium as the site of 
his pain.
This is a classic history of duodenal ulcer disease.
What should you do?
As the PCI is tomorrow you recommend he is given a PPI, e.g. omeprazole 
20 mg × 2 daily and referred to gastroenterology outpatients.
The cardiology SpR would like to put the patient on anti-platelet 
therapy post PCI and is worried that he has an ulcer. This is a problem of 
balancing the risks. As the coronary stent is urgent they will have to go 
ahead with anti-platelet therapy with a cytoprotective PPI. The ideal situ­
ation for this man would be to perform endoscopy prior to PCI and if an 
ulcer is present, to heal his ulcer before the intervention.
After reassessment with the Consultant Cardiologist, it is still decided 
that the PCI is urgent and will go ahead despite its risks, which are fully 
discussed with the patient.
How do you investigate a patient with a suspected ulcer 
in the community?
	 Less than 45 years: H. pylori serology. If positive, eradication therapy 
(see p. 48). If negative, treat symptomatically.
	 Greater than 45 years: patients with new dyspepsia and those with 
alarm symptoms (e.g. anorexia, weight loss) should be referred for 
endoscopy.
49
Peptic ulcer disease
4 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Remember
•	 H. pylori serology can remain positive even after successful 
eradication of H. pylori
•	 Current H. pylori infection can be detected by the urea breath 
test (see Fig. 4.4), endoscopy (urease test, histology or culture) 
and detection of stool antigen.
Case history (2)
A 40-year-old woman was seen in the A&E department with a 
sprained ankle. She was sent home with a strapped ankle and 
given diclofenac to take for the pain. There was no history of 
indigestion. Ten days later she is brought in by ambulance having 
vomited blood. The bleeding was thought to be related to the 
NSAID therapy.
On examination she was not shocked and there are no signs 
of chronic liver disease. She had stopped bleeding and an 
endoscopy was performed in the next 24 h.
A bleeding ulcer, with a fresh adherent clot, was seen on 
endoscopy and was injected with adrenaline (epinephrine) 
1:10 000 and a heater probe was also used. A biopsy was taken 
for H. pylori.
A bleeding ulcer might have certain stigmata that suggest 
rebleeding is likely to recur (see Remember box).
Gastric cancer does not usually cause an acute GI bleed; it is 
more likely to produce anaemia from chronic blood loss.
Remember
Stigmata of a recent bleed from an ulcer on endoscopy:
•	 Spurting vessel
•	 Prominent vessel
•	 Fresh adherent clot.
• Progress.  The H. pylori test was positive, indicating chronic peptic 
ulcer disease. The haematemesis was precipitated by the NSAIDs.
Discharge policy
The patient’s age, diagnosis on endoscopy, co-morbidity and the presence 
or absence of shock should be taken into consideration. In general, patients 
under the age of 60, as well as older patients who are haemodynamically 
stable and have no stigmata of recent haemorrhage on endoscopy, can be 
discharged within 24 h.
Note: All shocked patients need careful observation in hospital. Check 
your own hospital’s guidelines.
50
Gastroenterology
4 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Further reading
Malfertheiner P, Megraud F, O’Morain CA, et al. Management of Helico­
bacter pylori infection – the Maastricht IV/Florence consensus report. 
Gut 2012; 61: 646–664.
Managing acute upper GI bleeding. BSG Tool kit. Lancet 2011; 377: 1048.
Gralnek IM, Baskin AN, Bardon M. Management of acute bleeding from 
a peptic ulcer. NEJM 2006; 359: 928–937.
IRON DEFICIENCY ANAEMIA
Information
Faecal occult bloods:
•	 Of no use in males or post-menopausal females with iron 
deficiency anaemia and no other cause for bleeding
•	 Useful for screening populations for colonic cancer
Case history
A 40-year-old, female, globe-trotting managing director was found 
at routine screening to have a haemoglobin of 80 g/L with an 
iron-deficient appearance on the film.
She admitted to some ankle swelling and increased 
breathlessness of recent onset. Examination was unhelpful.
FBC, film and low serum ferritin confirmed iron deficiency.
What do you do?
	 Exclude all obvious causes of bleeding:
•	 Heavy periods
•	 Rectal bleeding
•	 Recurrent nose bleeds.
	 If there is no obvious menorrhagia, you can assume the anaemia is due 
to gastrointestinal disease. Malabsorption: coeliac disease is still very 
underdiagnosed.
	 The patient travels a lot abroad and could have a bowel infestation. 
Remember hookworm is the most common cause of iron deficiency 
anaemia world-wide.
	 Occult bleeding from the GI tract is common and can be confirmed by 
haemoccult testing. This, however, is totally unnecessary in a patient 
with iron deficiency because if there is no history of blood loss, blood 
can then only be lost from the GI tract.
What additional investigations are appropriate?
	 Rectal examination is mandatory to exclude rectal cancer. Proctoscopy 
to exclude piles.
	 Gastroscopy: peptic ulcer, gastric cancer and GORD can certainly occur 
in this age group. Also do a duodenal biopsy for coeliac disease (see 
Fig. 4.5).
51
Iron deficiency anaemia
4 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Intra-epithelial
lymphocyte
Columnar cell
Cuboidal cell
Normal
Coeliac
Figure 4.5  Small intestinal mucosa showing normal villi with normal columnar 
cells compared to coeliac mucosa showing subtotal villus atrophy, crypt 
hyperplasia, lamina propria inflammation and an increase in intra-epithelial 
lymphocytes. 
Remember
Coeliac disease:
•	 Is increasingly recognised world-wide and has an incidence of 
less than 1:100 in many countries. Certain areas of the world 
are said to have a higher incidence, e.g. Ireland and Italy
•	 Malabsorption of iron as well as increased iron loss can occur. 
There might be other deficiencies as well, e.g. calcium and folic 
acid
•	 A history of steatorrhoea can be missed unless a detailed stool 
history is taken (Note: many patients do not have steatorrhoea 
or any gastrointestinal symptoms)
•	 Coeliac serology with  anti-endomysial and anti-tissue 
transglutaminase (the target antigen for the endomysial 
antibody) antibodies. A serum IgA must be performed as these 
are IgA in vitro tests. Deaminated gluten peptide (DGP) testing 
is now becoming available. These tests have a high sensitivity 
and specificity.
•	 Diagnosis is confirmed by biopsy of duodenal/jejunal mucosa
•	 Treatment is with a gluten-free diet.
52
Gastroenterology
4 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Further reading
Goddard AF, McIntyre AS, Scott BB. Guidelines for the management of 
iron deficiency anaemia. Gut 2000; 46 (Suppl IV): 1–5.
RECTAL BLEEDING
Rectal bleeding is characterised by the passage of fresh blood rectally as 
opposed to either occult loss when blood can only be detailed by labora­
tory testing or melaena (see p. 66).
Remember
•	 Iron deficiency anaemia in a post-menopausal female or any 
male with no obvious cause of blood loss must have a GI cause 
for the anaemia
•	 Few patients have an inadequate iron intake in developed 
countries.
If gastroscopy is unhelpful, full colonic assessment is necessary. The best 
investigation is colonoscopy, which will allow full assessment of the colon 
when biopsy, polypectomy, laser treatment of angiodysplasia can be 
performed as appropriate.
If the above investigations are negative you have a problem. A small 
minority of patients fall into this category and the host of further investiga­
tions, performed with advice from the GI unit, will include:
	 Small bowel follow-through
	 Capsule endoscopy
	 Enteroscopy
	 Meckel’s scan
	 Angiography: preferably performed when a patient is bleeding and in 
this patient unlikely to be helpful
	 Laparotomy with possibly simultaneous on-table endoscopy at the time.
• Progress.  This patient turned out to have menorrhagia due to 
fibroids, despite initially denying heavy periods.
Case history
An 80-year-old woman was admitted in a shocked state after 
having passed ‘a great deal’ of fresh blood from her rectum. She 
gave no other history and prior to the incident had just returned on 
her bicycle from doing the shopping. Abdominal examination was 
normal.
How would you manage the patient initially?
	 Establish IV infusion and give 0.9% saline
	 Check Hb and U&Es
	 Group and cross match blood
	 Insert a CVP line
	 Transfuse blood.
The patient stabilised and had no further bleeding.
53
Family history of colon cancer
4 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Additional examination
Additional investigations must include a rectal examination, proctoscopy 
and rigid sigmoidoscopy.
Proctoscopy
This will allow the diagnosis of haemorrhoids and an anal fissure. These 
are the most common causes of rectal bleeding, but rarely if ever cause 
torrential blood loss. Features of bleeding from an anorectal lesion:
	 Passage of blood after a motion, and not mixed with it
	 Blood dripping into the pan
	 Blood just on the paper
	 Anal pain, particularly with an anal fissure.
Flexi sigmoidoscopy
This will determine the presence of a colitis and might show a lesion, e.g. 
carcinoma. If local anorectal disease is excluded, other causes include:
	 Cancer
	 Diverticular disease
	 Colitis
	 Angiodysplasia
	 Polyps
	 Ischaemia.
• Progress.  In this patient, sigmoidoscopy showed that the blood was 
coming from above the limit of the scope. Colonoscopy showed a 
bleeding polyp; this was excised.
FAMILY HISTORY OF COLON CANCER
Case history
A doctor phones to discuss a possible referral to the 
gastroenterology clinic. He has just seen an anxious, 32-year-old 
woman whose mother has recently died of colonic cancer. The 
patient has just discovered that her maternal aunt died of a similar 
complaint. The doctor emphasises that the patient herself has no 
GI symptoms.
Remember
Even in the presence of severe diverticular disease, a polyp and 
carcinoma can be the cause of the bleeding and must be 
excluded by colonoscopy.
What should you advise?
The patient needs to be seen by a gastroenterologist with a view to a full 
discussion on the pros and cons of having a colonoscopy.
Family cancer syndromes:
Familial adenomatous polyposis: multiple polyps are found throughout the 
colon and upper small bowel. All patients should be screened after 
54
Gastroenterology
4 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Modified Amsterdam criteria
←	 One individual diagnosed with colorectal cancer (or extra-colonic 
HNPCC-associated tumours) before age 50 years
←	 Two affected generations
←	 Three affected relatives, one a first-degree relative of the other two
←	 FAP should be excluded
←	 Tumours should be verified by pathological examination
Bethesda guidelines
←	 Colorectal cancer diagnosed in patient who is younger than 50 
years
←	 Presence of synchronous, metachronous colorectal, or other 
HNPCC-associated tumours, irrespective of age
←	 Colorectal cancer with the MSI-H ↑ histology ↑ diagnosed in a 
patient who is younger than 60 years
←	 Colorectal cancer diagnosed in one or more first degree relatives 
with an HNPCC-related tumour, with one of the cancers being 
diagnosed under the age 50 years
←	 CRC diagnosed in two or more first or second degree relatives 
with HNPCC-related tumours, irrespective of age
MSI-H, microsatellite instability – high.
Table 4.5  Diagnostic criteria for hereditary non-polyposis colon 
cancer (HNPCC)
Remember
Risks for development of colon cancer:
•	 Normal: 1:50
•	 With a first-degree relative: 1:17
•	 With an elderly first-degree relative: 1:30.
• Progress.  This patient’s colonoscopy showed a 2 cm polyp which 
was fully excised. Histologically this was a tubular adenoma and she 
was asked to return for a surveillance colonoscopy in 3 years’ time. 
She was told that she would need continuous follow-up in view of 
the family history.
age 12 years because all patients will develop colon cancer unless the 
colon is removed.
Hereditary non-polyposis cancer of the colon (HNPCC) (Table 4.5): this 
accounts for 5–10% of colon cancers; the average age of diagnosis is 
45 years. Cancers are mainly in the right-hand side of the colon.
A flexible sigmoidoscope can only reach 60–70 cm up the colon, where 
approximately 60% of cancers occur (Fig. 4.6).
The gastroenterologist advises a colonoscopy for this patient, which she 
agrees to have after full discussion.
55
Functional bowel disease
4 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
8
16
15
6
25
10
20
Rectum
Rectosigmoid
Sigmoid
Caecum
Descending
colon
Transverse
colon
Ascending
colon
Figure 4.6  Distribution of colorectal cancer (%). 
Case history
A 30-year-old woman is in the A&E department with severe lower 
abdominal pain. She is rolling around in agony but the surgical 
registrar has found no evidence of serious disease. He has already 
fully examined her and investigated her with routine blood tests 
and an abdominal X-ray, all of which are normal. Her boyfriend 
is aggressive and insisting that something must be done. The 
casualty officer is looking for help.
What do you do?
	 Re-take the history with the possibility of this being irritable bowel 
syndrome (IBS).
	 Re-examine the abdomen: think of all the causes of an acute abdomen 
again (see Information box).
	 Review the investigations.
The history strongly supports the diagnosis of IBS. Remember that the pain 
can be very severe and real to the patient even though it is related to life 
events, i.e. the pain is not just ‘all in the mind’.
Management
This can be very difficult, particularly because relatives often feel unable 
to cope. The situation needs to be calmed down with strong reassurance 
and pain relief (e.g. NSAID and anti-spasmodics). Refer to gastroenterol­
ogy outpatients.
FUNCTIONAL BOWEL DISEASE
56
Gastroenterology
4 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Information
Acute abdominal pain of sudden onset:
•	 Perforation, e.g. of a duodenal ulcer
•	 Rupture, e.g. aneurysm
•	 Torsion, e.g. ovarian cyst
Gradual onset:
•	 Inflammatory conditions, e.g. appendicitis, back pain
Think of:
•	 Pancreatitis
•	 Ruptured aortic aneurysm
•	 Renal tract disease
57
57
Liver and Biliary Tract 
Disorders 5 
ABNORMAL LIVER BIOCHEMISTRY
‘Liver function tests’ are routinely requested.
Serum bilirubin, aminotransferases, alkaline phosphatase, γ-glutamyl, 
transpeptidase (γ-GT) and total proteins are measured. These are in fact 
tests of liver damage (hence the term ‘liver biochemistry’) rather than 
actual liver function. Liver function is assessed by serum albumin and the 
prothrombin time.
Case history
A doctor telephones you to ask whether a hospital referral is 
necessary for her patient. The doctor has recently seen a 
55-year-old patient for a medical insurance examination for an 
American bank. She had found no problems with the patient at the 
time of the examination but the results of the liver biochemistry 
have come back abnormal. The tests showed:
•	 Serum bilirubin: 14 µmol/L
•	 Serum alkaline phosphatase: 134 iu/L
•	 AST: 70 iu/L
•	 ALT: 90 iu/L.
What advice do you give?
These tests suggest intra-hepatic disease and you ask about the patient’s 
alcohol history. The answer is only occasional alcohol. You suggest that 
the doctor could arrange the following tests while waiting for an outpatient 
appointment:
	 Repeat LFTs
	 Viral markers
	 Serum autoantibodies
	 Serum ferritin.
These tests will yield a diagnosis in most cases.
The doctor asks: would an ultrasound be helpful?
No. This is not the pattern of biliary or pancreatic disease.
You arrange to see the patient with your consultant in outpatients. At 
outpatients the history again is unhelpful. There is no history of:
	 Blood transfusions
	 Previous hepatitis
	 IV drug use
	 Sexual promiscuity.
On examination you notice a few spider naevi. The liver is not palpable.
The results of the tests performed by the doctor are now available (Table 
5.1). HCV antibodies indicate HCV infection (chronic hepatitis) and the 
58
Liver and Biliary Tract Disorders
5 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
patient will require HCV RNA, liver biopsy and possible treatment with 
anti-viral therapy with pegylated interferon and ribavirin, or with one of 
the newer protease inhibitors (boceprevir or telaprevir).
Armed with the HCV result you discuss IV drug use with your patient, 
who then admits to the very occasional use of IV drugs in the 1960s.
Although this patient did not have HBV, you need to know the signifi­
cance of HBV markers (Table 5.2).
Test
Result
Implication
Repeat LFTs
Similar to above
Hepatitis A
IgG positive
IgM negative
Patient has been infected 
with HAV in the past or 
immunised. This virus 
does not cause chronic 
liver disease
HBsAg
Negative
See below
HCV antibodies
Positive
Autoantibody screen
Negative
Positive titres usually 
found in autoimmune 
hepatitis
Serum ferritin
110 µg/L
This excludes hereditary 
haemochromatosis
Table 5.1  Further investigations into the cause of the abnormal liver 
function test
Antigens
HbsAg
Acute or chronic infection
HbeAg
Acute hepatitis B
Persistence implies:
continuous infectious state
development of chronicity
increased severity of disease
HBV DNA
Implies viral replication (found in serum and 
liver; also present in HbsAg-negative patients 
due to mutant viruses)
Anti-HBs
Immunity to HBV; previous exposure or 
vaccination
Anti-HBe
Seroconversion
Anti-HBc
Acute hepatitis B (high titre)
IgM
Chronic hepatitis B (low titre)
IgG
Past exposure to hepatitis B (HbsAg-negative)
From Kumar and Clark Clinical Medicine, 8th edn, 2012.
Table 5.2  Significance of viral markers in hepatitis B
59
Jaundice
5 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
• Progress.  This patient was referred to the Liver Clinic. Her HCV 
RNA showed 45 000 IU/ml viral load. She was treated with pegylated 
interferon and ribavirin and at 3 months she had a good response 
with a 2 log reduction in RNA. She stopped therapy at 6 months and 
continued to be followed up in the clinic.
JAUNDICE
Jaundice is detected clinically when the serum bilirubin is greater than 
50 µmol/L (3 mg/dL).
Investigations
•	 Blood count, liver biochemistry
•	 Liver function (INR and albumin)
•	 Abdominal ultrasound
•	 Viral markers to exclude hepatitis causing intra-hepatic 
cholestasis
Case history (1)
A 45-year-old woman has been admitted to MAU with deep 
jaundice. She gives a history of two episodes of severe abdominal 
pain which had lasted for about half an hour. She has lost her 
appetite and consequently lost some weight.
Abdominal examination is unhelpful; there were no signs of 
chronic liver disease.
The blood tests showed a raised serum bilirubin, an ALT of 
50 units and a high alkaline phosphate of 410 units. You order 
an ultrasound examination of the liver and biliary tree as you 
suspect that she has got gallstone disease (Fig. 5.1).
Ultrasound in extra-hepatic obstruction can show:
	 Dilatation of the intra-hepatic biliary tree
	 Dilatation of the common bile duct
	 Gallstones in the gall bladder
	 Gallstones in the biliary tree
	 A pancreatic mass
	 Metastatic liver disease.
In this patient, the ultrasound showed gallstones in the gall bladder and a 
dilated common bile duct. Provided this patient’s clotting is satisfactory, 
the next procedure should be an ERCP. This would enable a better visuali­
sation of the system and would allow a gallstone that is causing the 
obstruction in the common bile duct to be removed. A sphincterotomy 
would need to be performed beforehand and the stone could be removed 
with a basket or a balloon. If the stone is very large, the stone can be 
crushed and the debris removed. In an elderly patient, stent insertion to 
maintain drainage is an option.
60
Liver and Biliary Tract Disorders
5 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Case history (2)
A 78-year-old man is admitted with marked jaundice. He was 
previously fit and well but the ultrasound arranged by his doctor 
showed a dilated biliary system with the probability of a pancreatic 
mass.
An endoscopic ultrasound and/or CT scan should be performed 
to assess the vague possibility of operability.
An ERCP with placement of a stent through the stricture 
enables drainage and is the usual treatment. This makes the 
patient feel a lot better as well as relieving the jaundice. This was 
performed in this man.
Remember
•	 Cholangitis often accompanies gallstones obstructing the biliary 
tree and urgent duct drainage should be performed. Antibiotics 
(e.g. ciprofloxacin 500 mg × 2) should be given.
•	 The residual stones are removed endoscopically when the 
patient has recovered.
Impacted in
cystic duct
(acute cholecystitis)
Hepatic ducts
Common hepatic duct
Hartmann’s pouch
Common bile duct
Pancreatic duct
Stone causing
gallstone
pancreatitis
Asymptomatic
gallstones
Causing biliary
obstruction
Gall bladder
Duodenum
Ampulla of Vater
Sphincter of Oddi
Figure 5.1  Clinical presentation of gallstones. 
• Progress.  In this patient the stones were cleared from the common 
bile duct at ERCP and this was followed by a laparascopic 
cholecystectomy.
61
Jaundice
5 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Jaundice without pain is quite common with carcinoma of the pancreas 
but with gallstones there is usually a history of biliary pain accompanying 
the jaundice.
A similar obstruction could equally well be related to an obstruction 
higher up in the duct system, perhaps due to a cholangiocarcinoma. This 
could arise in pre-existing sclerosing cholangitis, although this would 
usually occur at a younger age.
Complications of ERCP sphincterotomy (complication rate 
8–12%)
	 Bleeding (severe in 2%)
	 Perforation
	 Acute pancreatitis (5%)
	 Cholangitis.
Case history (3)
A 20-year-old woman is admitted in a confused state and deeply 
jaundiced. She has recently returned from India, where she had 
been trekking; she had had a major argument with her boyfriend. 
A subconjunctival haemorrhage was noticed on examination.
This patient is critically ill with fulminant hepatic failure and it is 
essential to stabilise her as soon as possible.
A central venous line was inserted and as her haemoglobin was 
very low, she was given 2 units of red blood cells. The clotting 
studies give an indication of the degree of damage to her liver, 
and will be useful for daily follow-up. It is also necessary to make 
sure that the patient’s potassium and blood sugar are satisfactory 
and whether replacements are necessary.
Investigations
•	 Haemoglobin
•	 Clotting studies and albumin
•	 Liver enzymes
•	 Blood sugar
•	 U&E
This woman’s investigation showed a bilirubin of 130 µmol/L, ALT 
900 U/L, AST 785 U/L, alkaline phosphatase 109 U/L, albumin 34 g/L, 
INR 2.2, indicating severe hepatocellular damage.
Further management
This patient is liable to infection and intravenous antibiotics are required 
after blood cultures have been taken.
62
Liver and Biliary Tract Disorders
5 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
It is essential to try to establish a cause of this patient’s jaundice. This 
might be hepatitis A or hepatitis E – both are endemic causes of hepatitis 
in India and often follow an initial respiratory type of illness; they can 
occasionally cause fulminant liver damage. A paracetamol overdose is also 
a possibility, as her boyfriend said that she was very upset when they 
returned to the UK.
Further investigation
Viral markers for the above causes, and paracetamol levels, must be 
obtained urgently. Other investigations would include the following if no 
cause has been found:
	 Autoantibodies
	 Copper studies
	 Alpha-1 anti-trypsin levels.
In this case, the patient’s relatives arrive and say they have found empty 
containers labelled paracetamol 500 mg tablets in her bedroom at her 
apartment.
The patient might well stabilise at this stage but a close eye will need 
to be kept on her for potential infections, particularly with opportunistic 
organisms. It is reasonable to give Acetylcysteine in the initial management 
of such comatosed patients, whether or not the paracetamol blood level 
is high.
This patient’s clinical condition deteriorated, with a modified early 
warning score (MEWS) score of 5. She became increasingly drowsy and 
confused and developed a flapping tremor and fetor hepaticus. Her inves­
tigations now showed a serum bilirubin of 320 µmol/L, ALT 4200 U/L, 
AST 3800 U/L, serum albumin 32 g/L, with an INR of 3.62. Urgent advice 
was sought from the nearest liver unit.
Information
Criteria for transfer to a specialised unit:
•	 INR > 3.0
•	 Presence of hepatic encephalopathy
•	 Hypotension after resuscitation with fluid
•	 Metabolic acidosis
•	 Prothrombin time (seconds) > interval (hours) from overdose (in 
paracetamol cases)
Remember
Hepatic encephalopathy should be treated with a low-protein diet 
and lactulose.
You arrange for transfer. In specialised units 70% of patients with 
paracetamol overdose and grade IV encephalopathy survive. Factors that 
indicate a poor prognosis with paracetamol overdose (without transplan­
tation) are:
63
Acute liver disease
5 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Arterial pH < 7.3 OR
	 Serum creatinine > 300 µmol/L
	 Prothrombin time > 100 s
	 Grade III–IV encephalopathy.
• Progress.  This woman was seriously ill with acute hepatic failure. 
She survived with supportive therapy without transplantation being 
necessary.
ACUTE LIVER DISEASE
Case history
A medical student turns up in A&E with jaundice. He is very 
worried that he has gallstones and might need surgery. He has 
never seen jaundice outside a surgical ward.
How do you approach this situation?
First, you point out that gallstones are rare in a young person and that a 
viral hepatitis is, by far and away, the most likely diagnosis. You quickly 
ascertain that he has been previously immunised against hepatitis B and 
only drinks beer after rugby. He denies IV drug use. Your thoughts now 
turn to how he acquired hepatitis A. There is no clue from the history:
	 No contacts with jaundice
	 No prodromal features
	 No travel abroad.
On examination, apart from jaundice, there are no other abnormal signs.
Take blood for:
	 Liver biochemistry
	 HAV IgM (to indicate acute HAV infection).
You tell him to go back to his student flat, be careful with his personal 
hygiene and return in 2 days for his results (Table 5.3).
Oops! HAV IgM negative! You realise that although hepatitis A is very, 
very common in such a situation there are other causes. You had omitted 
to take a careful drug history from someone you knew (NB: remember 
Ecstasy!).
• Progress.  This student turned out to have glandular fever (EBV 
infection), which can occasionally present with jaundice.
Test
Result
Implication
Serum bilirubin
70 µmol/L
AST
300 iu/L
Compatible with acute
ALT
280 iu/L
hepatitis
ALP
140 iu/L
HAV IgM
Negative
Table 5.3  Test results in acute liver disease
64
Liver and Biliary Tract Disorders
5 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
ASCITES
Ascites is fluid within the peritoneal cavity due to sodium and water reten­
tion, e.g. cirrhosis or heart failure or secondary to malignant deposits.
Information
Paracentesis (ascitic tap):
•	 Obtain the patient’s consent after explaining procedure
•	 Percuss the dull area in the RIF
•	 Clean the skin and inject local anaesthetic (1% lidocaine) into 
skin using orange needle
•	 Insert 21-gauge needle (green) on a 20 mL syringe into the fluid
•	 Withdraw approximately 20 mL
•	 Withdraw the needle and apply dressing
Investigations
•	 Liver biochemistry
•	 FBC
•	 INR and serum albumin
•	 Ascitic tap – for white cell count, culture, protein, malignant 
cells
Case history (1)
A 45-year-old woman presents with ascites gradually increasing 
over 2 weeks.
Examination shows no abnormality outside the abdomen.
Determining the cause of the ascites is essential to developing 
a management plan and she is admitted to MAU.
Ascitic fluid
The ascitic protein concentration, as well as the serum : ascites protein 
gradient (SAG) help differentiate a transudate (< 25 g/L or SAG > 11 g/L) 
from an exudate (> 25 g/L or SAG < 11 g/L).
In this case, a high ascitic protein (> 25 g/L) suggests tumour or 
infection.
Malignant cells were present; further imaging with ultrasound – 
abdominal and pelvic – CT were performed to determine tumour site.
• Diagnosis.  In this patient, the age and sex suggested an ovarian 
malignancy and this was confirmed.
• Progress.  She was referred to the Gynaecology Department for 
further management.
65
Ascites
5 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
What should you do?
Case history (2)
A 45-year-old man has attended his doctor on many occasions 
with alcohol-related problems. He is sent up to A&E with a swollen 
abdomen. He admits to drinking 60–80 units per week for 
20 years.
On examination he is not jaundiced, but he has spider naevi, 
liver palms, Dupuytren’s contractures and testicular atrophy. He 
has gross ascites and pitting ankle oedema.
Investigations
•	 Liver biochemistry
•	 FBC
•	 Serum albumin and INR
•	 Urea, creatinine, eGFR and electrolytes
An ascitic tap is necessary to rule out infection and malignancy, even 
though he has chronic liver disease.
Ascitic fluid showed 25 cells/mm3, protein content of 23 g/L, with a 
serum ascitic albumin gradient of < 9 g/L, i.e. a transudate.
	 A transudate (< 25 g/L) indicates cirrhosis without any complication.
	 In a patient with known liver disease, a high white cell count and high 
protein levels suggest infection (spontaneous bacterial peritonitis).
Remember
Think of TB in ethnic minorities.
Ultrasound of the liver and spleen is now performed. It shows spleno­
megaly (portal hypertension) and an irregular liver with fat, indicative of 
cirrhosis.
Immediate management
	 Bed rest
	 Salt restriction
	 Daily weights and U&Es.
	 Start diuretics – spironolactone 100 mg/day (increasing gradually to 
400 mg/day) to obtain a weight loss of 500 g/day
	 If inadequate response to above, introduce furosemide 40–120 mg/day
	 Give thiamine 25–50 mg daily.
The patient must stop drinking.
66
Liver and Biliary Tract Disorders
5 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Subsequent management
It may be necessary to do a liver biopsy to confirm the cause of cirrhosis, 
but only after the ascites is removed. If it is impossible to do a percutaneous 
liver biopsy (due to ascites, prolonged clotting), then biopsy can be under­
taken through the jugular vein under X-ray control.
•  Progress.  This patient was referred to the Alcohol Dependency Unit 
after resolution of his ankle swelling and ascites. He may require liver 
transplantation and he should be referred on to a Liver Unit for 
assessment. He continues to abstain from alcohol but at present he 
does not fit the criteria for transplantation (MELD Score 7).
Further reading
Moore KP, Wong F, Gines P, et al. Management of ascites in cirrhosis. 
Report on the consensus conference of the International Ascites Club. 
Hepatology 2003; 38: 258–266.
Case history
A 70-year-old man was admitted, having vomited blood this 
morning. His stools have been loose and black (melaena).
On initial assessment he looked pale and was shocked, with a 
tachycardia of 110 beats/min and a BP of 80/60.
An IV cannula was immediately inserted, blood taken for Hb, 
urea and electrolytes, clotting, grouping and cross matching for 
4 units. He was initially given fluid replacement with a colloid.
Remember
Liver disease with few cutaneous or other signs of liver disease 
can occur particularly in chronic hepatitis C.
HAEMATEMESIS AND MELAENA
Haematemesis is vomiting blood. Melaena is the passage of black, tarry 
stools, usually from a lesion proximal to the right colon.
Resuscitation
	 IV access
	 CVP assessment
	 Fluid replacement (initially with colloid)
	 Blood transfusion
	 O2 for shocked patients.
67
Haematemesis and melaena
5 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Remember
Hb < 100 g/L, urea ↑, postural hypotension present, pulse rate 
110/min. This patient is severely compromised and needs urgent 
treatment.
Reflux
oesophagitis (2–5%)
Drugs (NSAIDs)
Alcohol
Varices (10–20%)
Gastric varices
Gastric carcinoma
(uncommon)
Haemorrhagic gastropathy
and erosions (15–20%)
Gastric ulcer
50%
Duodenal ulcer
Mallory–Weiss
syndrome (5–10%)
Other uncommon causes
Gastric antral vascular ectasia
   (GAVE)
Hereditary telangiectasia
   (Osler–Weber–Rendu syndrome)
Pseudoxanthoma elasticum
Blood dyscrasias
Dieulafoy gastric vascular abnormality
Portal gastropathy
Aortic graft surgery with fistula
Figure 5.2  Causes of bleeding. 
The gastroenterologists and surgical teams were informed. He was 
admitted to the high-dependency unit, a CVP line was inserted.
Many hospitals have multidisciplinary teams and protocols. Keep the 
patient nil by mouth until the bleeding has stopped. Causes of upper 
gastrointestinal bleeding are shown in Figure 5.2.
A further history of this man revealed that he had a high alcohol intake 
of 70 units/week for many years. He had no history of long-term dyspep­
sia and did not take NSAIDs, including aspirin.
On examination he had signs of chronic liver disease with spider 
naevi and gynaecomastia. His liver was 4 cm palpable and he had 
splenomegaly.
68
Liver and Biliary Tract Disorders
5 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Remember
Shock:
•	 Pallor
•	 Cold nose
•	 ↓ Systolic BP.
Bleeding varices
Urgent endoscopy
with banding or injection
Repeat endoscopic 
therapy
Bleeding
stops
Resuscitate
Prophylactic cephalosporin
Target transfusion Hb 80 g/L
Terlipressin or 
somatostatin
Early 
rebleeding
Sengstaken
tube
TIPS
Assess for 
beta-blockade; if 
contraindication/
intolerance use 
banding
If not available consider 
surgery or use of injectable 
adhesive glues or thrombin
Figure 5.3  Management of gastrointestinal haemorrhage due to oesophageal 
varices. TIPS, transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt. 
The common causes of a GI bleed are
	 Oesophageal varices
	 Peptic ulcer
	 Gastric cancer
	 Gastric erosions.
Management
His haemoglobin returned as 90 g/L and the urea was raised at 10 mmol/L. 
A blood transfusion was started to resuscitate him (Fig. 5.3). On improve­
ment he had an endoscopy which showed oesophageal varicies and these 
were banded (Fig. 5.4). On return to the ward he had a further haemate­
mesis 4 hours later. Vasoconstrictor therapy was given.
Vasoconstrictor therapy
The main use of this is for emergency control of bleeding whilst waiting 
for endoscopy and in combination with endoscopic techniques. The aim 
of vasoconstrictor agents is to restrict portal inflow by splanchnic arterial 
constriction.
69
Haematemesis and melaena
5 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
a
b
Figure 5.4  Oesophageal varicies (a), with band in place (b). (Kumar and Clark 
Clinical Medicine 8th edn, 2012, p. 333).
	 Terlipressin. This is the only vasoconstrictor shown to reduce mortality. 
Dose is 2 mg 6-hourly, reducing to 1 mg 4-hourly after 48 hours if a 
prolonged dosage regimen is used. It should not be given to patients 
with ischaemic heart disease. The patient will complain of abdominal 
colic, will defecate and have facial pallor owing to the generalised 
vasoconstriction.
	 Somatostatin. This drug has few side effects. An infusion of 250–500 µg/h 
appears to reduce bleeding, but has no effect on mortality. It should be 
used if there are contraindications to terlipressin.
Balloon tamponade with a Sengstaken–Blakemore tube can be used if the 
bleeding continues. Use the gastric balloon only initially but, if the bleed­
ing is not controlled, inflate the oesophageal balloon, remembering that 
continuous inflation leads to oesophageal damage. It has serious complica­
tions and should be left in situ for only 24 h.
If these measures fail, transjugular intra-hepatic portosystemic shunt 
(TIPS) might be required and is often used as the treatment of choice for 
gastric varices.
• Progress.  Unfortunately this patient continued to bleed, despite a 
repeat endoscopy with injection of the varices. A Sengstaken–
Blakemore tube was put in place and he was therefore referred 
urgently on to a liver unit for TIPS insertion.
Remember
Erosions can bleed profusely and be very difficult to control.
Further reading
Jalan R, Hayes PC. UK Guidelines on the management of variceal haemor­
rhage in cirrhotic patients. Gut 2000; 46 (Suppl 3–4): III1–III15.
70
Liver and Biliary Tract Disorders
5 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Information
Portosystemic encephalopathy (PSE) is a neuropsychiatric 
syndrome that occurs in cirrhosis. The blood by-passes the liver 
via collaterals allowing ‘toxic’ metabolites to pass directly to the 
brain. The nature of these ‘toxins’ is unclear but appear to be 
related to ammonia. Treatment is aimed at reducing protein 
breakdown in the gut.
Case history
A 60-year-old female has been a known user of alcohol for the 
past 20 years. She is admitted because of deterioration in her 
health with confusion and the development of ascites.
Further history indicates that she has stopped drinking some 2 
months ago and suffered no withdrawal symptoms.
On examination you wonder whether she has liver failure.
LIVER FAILURE
What signs indicate liver failure?
	 Jaundice
	 Ascites/portal hypertension (splenomegaly)
	 Hepatic encephalopathy:
•	 Hepatic flap
•	 Fetor hepaticus
•	 Constructional apraxia
	 Signs of chronic liver disease, e.g.:
•	 Spider naevi
•	 Gynaecomastia
•	 Dupuytren’s contracture
•	 Liver palms.
If there is no risk of bleeding, then concentrate on determining the level of 
encephalopathy:
	 Grade 1: disorientated
	 Grade 2: confused
	 Grade 3: comatose
	 Grade 4: unconscious.
Early signs should be demonstrated by asking the patient to copy a five-
pointed star.
Immediate management
	 Measure electrolytes and blood sugar (BS), liver function and liver 
biochemistry.
	 Ascitic tap to rule out infection (p. 64).
	 Low protein and low salt diet.
	 Thiamine.
71
Excess alcohol use
5 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Establish infusion of 5% glucose (10% if BS is low).
	 Diuretic therapy (see ascites).
	 Use purgatives: lactulose 10–20 mL × 3/day to produce two to three 
stools a day.
	 Determine presence of infection both in ascites (ascitic tap) and systemi­
cally (blood culture) and treat.
Further management
Monitor daily:
	 Weight (see ascites)
	 Conscious level (Glasgow Coma Score)
	 Liver function tests and coagulation
	 Electrolytes and blood sugar.
• Progress.  This woman’s condition improved dramatically and she 
was ready for discharge from hospital after 10 days. She was referred 
to the Alcohol Dependency Unit and regular follow-up arranged at 
the Liver Clinic.
EXCESS ALCOHOL USE
Case history
A 45-year-old man presents with a history of excessive alcohol 
intake for 10 years since his marriage failed. He has sought help 
from counselling services but has been unable to remain sober. 
His presenting symptoms were of collapses in the street and home 
– the most recent collapse was witnessed and reported as 
epileptic.
Neurological examination shows that he is conscious, aware 
of his surroundings but confused (GCS 13). He has nystagmus 
and ataxia when asked to walk. Examination of his legs shows 
diminished sensation to light touch, pinprick and vibration below 
the knees. Ankle jerks are absent.
This man has two features of excess alcohol consumption.
1.	 Central findings – Wernicke–Korsakoff syndrome. This is sometimes 
reversible with parenteral thiamine therapy.
2.	 Peripheral neuropathy which is usually not reversible on alcohol absti­
nence or vitamin therapy.
• Management.  Start intravenous vitamins immediately – parenteral 
vitamin B and C should be used for the first 3 days. Note: Serious, 
allergic adverse reactions can occur. Give injections slowly and know 
how to treat anaphylaxis. Thiamine 100 mg × 3 day given orally 
throughout admission.
72
Liver and Biliary Tract Disorders
5 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Information
Epilepsy occurs in 3–10% of patients who have alcohol 
dependence associated with:
•	 Alcohol intoxication
•	 Alcohol withdrawal
•	 Hypoglycaemia
A full history and examination must be undertaken to exclude:
•	 Neurological damage (central, peripheral)
•	 Hepatic damage/signs of liver failure
•	 Use of other drugs
Remember
There are many initiating factors for alcohol excess. It produces 
damage in many areas of function – financial, social, psychological 
and physical – and all need addressing.
Further treatment
	 Withdraw all alcohol.
	 Sedate: use benzodiazepines in adequate doses to produce sedation but 
beware of respiratory depression.
	 Keep under supervision.
	 Do not mix sedatives.
	 Reduce diazepam slowly over next 5 days, observing resolution of signs 
of withdrawal:
•	 Sweating
•	 Shaking
•	 Vomiting
•	 Agitation
•	 Hallucination.
	 Do not use anti-epileptics.
Further management
Seek help from agencies dealing with alcohol and drug use for assessment 
and further management. Following abstinence, give Acamprosate 666 mg 
× 3 daily. This drug acts by enhancing GABAergic inhibition.
Lesser degrees of damage than in the above case can occur in excess 
alcohol use and must always be assessed in all patients attending hospital. 
These findings are commonly hidden and should be sought using a non-
judgemental interviewing style.
Additional biochemical tests can help to determine physical damage 
produced by alcohol (MCV, triglycerides, uric acid, γ-GT).
73
Cholecystitis
5 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Case history
A 28-year-old man presents to the A&E Unit with right 
hypochondrial pain. This has been persistent, increasing in severity 
over the last three days.
On examination there is right hypochondrial tenderness. In 
view of his age and general good health he is sent home after 
surgical review, given paracetamol and told to see his doctor for 
follow-up.
Two days later a rather concerned doctor phones A&E to say 
that the patient’s pain has persisted and the tenderness is marked. 
You ask him to send him back to A&E. On examination you 
confirm the doctor’s findings of marked tenderness in the right 
hypochondrium. He has a temperature of 37.8°C.
• Progress.  This man was discharged from hospital with regular 
attendance at the Alcohol Dependence Unit. His attendance became 
erratic and he started drinking again.
CHOLECYSTITIS
What should you do now?
In view of the persistence of pain and second referral by his doctor, admit 
the patient to the medical assessment unit. Do the blood tests shown in the 
investigations box.
Investigations
•	 FBC
•	 U&Es
•	 Liver biochemistry
•	 Serum amylase
•	 Blood culture in view of pyrexia
One hour later your house officer phones you to say his WCC is 19 000. 
Clearly he has an infection and you tell your house officer to organise an 
urgent ultrasound while you call the surgical registrar. The surgical regis­
trar recognises the patient he discharged 2 days ago. You discuss possible 
diagnoses. The ultrasound scan (Fig. 5.5) shows:
	 Gallstones in the gall bladder
	 Sonographic Murphy’s sign
	 Gall bladder wall thickening
	 Peri-cholecystic fluid.
74
Liver and Biliary Tract Disorders
5 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Figure 5.5  Ultrasound scan in a patient with acute cholecystitis. There is a 
stone (casting an acoustic shadow – thin arrow) impacted in the gall bladder 
neck, with a distended gall bladder (thick arrow) and thickening and oedema of 
the gall bladder wall. 
b
a
75
Cholecystitis
5 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Remember
•	 Acute appendicitis: but the site of pain is a bit high
•	 Acute cholecystitis: but the patient is 28 years old and a man 
– surely not!
•	 A localised perforation and other mischief run through 
your mind.
Remember
Gallstones can occur at any age and not necessarily in fair, fat, 
fertile females of forty! Always think of appendicitis in a young 
patient with acute pain. Ultrasound/CT scans are invaluable in 
making the diagnosis.
Diagnosis
• Progress.  A successful laparoscopic cholecystectomy was per­
formed with no complications.
The diagnosis is acute cholecystitis. The surgical SpR starts antibiotics 
(a cephalosporin, e.g. cefuroxime), nil by mouth and IV fluids. He books 
him for a laparoscopic cholecystectomy in 2 days’ time.
This page intentionally left blank
77
77
Haematology and Oncology 6 
MICROCYTIC AND MACROCYTIC ANAEMIA
Definition of anaemia
Anaemia is present when the level of haemoglobin in the blood is below 
the normal range. The normal range varies at different ages and between 
men (130–180 g/L) and women (115–155 g/L).
Remember
An accurate result depends on a correctly taken blood sample:
•	 Avoid prolonged venous occlusion
•	 Don’t take the sample from an arm with an IV infusion
If the haemoglobin concentration doesn’t fit the clinical picture 
take another sample.
Assessment
The impact of anaemia on an individual is variable and will depend on:
	 The degree of anaemia
	 The speed of onset
	 Age
	 Cardiovascular reserve.
Symptoms are non-specific and clinical signs easily overlooked:
	 Tiredness, lack of energy
	 Shortness of breath on exercise
	 Palpitations
	 Ischaemic pain.
Investigations
The classification of anaemia (Fig. 6.1) is based on the mean red 
cell volume (MCV; NR 76–96 fL).
Further investigation is determined by whether the anaemia is 
microcytic (< 76 fL), macrocytic (> 96 fL) or normocytic.
What is the reason for her anaemia and is it relevant to her 
presentation?
The first thing to exclude is iron deficiency, commonly due to uterine or 
gastrointestinal bleeding. Iron deficiency is unlikely in this patient:
	 Very low MCV with only moderate anaemia
	 Minimal variation in red cell size (anisocytosis) and shape 
(poikilocytosis).
78
Haematology and Oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Red cell 
appearances
Indices
Appearance of 
bone marrow
Diagnosis
Small cells 
(microcytes)
Iron deficiency 
Thalassaemia 
Anaemia of 
 chronic disease 
Sideroblastic 
 anaemia
Low MCV (<80 fL)
Normal-sized cells
Normal MCV
Large cells 
(macrocytes)
High MCV 
(>96 fL)
Megaloblastic
Normoblastic
Vitamin B12 or 
 folate deficiency
Acute blood loss
Anaemia of 
 chronic disease
Chronic kidney failure
Autoimmune rheumatic  
 disease
Marrow infiltration/fibrosis
Endocrine disease
Haemolytic anaemias
 Alcohol
 Reticulocytes 
 e.g. haemolysis
        haemorrhage
 Liver disease
 Hypothyroidism
 Drug therapy, e.g.  
   
azathioprine
Figure 6.1  Classification of anaemia. MCV, mean corpuscular volume. 
79
Microcytic and macrocytic anaemia
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Remember
•	 Ferritin is an acute-phase protein. Iron deficiency can therefore 
be difficult to diagnose in the presence of inflammatory disease 
and tissue iron stores might need to be examined directly by 
bone marrow aspiration
•	 Serum transferrin receptor assay does differentiate between 
these conditions (see p. 142).
Case history (1)
A 45-year woman of African origin presents to the A&E department 
with chest pain that is thought to reflect cardiac ischaemia.
On examination she looked well. CVS examination showed a 
pulse of 82/min, a blood pressure of 140/80 and no abnormal 
signs. General examination was normal.
Investigations
•	 Hb 99 g/L
•	 MCV 59 fL
•	 RDW 14%
•	 WBC 6.4 × 109/L
•	 Platelets 273 × 109/L
•	 ESR 10 mm/h
•	 Anisocytosis, poikilocytosis +
•	 Target cells + +
These are the features of a microcytic anaemia.
	 The serum ferritin (30 µg/L) was normal, indicating normal tissue 
stores of iron (Note: ferritin can be high because it is an acute-phase 
protein that rises whenever the ESR or CRP is elevated).
The anaemia of chronic disorder, a form of functional iron deficiency, is 
also unlikely without an obvious underlying illness and a normal ESR.
A common cause of a microcytic anaemia in patients of certain ethnic 
groups is β-thalassaemia trait. This is common in people from Africa, the 
Mediterranean, the Middle East, India and south-east Asia.
Characteristically, β-thalassaemia trait results in a marked microcytosis 
with only a moderate anaemia, as shown in this patient. In addition, the 
red cell distribution width (RDW) is normal (NB – it is high in iron 
deficiency).
β-thalassaemia trait is confirmed by measuring HBA2, which is normally 
< 3.4% of total haemoglobin.
•	 Progress.  The HBA2 in this patient was 5.2%, confirming a diagnosis 
of β-thalassaemia trait.
Patients are asymptomatic and require no treatment. Note: Do not give 
iron. The anaemia is not contributory to this patient’s cardiac ischaemia. 
The patient was referred to the Cardiac Department for investigation and 
management of her chest pain.
80
Haematology and Oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Iron deficiency anaemia
Iron deficiency anaemia (Fig. 6.2 and see p. 142) responds to treatment with 
oral iron supplements – ferrous sulphate 200 mg × 3 daily (or all in one 
dose) for 6 months – it is essential to give a full course of treatment. Lower 
the dose if GI symptoms occur. Parenteral therapy is required only rarely. 
The cause of iron deficiency is almost always blood loss and the cause must 
be determined.
Other causes include:
	 Poor diet
	 Multiple pregnancies
	 Regular blood donation.
Further reading
Provan D. Mechanisms and management of iron deficiency anaemia. 
British Journal of Haematology 1999; 105 (Suppl 1): 19–26.
Figure 6.2  Typical blood film in chronic iron deficiency anaemia. Note the pale 
red cells with pencil (elongated) cells. 
Remember
The anaemia of β-thalassaemia trait is:
•	 Life-long
•	 Stable.
Case history (2)
An 81-year-old woman presents to the A&E department with 
recent onset congestive cardiac failure.
On examination she is mildly jaundiced and anaemic. Her 
pulse was 88/min, BP 120/90. She had signs of heart failure with a 
81
Microcytic and macrocytic anaemia
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
The findings indicate a severe macrocytic anaemia with a moderate 
neutropenia and thrombocytopenia. The diagnosis could be pernicious 
anaemia.
Vitamin B12 or folate deficiency impairs DNA synthesis and affects all 
rapidly dividing cells, particularly in the bone marrow, resulting in pan­
cytopenia when severe. The anaemia is slow to develop and elderly 
patients, in particular, often do not present until very late.
Avoid blood transfusion, if at all possible, because there is a risk of volume 
overload and acute left ventricular failure.
Make a precise diagnosis by measuring serum vitamin B12, serum and 
red cell folate:
	 In vitamin B12 deficiency the serum vitamin B12 concentration is always 
reduced; in folate deficiency the red cell folate concentration is always 
reduced.
	 Severe vitamin B12 deficiency can be associated with a low red cell folate 
and a normal or high serum folate. Vitamin B12 is required to polygluta­
mate folate, without which folic acid cannot be retained within cells.
Remember
Drugs and rare metabolic defects can result in megaloblastic 
anaemia with normal vitamin levels:
•	 Methotrexate induces functional folate deficiency
•	 Transcobalamin II deficiency results in intracellular vitamin B12 
deficiency (but is very rare).
Bone marrow aspiration (not generally necessary since modern analys­
ers can provide rapid vitamin B12 levels):
	 Confirms megaloblastic erythropoiesis
	 Documents pretreatment iron stores
	 Excludes other conditions – myelodysplasia, acute leukaemia and aplas­
tic anaemia – all of which can present with a macrocytosis and 
pancytopenia.
Causes
	 Folate deficiency? Nutritional deficiency is almost always a factor in 
any cause of folate deficiency, whether this is due to increased 
Case history (2) (continued)
raised venous pressure, a 3rd heart sound, basal crackles and 
marked lower leg oedema.
Investigations
•	 Hb 32 g/L
•	 MCV 121 fL
•	 WBC 1.5 × 109/L
•	 platelets 64 × 109/L
•	 aniso poikilocytosis + + +
•	 hypersegmented neutrophils present
82
Haematology and Oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
requirements (e.g. myelofibrosis, haemolysis) or to excess alcohol use. 
In malabsorption, e.g. coeliac disease, there is also poor dietary intake 
of folate.
	 B12 deficiency? Most cases of vitamin B12 deficiency are due to malab­
sorption, either gastric (because of intrinsic factor deficiency) or intesti­
nal (due to small bowel disease). Pernicious anaemia (antibodies against 
intrinsic factor) is the most common cause.
Additional investigations
	 Intrinsic factor antibody assay (positive in 50% of patients with perni­
cious anaemia).
	 Anti-tissue transglutaminase antibodies and/or jejunal biopsy (to 
exclude coeliac disease).
	 Barium meal and follow-through (to exclude small bowel disease, e.g. 
Crohn’s disease); in a woman of this age only after the other causes have 
been excluded.
Many patients with moderate vitamin B12 or folate deficiency have a 
normal haemoglobin with a raised MCV. Vitamin assays should be per­
formed if the clinical picture is suggestive of a deficiency picture.
	 Gastrointestinal disease or surgery including glossitis, malabsorption or 
diarrhoea
	 Neurological disease, including visual loss, a peripheral neuropathy or 
evidence of demyelination
	 Psychiatric disorders including dementia, confusion or depression
	 Malabsorption or restricted diets, including vegans and those with ano­
rexia nervosa
	 Alcohol excess
	 Infertility
	 Autoimmune endocrine disease
	 Family history of pernicious anaemia
	 Drug therapy, particularly anti-convulsants.
•	 Diagnosis.  This patient had megaloblastic anaemia secondary to 
severe vitamin B12 deficiency.
Pernicious anaemia
	 Serum B12: 25 ng/L (NR 160–960 ng/L)
	 Serum folate: 14.6 µg/L (NR 4.0–18.0 µg/L)
	 Red cell folate: 86 µg/L (NR 160–640 µg/L).
Management
Whenever possible, treat with one haematinic only. In this patient, treat 
with hydroxocobalamin 1000 µg IM daily for 3 days.
Remember
Never give folate alone because, although it might partially correct 
the blood abnormalities associated with vitamin B12 deficiency, it 
will also cause the B12 level to drop even further and might 
precipitate severe neuropathy.
83
Haemolytic anaemia
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Do full blood counts + reticulocytes and urea and electrolytes initially 
daily (in a severely anaemic patient – as in this case) to look for:
	 Hypokalaemia, which can occasionally develop 1–2 days post therapy
	 Reticulocyte count, which starts to increase 2–3 days after treatment and 
reaches a peak on days 5–7
	 The haemoglobin concentration, which often falls further before starting 
to rise
	 Stay calm! Avoid blood transfusion. Failure of the reticulocyte count 
and haemoglobin to rise in the predicted manner might be due to:
•	 Incorrect diagnosis and/or treatment: review laboratory data
•	 Coexistent iron deficiency: check iron stores, e.g. ferritin levels
•	 Intercurrent infection: review patient – chest infection? urinary tract 
infection?
•	 Coexistent hypothyroidism.
Remember
Pernicious anaemia is an autoimmune disease; 1–2% of patients 
will also develop thyroid disease. Gastric cancer is also slightly 
more common (1–3% of cases).
The majority of patients with vitamin B12 deficiency have vitamin B12 
malabsorption and require life-long treatment with vitamin B12.
•	 Treatment.  Hydroxocobalamin 1000 µg IM every 3 months is given 
but high doses of vitamin B12 (2 mg) daily by mouth are also 
effective.
Nutritional deficiency of vitamin B12 is rare and confined to vegans.
Further reading
Lahner E, Annibale B. Pernicious anaemia; new insights. World J Gastro 
2009; 15: 5121–5128.
Anaemia due to folic acid deficiency
These patients need 6 months’ treatment with folic acid 5 mg daily after 
the cause (e.g. coeliac disease, see p. 51) has been defined and treated. Folic 
acid is, however, ineffective in the treatment of methotrexate toxicity, 
when folinic acid 15 mg IV daily is given.
HAEMOLYTIC ANAEMIA
Haemolytic anaemias are caused by increased destruction of red cells in 
two sites, intravascular or extravascular.
Case history
A 60-year-old woman presents with a history of feeling tired and 
exhausted for the last week. She is normally well but is under the 
care of the haematologists with chronic lymphatic leukaemia 
(CLL). She knows all about the condition, having been diagnosed 
Continued
84
Haematology and Oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
A normocytic anaemia can be due to:
	 Acute blood loss
	 Lack of erythropoietin – chronic kidney disease
	 Bone marrow infiltration, e.g. carcinoma
	 Haemolysis.
The patient described is anaemic and jaundiced with splenomegaly, sug­
gesting a haemolytic anaemia. To confirm this you need to demonstrate:
	 Increased red cell production
	 A reduced red cell lifespan.
Increased red cell production
	 Reticulocytosis: reticulocytes are immature red cells newly released 
from the bone marrow. They are larger than mature red cells, contain 
mRNA and appear polychromatic on standard blood films.
	 Bone marrow aspiration: erythroid hyperplasia.
Remember
Cortisol, androgens and thyroxine are all required for optimal 
erythropoiesis.
Case history (continued)
4 years ago. She is not on any treatment but is under regular 
follow-up.
On examination she is clinically jaundiced, with cervical 
lymphadenopathy and a just palpable spleen.
•	 Hb 68 g/L
•	 MCV 90 fL
•	 WBC 30 × 109/L
•	 Platelets 172 × 109/L
•	 Reticulocytes 18.8%
•	 Anisopoikilocytosis ++
•	 Polychromasia ++
•	 Spherocytes present
•	 Lymphocytosis with smear cells.
She has a normocytic anaemia with a raised white cell count and 
a reticulocytosis.
Reduced red cell lifespan
	 Acholuric jaundice: unconjugated hyperbilirubinaemia, urobilinogen 
but no bilirubin in the urine.
	 Abnormal red cell morphology: this might also indicate the specific 
cause of the haemolytic anaemia (see below).
	 Directly by radioactive isotope studies: reduced survival of 51Cr-
labelled autologous red cells (only performed if diagnosis of haemolysis 
is in doubt).
85
Haemolytic anaemia
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
There are many specific causes of haemolysis. The diagnosis can often be 
made by review of the blood film. Speak to the haematology medical staff.
Features of haemolysis on blood film
	 Spherocytes: autoimmune haemolytic anaemia, hereditary spherocyto­
sis, Clostridium welchii septicaemia, extensive burns
	 Red cell fragments: leaking mechanical heart valve, disseminated 
malignancy
	 Sickled cells: sickle-cell anaemia, sickle-cell–HbC disease
	 Bitten-out red cells: glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, 
unstable haemoglobin, oxidative drug therapy, e.g. Dapsone
	 Malaria parasites.
Investigations
•	 Antibody screen and direct anti-globulin test (DAT): in 
autoimmune haemolytic anaemia autoantibodies to red cell 
membrane antigens are present in serum and on the red cell 
surface
•	 Urinary haemosiderin: positive in chronic intravascular 
haemolysis such as paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria 
(PNH, very rare) and leaking mechanical heart valves
•	 Flow cytometry with antibodies against CD55 and CD59 
antigens for PNH
•	 Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase assay: common enzyme 
deficiency in particular ethnic groups (African, Mediterranean, 
SE Asian)
This patient had a strongly positive direct anti-globulin test (DAT) with 
anti-IgG (see Fig. 6.13, p. 129). The antibody eluted from her red cells was 
also present free in her serum and did not have any easily definable 
antigen specificity. She therefore has autoimmune haemolytic anaemia 
(AIHA) due to an IgG red cell autoantibody active at 37°C. AIHA can be 
primary or secondary. This patient is known to have CLL and has lym­
phadenopathy and a lymphocytosis with small, mature lymphocytes. Her 
AIHA is secondary to the underlying chronic lymphocytic leukaemia 
(CLL); 10–15% of patients with CLL develop AIHA.
•	 Diagnosis.  Autoimmune haemolytic anaemia (secondary to under­
lying CLL).
Management
	 Start oral prednisolone 60 mg/day. This usually produces a remission. 
Corticosteroids reduce the production of antibodies and also destroy 
antibody coated red cells.
	 Blood transfusion is necessary if the haemoglobin continues to fall. 
Compatibility testing is complex because the autoantibody interferes 
with the cross-match; the laboratory could carry out autoabsorption 
studies to exclude additional alloantibodies. Transfuse slowly.
	 Refer patient to her Consultant in Haematology to discuss further 
management.
86
Haematology and Oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
•	 Progress.  This patient went into remission on the steroids. Steroids 
are effective in about 80% of cases. The haematologists gradually 
reduced her steroids over 3 months and she was started on azathio­
prine. A year later her CLL became active and she is now on rituxi­
mab and fludarabine.
SICKLE-CELL DISEASE
Investigations
Performed in medical assessment unit (MAU), aimed at assessing 
the severity of the crisis and determining any treatable cause:
•	 FBC + reticulocytes
•	 U&Es
•	 Liver biochemistry
Compare values with normal steady-state values, which should be 
in her notes. Remember that many nucleated red cells can result 
in an erroneously high WBC count:
•	 MSU
•	 Blood cultures
Infection is a frequent precipitant of a painful crisis:
•	 O2 saturation on air (see Information box)
•	 Group and save
Case history
An 18-year-old female of African origin came to A&E with severe 
pains in her right leg, left hip, chest and back. She was well 
known to many of the staff as she had attended on many 
occasions with painful sickle crises. She had been out all night at 
a club.
The examination should initially be brief until adequate pain control 
has been achieved.
Questions to ask patients presenting with sickle-cell crises
Distribution of pain? Any bone tenderness?
	 Lumbar back pain can be particularly severe
	 Rib, sternal or thoracic vertebral pain can impair respiratory effort and 
predispose to the acute chest syndrome.
Remember
AHA can develop acutely with a rapid fall in haemoglobin. This 
patient has a short history. Check the haemoglobin concentration 
at least once a day.
87
Sickle-cell disease
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Any fever?
	 Fever ± leucocytosis can indicate an underlying infection but is also 
compatible with ischaemic tissue necrosis secondary to intravascular 
sickling alone.
Any hepatosplenomegaly?
	 Splenomegaly is unusual in adults with HbSS or HbS/β0 thalassaemia 
– splenic atrophy is more common.
	 A larger spleen than normal for the patient (ask the patient or parents/
consult medical notes) might indicate acute splenic sequestration.
Compliance with hyposplenic prophylaxis?
	 Patients with HbSS and HbS/β0 thalassaemia have severe hyposplenism 
and are susceptible to overwhelming sepsis, particularly with Strepto­
coccus pneumoniae.
	 Prophylaxis includes penicillin V 250 mg × 2 daily and vaccination with 
polyvalent pneumococcal and the Hib vaccines.
Treatment of acute painful sickle-cell crises
Analgesia
 Morphine/diamorphine
	 0.1 mg/kg IV/SC every 20 minutes until pain controlled, then
	 0.05–0.1 mg/kg IV/SC (or oral morphine) every 2–4 hours
	 Patient controlled analgesia (PCA) when pain controlled
	 NB Ask patient about previous morphine dosages. Check medical 
records and discharge summaries. Higher doses may be required in 
cases who have previously received opioids.
Patient controlled analgesia (PCA) (example for adults > 50 kg)
 Diamorphine
	 Continuous infusion: 0–10 mg/h
	 PCA bolus dose: 2–10 mg
	 Dose duration: 1 minute
	 Lockout time: 20–30 minutes.
Information
A low O2 saturation might reflect acute lung pathology, e.g. 
pneumonia or the acute chest syndrome, or chronic sickle-cell-
related lung damage.
CXR and arterial gases are indicated only if there is:
•	 Rib, sternal and thoracic vertebral pain
•	 Signs of consolidation
•	 Tachypnoea (> 25/minute)
•	 O2 saturation < 80% on air or < 95% on maximal 
supplementary O2
Any precipitating factors?
	 Exposure to cold/skin chilling (might apply to this patient)
	 Dehydration (could also apply to this patient)
	 Hypoxia
	 Infection.
88
Haematology and Oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
When using diamorphine or other parenteral opiates the following param­
eters must be monitored regularly on an hourly basis:
	 Pain score
	 Respiratory rate
	 O2 saturation on air
	 Analgesia consumption.
Adjuvant oral analgesia
	 Paracetamol 1 g 6-hourly
	 +/− Ibuprofen* 400 mg 8-hourly
	 or Diclofenac* 50 mg 8-hourly
Supplementary analgesia may be provided by:
	 Regular oral dihydrocodeine and/or NSAIDs
	 TENS
	 Acupuncture
	 Massage with analgesic rub
	 Laxatives (all patients). For example:
•	 Lactulose 10 mL × 2 daily
•	 Senna 2–4 tablets daily
•	 Sodium docusate 100 mg × 2 daily
•	 Macrogol 1 sachet daily
• Other adjuvants
	 Anti-pruritics:
•	 Hydroxyzine 25 mg × 2 as required
	 Antiemetics:
•	 Prochlorperazine 5–10 mg × 3 as required
•	 Cyclizine 50 mg × 3 as required
	 Anxiolytic:
•	 Haloperidol 1–3 mg oral IM × 2 as required.
Remember
Failure to maintain oxygenation can:
•	 Exacerbate the painful crisis
•	 Indicate the development of the acute chest syndrome.
Hydroxycarbamide is useful in increasing HbF. It should be prescribed 
by haematologists and often takes months to have an effect. It reduces the 
episodes of pain, the acute chest syndrome and the need for blood transfu­
sions. The overall mortality has also been shown to be reduced.
Supportive measures
	 Keep warm: use heat pads
	 Hydration: aim for 3 L per 24 h – orally if possible
	 Venous access is often very difficult in these patients; to conserve 
peripheral veins the repeated insertion of IV lines should be avoided
	 IV hydration is indicated if:
•	 Nausea/vomiting is uncontrolled
•	 The patient is sedated
•	 The serum urea/creatinine are rising
*Advised with NSAIDs in renal impairment.
89
Types of sickle-cell disease
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Oxygenation: aim for O2 saturation 95%
	 Monitor the haemoglobin concentration daily and transfuse if it falls to 
150 g/L. All transfused blood should be matched for minor blood group 
antigens Kell and Rh (C and e, as well as D antigens). Remember, do 
not use transfusions in this steady-state anaemia, in an uncomplicated 
painful episode and for minor surgery.
The acute chest syndrome
Most painful sickle-cell crises resolve without complications within 7–10 
days. The development of the acute chest syndrome is the most common 
cause of death in adults with sickle-cell disease.
The syndrome is characterised by:
	 Rib, sternal and/or thoracic vertebral pain
	 Bilateral basal chest signs with new infiltrates on CXR
	 Tachypnoea
	 Deteriorating oxygenation
	 Falling haemoglobin concentration
	 Fever and leucocytosis.
Pathophysiology of acute chest syndrome
	 Infection
	 Fat embolism from necrotic bone marrow
	 Pulmonary infarction due to sequestration of sickled red cells.
Treatment of acute chest syndrome
	 Exchange blood transfusion to reduce the amount of HbS to < 20%
	 Maintenance of oxygenation: this might include, for example, continu­
ous positive airway pressure (CPAP) via a tight-fitting mask, or inter­
mittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV)
	 Aggressive pain relief
	 Intravenous antibiotic therapy.
The majority of patients with a sickle-cell crisis present with severe, acute 
bone pain secondary to ischaemic bone marrow necrosis. Beware the 
patient with sickle-cell disease (SCD) who presents unwell but without 
pain. Such patients might have other, less common, complications of 
SCD, which can progress very rapidly (Figs 6.3 and 6.4).
Remember
Other complications of SCD include:
•	 Pneumococcal septicaemia
•	 Splenic sequestration
•	 Erythrovirus infection associated with marrow aplasia
•	 Acute folate deficiency
•	 Progress.  This patient’s current crisis was more severe than her 
previous ones and she went on to develop the acute chest syndrome 
from which she died.
TYPES OF SICKLE-CELL DISEASE
	 Sickle-cell anaemia HbSS
	 Sickle-cell–haemoglobin C disease HbSC
90
Haematology and Oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
a
b
Figure 6.3  (a) Osteomyelitis of the humerus in a sickle patient (pre-treatment). 
Note the elevation of the periosteum at the distal part of the humerus. (b) The 
same patient showing normal periosteum following treatment. 
Figure 6.4  Avascular necrosis of the femoral head in a patient with homozygous 
sickle-cell disease. There is loss of joint space and distortion of the head of the 
femur and acetabulum. 
91
Types of sickle-cell disease
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Sickle-cell beta thalassaemia
	 Rare compound heterozygotes, e.g. HbSD.
Diagnosis in A&E/MAU
	 Information from patient
	 UK Haemoglobinopathy card
	 Blood count, reticulocyte count and blood film review
	 Serum bilirubin
	 Sickle solubility test (commercial kits are available).
Later:
	 Haemoglobin electrophoresis (Fig. 6.5) on cellulose acetate membrane 
(CAM) at an alkaline pH
or
	 High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC).
Typically, the patient will be anaemic with evidence of haemolysis (ele­
vated bilirubin and reticulocyte count). The blood film will show sickled 
red cells in variable numbers (Fig. 6.6). The sickle solubility test will be 
positive and CAM electrophoresis or HPLC will confirm the presence of 
HbS ± HbC or HbD with no HbA (except in HbS/β+ thalassaemia).
Beware
	 In HbSC and HbS/β+ thalassaemia the haemoglobin concentration, 
reticulocyte count and serum bilirubin can be virtually normal.
	 The sickle solubility test is a qualitative test only and will be positive in 
any individual where the amount of HbS is > 10%. This will include 
both sickle-cell trait and sickle-cell disease.
Normal
β-Thalassaemia 
trait
Sickle-cell 
trait
Sickle-cell 
anaemia
β-Thalassaemia 
major
Origin
HbA2
HbF
HbA
HbS
Figure 6.5  Patterns of haemoglobin electrophoresis. 
92
Haematology and Oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Case history (1)
On your medical take you admitted a 70-year-old man with 
breathlessness, wheeze, fever and cough productive of sputum. 
As a long-standing smoker he suffers bouts of bronchitis but is 
otherwise in reasonable health.
On examination he was not breathless at rest. Pulse was 82/
min with no evidence of cardiac failure. Auscultation of the chest 
showed scattered wheeze and a few crackles at both bases. Peak 
flow was 350 L/min.
Initial investigations have shown Hb 230 g/L, PCV 0.62, WCC 
12 × 109/L, a mild neutrophilia and platelets 200 × 109/L.
Figure 6.6  Blood film in sickle-cell disease showing numerous sickle-shaped 
red cells. 
Further reading
Rees DC, Williams TN, Gladwin MT. Sickle cell disease. Lancet 2010; 376: 
2018–2031.
ELEVATED HAEMOGLOBIN (POLYCYTHAEMIA)
Case history (2)
In the next bed a 54-year-old man has been admitted with chest 
pain and a suspected myocardial infarct. His general health is 
reasonable but he has developed severe night sweats and has lost 
7 kg over the last 3 months. He denies smoking cigarettes and 
does not have any previous history of chest problems.
93
Elevated haemoglobin (polycythaemia)
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
These two cases both have elevated Hb, but is their cause 
the same?
Haemoglobin (in red blood cells) is required for oxygen transport and, like 
most things, too much Hb has serious consequences and needs appropriate 
management (Fig. 6.7).
How to visualise the Hb level:
	 Hb is expressed as a concentration, i.e. g/dL blood but blood = plasma 
+ solids (RBCs mainly). Thus Hb level must be related to the level of 
the plasma.
Preliminary management
	 Ensure no hyperviscosity symptoms or signs:
•	 Confusion
•	 Visual disturbance
•	 Peripheral circulatory disturbance.
Case history (2) (continued)
On examination he looked well. Pulse and blood pressure were 
normal. There were no abnormal signs in the cardiac or respiratory 
systems.
Investigations show his Hb was 220 g/L with PCV 0.58, WBC 
20 × 109/L and platelets 600 × 109/L. Lactic dehydrogenase 
740 U/L.
Plasma ∼55%
RBC ∼45%
≡ PCV 0.45
Normal
True
polycythaemia
Apparent
polycythaemia
Increased
RBC mass, e.g.
Polycythaemia
 vera
Secondary
 polycythaemia
RBC mass normal
but plasma volume
is reduced with
effect that Hb
concentration
increases
Figure 6.7  Alteration of haemoglobin in relation to plasma. 
94
Haematology and Oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Ensure patient is adequately hydrated.
	 Infection (if present) must be treated.
	 Identify correctable causes, e.g. chronic hypoxia.
Having made sure that the patients are stable, the next step is to determine 
the cause of the high Hb concentration. Before carrying out extensive 
investigation, it is sensible to contact the haematology team, who will 
either advise on further tests or take over the patient’s care.
Information
Hb might be high in:
•	 Primary proliferative polycythaemia (polycythaemia vera, PV)
•	 Secondary to underlying hypoxic state: raised Hb serves a 
purpose:
–	 Chronic lung disease
–	 Cyanotic heart disease
•	 Inappropriately high level of erythropoietin production: raised Hb 
serves no purpose:
–	 Renal cell carcinoma
–	 Uterine tumours
–	 Cerebellar haemangioblastoma
•	 Relative/apparent polycythaemia:
–	 Where the plasma component is reduced with effect that Hb 
concentration rises, e.g. dehydration, associated with 
obesity, hypertension, diuretics, smoking
The haematology registrar advises you to arrange some investigative 
tests.
Investigations
	 Repeat FBC (to check the result is correct or that with some oral/IV fluid 
the Hb has normalised). High haematocrit.
	 Biochemistry screen: renal function – is it normal? Uric acid – might be 
high in some types of polycythaemia.
	 Blood film: these patients had elevated platelets and WBC – make sure 
these are normal peripheral blood cells, with no evidence of leukaemia.
	 Presence of JAK 2 mutation (see Remember box).
	 Bone marrow (see Remember box).
	 Erythropoietin levels (normal or low in PV).
Remember
Proposed criteria for PV
Modified from proposed revised WHO criteria for polycythaemia 
vera (PV).
Major criteria
•	 Haemoglobin > 185 g/L in men, 165 g/L in women or other 
evidence of increased red cells volume.
95
Elevated haemoglobin (polycythaemia)
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Remember (continued)
•	 Presence of JAK2 tyrosine kinase 617VF or other functionally 
similar mutation such as JAK2 exon 12 mutation.
Minor criteria
•	 Bone marrow biopsy, showing hypercellularity for age with 
trilineage growth (panmyelosis) with prominent erythroid, 
granulocytic and megakaryocytic proliferation.
•	 Serum erythropoietin level below the reference range for normal.
•	 Endogenous erythroid colony (EEC) formation in vitro*.
Diagnosis requires the presence of both major criteria and one 
minor criterion or the presence of the first major criterion together 
with two minor criteria.
From: Tefferi et al. Blood (2007) 110:1092. American Society of Haematology.
*EEC. This is not routinely available but colony formation in the absence of 
exogenous erythropoietin in vitro is 100% specific and sensitve in patients 
without previous treatment.
For diagnosis of secondary cases
	 Blood gases or pulse oximetry (the latter is painless and quite adequate 
to exclude hypoxia only).
	 CXR: emphysema, other lung pathologies.
	 Abdominal ultrasound: is the spleen enlarged? Remember renal and 
uterine causes of polycythaemia.
	 Bone marrow: not diagnostic in isolation but gives additional 
information.
	 Erythropoietin levels raised.
NB It is now not necessary to do blood viscosity and red cell volume 
studies.
Classic features of polycythaemia vera (PV)
	 Weight loss, sweats, pruritus (itching is typically much more pro­
nounced after a warm bath) (Fig. 6.8).
	 High Hb and perhaps raised WBC + platelets.
	 Splenomegaly ± hepatomegaly.
	 Other causes (e.g. hypoxia) excluded.
	 Increased red cell mass.
	 Plasma volume normal.
Secondary polycythaemia
	 As 
above, 
but 
generally 
with 
no 
hepatosplenomegaly, 
no 
thrombocytosis.
	 Usually secondary cause found, such as cyanotic heart disease, lung 
disease, renal disease.
Apparent (or relative) polycythaemia
	 Red cell mass normal
	 Reduced plasma volume
	 No hepatosplenomegaly.
96
Haematology and Oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Management and progress
This is where knowledge of the underlying cause becomes crucial.
Your FIRST patient has secondary polycythaemia due to lung 
disease
This is a physiological rise in Hb. Reducing the Hb to normal could have 
serious consequences because the rise in Hb is a compensatory 
mechanism.
The initial aim is to reduce the Hb to a safe level. Generally this is 
achieved by venesection (removal of ~400–500 mL blood) every 2 days. In 
males the PCV is reduced to < 0.5 and in females to < 0.45.
ALL cases of secondary polycythaemia should be treated with venesec­
tion and treatment of the underlying cause if possible. This patient’s raised 
Hb was due to chronic lung disease, with the high Hb due to hypoxia.
Your SECOND patient has polycythaemia vera (Remember box)
	 Venesect 400–500 mL weekly.
	 Then control marrow activity with hydroxycarbamide.
	 Targeted therapy with JAK1 and JAK2 agonists is becoming available.
Long-term complications
Up to 30% of patients with PV will develop intense marrow fibrosis and 
5% develop acute myeloid leukaemia. The other polycythaemias do not 
transform.
Figure 6.8  Erythromelalgia of the toes (this is a painful complication in which the 
skin becomes suffused and red, as in this patient). 
97
Elevated white blood cell count
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
ELEVATED WHITE BLOOD CELL COUNT
Case history
A 17-year-old boy who has ulcerative colitis was admitted to MAU 
because he felt unwell with a headache, sore throat and a 
temperature. He had also developed diarrhoea but there was no 
blood in the stools. He was not on steroids but was on 
azathioprine 100 mg daily.
On examination his tonsils were enlarged and inflamed; he had 
palatal petechiae and cervical lymphadenopathy.
Investigations showed an Hb of 124 g/L, an MCV of 98 fL, 
WBC of 16 × 109/L with abnormal lymphocytes in the peripheral 
blood. A monospot test is positive.
Diagnosis: Infectious mononucleosis.
There are many causes of a raised WBC (Table 6.1) and there is overlap 
with haematological malignancies, many of which present with WBC 
elevation. As a non-specialist confronted with a patient who has an ele­
vated WBC, the key question is: does this elevation represent a haemato­
logical malignancy or is it reflecting some other process?
A thorough history and examination will usually allow you to deter­
mine the cause of the elevated WBC. ‘Alert’ features suggesting a possible 
malignant cause include:
	 Ill patients
	 Those with bleeding/bruising
	 Fever
	 Enlargement of liver or spleen or lymphadenopathy
	 Weight loss
	 Lymphocytes or bizarre/abnormal cells on blood film.
Is it glandular fever or acute leukaemia?
The atypical lymphocytes seen in this patient with an infectious mononu­
cleosis can be confused with leukaemic blasts because the lymphocytes are 
large, often have nucleoli and resemble lymphoblasts. Specific tests, such 
Patients with haematological 
malignancies likely to have high WBC
Situations in which a 
reactive high WBC occurs
Acute myeloid leukaemia
Infection
Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia
Corticosteroid therapy
Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia
Brisk GI tract bleeding
Chronic myeloid leukaemia
‘Stress’, e.g. postoperative
Lymphoma
Post splenectomy
Other infiltrations: myeloma, 
myelofibrosis
Table 6.1  Causes of high white blood cell counts
98
Haematology and Oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
as the ‘Monospot’, help confirm the diagnosis. In general, the haematology 
department will advise on further investigation, e.g. cell marker analysis 
to exclude leukaemia.
•	 Progress.  This patient quickly improved, with no significant flare 
up of his colitis. He was sent home after 72 hours, continuing on 
azathioprine.
Case history
A 75-year-old woman was admitted with acute ischaemia of the 
toes in both feet. On examination she was found to have dusky 
skin on both feet, with evidence of early gangrene in the toes. FBC 
showed normal Hb, WBC of 18 × 109/L (neutrophilia) and platelet 
count 1500 × 109/L.
Other significant features in this patient:
•	 Evidence of weight loss
•	 Splenomegaly 4 cm below the costal margin.
You need to decide whether the marked elevation of the platelet 
count is likely to be reactive to some underlying process/disorder, 
or whether she has a primary marrow disorder, because the 
management is dictated by the underlying cause.
Remember
If in doubt – contact the haematology staff. Early intervention in a 
patient with acute leukaemia is advised and if you are not 
confident that the WBC rise is ‘benign’ – seek expert help. There 
is less urgency if:
•	 The patient is obviously well
•	 Isolated WBC only (Hb/platelets normal)
•	 Obvious infection
•	 Simple neutrophilia.
Further reading
Stock W, Hoffman R. White blood cells 1: non-malignant disorders. Lancet 
2000; 355: 1351–1357.
ELEVATED PLATELET COUNT
Why does the platelet count rise in a reactive manner?
In simplistic terms, any acute stress (bleeding, operative surgery, severe 
infection) causes intense marrow activity with elevation of white cells and 
platelets in a non-specific way.
Reactive thrombocytosis does not usually exceed 1000 × 109/L, whereas 
primary thrombocytosis is often > 1000 × 109/L, but do not rely on platelet 
count alone. A reactive thrombocythaemia will resolve when the underly­
ing problem, e.g. infection, is treated.
99
Elevated platelet count
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Immediate action
	 Contact haematologist.
	 Check end organs – are they threatened:
•	 Look at fundi: vascular occlusion?
•	 Extremities: too late at this point because there is vascular damage 
to feet in this patient
•	 Renal function.
	 Is there a secondary (reactive) cause:
•	 Infection
•	 Bleeding
•	 Malignancy (breast, lung, bowel)
•	 Connective tissue disorder (e.g. rheumatoid).
If none obvious – check again for splenomegaly, as was found in this 
case.
If platelets are raised + splenomegaly, then the cause is likely to be a 
myeloproliferative disorder.
•	 Diagnosis.  This patient has a myeloproliferative disorder.
Is there a test that will confirm a primary bone marrow 
pathology?
Unfortunately not. The JAK2 tyrosine kinase mutation is only present in 
50% of cases (see polycythaemia vera). Bone marrow trephine biopsy can 
help because increases in the numbers of megakaryocytes (the cells that 
make platelets; Fig. 6.9) with clustering favour a diagnosis of essential 
thrombocythaemia (ET), but often it is a diagnosis of exclusion. Blood film 
examination may show marked variation in size and shape of the platelets 
(platelet anisocytosis; Fig. 6.10) in primary thrombocythaemia – but this is 
not diagnostic.
Figure 6.9  Bone marrow in essential thrombocythaemia: clusters of 
megakaryocytes (from which platelets bud off) are seen in the centre of the field. 
100
Haematology and Oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Management
	 Give low-dose aspirin 75–300 mg/day (or dipyridamole if aspirin 
contraindicated).
	 Plateletpheresis (using cell separator) if organ function threatened and 
need rapid reduction in platelet count.
	 Oral hydroxycarbamide (e.g. 2–3 g per day for 2–3 days, dropping 
thereafter to 500 mg/day) to suppress bone marrow production of 
platelets (but beware neutropenia if dose too high). Suggested regimen: 
10–30 mg/kg/day. Anagrelide and Busulfan are also used.
Complications
	 Primary thrombocythaemia: generally indolent course but might trans­
form to polycythaemia myelofibrosis in ~5% (occasionally transforms 
to acute myeloid leukaemia).
•	 Progress.  This patient was referred to the Vascular Surgical Depart­
ment who carried out Doppler and Duplex imaging of his peripheral 
arteries but found no lesion amenable to surgery.
GLUCOSE-6-PHOSPHATE DEHYDROGENASE 
DEFICIENCY
Definition
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) is an enzyme in the hexose-
monophosphate pathway. It is responsible for generating NADPH. In the 
Figure 6.10  Large numbers of platelets (small purple cells) in blood film of 
patient with essential thrombocythaemia. 
Information
Myeloproliferative disorders associated with thrombocytosis
•	 Primary (essential) thrombocythaemia
•	 Polycythaemia vera
•	 Chronic myeloid leukaemia
•	 Myelofibrosis
101
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
red cell, NADPH is a major source of reducing the potential required to 
maintain the iron atoms of haemoglobin in the ferrous state and to prevent 
membrane lipid peroxidation.
Case history
A 30-year-old Nigerian man was brought to A&E having collapsed 
in the street. He had returned from a 3-month holiday in Nigeria 6 
days previously. Two days before admission he had developed 
central colicky abdominal pain and diarrhoea; 1 day before 
admission he began to feel weak and noticed his urine was 
discoloured red.
On examination he was pyrexial (37.8°C), anaemic and 
jaundiced. There was no hepatosplenomegaly.
Dipstix testing of urine was negative for bilirubin but positive 
for urobilinogen and blood. Urine microscopy revealed no red 
cells.
Investigations
•	 Hb 54 g/L
•	 MCV 91 fL
•	 WBC 15.8 × 109/L
•	 Platelets 249 × 109/L
•	 Reticulocytes 11.61%
Blood film showed polychromasia, irregularly contracted and 
bitten-out red cells. There were no malaria parasites or Heinz 
bodies.
The patient has a normocytic anaemia with a reticulocytosis 
suggesting acute haemolysis or haemorrhage.
Polychromasia refers to the appearance of reticulocytes, or immature 
red cells, when stained by using standard stains.
The appearance of the red cells is compatible with oxidative red cell 
damage. It is unusual to see Heinz bodies when patients have a functional 
spleen.
Differential diagnosis (see Table 6.4)
Malaria is a common cause of haemolysis in patients returning from the 
tropics. Other evidence to suggest acute intravascular haemolysis is shown 
in Table 6.2.
Hb electrophoresis on cellulose acetate membrane (CAM) and agar gel 
demonstrates sickle-cell trait but no other structural haemoglobin variant. 
Sickle-cell trait does not result in a haemolytic anaemia.
The negative isopropanol stability test excludes an inherited, unstable 
haemoglobin variant.
The negative DAT (or Coombs’ test) excludes immune-mediated red 
cell destruction.
G6PD was assayed by two methods that confirmed G6PD deficiency. 
The most common G6PD variant in individuals of African descent is 
G6PD A–.
102
Haematology and Oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Deficiency of G6PD arises from a large number of different mutations 
in the G6PD gene, the majority of which are point mutations resulting in 
single amino acid substitutions. G6PD deficiency is widespread in many 
tropical and subtropical populations where malaria was, or is, endemic. 
Frequencies of 20% of the population in Southern Europe and Africa and 
40% in south east Asia and the Middle East have been reported.
G6PD deficiency can present as:
	 Neonatal jaundice
	 Chronic haemolytic anaemia
	 Acute haemolytic anaemia.
An acute haemolytic crisis is the most common presentation and most 
affected individuals are asymptomatic until this happens. Acute haemoly­
sis occurs when an exogenous factor imposes an extra oxidative stress, 
which overwhelms the limited supply of NADPH in the red cells. Acute 
haemolysis can be precipitated by:
	 Infection
	 Drugs
	 Fava beans (either lightly cooked food or as a pollen).
Many drugs (Table 6.3) have been implicated in attacks of acute haemoly­
sis in susceptible individuals.
Test
Result
Serum bilirubin
65 mmol/L
Serum haptoglobins
Undetectable
Serum LDH
587 iu/L
Schumm’s test
Positive
Table 6.2  Evidence to show intravascular haemolysis
Remember
•	 G6PD deficiency will be present in all (homozygous) males who 
carry an affected X chromosome
•	 Heterozygous females will have a dual population of red cells
•	 Because X chromosome inactivation is random (lyonisation), 
some heterozygous females will demonstrate clinical G6PD 
deficiency.
Remember
•	 Some drugs (e.g. primaquine, aspirin and vitamin K) can be 
given safely in reduced doses
•	 Some agents (e.g. Dapsone and naphthalene) in sufficient 
amounts will cause haemolysis in individuals with normal levels 
of G6PD.
103
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Type
Example
Anti-malarials
Primaquine
Pamaquine
Chloroquine
Quinine
Sulfonamides
Sulfasalazine
Dapsone
Co-trimoxazole
Other antibiotics
Nitrofurantoin
Nalidixic acid
Quinolones, e.g. ciprofloxacin
Analgesics
Aspirin (> 1 g per day)
Miscellaneous
Vitamin K analogues
Naphthalene
Probenecid
Dimercaprol
Methylene blue
Table 6.3  Drugs that commonly cause acute haemolysis in patients 
with G6PD
Favism is a form of severe, acute, intravascular haemolysis, often with 
massive haemoglobinuria, precipitated by exposure to fava beans (Vicia 
faba) in individuals with G6PD deficiency. It is most common in children, 
following the ingestion of fresh, raw beans. Haemolysis is probably pre­
cipitated by divicine, a glucoside constituent in fava beans, which gener­
ates free oxygen radicals when oxidised.
Diagnosis of G6PD deficiency
Clinical features
	 Sudden onset
	 Severe malaise and pallor often with fever and abdominal pain
	 Dark urine
	 Jaundice.
Remember
•	 The jaundice of haemolysis is prehepatic and the bilirubin is 
unconjugated and therefore does not appear in the urine
•	 The dark urine is partly due to haemoglobinuria and partly to 
increased urobilinogen which oxidises and darkens on standing.
Laboratory features
Blood count:
	 Normocytic anaemia
	 Reticulocytosis
	 Bitten-out and irregularly contracted red cells.
The spleen ‘bites out’ Heinz bodies, which are aggregates of oxidised 
methaemoglobin, from affected red cells.
104
Haematology and Oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Features of intravascular haemolysis
	 Decreased haptoglobins
	 Increased LDH
	 Haemoglobinaemia
	 Haemoglobinuria
	 Positive Schumm’s test due to methaemalbumin.
One of the isoenzymes of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) is found in high 
concentrations in red cells and is released in red cell damage.
Rapid depletion of haptoglobin with the formation of methaemalbumin 
is typical of intravascular haemolysis. In the absence of other scavenging 
serum proteins excess haem binds to albumin and the ferrous iron is sub­
sequently oxidised to ferric iron to give methaemalbumin and a positive 
Schumm’s test. The cause of the intravascular haemolysis was established 
by further tests, as shown in Table 6.4.
Haemoglobinuria might result in acute kidney injury, particularly in 
adults – monitor urine output, urea and creatinine.
Test
Result
Haemoglobin electrophoresis
HbA + HbS
Direct antiglobulin test (DAT)
negative
Isopropanol stability test
negative
G6PD assay
1.9 IU/gHb
Table 6.4  Test results confirming the cause of intravascular 
haemolysis
Remember
•	 Old red cells have less G6PD than young red cells and are 
destroyed first during a haemolytic attack
•	 Newly formed reticulocytes have relatively high concentrations 
of G6PD
•	 As a result of these two factors the concentration of G6PD in an 
affected individual may rise during an acute haemolytic episode 
to within the normal range
•	 If in doubt retest 1 month later.
Assessment of G6PD activity
	 Qualitative screening test, e.g. cresyl blue decolorisation test
	 Quantitative enzyme assay by spectrophotometry.
Treatment
	 Stop any drug that could have precipitated the acute haemolysis
	 Search for and treat any infection
	 Monitor haemoglobin concentration twice daily until stable
	 Bed rest; urgent blood transfusion may be required in severe cases.
105
Bleeding disorders
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Patient education:
•	 Issue G6PD deficiency card and information leaflet
•	 Discuss avoidance of specific drugs and fava beans
•	 Offer family screening.
What had precipitated a haemolytic crisis in this man with 
G6PD deficiency?
This was initially obscure. He denied any drug ingestion but, on repeated 
questioning, admitted drinking approximately 50 mL of an oily liquid he 
had obtained from his church in Nigeria where it was used for anointing 
the faithful. When he produced the bottle it smelt strongly of mothballs 
and ultraviolet spectrophotometry confirmed the presence of naphtha­
lene. Naphthalene is well known to cause acute haemolysis. It was first 
described in the 19th century after the introduction of beta-naphthol to 
treat hookworm infestations. Many cases of affected infants have been 
described where the naphthalene was used as a moth repellant in clothes. 
The presence of G6PD deficiency greatly increases sensitivity to the oxida­
tive red cell damage mediated by naphthalene.
•	 Progress.  The patient’s haemoglobin concentration did not fall any 
further but rose slowly, reaching 92 g/L 7 days later. The reticulocyte 
count peaked at 17.4% on the fifth day, and the jaundice had resolved 
by 14 days. Re-assay 6 weeks later confirmed G6PD deficiency.
BLEEDING DISORDERS
These can be due to inherited or acquired causes. Disorders are due to 
haemolysis (either intra or extra-vascular) or coagulation disorders. 
Always take a good history and use your common sense, as illustrated in 
the case below.
Case history (1)
You are phoned by a surgical specialist registrar asking for your 
advice. He has just finished a bilateral hernia repair on a 
50-year-old man and the right side is bleeding briskly. The patient 
has required a transfusion with two units of blood in the last 
30 min. The surgeon tells you that the surgery has gone well and 
wants you to sort out his clotting.
What do you think about this case?
This patient is most likely to be bleeding from a surgical cause: 2 units in 
30 min is far in excess of what you would expect to give in a patient with 
a clotting disorder, and he is only bleeding from one of the repair sites, 
not both. Best to advise the registrar to find the bleeding vessel!
Although this might seem like a somewhat silly example, it shows that 
not all bleeding is due to abnormal clotting. Look at the whole picture 
before jumping in with fresh frozen plasma (FFP).
Inherited bleeding disorders
You are far more likely to see acquired bleeding disorders than inherited. 
Inherited disorders are uncommon, but must be identified.
106
Haematology and Oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
How can I identify the inherited disorders?
Most inherited disorders of any severity present in childhood and hence 
most, if not all, patients will be able to tell you about their problem. They 
should carry a medical card with them, identifying the problem and their 
haematology consultant. It should be easy to sort out these patients and 
get in touch with the appropriate specialist. Always take any suggestion 
of an inherited bleeding disorder seriously (see Figs 6.11 and 6.12).
How can I identify milder forms?
Milder inherited disorders might not present until later in life and usually 
do so after surgery or other interventions.
Acquired bleeding disorders
As mentioned, these are far more common than inherited problems and 
are usually seen in particular clinical settings. These common scenarios 
will be outlined later. Most acquired disorders involve multiple and 
complex defects of coagulation.
Investigation of a suspected bleeding disorder
Should I check the clotting on everyone who bleeds?
Probably, although this isn’t absolutely necessary; however, it is best to 
have a low threshold. A normal set of results might help you be more 
secure that you aren’t overlooking something. Remember, however, 
always to take a full history and family history to try to identify any 
underlying inherited coagulation defect. For example, if a patient had:
Remember
Management of inherited disorders is complex: always seek 
specialist support.
Figure 6.11  Gross arthritis in a patient with haemophilia (inherited factor VIII or 
IX deficiency). 
107
Bleeding disorders
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Remember
Even a 2-second prolongation might indicate an inherited clotting 
problem of significance and should be investigated more fully.
Figure 6.12  This patient with 
haemophilia A has bled into his 
foot (note the discoloration of 
the foot below the medial 
malleolus). 
	 Excessive bleeding after a previous haemostatic challenge:
•	 Operation
•	 Dental extraction
•	 Trauma.
	 Needed a previous blood transfusion for bleeding
	 Family history of bleeding
	 Epistaxis, easy bruising.
What should I request?
You request a basic coagulation screen:
	 Full blood count to check platelet count
	 Prothrombin time (PT)
	 Activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT).
These are the minimum number of tests to start with. If you really want 
to check that a clotting disorder exists, then the following should also be 
performed:
	 Fibrinogen level
	 Thrombin time (TT).
108
Haematology and Oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
These tests form your baseline investigations or screening tests.
Acquired disorders are relatively easy because clotting times are usually 
notably prolonged.
There are a whole range of specialist investigations for the complete 
study of a coagulation disorder: it is best to seek specialist advice.
Case history (2)
You are called to see a patient in A&E who is bleeding excessively 
from a dental extraction. The doctor in A&E thinks that the patient 
has liver disease and asks you for some help. There is nothing in 
the history to indicate what the liver problem might be and the 
patient denies excess alcohol consumption.
On examination you notice spider naevi, liver palms and 
splenomegaly. You agree that the excess bleeding is probably due 
to liver disease.
Bleeding in liver disease
This causes widespread coagulation and bleeding problems. Always be 
aware that significant liver dysfunction can result in a potentially severe 
bleeding disorder. The components of liver-related bleeding are:
	 Reduced synthesis of coagulation factors: the liver is the source of all 
coagulation factors (apart from Factor VIII).
	 Associated vitamin K deficiency: coagulation proteins might be synthe­
sised but will not be active because of vitamin K deficiency.
	 Thrombocytopenia: frequently secondary to splenomegaly from portal 
hypertension.
	 Chronic low-grade disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC): see 
p. 112.
	 Abnormal fibrinogen synthesis: in liver disease, excess sialic acid resi­
dues are added to fibrinogen and hence an acquired dysfibrinogenae­
mia occurs.
The classic laboratory defects would be:
	 PT prolonged due to decrease in factor II, V, VII or X
	 APTT prolonged due to decrease in all factors
	 TT prolonged due to abnormal fibrinogen
	 Fibrinogen degradation products (FDPs) increased (due to failure to 
remove from circulation ± chronic DIC).
Information
Causes of vitamin K deficiency
•	 Biliary obstruction
•	 Oral anti-coagulants
•	 Liver disease
•	 Malabsorption states
•	 Inflammatory bowel diseases (with ileal resection)
109
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Management
	 Give 10 mg vitamin K daily IV for 3 days
	 For acute bleeding give 10–20 mL/kg FFP to replace all coagulation 
proteins
	 If the fibrinogen level is low or TT prolonged, give cryoprecipitate to 
supply fibrinogen.
•	 Progress.  This man’s bleeding stopped with help from the dental 
surgeons. The patient has been referred to the Liver Clinic for inves­
tigation and management of his chronic liver disease.
Case history (3)
A 49-year-old man has been on treatment for hypertension for 
years. His renal function has gradually deteriorated despite 
reasonable control of his blood pressure (now 130/80), stopping 
smoking and taking statin therapy (his present cholesterol is 
3.2 mmol/L).
His present GFR is 32 mL/min/1.73m2. He has recently suffered 
from bruising around his upper arms and shins.
Diagnosis: Chronic kidney disease
Anyone with significantly impaired renal function can have an acquired 
bleeding disorder. The major cause is toxic metabolites impairing platelet 
function, as is the case in this patient.
	 Is the APTT or PT abnormal in renal disease?  No. As mentioned 
above, the major defect is an acquired platelet disorder. The clotting 
times are usually normal.
	 Should the bleeding time be measured regularly in patients with renal 
disease?  No, but remember that renal disease is a cause of an acquired 
bleeding disorder and if you are planning surgery on the patient they 
might have a bleeding problem.
	 What can we do in renal failure?  There are several approaches to treat­
ment but sorting out the renal problem first is the best option. Dialysis 
will improve platelet function; this is why few stable dialysed/
controlled patients actually bleed. The real risk group is those with a 
very high serum creatinine/urea.
Other treatments for bleeding include:
	 Synthetic vasopressin analogue (desmopressin)
	 Cryoprecipitate
	 Platelet transfusion.
These are all used in bleeding episodes.
DISSEMINATED INTRAVASCULAR COAGULATION (DIC)
This is the most complex of the acquired bleeding disorders.
DIC is inappropriate and continued activation of coagulation that leads 
ultimately to both bleeding and thrombosis.
The initial phase of DIC is thrombosis. This is why DIC is associated 
with end-organ damage leading to multi-organ failure.
110
Haematology and Oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Bleeding arises as a secondary phenomenon due to consumption of 
coagulation factors and platelets (due to continued activation of clotting) 
and the activation of fibrinolysis (breaking down any fibrin that gets laid 
down).
Remember
DIC is always secondary to some other major clinical problem.
Case history (4)
A 29-year-old man is brought to the Trauma Unit with severe 
injuries to his abdomen and legs as a result of a road traffic 
accident. Initial examination and CT scanning confirm that he has 
fractured both femurs and has a fractured pelvis. He has fluid in 
his abdomen on CT, suggesting internal organ damage.
He is resuscitated and taken to ITU where he needs ventilation, 
volume replacement and cardiovascular support with inotropes. 
His leg fractures are stabilised and he undergoes emergency 
laparotomy with resection of damaged small bowel. He initially 
improved but then his renal and liver function deteriorated and he 
was diagnosed as having multi-organ failure. He was then noted 
to be bleeding from his laparotomy wound.
 Action
	 Always think about DIC in a bleeding patient
	 Try to make the diagnosis.
 Causes
	 Infection
	 Obstetric complications
	 Surgical
	 Trauma
	 Malignancy
	 Liver disease
	 Transfusion reactions.
If someone is bleeding and you always think about DIC you won’t go 
wrong. In many ways the long list of causes is academic when you first 
see the patient – but if they have got DIC you must identify the cause.
 How do I make the diagnosis?  Send off all the screening tests and 
fibrinogen degradation products (FDPs). The pattern is:
	 Platelets low: consumption
	 PT prolonged: consumption
	 APTT prolonged: consumption
	 TT prolonged: consumption of fibrinogen and FDPs
	 Fibrinogen low: consumption
	 FDPs high: breakdown of fibrin.
 Why are FDPs measured?  FDPs tell you that fibrin is being broken 
down. The most specific test is the D-dimer, which tells you that cross-
linked fibrinogen has formed and has then been broken down.
111
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
• How do I manage DIC?
	 Treat the underlying disorder.
	 Treat the underlying disorder!
	 Treat the underlying disorder!!
	 Support with FFP, cryoprecipitate and platelets.
Case history (5)
A 50-year-old patient has carcinoma of the lung with a prolonged 
PT, APTT, TT, low fibrinogen and platelet count and high FDPs, 
but he isn’t bleeding.
Remember
People die from their underlying disorder rather than the DIC 
per se.
You must aim to treat the underlying disorder! DIC is always second­
ary. As mentioned earlier, it is due to inappropriate and continued activa­
tion of clotting. Until you stop this by treating the underlying problem it 
won’t get better.
Blood component therapy is purely supportive. Give:
	 10–20 mL/kg FFP + cryoprecipitate
	 Platelets
	 Blood as required.
Aim to get the fibrinogen concentration to normal and the PT/APTT to 
within 4 s of normal.
•	 Progress.  Despite all efforts the patient died.
Has this patient got DIC?
This is the picture of subclinical DIC – laboratory abnormalities but no 
bleeding. It is seen in chronic DIC, e.g. in liver disease, malignancy. DIC 
ranges from florid bleeding to abnormalities that are picked up only by 
laboratory testing.
Remember
People die from their underlying disorder rather than the DIC 
per se.
Anti-coagulant overdosage
An obvious cause of bleeding. Don’t forget to look for warfarin/heparin 
usage.
Action
Confirm anti-coagulant overdosage by finding a prolonged PT (warfarin) 
or APTT (heparin). The treatment of bleeding depends on the problem, but 
in essence:
112
Haematology and Oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
If due to warfarin: STOP WARFARIN
	 Minor bleeding: If INR > 6.0: restart warfarin when INR < 5.0; check 
INR daily. If INR > 8.0 give vitamin K 2.5 mg oral or 0.5 mg IV.
	 Major bleeding: give prothrombin complex concentrate 50 units/kg or 
FFP 15 mL/kg; give vitamin K 5 mg IV.
Remember
High prothrombin time (due to warfarin) without bleeding usually 
requires no treatment apart from stopping warfarin.
If due to heparin: STOP HEPARIN
If bleeding is excessive or uncontrolled:
	 Protamine reversal (1 mg IV neutralises 100 units heparin – maximum 
dose 40 mg). Protamine has no effect on low molecular weight heparin.
	 Seek advice.
	 Heparin excess will correct in a few hours.
Remember
Surgical and medical bleeding might coexist. If you correct the 
coagulation and the patient is still bleeding, think surgical whatever 
the surgeon says!
PLATELET DISORDERS
Case history (1)
You are asked to see a 24-year-old woman who is in A&E. She 
has presented with petechiae scattered over her body. The 
casualty officer has found that she has a platelet count of 10 × 
109/L. This woman seems very well and tells you that she has had 
Remember
New thrombin inhibitors that are now being used for anti-anti-
coagulation, e.g. dabigatran, apixaban and rivaroxaban have no 
antidotes.
Surgical cause
Suspect if rapid blood loss at operation. Don’t understimate the number 
of times this is forgotten and people chase a medical cause for bleeding 
when a vessel has a hole in it.
If you have a hole in a vessel bleeding won’t stop until the hole is fixed, 
however good the coagulation system is.
113
Platelet disorders
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
There are multiple causes of thrombocytopenia (Table 6.5). Thrombocy­
topenia may be the presentation of another disorder rather than a primary 
platelet disorder. All patients with severe thrombocytopenia (defined as 
< 20 × 109/L, which produces spontaneous haemorrhage) require admis­
sion for investigation/treatment.
Remember
Meningococcal septicaemia has a purpuric rash and/or petechiae.
Case history (1) (continued)
the petechiae for at least a week. She has no other symptoms. 
She is on the contraceptive pill and is taking no other tablets. She 
does not smoke and drinks wine (6 units) at the weekend only.
On examination she has petechiae over her trunk, arms and 
legs. She has no other abnormal signs.
Investigations
You note the platelet count and also that all the other parameters 
in her blood count are normal. She also has normal routine 
biochemistry.
Remember
The list of causes (Table 6.5) is not comprehensive and excludes 
inherited thrombocytopenia or causes that would present in 
childhood.
Questions that need to be answered immediately
	 Does this patient have immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP)?
	 Does she have acute leukaemia?
	 Does she have aplastic anaemia?
	 ITP: 
normal 
Hb, 
normal 
WCC, 
no 
hepatosplenomegaly 
or 
lymphadenopathy.
	 Acute leukaemia (see p. 132): high WCC, abnormal white cells on film, 
lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly (occasionally).
	 Aplastic anaemia: low Hb, low WCC, no lymphadenopathy, no 
hepatosplenomegaly.
The diagnosis appears to be ITP. You are called back to see the patient 20 
minutes later as she has had a massive haematemesis. You think the diag­
nosis is ITP as there are no other features to make you think it is aplastic 
anaemia or acute leukaemia.
Major bleeding in ITP is not common but can be a serious complication. 
Treatment approaches should be decided by a haematologist.
114
Haematology and Oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Failure of platelet production
Marrow aplasia
Metabolic defects
Vitamin B12/folate deficiency
Uraemia
Alcohol excess
Liver disease
Drugs
Chemotherapy ± radiation
Marrow infiltration:
Leukaemia
Lymphoma
Myeloma
Myelofibrosis
Carcinoma
Decreased platelet survival
Immune:
Immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP)
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
Chronic lymphatic leukaemia (CLL)
Hodgkin’s lymphoma
Drug related
Infection
Malaria
Virus infection
Consumption:
DIC
Extracorporeal circulation
Haemolytic uraemic syndrome
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP)
Loss from circulation:
Splenomegaly
Massive transfusion
Table 6.5  Causes of thrombocytopenia
Management for this patient
	 Adequate and secure IV access
	 ABO and Rh (D) group and cross-match 6 units of blood
	 Fluid and blood replacement as appropriate
	 Start high-dose IV immunoglobulin infusion 0.4 g/kg/24 h
	 Platelet transfusion: 2 units immediately
	 Oral prednisolone: 1 mg/kg daily.
•	 Progress.  She had no further haematemesis and her platelet count 
rose to 50 × 109/L on Day 5 but remained at that level. After discus­
sion she was referred for splenectomy, which produced a good 
response in her platelet count. See p. 124 for management of a 
splenectomised patient.
115
Platelet disorders
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Learning points
	 High-dose immunoglobulin elevates the platelet count by macrophage 
Fc receptor blockade of the reticuloendothelial system.
	 Endogenous platelets usually rise after 24–48 h; the survival of exoge­
nous platelets is improved.
	 Platelet transfusion is usually not necessary in ITP except in the situa­
tion of life-threatening haemorrhage, such as in this case.
	 75% of patients respond to oral steroids but the full therapeutic effect 
may take 2–4 weeks to develop.
Remember
ITP might become chronic and might require long-term treatment 
± splenectomy. Romiplostim and eltrombopag, thrombopoeitin 
receptor agonists, are now being used if splenectomy has no 
effect.
Further reading
Provan D, Newland A. Fifty years of idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura 
(ITP): management of refractory ITP in adults. British Journal of Haematol­
ogy 2002; 118: 933–944.
Imbach P, Crowther M. Thrombopoietin receptor agonists for primary 
immune thrombocytopenia. N Engl J Med 2011; 365: 734–741.
Case history (2)
You are asked to see a 50-year-old man on a surgical ward who 
has come into hospital for an elective hernia repair. He is found on 
a routine preop FBC to have a platelet count of 90 × 109/L. His Hb 
and WCC count are normal.
This chronic presentation of mild thrombocytopenia is 
reasonably common. To establish the cause you should 
systematically go through the causes of thrombocytopenia from an 
initial clinical history and examination.
Can he go ahead and have his hernia repair?
It might take a while to get to the bottom of his thrombocytopenia. Elective 
surgery can be performed as the platelet count is greater than 80 × 109/L.
Avoid any NSAIDs as postop analgesia; make sure aspirin has not been 
taken within the last 10 days.
This man was discharged following a successful surgical repair and one 
week later his platelet count was 96 × 109/L. By 1 month the platelet count 
was normal. No clear reason for the thrombocytopenia was found but a 
viral cause seemed the most likely.
116
Haematology and Oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Diagnosis
This is the typical picture of an inherited platelet disorder. Severe platelet 
function disorders present in childhood but milder versions do not usually 
present until surgery in adulthood. Clues here are bleeding after dental 
extraction and long-standing menorrhagia.
Management
Assess the extent of bleeding. Treatment options include:
	 Tranexamic acid 1 g × 4 daily if mild bleeding
	 Platelet transfusion if severe bleeding.
In a classic platelet function disorder the bleeding time is prolonged, but 
this test is difficult to perform. If you suspect a platelet function disorder 
organise platelet function studies with your haematological laboratory.
•	 Progress.  This patient stopped bleeding following a platelet transfu­
sion. She was referred to the Haematology Department for follow-up.
THROMBOSIS
Case history (3)
A 28-year-old woman has had a D&C for long-standing 
menorrhagia. She is now 5 days after the procedure and still 
bleeding. She has been back in theatre and no local defect is 
found. She says she had problems in the past with bleeding after 
dental extractions. Her PT and APTT and platelet count are 
normal.
Case history (1)
You are asked to see a 24-year-old woman who has had a 
life-threatening pulmonary embolus. She received fibrolytic therapy 
(p. 286) on the ICU. Her condition stabilised and she is now on 
warfarin following initial treatment with low molecular weight 
heparin. She wants to know why she has had a pulmonary 
embolus. She has a family history of DVT.
Are investigations indicated?
Thrombosis is common but relatively uncommon under the age of 45 years 
unless there is a precipitating event (see below). In such patients with a 
family history, about 50% have a definable underlying prothrombotic 
state. It is well worth formally investigating her for a prothrombotic state.
Attempt to identify any precipitating event, such as:
	 Taking combined oral contraceptive pill
	 Immobility and/or recent surgery/fracture/injury
	 Long-haul flight
	 Obesity
	 Malignancy.
117
Thrombosis
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Should she be investigated now or later?
She is on warfarin, which can interfere with thrombotic investigations. 
Identifying an underlying thrombotic state acutely will not change the 
immediate management.
Remember
•	 An abnormal result after an acute thrombosis does not mean an 
abnormality genuinely exists
•	 It must be rechecked
•	 However, a normal result is normal.
She is on warfarin so formal studies must be delayed. Refer her on to a 
specialist for follow-up and investigation.
What investigations will be requested after stopping 
warfarin?
Investigations
•	 Lupus anti-coagulant
•	 Anti-phospholipid antibody
•	 Protein C deficiency
•	 Protein S deficiency
•	 Anti-thrombin deficiency
•	 Factor V Leiden
•	 3′ prothrombin UTR variant
•	 JAK 2 mutation
These aim to look for an inherited deficiency of natural anti-coagulants, 
mutations leading to increased thrombin generation or acquired causes of 
a prothrombotic state.
•	 Progress.  This woman has Factor Leiden deficiency. She is referred 
on to a specialist for long-term follow-up and counselling and family 
studies.
Case history (2)
You are asked to see a 70-year-old man who had a DVT after a 
knee replacement despite DVT prophylaxis. He has no family 
history of venous thrombosis. He is at present on warfarin 
following treatment with LMW heparin.
Should he be investigated for thrombophilia? No!
It is likely that at this age a DVT in this setting has been precipitated by 
the surgery. The pick-up rate for a significant thrombotic disorder is very 
118
Haematology and Oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
low in this setting. When asked to assess the thrombotic status, balance the 
likelihood of finding a defect against the value of identifying the exact 
defect.
Case history (3)
You are called to see a 45-year-old man who is being anti-
coagulated for acute iliofemoral vein thrombosis with heparin. His 
APTT remains normal on 28 000 units heparin per 24 h. The dose 
of heparin has been progressively increased over the last 3 days 
but his leg swelling is worse.
What do you advise?
The target APTT for heparin for an acute thrombosis is 1.5–2.5 times the 
mid-point of the normal range. The most common reasons for failure are:
	 Under-monitoring
	 Underdosing
	 Not actually receiving dose of heparin prescribed.
Action
	 Ensure prescribed dose is being given.
	 Increase dose by 10% per 24 h.
	 Recheck APTT in 4 h.
	 If still low, repeat the 10% increase in heparin dose and recheck at 
4-hourly intervals.
Heparin monitoring is notoriously bad in most hospitals. If IV heparin is 
being used it should be monitored as follows:
	 Check APTT every 4 h until target reached.
	 Increase dose in 10% increments.
	 Once target APTT reached, repeat at 4 h.
	 If stable APTT, repeat 12-hourly.
Remember
•	 Outcome is dependent on the effectiveness of anti-coagulation 
within the first 48 h
•	 Heparin resistance is rare; poor heparin control is very common
For how long should a patient with venous thromboembolic 
disease be anti-coagulated with warfarin?
The duration and target INRs for various thrombotic conditions are listed 
in Table 6.6.
Recurrent VTE is essentially two or more events. The more events, the 
greater the likelihood of recurrence.
Long-term anti-coagulation carries the risk of major haemorrhage (4% 
per annum) and death (~0.5% per annum). These must be balanced against 
119
Thrombosis
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Remember
•	 Drug interactions with warfarin
•	 Need to amend dosage in patients undergoing invasive 
procedures
•	 Regular anti-coagulant clinic follow-up.
Duration
INR target
Uncomplicated DVT
6 months
2.5
Complex DVT
6 months
2.5
Pulmonary embolus
6 months
2.5
Recurrent VTE
Indefinite
2.5 – if the recurrent event occurs 
whilst taking warfarin the intensity 
of anti-coagulation is increased, 
target 3.5
AF
Indefinite
2.5
Mechanical heart 
valves
Indefinite
3.5
AF, atrial fibrillation; DVT, deep vein thrombosis; INR, international normalised 
ratio; VTE venous thromboembolism
Table 6.6  Duration and target INRs for thrombotic conditions
recurrence prevention. Complications are far more common in older 
patients.
Recurrence is much higher in patients anti-coagulated for 6 weeks 
rather than 6 months.
New orally active anti-coagulant drugs
A number of orally active direct thrombin and Xa inhibitor drugs (dabigat­
ran, rivaroxaban) are being used in clinical trials for prevention and treat­
ment of thrombosis. Such drugs have a much broader therapeutic window 
than warfarin and offer the prospect of fixed drug dosing without the need 
to monitor coagulation. They do not, however, have specific antidotes.
Case history (4)
You are asked to see a 36-year-old woman with an acutely 
swollen calf. Clinical diagnosis is a distal DVT. She has no 
complicating problems.
How should she be treated?
Initially, the diagnosis should be confirmed by venous compression ultra­
sonography (sensitivity 97% for proximal and 73% for calf veins). An 
acutely swollen leg has a range of causes:
120
Haematology and Oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 DVT
	 Ruptured Baker’s cyst
	 Rupture of head of gastrocnemius
	 Acute knee injury
	 Haematoma
	 Infection (e.g. cellulitis).
Action
If a DVT is confirmed:
	 Give SC low molecular weight (LMW) heparin
	 Warfarinise the patient.
This can be managed in outpatients with good nursing and laboratory 
support.
If the DVT is complex (i.e. iliofemoral):
	 Admit
	 IV unfractionated heparin or LMW heparin
	 Warfarinise.
There is an increasing move to outpatient management of venous throm­
boembolism (VTE).
Dabigatran (see above) is being used instead of warfarin in some 
centres.
Case history (5)
You are phoned about a 36-year-old man with an acute right lower 
limb ischaemia due to an arterial thrombosis. He has a family 
history of thrombosis. There has been improvement in the 
ischaemic area over 24 hours. The patient is on intravenous 
heparin infusion and is being monitored by the vascular surgeons. 
The houseman wonders in view of the family history whether he 
should be investigated for thrombophilia. He has already sent off 
standard thrombophilia screen (see Investigations box, p. 118) and 
he asks if this is all that you need.
You tell him that thrombophilia is uncommon in arterial disease 
but there are a number of risk factors for arterial thrombosis. You 
suggest he requests:
•	 Plasma homocysteine
•	 Lipid profile
•	 Plasminogen activator inhibitor.
•	 Finding a cause in arterial disease is less likely than in venous 
thrombosis.
•	 Progress.  No evidence of thrombophilia was found in this man but 
he is a smoker and his cholesterol was 7.4 mmol/L with risk factors 
for atherosclerosis. His lifestyle issues were addressed by the cardiac 
rehabilitation nurse specialist and he was started on a statin.
121
Splenomegaly, splenectomy and hyposplenism
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
What is the most likely diagnosis to consider?
This would be a good picture for heparin-induced thrombocytopenia 
with thrombosis (HIT) of the artery. The classic features are progressive 
platelet decline and new thrombosis. HIT is a clinical diagnosis and is 
diagnosed in any patient on heparin whose platelet count falls 
significantly.
Action
	 Stop all heparin (including heparin flush).
	 Contact haematologist.
	 Alternative forms of anti-coagulation are not required for the DVT in 
this woman because she is on warfarin and the INR is 2.0 and heparin 
was about to be discontinued.
HIT is due to an immune induction of anti-heparin/PF4 antibodies which 
bind to and activate platelets via a Fc receptor. This results in a prothrom­
botic state with low platelets. There is usually a previous history of heparin 
exposure.
NB
	 Fatal thrombosis, both venous and arterial, can arise if heparin is not 
stopped immediately.
	 HIT can occur after SC heparin use. It is becoming increasingly common 
with the widespread use of heparin prophylaxis.
•	 Progress.  This woman has left acute ischaemic lower limb and 
required surgical removal of the thrombus in her popliteal artery. She 
fortunately made a good recovery although she still has a swollen, 
painful right leg (from the DVT) and ischaemic pain in the left leg 
after exertion.
SPLENOMEGALY, SPLENECTOMY AND HYPOSPLENISM
Case history (6)
You are asked to see a 60-year-old woman with a right leg DVT, 
who is on unfractionated heparin. She has been in hospital for 5 
days and started warfarin therapy 48 hours previously. She has 
now developed a cold, painful leg on the left that is pulseless. You 
are told her platelet count has been falling since starting heparin.
Case history (1)
A 55-year-old man presented with a 3-month history of discomfort 
in the left side of his abdomen. The discomfort is present most of 
the time and now seems to be getting worse.
He has had rheumatoid arthritis for many years but his 
condition has stabilised on methotrexate therapy and occasional 
use of diclofenac for pain in his knees.
On examination he looks pale, he has evidence of rheumatoid 
arthritis in his hands with ulnar drift and palmar subluxation of the 
Continued
122
Haematology and Oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Case history (1) (continued)
MCPs. He has rheumatoid nodules in both elbows. Both knees are 
deformed. Examination of his abdomen shows a large spleen.
Investigations show a normochromic normocytic anaemia with 
low platelets and a neutropenia.
The diagnosis is Felty’s syndrome in a patient with rheumatoid 
arthritis.
Information
Causes of splenomegaly
•	 Malignant haematological disease: e.g. acute or chronic 
leukaemia, malignant lymphoma
•	 Myeloproliferative disorders: e.g. polycythaemia vera, 
myelofibrosis (often massive)
•	 Haemoglobinopathies: e.g. β-thalassaemia major, haemoglobin, 
H, SC or E disease
•	 Haemolytic anaemias: e.g. hereditary spherocytosis
•	 Congestive splenomegaly: e.g. portal hypertension (cirrhosis)
•	 Inborn errors of metabolism: e.g. Gaucher’s disease
•	 Auto-immune rheumatic disorders: e.g. SLE, rheumatoid arthritis 
(Felty’s syndrome)
•	 Infections:
–	 Viral, e.g. infectious mononucleosis
–	 Bacterial (any bacteria), occasionally – remember infective 
endocarditis
–	 Protozoal, e.g. malaria, kala-azar
•	 Miscellaneous (rare): e.g. amyloid, tropical splenomegaly.
Enlargement of the spleen from any cause can be complicated by 
hypersplenism. This is characterised by:
•	 Splenomegaly
•	 Pancytopenia
•	 Normal or hypercellular bone marrow.
Felty’s syndrome consists of splenomegaly and neutropenia in a patient 
with rheumatoid arthritis. A normochromic, normocytic anaemia of 
chronic disease is usually seen, although iron deficient and rare haemolytic 
(Coombs’ positive) anaemias are seen. Hypersplenism causing a pancyto­
penia may occur (see below).
Spleen size can be assessed by abdominal palpation or by imaging, e.g. 
ultrasound. CT, MRI and PET scans are also used to delineate the cause, 
e.g. lymphoproliferative disease.
There are many causes of splenomegaly, with the most frequent 
showing geographical variation. In temperate climates, malignant blood 
diseases, portal hypertension, haemolytic anaemias and infective endocar­
ditis account for most cases, whereas in tropical countries malaria, leish­
maniasis and the haemoglobinopathies are prevalent.
123
Splenomegaly, splenectomy and hyposplenism
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Pathophysiology of hypersplenism
Mature red cells, neutrophils and platelets ‘pool’, or are trapped, in the 
sinusoids of the large spleen and prematurely destroyed.
Hyposplenism may be due to:
	 Congenital absence
	 Splenectomy: surgical or by irradiation
	 Splenic atrophy, e.g. coeliac disease, chronic inflammatory bowel 
disease
	 Splenic infarction, e.g. sickle-cell anaemia (HbSS)
	 Splenic infiltration.
Remember
Surgical splenectomy might be carried out because of:
•	 Trauma
•	 Treatment, e.g. hereditary spherocytosis, idiopathic 
thrombocytopenic purpura or myelofibrosis.
Splenic function can be assessed by:
•	 Peripheral blood film: look for abnormal red cells:
–	 Acanthocytes = spiky red cells
–	 Target cells = like an archery target
–	 Pappenheimer bodies = iron granules
–	 Howell–Jolly bodies = nuclear DNA fragments
•	 Differential interference microscopy of blood: increased pitted 
red cell (red cells with submembrane vacuoles) count
•	 Radioactive spleen scan (see above).
The functional size of the spleen can be assessed by scanning with a 
scintillation counter following the injection of radiolabelled (99mTc), heat-
damaged, autologous red cells. These cells are removed from the circula­
tion solely by the spleen.
•	 Progress.  This patient with RA was confirmed as having Felty’s 
syndrome as the cause of his splenomegaly. Over the following year 
he developed recurrent infections with a persistent, refractory neu­
tropenia and eventually had a splenectomy.
Case history (2)
A 6-month-old baby boy of Nigerian parents was admitted to A&E, 
collapsed and unconscious. The family was travelling to the airport 
by taxi and diverted the car to hospital when the baby became 
suddenly unwell. Twelve hours before admission the child had 
been seen at a different A&E department with a short history of 
poor feeding, irritability and diarrhoea. He was noted to be febrile 
but not thought to be seriously unwell.
On examination the child was noted to be pale, with a GCS of 
5. He was febrile at 39.5° with a firm spleen extending to below 
Continued
124
Haematology and Oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
•	 Diagnosis.  Sickle-cell anaemia with pneumococcal sepsis.
Haemoglobin electrophoresis showed:
	 HbS:90%
	 HbF: 8%
	 HbA2: 1.8%.
Case history (2) (continued)
the umbilicus. Shortly afterwards, the child had a cardiorespiratory 
arrest and could not be resuscitated. The results of a blood count 
and blood film taken before death were:
Blood count
Blood film
Hb 24 g/L
Polychromasia
MCV 76 fL
Very reduced platelets
WBC 30.5 × 109/L
Nucleated red cells
Platelets 27 × 109/L
Occasional elongated sickle cells
Reticulocytes 7.0%
Diplococci both within neutrophils and 
macrophages and free in the plasma
Subsequent investigations demonstrated Streptococcus 
pneumoniae on blood culture.
Remember
Prevention of pneumococcal sepsis in babies with sickle-cell 
anaemia is dependent on maternal antenatal haemoglobinopathy. 
At-risk pregnancies need to be identified and screened:
•	 Haemoglobinopathy screening of cord blood samples
•	 Institution of penicillin prophylaxis by 8 weeks of age.
•	 Progress.  This baby presented moribund with splenomegaly, severe 
anaemia and thrombocytopenia. The reticulocytosis/polychromasia 
and nucleated red cells suggested a haemolytic anaemia. Haemo­
globin electrophoresis subsequently confirmed sickle-cell anaemia 
(HbSS). The sickle-cell mutation affects the beta-globin gene and only 
assumes clinical importance 4 months after birth, when gamma-
globin gene activity is suppressed and the beta-globin gene 
activated.
This child’s death was due to overwhelming infection with Streptococcus 
pneumoniae, which was present in enormous numbers in the bloodstream. 
The thrombocytopenia was almost certainly related to DIC secondary to 
the bacterial infection. Severe hyposplenism is a characteristic feature of 
sickle-cell anaemia and is established by 4–6 months. Pneumococcal sepsis 
secondary to hyposplenism is a common cause of death in children less 
than 3 years old with sickle-cell anaemia.
The gross splenomegaly and severe anaemia were due to acute splenic 
sequestration of sickled red cells within the spleen, which often accompa­
nies pneumococcal sepsis in this age group (see p. 126).
125
Blood transfusion
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Overwhelming post-splenectomy infection (OPSI) is the most feared com­
plication of hyposplenism.
Remember
•	 The greatest risk of OPSI following splenectomy is in the first 2 
years but the increased risk is lifelong
•	 The mortality rate with OPSI due to Streptococcus pneumoniae 
is 50% despite treatment.
Pathophysiology
	 Decreased antibody synthesis
	 Decreased phagocytosis of opsonised bacteria.
The major pathogens involved in OPSI are:
	 Streptococcus pneumoniae > 80%
	 Haemophilus influenzae type B
	 Neisseria meningitidis.
These are all encapsulated bacteria – the spleen is a vital first line of defence 
against encapsulated organisms. Severe infections in the hyposplenic 
patient can also occur in malaria and babesiosis (mosquito and tick bites, 
respectively) and following dog bites with Capnocytophaga canimorsus.
Remember
•	 Following vaccination check adequacy of antibody response
•	 Repeat antibody levels at 5 years post-vaccination and give 
booster doses if appropriate.
Prevention of OPSI depends on:
	 Identification of the patient at risk
	 Education of the patient about the risks of infection, dog bites and tropi­
cal travel
	 Issue of a ‘post-splenectomy’ card and leaflet to the patient
	 Lifelong prophylactic antibiotic therapy, e.g. penicillin V 250 mg × 2 
daily
	 Vaccination with a pneumococcal polysaccharide conjugate vaccine and 
the Hib vaccine.
BLOOD TRANSFUSION
The Blood Transfusion Department supplies red cells, platelets and plasma 
products, such as fresh frozen plasma, cryoprecipitate and human albumin.
The efficient and safe provision of blood products depends on good 
communication between you and the laboratory, and accurate patient 
identification.
126
Haematology and Oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Always
	 Provide complete and accurate patient identification on the blood 
sample and request form.
	 Tell the Blood Transfusion Department how much of what blood 
product is required and the urgency of the clinical situation.
Never
	 Take blood from more than one patient at a time.
	 Prelabel the blood sample tube.
Remember
When you request blood always make clear the urgency of the 
clinical situation:
•	 Very urgent: there is a life-threatening haemorrhage and blood 
is required in 1–5 min:
–	 ACTION: No pre-transfusion compatibility test. The laboratory 
will issue group 0 Rh(D) negative blood
•	 Urgent: blood required in 5–10 min:
–	 ACTION: ABO and Rh(D) group on patient sample. The 
laboratory will issue ABO and Rh(D) group compatible blood
•	 Non-urgent: blood required in 30–60 min:
–	 ACTION: Full pre-transfusion compatibility test. The 
laboratory will issue fully compatible blood.
To provide compatible red cells for transfusion the following proce­
dures are undertaken by the Blood Transfusion laboratory:
	 ABO and Rh(D) blood group:
•	 Major haemolytic transfusion reactions usually result from the trans­
fusion of ABO incompatible blood.
•	 The Rh(D) antigen is very immunogenic and the development of 
anti-D must be avoided in women of childbearing age.
	 Antibody screen: excludes the presence of clinically significant red cell 
alloantibodies in the patient’s plasma. These might result in an acute or 
delayed haemolytic transfusion reaction.
	 Selection of appropriate donor units: wherever possible, blood of the 
same ABO and Rh(D) group as the patient is selected and will be nega­
tive for the appropriate antigen if an alloantibody has been identified.
	 Cross-match: the patient’s plasma is reacted with the donor red cells in 
vitro. Incompatibility is indicated by agglutination or haemolysis.
A full compatibility procedure is always completed but this can be retro­
spective if the clinical demand for blood is urgent.
Case history (1)
You are asked to see a 72-year-old man with myelodysplasia who 
receives regular blood transfusions. One unit of blood was given 
uneventfully but 15 min into the second unit he began to shiver, 
felt unwell and developed a pyrexia and tachycardia.
127
Blood transfusion
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Action
	 Stop the transfusion immediately:
•	 Replace giving set
•	 Keep IV line open with 0.9% saline.
	 Check patient identification:
•	 Wrist band
•	 Compatibility form
•	 Compatibility label on unit of blood.
	 Take appropriate samples:
•	 Blood count
•	 Blood cultures
•	 Blood transfusion sample
•	 Urine for haemoglobin.
	 Take samples and a relevant unit of blood to the laboratory.
	 Inform haematology medical staff of the problem.
	 The laboratory will:
•	 Check laboratory documentation
•	 Repeat ABO Rh(D) group, antibody screen and cross-match on pre- 
and post-transfusion samples in parallel
•	 Carry out a direct anti-globulin test (DAT or Coombs’ test; see Fig. 
6.13) to exclude the presence of alloantibodies on the patient’s red 
cells.
Outcome
The red cell alloantibody was identified.
•	 Diagnosis.  Haemolytic transfusion reaction.
Monitor renal function, urine output, haemoglobin concentration and 
check coagulation screen.
A major ABO incompatibility can be life threatening, with acute kidney 
injury and disseminated intravascular coagulation:
	 Monitor as above.
	 Insert urinary catheter and monitor urine output.
	 Give IV fluids to maintain urine output (> 1.5 mL/h/kg).
	 If urine output inadequate insert CVP line and give fluid challenge and 
diuretics (p. 223).
	 Refer to renal unit.
	 Report to SHOT (Serious Hazards of Blood Transfusion), a confidential 
enquiry into major blood transfusion errors in the UK.
•	 Progress.  An error in the collection of the blood from the laboratory 
led to the wrong blood being given in this man. The error was 
reported to the hospital as a serious event. The patient maintained 
his normal blood pressure and his symptoms settled, requiring no 
further treatment for this.
Case history (1) (continued)
A febrile transfusion reaction to HLA or granulocyte antigens is 
common in multi-transfused patients but cannot be safely 
distinguished from a haemolytic transfusion reaction due to red 
cell antibodies without appropriate laboratory tests.
128
Haematology and Oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
+
+
INDIRECT
DIRECT
Patient’s cells sensitised in vivo, e.g.
•  autoimmune haemolytic anaemia,
•  HDN
•  haemolytic transfusion reaction
•  drug-induced immune haemolytic
   anaemia
Patient’s serum
e.g. antibody screening
Normal RBC
Sensitised RBC
Anti-human globulin
Agglutination
Incubation in vitro
Figure 6.13  Antiglobulin (Coombs’) tests. The anti-human globulin forms bridges 
between the sensitised cells causing visible agglutination. The direct test detects 
patients’ cells sensitised in vivo. The indirect test detects normal cells sensitised 
in vitro. HDN, haemolytic disease of newborn. 
129
Blood transfusion
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
A major review of blood transfusion procedures was instituted. Fortu­
nately with the prompt treatment, this man had no serious problems.
Other acute complications of blood transfusion can present 
with:
	 Non-haemolytic (febrile) transfusion reactions. These are due to the 
presence of leucocyte antibodies in a multiply transfused person acting 
against donor leucocytes in red cell concentrate, leading to release of 
pyrogens. Leucocyte depleted blood is now used in many countries so 
the febrile reaction is not often seen.
	 Breathlessness:
•	 Acute volume overload
•	 Transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI): characterised by dys­
pnoea, fever, cough and lung shadowing on CXR.
	 Urticaria or anaphylaxis: reaction to plasma proteins.
	 Collapse or hypotension: major ABO incompatibility-infected blood 
product.
	 Cardiac arrhythmia:
•	 Hypocalcaemia
•	 Hyperkalaemia
•	 Rapid transfusion with ‘cold’ blood.
Case history (2)
A 64-year-old man with known severe chronic liver disease on the 
liver transplant list.
He has been admitted on a number of occasions with 
haematemesis due to variceal bleeding. Endoscopic banding of 
the varices has been undertaken and he is on propranolol therapy.
He is admitted on this occasion with a large haematemesis.
On examination he is cold, pale, pulse rate is 120/min and he 
has a blood pressure of 80/50.
He is in hypovolaemic shock and needs urgent resuscitation 
with fluid and blood and vasocontrictor therapy with terlipressin 
before urgent endoscopy.
Remember
There are other longer-term complications of blood transfusion 
including:
•	 Post-transfusion purpura (PTP)
•	 Viral infection: hepatitis C, hepatitis B, HIV (Note: donor blood in 
many countries checked for these), CMV
•	 Iron overload (multiple transfusions)
•	 Graft versus host disease.
130
Haematology and Oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Management of massive haemorrhage
	 Communicate: nature and urgency of the situation to the laboratory.
	 Predict: requirements for blood and blood products; always try to think 
ahead.
	 Monitor:
•	 Volume replacement
•	 Haemostatic parameters
•	 Serum calcium: blood is preserved with citrate-phosphate dextrose 
solution, which chelates calcium.
	 Maintain intravascular volume.
	 Avoid:
•	 Hypovolaemia
•	 Acute kidney injury
•	 DIC
•	 Cardiac arrhythmias.
	 Use:
1.	 Saline/colloid solutions
2.	 Group 0 Rh(D) negative blood is used
3.	 ABO Rh(D) group compatible blood until fully compatible blood 
available.
Investigations
Anticipate haemostatic failure. Check:
•	 Blood count
•	 PT/INR
•	 APTT
•	 Fibrinogen concentration
•	 Fibrin breakdown products (FDPs or fibrin D-dimers)
Remember
Give blood through a blood warmer to minimise hyperkalaemia 
and cardiac arrhythmias.
Check for failure of haemostasis
	 Initially at beginning of emergency
	 Every 5 units of blood given
	 Whenever additional blood products (platelets, FFP, cryoprecipitate) 
are given.
Haemostasis failure is due to:
	 DIC: secondary to hypovolaemic shock with additional liver failure, 
infection or tissue trauma
	 Dilutional coagulopathy
	 Stored blood is depleted of coagulation factors and contains few 
platelets.
131
Haematological oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Action
	 Request platelets: to maintain platelet count > 50 × 109/L or if sequential 
platelet counts are falling progressively.
	 Request cryoprecipitate (10 units) if fibrinogen concentration < 1.0 g/L.
	 Request fresh frozen plasma (10–20 mL/kg) if PT/INR and PTTK 
prolonged.
Remember
•	 Fresh frozen plasma takes 30 min to unfreeze
•	 Platelets might need to be delivered from Regional Transfusion 
Centres.
•	 Progress.  This man was given 9 units of blood and also balloon 
tamponade as he was exsanguinating. He could not be resuscitated.
Further reading
Murphy MF, Pamphilon D (eds) 2009 Practical blood transfusion. 3rd edn, 
Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford.
HAEMATOLOGICAL ONCOLOGY
This umbrella term covers a huge range of disorders. There are those that 
present dramatically and require urgent treatment and, at the other end of 
the spectrum, there are diseases that are indolent and chronic, often requir­
ing no therapy. You should be able to recognise the low-grade (non-
urgent) disease and high-grade (urgent) disorders and refer to your 
haematology department (outside normal hours do not be afraid to talk to 
the haematology registrar/consultant on call).
What main groups of disease are there?
	 Leukaemias: can be acute (short duration, serious, rapidly fatal if not 
treated) or chronic. Generally have elevated WBC and other features 
(see below). These are marrow-/blood-based diseases.
	 Lymphomas are lymph-node-based, sometimes involving blood and 
marrow. Some need urgent treatment and others can be sorted out at 
leisure.
	 Myeloma is a low-grade, highly destructive disorder caused by malig­
nant plasma cells, often presenting with bone pain, renal failure and 
hypercalcaemia.
Case history (1)
A 63-year-old cleaner is admitted to the medical assessment unit 
(MAU) with pyrexia and cough productive of sputum. Her general 
health has been reasonable until now.
On examination she has chest signs suggestive of pneumonia. 
In addition, she has generalised lymphadenopathy and a 
Continued
132
Haematology and Oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
You need to establish
	 Whether this is an acute or chronic disease
	 If urgent treatment is required
	 What steps you would need to take to make a diagnosis.
The key features
	 Old patient
	 Fairly well
	 Shingles
	 Active infection
	 Lymphadenopathy/splenomegaly
	 High WBC with smear cells.
This must be chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL), the most common 
leukaemia in adults (Fig. 6.14). It is a slowly progressive disorder and is 
an incidental finding or presents with an infective complication. Shingles 
is a fairly common presenting feature.
CLL is a disease mainly of the B lymphocytes (95%, the remaining 5% 
are T lymphocytes) – determined by checking cell markers. There is a 
reduction in immunoglobulin synthesis leading to the infective 
complications.
Other features
	 Might be decreased Hb and platelets (depends on disease stage)
	 Haemolytic anaemia (red cell autoantibodies)
	 Other autoimmune complications.
Management
On day of admission
Start IV antibiotics (e.g. cefuroxime 750 mg × 3, erythromycin 500 mg × 4); 
rehydrate if necessary. Refer to the haematology department next day.
The prognosis in CLL is very variable and the disease may remain stable 
for several years. Many patients (approximately 30%) with CLL never need 
any treatment at all and lead normal lives.
Remember
A smear cell is an artefact induced by making the blood film (the 
CLL cells are fragile and burst). There are no smear cells actually 
circulating in the patient’s blood.
Case history (1) (continued)
three-fingerbreadth spleen. Scarring over her trunk is, she claims, 
due to shingles 4 months earlier.
A full blood count shows mild anaemia (Hb 106 g/L), normal 
platelets, and a WBC elevated at 25 × 109/L. The haematology 
technician phones to say most of the white cells are lymphocytes 
and there are smear cells on the film.
133
Haematological oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Remember
Do not wait until the next morning – the patient may succumb 
before then!
Case history (2)
You are called to see a 43-year-old accountant in A&E. This man 
went to see his doctor suffering from excessive tiredness. You are 
presented with an anxious, pale man, who has bruising over his 
lower limbs and arms. Temperature is 39°C. He is admitted 
urgently to MAU, where further examination reveals no other signs.
Figure 6.14  Blood film in chronic lymphocytic leukaemia showing numerous 
smear cells (artefacts). 
Long-term treatment
Observation; the patient might require oral chemotherapy at a later stage 
(e.g. chlorambucil). Rituximab, in combination with chemotherapy, is now 
first line therapy.
What tests would you arrange?
	 FBC and U&Es
	 Blood cultures
	 MSU
	 CXR.
The Hb is 60 g/L, WBC 90 × 109/L and platelets are 30 × 109/L. Renal 
function is normal and CXR shows minimal increased shadowing at the 
right base.
134
Haematology and Oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Is this an acute or chronic disorder?
A short history in an ill patient with severe anaemia and thrombocytopenia 
indicates an acute disorder.
You must ask what the white cells are, morphologically. If they are 
neutrophils (neutrophilia), this might reflect an underlying infection; this 
is unlikely with such a high WBC.
However, the technician looks at the blood film and tells you they look 
like blasts.
Remember
Blasts are primitive white cells present in bone marrow in small 
numbers. They are never seen in peripheral blood in health.
Figure 6.15  Bone marrow in acute myeloid leukaemia showing numerous large 
leukaemic blasts. 
Investigations
•	 Specific diagnostic tests (performed by haematology 
department)
•	 Peripheral blood film examination (are there Auer rods? If so, 
their presence confirms AML; these are not all that common)
•	 Bone marrow aspirate and biopsy
•	 Cell marker analysis (determines pattern of antigens on white 
cells)
•	 Cytogenetic studies on marrow blasts: several karyotypic 
abnormalities are diagnostic
•	 Plus other tests, e.g. HLA typing
This suggests an acute leukaemia (Fig. 6.15). In a patient of this age, 
acute myeloid leukaemia is likeliest (if he were a child then acute lym­
phoblastic leukaemia is more likely).
135
Haematological oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
You should aim to perform only the initial treatment steps: IV fluids, 
empirical (blind) therapy of infection (send blood and urine cultures first) 
and then notify the haematology staff as soon as possible.
Case history (3)
A 72-year-old butcher is currently on the orthopaedic ward with 
collapse of one of his lumbar vertebrae. The orthopaedic SHO is 
concerned because some results have come back which he 
wishes to discuss with you.
The patient has mild anaemia with an elevated WBC (26 × 
109/L, mainly neutrophils). The ESR is 120 mm/h. Blood film 
comment: red cell rouleaux.
There is mild renal impairment and hypercalcaemia (corrected 
calcium is 3.21 mmol/L).
The patient appears quite uncomfortable and has lower back 
pain, pain in the left rib cage, right humerus and right thigh. His 
general health was excellent until about 4 months ago when he 
developed anorexia and mild weight loss. His wife, who is present, 
is concerned as he is forgetful and confused at times (this has 
been much worse over the past 1–2 weeks).
What possible diagnoses are there?
Although not in extremis, this man is ill:
	 An ESR of 120 suggests serious underlying pathology (an ESR of 120 
could be due to serious infection, autoimmune disease, rheumatoid 
disease, malignancy).
	 Red cell rouleaux, renal impairment and hypercalcaemia in a patient 
with bone disease suggest either a primary bone disorder (such as 
myeloma) or possible infiltration by malignancy, e.g. carcinoma.
If outside working hours there is little else you can request. Your main 
objective is to treat the symptoms, e.g. rehydrate, start antibiotics if you 
think infection is present, correct the elevated calcium level (see p. 450). 
Alert the haematology team.
As soon as possible, check:
	 Blood film.
	 Immunoglobulin levels/serum protein electrophoresis/immunofixation.
	 Repeat biochemistry to check renal function and calcium level.
	 Send urine for Bence–Jones protein and plasma for free immunoglobu­
lin light chains.
	 Blood cultures if febrile.
	 MSU.
	 Arrange skeletal survey (plain radiology of skull, spine, pelvis, femora).
In this case the results are:
	 Elevated total IgG with reduced IgA and IgM.
	 Serum IgG M paraprotein (paraprotein = monoclonal immunoglobulin 
produced by the malignant clone of plasma cells).
	 Bence–Jones protein present: kappa light chains.
136
Haematology and Oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Widespread lytic lesions throughout skeleton.
	 Subsequent bone marrow aspirate showed infiltration by abnormal 
plasma cells (Fig. 6.16).
•	 Diagnosis.  Multiple myeloma.
The patient should be referred for specialist advice, i.e. treatment for his 
myeloma. He also needs bisphosphonate treatment for his bone disease 
and orthopaedic referral for possible kyphoplasty, which involves inflating 
a balloon in the affected vertebral body and filling this, with methyl meth­
acrylate cement in order to restore the vertebral shape.
Figure 6.16  Bone marrow aspirate in myeloma showing large numbers of 
plasma cells. 
Case history (4)
A 50-year-old bank manager is admitted with weight loss, sweats 
and splenomegaly.
On examination initial investigations show mild anaemia, WBC 
200 × 109/L and platelets 600 × 109/L.
What further information do you require?
	 White cells: are they blasts? No – there are neutrophils, eosinophils, 
basophils and early (i.e. immature) granulocytes (e.g. promyelocytes, 
myelocytes).
	 How large is the spleen? Palpable to umbilicus (ultrasound = 24 cm).
Biochemical screen
	 Normal apart from elevated serum uric acid level.
	 Re-examine patient yourself. Are there any other abnormal findings?
	 There is no lymphadenopathy.
	 Liver edge is palpable.
	 Chest is clear.
	 Fundi: NAD.
137
Haematological oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
What is the underlying diagnosis?
There are several significant findings, i.e. very high WBC, splenomegaly 
with weight loss and sweats. Could the patient have an underlying 
infection/neoplasm producing these features (i.e. reactive process)? Yes, 
but it is much more suggestive of an underlying primary blood disorder 
such as chronic myeloid leukaemia, because the white cell count is high 
with the whole spectrum of granulocytic cells present (Fig. 6.17). If the 
blood picture were ‘reactive’, a neutrophilia would be more likely.
What single investigation will confirm the diagnosis?
Cytogenetic analysis of peripheral blood white cells or bone marrow white 
cells.
The Philadelphia chromosome will be present (translocation of DNA 
between chromosomes 9 and 22) in most (95%) CML.
Remember
Philadelphia chromosome is present in some acute leukaemias but 
this patient does not have features of acute leukaemia, and the 
bone marrow will confirm this.
Figure 6.17  CML blood film: note the large numbers of granulocytic cells, in 
particular neutrophils, at all stages of development. 
Does he need urgent referral to the haematology team?
Unless the patient is very unwell or has features of leucostasis (blood 
sludging in the lungs or brain due to high WBC) then there is no immediate 
need for urgent referral, but you should alert the haematology staff, who 
should take over the patient’s care next day. Leucostasis can result in:
	 Confusion
	 Visual disturbance
	 Cough and dyspnoea.
138
Haematology and Oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Features suggestive of acute leukaemia/high-grade 
lymphoma
	 Acute onset
	 Unwell
	 Dramatic presentation
	 Extensive infection and/or bruising
	 Gum swelling
	 Fundal haemorrhage
	 Coagulopathy
	 Blasts/immature cells in peripheral blood
	 Auer rods (neutrophil granules join up to produce these rod-like struc­
tures = pathognomonic of acute myeloid leukaemia (AML).
Features suggestive of chronic/low-grade haematological 
malignancy
	 Less dramatic onset
	 Not particularly unwell
	 Previous infection (e.g. chest infection or herpes zoster)
	 Absence of blasts in blood
	 Abnormal peripheral blood cells: lymphocytes with abnormal morphol­
ogy or immature granulocytes. Generalised lymphadenopathy present 
for months.
Refer all suspected patients with acute leukaemia to the haematology team 
as soon as possible, for specialist management.
Remember
The WBC does not have to be high to diagnose acute (or chronic) 
leukaemia. In many cases acute leukaemia may present with 
normal or low WBC.
Not all patients with acute leukaemia are ill at presentation.
Is it lymphoma or leukaemia? (Fig. 6.18)
	 Leukaemias generally involve bone marrow and blood. Lymph nodes 
and other organs might be involved.
	 Lymphomas originate in lymphoid tissue (lymph nodes, spleen), some­
times spill over into blood and might involve marrow (especially low-
grade lymphomas).
	 High-grade lymphoma and acute lymphoblastic leukaemia are very 
similar.
	 Low-grade lymphomas and chronic lymphoid leukaemias are similar.
•	 Progress.  This patient with chronic myeloid leukaemia was referred 
to the haematologists, who treated him with Imatinib. He achieved 
a complete haematological response.
Further reading
Appelbaum FR, Rowe JM, Radich J, Dick JE. Acute myeloid leukemia. 
Hematology (American Society of Hematology Educational Program) 2001; 
Review: 62–86.
139
Haematological oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
WBC high
WBC normal/low
Well
Unwell
Probably
non-urgent
REFER for further
investigation
URGENT
REFER asap
Hb/platelets
∼normal
No other
physical
findings
Occasional
blasts on film,
lymphadenopathy,
hepatosplenomegaly,
gum swelling,
bleeding
Non-urgent,
chronic,
incurable
Mainly
lymphocytes,
‘mature’ cells
Likely CLL/low
grade NHL,
often elderly, 
not unwell,
±lymphadenopathy,
±splenomegaly
Urgent,
acute,
curable
Lymphoid cells,
immature
blast cells
Urgent,
acute,
curable
Non-lymphoid cells,
(myeloid), immature
blast cells, likely AML,
adult > children,
±gum swelling,
anaemia,↓platelets,
hepatosplenomegaly
CML,
Non-urgent,
chronic,
incurable
Myeloid cells,
neutrophils,
eosinophils,
basophils
plus immature
granulocytes,
large spleen,
hepatomegaly
±leucostasis if
WBC very high
Likely ALL/high
grade NHL,
children>adult,
unwell, anaemia,
↓platelets,
lymphadenopathy,
hepatosplenomegaly
Figure 6.18  Summary of suspected haematological malignancy (ALL, acute 
lymphoblasic leukaemia; AML, acute myeloid leukaemia; CLL, chronic 
lymphocytic leukaemia; NHL, non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma). 
140
Haematology and Oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Magrath IT, Boffetta P, Potter M (eds) 2010 The Lymphoid neoplasms. 
3rd edn, Hodder Arnold, London.
Sawyers CL. Even better kinase inhibitors for chronic myeloid leukaemia. 
N Engl J Med 2012; 362: 2314–2315.
ANAEMIA IN RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS
Case history
A 53-year-old woman with rheumatoid arthritis was admitted for 
investigation of anaemia.
On examination she had typical features of rheumatoid arthritis 
in her hands and arms. Her hands are grossly deformed, swollen 
with redness over the MCPs. She has tender, subcutaneous 
nodules on her elbows. All these features were indicative of an 
acute flare-up of her condition.
Investigations showed a Hb of 92 g/L, MCV 84 fL, WBC 11.4 × 
109/L and platelets 490 × 109/L. Serum vitamin B12, folate and 
ferritin were checked and found to be normal.
There are several possible causes for this anaemia:
	 Bleeding (e.g. due to NSAIDs): the patient denies obvious GI bleeding. 
If she had been bleeding chronically her MCV would probably be 
reduced (iron deficiency). This woman’s MCV is normal, making 
chronic blood loss unlikely.
	 Poor diet: can induce folate deficiency, but we know her folate level is 
normal.
	 Autoimmune causes: e.g. pernicious anaemia (PA; she has rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) and might possibly have PA, another associated autoim­
mune disease). However, her vitamin B12 level is normal.
	 Felty’s syndrome (p. 123): RA, splenomegaly and neutropenia. This 
woman has no features of this disorder.
	 Infiltrations, myelodysplasia (MDS): difficult to exclude these in the 
absence of additional information, e.g. bone marrow. In MDS and 
marrow infiltration due to carcinoma in the presence of reduced Hb, it 
is likely (but not always the case) that the blood film would show mor­
phological abnormalities such as red cell ‘tear-drop’ cells, nucleated red 
cells, hypogranular neutrophils, immature white cells. This woman’s 
blood film simply showed RBC rouleaux.
	 Renal impairment, liver disease: again, morphological abnormalities are 
usually present on the film, and biochemical screen will assess liver and 
renal function.
	 Drug-induced anaemia: several mechanisms, e.g. haemolysis. There are 
no features suggesting this. Remember the bone marrow suppressive 
effect of gold and azathioprine.
This woman’s ESR was found to be > 100 mm/h with a high C-reactive 
protein. Her rheumatoid disease was very active (flare-up) and 3 months 
before admission her Hb was 110 g/L. The drop in Hb has coincided with 
the flare-up; a common finding, especially in patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis.
141
Anaemia in rheumatoid arthritis
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
A major diagnostic pitfall in the assessment of anaemia in patients with 
inflammatory disease is in the determination of iron status. Patients can 
be iron deficient (confirmed by bone marrow aspirate stained for iron, the 
‘gold standard’) yet have a normal serum ferritin: an acute-phase protein 
that rises to normal (or > normal) in such patients.
Assessment of iron status in patients with inflammatory 
disorders
	 Ferritin: likely to be misleading for the reasons given above.
	 Serum iron/TIBC: might show reduction of both in chronic disease. 
These tests are seldom performed now because they are unreliable. 
Ferritin is the preferred assay.
	 Bone marrow: will determine iron status, but is expensive, painful and 
to be avoided if possible.
	 Serum transferrin receptor assay: number of transferrin receptors on red 
cells rises in iron deficiency but remains normal in secondary anaemia. 
This test is replacing bone marrow aspirate in diagnosis of iron defi­
ciency in patients such as this.
This woman had normal transferrin receptor levels, confirming anaemia 
of chronic disease. She failed treatment with sulfasalazine and methotrex­
ate. She was therefore treated with Etanercept, a fully humanised p75 TNF 
α receptor IgG fusion protein subcutaneously, with a good response in her 
joints and the ESR. She is now attending the Rheumatology Clinic for 
follow-up.
Anaemia in chronic kidney disease (CKD)
The kidney is the body’s major site of erythropoietin (Epo) production. In 
renal disease Epo levels fall, leading to chronic anaemia.
Additional factors in development of anaemia in CKD
	 Reduced RBC lifespan
	 Iron deficiency (blood loss in dialysis tubing or GI tract blood loss)
	 Folate loss due to dialysis.
What features should you look for?
	 Low Hb
	 Normal MCV
	 Reticulocytes normal or reduced: low Epo reduces RBC production.
	 Bizarre RBC shape on blood film: burr cells.
Management
Generally, Epo replacement given at dialysis improves the Hb in these 
patients (50–100 units/kg × 3 per week IV). Alternatively, darbepoietin alfa 
can be given weekly or pegzerepoietin alfa monthly. Might also require 
additional iron and folic acid. The Hb should be kept within the range of 
100–120 g/L.
Anaemia in liver disease
Complex and multifactorial
Patients with chronic liver failure generally have moderate anaemia.
The red cells are often macrocytic and can have abnormal shapes – 
target cells and spur cells – owing to membrane abnormalities.
142
Haematology and Oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Information
Rouleaux
The tendency of red cells on the blood film to stack up like a ‘pile 
of coins’ relates to an increase in plasma proteins, particularly 
fibrinogen, as part of the acute-phase response.
Case history
A 55-year-old woman who underwent a right mastectomy 10 years 
earlier presents with a subcapsular fracture of the left humerus. 
This had followed minimal trauma following slipping on the floor in 
the supermarket. It was thought that she might have disseminated 
bony metastases.
The contributory information provided by the blood count is 
shown below:
•	 Hb 86 g/L
•	 MCV 76 fL
•	 WBC 14.7 × 109/L
•	 Platelets 64 × 109/L
•	 Reticulocytes 2.0%
•	 Nucleated red cells
•	 Occasional myelocytes noted 4/100 WBCs
•	 Rouleaux +
•	 Platelets clumped + +
Vitamin B12 levels are normal or high; folate levels are often low, owing 
to poor dietary intake.
	 Bleeding produces a hypochromic, microcytic picture.
	 Alcohol causes macrocytosis, sometimes with leucopenia and thrombo­
cytopenia due to bone marrow suppression.
	 Hypersplenism results in pancytopenia.
	 Cholestasis can often produce abnormal-shaped cells and also defi­
ciency of Vitamin K.
	 Haemolysis accompanies acute liver failure and jaundice.
	 Aplastic anaemia is present in up to 2% of patients with acute viral 
hepatitis.
	 A raised serum ferritin with transferrin saturation (> 60%) is seen in 
hereditary haemochromatosis.
ANAEMIA IN CANCER
This patient has a microcytic anaemia with rouleaux formation on the 
blood film. The anaemia of chronic disorder is common in disseminated 
malignancy and many other inflammatory and infective illnesses.
143
Anaemia in cancer
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Further investigations
 Blood
	 Serum alkaline phosphatase 247 IU/L
	 CRP 80
	 Serum calcium 2.9 mmol/L.
 Imaging
	 X-ray of shoulders showed humeral fracture
	 Skeletal survey showed bony metastases in thoracic spine and pelvis.
•	 Diagnosis.  Carcinoma of the breast with bony secondaries.
Anaemia of chronic disorder: pathophysiology
	 Functional iron deficiency
	 Reduced sensitivity to erythropoietin
	 Reduced red cell lifespan.
She has a raised total white cell count with nucleated red cells and imma­
ture granulocytes seen on the blood film. This is a leucoerythroblastic 
picture; such cells are normally confined to the bone marrow. Bone 
marrow infiltration by disseminated malignancy disrupts the normal 
mechanisms controlling release of haemopoietic cells into the blood.
Leucoerythroblastic anaemia
Causes include:
	 Acute haemolysis
	 Severe infection
	 Severe hypoxia
	 Bone marrow infiltration:
•	 Carcinoma
•	 Myeloma
•	 Lymphoma
•	 Tuberculosis
•	 Myelofibrosis
•	 Osteopetrosis.
Remember
Most blood count analysers cannot distinguish nucleated RBCs 
(nRBCs) from white cells, and when nRBCs are present might give 
an inappropriately high white cell count. Ask for the blood film to 
be reviewed.
The reticulocyte count is not increased and no red cell fragmentation is 
present on blood film review. Microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia 
(MAHA), which sometimes complicates disseminated breast, prostate 
or gastric carcinoma, is not likely to be a feature in this patient. MAHA 
results from mechanical disruption of red cells in small blood vessels 
and can be complicated by chronic DIC, with a coagulopathy, reduced 
fibrinogen concentration, elevated fibrin breakdown products and 
thrombocytopenia.
144
Haematology and Oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Remember
Before accepting that a patient is thrombocytopenic:
•	 Ask for the blood film to be reviewed
•	 Repeat the blood count: fibrin formation or a small clot in the 
sample will result in a low platelet count.
Remember
A neutrophil leucocytosis may reflect processes other than 
infection:
•	 Tissue ischaemia:
–	 Myocardial infarct
–	 Sickle-cell crisis
•	 Inflammation:
–	 Rheumatoid arthritis
–	 Vasculitis
•	 Endocrine disease:
–	 Thyrotoxicosis
–	 Cushing’s disease
–	 Post-splenectomy
This patient has thrombocytopenia. The aetiology of thrombocytopenia 
in disseminated malignancy is complex and can be due to:
	 Bone marrow infiltration
	 Folate deficiency secondary to anorexia
	 Cytotoxic chemotherapy
	 DIC.
However, review of the blood film in this patient reveals that the throm­
bocytopenia is spurious – platelets are clumped on the blood film. Platelet 
clumping is a common phenomenon related to the EDTA anti-coagulant 
that blood is collected into.
Progress and management
This lady was treated symptomatically with NSAIDs and started on 
bisphosphonates. She was referred to the Oncology Department for an 
MDT for discussion of further management.
INFECTION/SEPSIS
Bacterial sepsis
This results in a characteristic constellation of changes in the blood which 
provide confirmatory evidence of sepsis and, in occasional patients with 
occult infection, may direct appropriate investigations.
	 Neutrophil leucocytosis: increased numbers of neutrophils.
	 Immature granulocytes (= left-shift): occasional promyelocytes, 
myelocytes.
	 Toxic granulation: coarse neutrophil granulation.
	 Döhle bodies (these are white cells containing large RNA inclusions that 
are seen in, e.g., sepsis, malignancy, pregnancy).
145
Infection/sepsis
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Uncontrolled sepsis might be accompanied by:
	 A falling white cell count/neutropenia
	 Granulocyte vacuolation
	 Bacteria visible on the stained blood film
	 Thrombocytopenia
	 DIC.
Anaemia is common in bacterial sepsis and is usually related to the acute-
phase response. Occasionally, haemolysis and red cell fragmentation 
accompany DIC, and severe haemolysis might complicate Clostridium 
welchii septicaemia with spherocytosis on the blood film.
Malaria (see also case on p. 14)
This should be suspected in any individual with a fever who has recently 
visited/come from malarial parts of the world. Thrombocytopenia is a 
frequent accompaniment of malaria infection and haemolytic anaemia 
might develop, particularly if an individual also has G6PD deficiency.
Remember
If malaria is suspected:
•	 Ask for thick and thin blood film examination
•	 Repeat × 3–5 if the initial results are negative but clinical 
suspicion persists.
If malaria is diagnosed:
	 Ask for the species of Plasmodium
	 If P. falciparum, ensure you are given the parasite count. This indicates 
the severity of infection:
–	 A high parasite count > 5.0% indicates an increased risk of cerebral 
malaria
–	 Pre-schizont forms indicate an increased risk of cerebral malaria.
Some features of severe falciparum malaria
Remember
Treatment for severe malaria due to P. falciparum is a MEDICAL 
EMERGENCY. Give:
•	 Artesunate 2.4 mg/kg single bolus and then at 12 h and 24 h 
and then daily until oral medication can be tolerated.
•	 Quinine dihydrochloride 20 mg/kg IV over 4 h, then 10 mg/kg if 
artesunate unavailable.
See National Formulary for details; see p. 15 for other treatment.
	 CNS: cerebral malaria (coma, convulsion)
	 Renal:
•	 Haemoglobinuria (blackwater fever)
•	 Oliguria
•	 Uraemia (acute tubular necrosis).
146
Haematology and Oncology
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Information
Consider:
•	 Age of patient
•	 Length of history
•	 Clinical findings
•	 Morphology of lymphoid cells
•	 Monospot or Paul–Bunnell test
•	 Immunophenotyping
	 Blood:
•	 Severe anaemia (haemolysis and dyserythropoiesis)
•	 Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC: haemorrhage).
	 Respiratory: acute respiratory distress syndrome (see p. 391).
	 Metabolic:
•	 Hypoglycaemia (particularly in children)
•	 Metabolic acidosis.
	 Gastrointestinal/liver
•	 Diarrhoea
•	 Jaundice/splenic rupture.
	 Other:
•	 Shock: hypotensive
•	 Hyperpyrexia.
Beware
The parasite count in falciparum malaria may underestimate the severity 
of the infection due to parasite sequestration. Always take a diagnosis of 
falciparum malaria seriously.
Viral infections
These produce a variety of specific and non-specific effects on the blood 
that might be helpful diagnostically.
Non-specific effects
These are common to many viral illnesses:
	 Mild neutropenia and thrombocytopenia
	 Occasional reactive lymphoid cells on blood film.
Specific effects
	 Glandular fever is produced by Epstein–Barr virus infection (see p. 18). 
Similar features are seen in cytomegalovirus but also in toxoplasmosis. 
The reactive lymphocytosis must be distinguished from a malignant 
lymphoid proliferation.
	 Erythrovirus B19 causes Fifth’s disease and specifically infects erythroid 
progenitor cells, resulting in transient erythroid hypoplasia and failure 
of red cell production. This is of no consequence in otherwise healthy 
individuals but, in those with chronic haemolytic anaemia, it causes a 
sudden fall in the haemoglobin concentration, with absent reticulocytes. 
Urgent blood transfusion can be life saving.
147
Infection/sepsis
6 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 HIV infection results in anaemia, thrombocytopenia and neutropenia in 
most patients. The severity of the cytopenia is related to the stage of the 
disease and is reflected by ineffective haemopoiesis with dysplastic 
changes in bone marrow precursor cells. It can be exacerbated by inter­
current infection and therapy.
Remember
Erythrovirus B19 is infective, and chronic haemolytic anaemias can 
be inherited, e.g. sickle-cell disease. Ask about other family 
members with haemolysis, ‘Are they well?’
This page intentionally left blank
149
149
Care of the Elderly 7 
BLACKOUTS
This implies either altered consciousness, with or without falling, or some­
times a visual disturbance.
Case history
An 86-year-old woman is brought into A&E with a ‘blackout’. She 
had been found on the floor but had regained consciousness on 
the way to hospital.
On examination pulse and blood pressure were normal and 
there was no abnormality found on neurological examination.
What should you ascertain from the history?
	 Any previous episodes?
	 What was patient doing at the time (e.g. micturition, change in posture, 
coughing).
	 Symptoms preceding blackout:
•	 Chest pain or palpitations, suggests cardiac cause.
•	 Aura, suggests epilepsy.
	 Witness history: any witness(es) to give description of the blackout.
• Differential diagnosis.  Common causes include neurological or car­
diovascular events.
Epilepsy in the elderly
	 Focal fits or a focal origin of generalised seizures are common in the 
elderly (accounting for 80% of fits in this age group).
	 Post-ictal confusion, headache and focal signs (Todd’s paresis) are 
common.
	 35% to 50% of fits in the elderly are caused by vascular disease.
	 20% of patients with stroke have seizures within the first year.
	 Elderly persons are more susceptible to pharmacological causes of fits, 
e.g. neuroleptics, tricyclics, and to alcohol withdrawal.
	 An EEG can be useful but a normal or non-diagnostic EEG does not rule 
out epilepsy.
	 Don’t forget hypoglycaemia as a cause of fits.
	 Anti-convulsant drugs should be started after the first fit if a vascular 
or structural cause is suspected.
	 Pallor suggests cardiac cause.
	 Tonic–clonic contractions or incontinence suggest epilepsy.
	 Was there a history of head turning or tight neckwear? This suggests 
carotid sinus syndrome.
150
Care of the Elderly
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Investigations
•	 FBC, U&Es, glucose, TFTs, Ca2+
•	 ECG
•	 24-hour tape if ECG abnormal or history suggestive of cardiac 
cause
•	 If history suggests epilepsy: EEG, and/or CT scan
•	 Specialist intervention: carotid sinus massage – undertaken if 
carotid sinus syndrome suspected (Note: contraindications for 
massage include presence of carotid bruit or history of carotid 
territory neurological events)
Remember
Epilepsy might be secondary to reduced cardiac output.
	 Was there a period of drowsiness after blackout? This suggests epilepsy 
but might also occur in cardiac causes.
Cardiovascular causes of blackouts
	 Arrhythmias (brady- or tachy-) can be difficult to diagnose and some­
times require repeated 24-h tapes or 2–3-week ‘event recorders’ (see 
p. 278).
	 Myocardial infarction: can be pain free in older people.
	 Aortic stenosis: typically causes exertional syncope, also shortness of 
breath on exertion and angina.
	 Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: diagnosed on echocardiogram.
	 Postural hypotension.
	 Carotid sinus syndrome is an underdiagnosed cause of unexplained 
blackouts. It is caused by an exaggerated response of baroreceptors in 
the carotid sinus and requires specialist investigation by carotid sinus 
massage with close observation. There are three variants. The cardioin­
hibitory variant is diagnosed by > 3-s asystole on massage. The vaso­
pressor variant is diagnosed by a 50-mmHg drop in blood pressure or 
systolic blood pressure drop to < 90 mmHg. Thirdly, up to one-third of 
cases are mixed.
	 Vasovagal syncope: occasionally presents for the first time in older 
people. Consider if there is a long history of ‘funny turns’.
Treatment
In this patient an ECG, chest X-ray and blood tests were normal. It was 
thought that the blackout could be due to an arrhythmia so a 24-hour tape 
ECG was performed. This showed episodes of tachycardia, bradycardia, 
with two episodes of sinus arrest, compatible with the sick sinus 
syndrome.
• Progress.  This patient was fitted with a pacemaker/DDI and has 
had no further attacks.
151
Falls in the elderly
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Further reading
Fall Prevention in Acute Care Hospitals: A Randomized Trial.
Dykes PC, Carroll DL, Hurley A et al. JAMA 2010; 304(17): 1912–1918.
FALLS IN THE ELDERLY
Case history
A 79-year-old man was brought into A&E following a fall. He was 
taking atenolol 100 mg daily, aspirin 75 mg daily and 
bendroflumethiazide 2.5 mg daily.
On examination he was well. His pulse was normal, blood 
pressure low at 90/50 but no abnormal neurological signs. He had 
symptomatic postural hypotension on standing up.
What questions should you ask?
	 What was he doing when he fell, e.g. was there a postural element?
	 What does he remember about the fall?
	 Did he lose consciousness?
	 What happened immediately before the fall?
	 Were there any preceding symptoms?
	 Was there a witness?
	 Were there any physical hazards, e.g. wet floor, carpet edge?
	 Had he fallen before?
These features can help distinguish pathological causes (intrinsic) from 
those with a major external factor (extrinsic), although in practice most 
falls are multi-factorial. Falls or ‘collapse’ can be seen as a final common 
pathway for many diseases common in the elderly.
Falls – examination
Full physical examination, especially:
	 Cardiovascular:
•	 BP including postural changes after 1–3 min
•	 Evidence of heart failure or rhythm disturbance
•	 Murmurs.
	 Musculoskeletal:
•	 Arthritis: acute or chronic and evidence of joint instability
•	 Muscle wasting, especially quadriceps.
	 Neurological:
•	 Focal signs, don’t forget cerebellar/brainstem
•	 Hearing or visual impairment
•	 Gait: observation of the patient standing from sitting (with arms 
folded) and walking (with turns) provides a good assessment of risk 
for falling.
Orthostatic hypotension
This is defined as a > 20-mmHg drop in systolic BP on standing or during 
head-up tilt:
152
Care of the Elderly
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Common in elderly: occurs in up to 30% of healthy older people and it 
is not clear why some develop symptoms.
	 ‘Physiological’ changes in elderly: decreased baroreceptor sensitivity 
increases risk of postural hypotension.
	 ‘Pathological’ changes: e.g. sepsis with vasodilatation; poor LV func­
tion; neurological disease affecting reflex pathways.
	 Pharmacological causes: beta blockers, vasodilators, anti-parkinsonian 
drugs, sedatives, neuroleptics, diuretics.
Investigations of falls
	 BP and heart rate measurement with patient lying flat, with patient 
standing upright or at 45° on tilt table after 1, 3 and 5 min.
	 FBC for evidence of infection, anaemia.
	 U&Es, creatinine for evidence of dehydration, renal impairment (eGFR 
is calculated).
	 Blood glucose for hypo-/hyperglycaemia.
	 Thyroid function tests for subclinical hypothyroidism.
	 CXR for infection, tumour.
	 ECG for ischaemia, arrhythmias, silent MI.
	 Heart beat monitoring (beat-to-beat variation) for autonomic 
neuropathy.
	 MSU and Stix testing for infection.
Management of falls
	 Review medications and withdraw exacerbating drugs if possible.
	 Treat medical factors, e.g. sepsis.
	 Assessment and reduction of osteoporosis risk.
	 Advice to patients (see below).
	 Drug treatment occasionally used in patients with persistent disabling 
symptoms:
1.	 Fludrocortisone 100–200 µg at night. Watch for fluid retention and 
hypokalaemia
2.	 If still symptomatic, add sympathomimetic agent, e.g. ephedrine 
15 mg × 3 daily. This can be increased to 45 mg × 3 (side effects: 
hypertension, tachycardia, tremor).
• Progress.  In this patient with postural hypotension, the atenolol
was stopped and a careful watch was kept on his blood pressure 
(he had his own blood pressure machine) over the following 
few weeks. He should stay on aspirin and bendroflumethiazide. 
His BP stabilized at 115/80 and therefore no further medication 
was required.
Advice for patients with postural hypotension
	 Get out of bed in stages.
	 Pause between positional changes.
	 Wear leg support tights during day; take them off at night.
	 Raise head of bed.
	 Avoid alcohol.
Further reading
www.profane.eu.org Prevention of falls network Europe; focuses on the 
prevention of falls.
153
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Delirium
DELIRIUM (see p. 515)
This is also known as ‘toxic confusional state’. It is the commonest psycho­
sis seen in the general medical setting. It is ‘brain failure’ with impairment 
of attention and abnormalities of perception and mood.
Case history
A 76-year-old female is admitted to MAU with a 3-day history of 
confusion associated with hallucinations.
On examination she has signs of consolidation at the left lung 
base. Her temperature and white cell count, however, were within 
normal limits.
Delirium in the elderly
An elderly person presenting with acute confusion associated with disori­
entation, agitation ± hallucinations is a common medical emergency. In a 
hospital setting, the elderly develop delirium while receiving treatment for 
other medical or surgical problems, the reported incidence varying from 
10 to 60%.
As a condition (syndrome) it is associated with increased morbidity and 
mortality.
Diagnosis
Use DSM (IV-TR) criteria or the Confusional Assessment Method (CAM), 
which is based on the DSM criteria (see below).
Delirium – diagnostic criteria (derived from DSM-IV-TR)
•	 Disturbance of consciousness:
–	 clarity of awareness of environment
–	 ability to focus, sustain or shift attention
•	 Change in cognition:
–	 memory deficit, disorientation
–	 language disturbance, perceptual disturbance
•	 Disturbance develops over a short period (hours or days)
•	 Fluctuation over course of day
Information
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM) is published by the 
American Psychiatric Association and provides clear descriptions 
of diagnostic categories. The 4th edition (DSM-IV-TR) was 
published in 2000. The 5th edition will be available in 2013.
154
Care of the Elderly
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Confusional assessment method (CAM) criteria
Need points 1 and 2:
1.	 Acute onset + fluctuating course: this history is usually obtained from the 
family/carer or from the nurse caring for a patient already in 
hospital.
2.	 Inattention: is the patient easily distractible or does he/she have diffi­
culty keeping track of what is being said?
… and either 3 or 4:
3.	 Disorganised thinking: is the patient incoherent? Is the conversation 
irrelevant?
4.	 Altered level of consciousness: the patient might be hyperactive, 
hypoactive/lethargic or semi-conscious.
Remember
•	 One in four patients with delirium are hypoactive
•	 Although history/observations can confirm the presence of CAM 
features, it is also useful to assess the patient’s cognitive 
functioning using serial mental test scores, e.g. Abbreviated 
Mental Test (AMT) (Table 7.1). Other tests using questions on: 
orientation (e.g. time, place, date), registration (naming objects), 
attention and calculation (simple arithmetic), recall (previously 
mentioned objects) and language (understanding commands) 
can be used.
Total score ten (one point for each item)
Age
Time (to nearest hour)
Address for recall
Year
Where do you live (town or road)?
Recognition of two persons
Date of birth (day and month)
Year of the start of the First World War
Name of present leader of the country
Count backwards 20 to 1
Table 7.1  Abbreviated Mental Test (AMT)
What should you do when delirium is suspected/diagnosed?
	 Identify the cause by taking a medical history, physical examination and 
appropriate investigations.
	 Manage the delirium.
Medical history
Illness in old age can present in a non-specific or atypical way. It is there­
fore necessary to go through a systematic enquiry to detect symptoms of 
physical illness, particularly those relating to chest infection and urinary 
tract infection. The family/carer or doctor should also be questioned about 
recent changes to drug therapy.
155
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Delirium
Physical examination
Full physical examination including neurological examination is essential 
as any physical illness in older people can lead to delirium.
Investigations
•	 FBC
•	 U&Es
•	 Liver function tests
•	 Calcium
•	 Phosphate
•	 Thyroid function tests
•	 CXR
•	 ECG and MSU
•	 Other investigations as indicated by clinical findings
Causes
For causes, remember the mnemonic delirium and think of common 
conditions:
D	 drugs: side effects, toxicity of drugs, e.g. hypotensives, sedatives
E	 electrolyte/endocrine disturbance, e.g. hyponatraemia, hypernatrae­
mia, hypothyroidism
L	 lack of drugs: withdrawal of drugs
I	
infections, e.g. pneumonia, cellulitis
R	 reduced sensory input, e.g. visual impairment
I	
intracranial: TIAs, epilepsy
U	 urinary retention/faecal impaction
M	 myocardial: ischaemia/infarct, arrhythmias, CHF.
Remember
The presentation of illness in the elderly can be altered, e.g. not all 
patients with pneumonia will have a raised temperature or raised 
white cell count.
Risk factors for delirium
	 Dementia
	 Severe physical illness
	 Raised urea/creatinine
	 Visual impairment
	 More than three prescribed drugs.
How would you manage a patient with delirium?
	 Treat cause(s) of delirium. Review present drug therapy.
	 Environmental measures and general support: fluids/nutrition; 
bladder/bowel care + environment (nurse in quiet, dimly lit room if 
possible), providing reassurance and reorientation.
156
Care of the Elderly
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Pharmacological management: only appropriate if general supportive 
measures are not adequate to reduce patient’s distress and if there is 
danger to patient. Drugs of choice:
1.	 Lorazepam up to 2 mg IV or IM up to 4-hourly
2.	 Haloperidol 0.5 mg IV or IM, repeating if necessary after 30 min
3.	 Olanzapine 5 mg is also used.
• Progress.  In this patient the cause of her delirium was pneumonia. 
She did not mount a raised white count or have a temperature. Her 
delirium resolved on treatment with antibiotics.
Further reading
Folstein MF, Folstein SE, McHugh PR. Mini-mental state: a practical 
method for grading cognitive state of patients for the clinician. J Psychiatr 
Res 1975; 12 (3): 189–198.
Inovye SK. Delirium in the older persons. NEJM 2006; 354: 1157–1185.
Young J, Inovye SK. Delirium in older people. BMJ 2007; 334: 824–826.
Help website. http:/hospitalelderlifeprogram.org
DEMENTIA
• Definition.  Dementia is defined by the Royal College of Physicians 
as global impairment of higher cortical functions, including memory:
	 The capacity to solve problems of day-to-day living.
	 The performance of learned perceptuomotor skills.
	 The correct use of social skills.
	 The control of emotional reactions in the absence of gross clouding of 
consciousness.
Case history
An 89-year-old man with a 6-month history of deteriorating 
short-term memory and increasing confusion is referred to A&E 
because of self-neglect. He has become even more confused over 
the previous 24 h. He was diagnosed as having dementia and 
referred to the Care of the Elderly team.
Remember
You should distinguish delirium from dementia, but remember that 
delirium can and does occur commonly in patients with dementia, 
as in this case.
	 Dementia is often irreversible and progressive, and has a number of 
causes.
	 Assessment: this is performed using the 10-point Abbreviated Mental 
Test (AMT; Table 7.1), or Clock-drawing test (Fig. 7.1).
	 Although screening tests are useful in demonstrating the presence of 
deficits in cognition, they cannot be used for making the diagnosis of 
dementia or identifying the underlying cause. This requires imaging 
(CT or MRI scan) and, in some patients, assessment by a clinical 
157
Dementia
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
psychologist and/or a psychiatrist. A history of progressive decline in 
memory or cognition over 6 months is significant.
a
b
1
12
2
3
7
8
6
5
4
10
11
9
1
12
2 3
7
8
6
5
4
10
11
9
Figure 7.1  Clock drawing test. (a) Normal. (b) Abnormal – inappropriate spread. 
Investigations
Initial investigations for dementia:
•	 FBC and film
•	 U&Es
•	 Random blood glucose
•	 LFTs
•	 Thyroid function tests (TFTs)
•	 Vitamin B12 and folate
•	 Syphilis serology
•	 CXR
•	 ECG
•	 CT/MRI scan of brain or PET scan
Causes
The common causes of dementia include Alzheimer’s disease, multi-infarct 
dementia, Lewy body dementia and Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease, but other 
conditions can produce a dementia-like syndrome (Table 7.2) and p. 523.
Hypothyroidism
Vitamin B12 deficiency
Folate deficiency
Recurrent hypoglycaemia
Alcohol excess
Depression (‘pseudodementia’)
Subdural haematoma
Normal pressure hydrocephalus
Table 7.2  Examples of treatable causes of dementia-like syndrome 
(see also p. 523)
158
Care of the Elderly
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Remember
In all types of dementia it might be necessary to use 
pharmacological agents to control agitation and other behavioural 
disturbances, but it must be remembered that patients with Lewy 
body dementia are very susceptible to the side effects of 
anti-psychotic drugs.
Remember
Acetylcholine esterase inhibitors for Alzheimer’s disease are 
initiated only by a specialist (psychiatrist, neurologist or a 
geriatrician):
•	 Donepezil 5–10 mg daily
•	 Rivastigmine 3–12 mg daily
•	 Galantamine 8–24 mg daily
•	 Mematine 5–20 mg daily.
Management
	 Alzheimer’s disease (AD): although there is no cure for Alzheimer’s 
disease, research on acetylcholine esterase inhibitors has shown that in 
selected patients with mild to moderate AD the decline can be slowed 
down. The National Institute for Clinical Excellence (NICE) has pro­
duced a guidance on use of donepezil, rivastigmine, memantine and 
galantamine in patients with mild to moderate AD by specialists. Other 
agents/drugs that have some benefit to patients with AD include 
vitamin E and Ginkgo biloba extract.
	 Multi-infarct dementia: treat the risk factors, such as hypertension. 
Aspirin also has a role in preventing further strokes. Ginkgo biloba (120–
240 mg daily) can also help.
	 As dementia progresses, the management focus changes to care provi­
sion for patients plus support for carers.
	 Lewy body dementia: avoid anti-psychotics as they can increase confu­
sion. Some of these patients respond to acetylcholine esterase 
inhibitors.
• Progress and management.  In this patient, his previous history of 
hypertension and two small strokes suggested a multi-infarct demen­
tia (avascular dementia). The diagnosis was confirmed by an MRI. 
The Care of the Elderly team arranged for full support in the com­
munity and he was continued on his treatment for hypertension. He 
is being assessed regularly to see if pharmacological treatment for his 
dementia is required.
Further reading
Ballard C, Gauthier S, Corbett A et al. Alzheimer’s disease. Lancet 2011: 
377: 1019–1031.
159
Depression
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
NICE (2006) Dementia: supporting people with dementia and their carers 
in health and social care.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mini%E2%80%93mental_state_
examination
DEPRESSION
Depression is common in old age (see also p. 528). Community studies 
have revealed a prevalence of 11.3% for depressive symptoms and 3% for 
depression in the UK. Studies of elderly hospital inpatients have shown 
that up to 33% have depression. It is common in the elderly with chronic 
physical illnesses such as stroke, and it can also be the presentation of an 
occult physical illness such as hypothyroidism, hypercalcaemia or carci­
noma of the lung. Physical illness is the biggest risk factor for depression 
in old age.
Remember
Whereas the clinical features of depression in old age can be the 
same as in younger patients, somatic complaints, delusions and 
decline in cognition (‘pseudodementia’) are more frequently noted 
in the elderly.
Case history
A senior nurse noted that an 83-year-old man with a CVA is not 
eating poorly and is losing weight. On direct questioning the 
patient admits to feeling depressed, and feels he has no future.
Examination showed no abnormality apart from slight residual 
neurological signs from his CVA.
Remember
Always ask the patient about suicidal thoughts/intent.
Assessment
	 Geriatric depression scale (Table 7.3) as a screening test. The Geriatric 
Depression Scale (shorter version) is a reliable and valid screening 
instrument of depression in the elderly. A score greater than 5 indicates 
probable depression.
	 Physical examination and investigations to detect/exclude physical 
causes of depression, such as hypothyroidism, hypercalcaemia, malig­
nancy. In a patient with a normal physical examination it is recom­
mended that FBC, U&Es, LFTs, vitamin B12, Ca2+, PO4
− TFTs and chest 
X-ray are performed.
In this patient, these blood tests and the CXR showed no abnormality.
160
Care of the Elderly
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Choose the best answer for how you have felt over the past 
week:
1.
Are you basically satisfied with your life?
Yes/No
2.
Have you dropped many of your activities and 
interests?
Yes/No
3.
Do you feel that your life is empty?
Yes/No
4.
Do you often get bored?
Yes/No
5.
Are you in good spirits most of the time?
Yes/No
6.
Are you afraid that something bad is going to 
happen to you?
Yes/No
7.
Do you feel happy most of the time?
Yes/No
8.
Do you often feel helpless?
Yes/No
9.
Do you prefer to stay at home, rather than going 
out and doing new things?
Yes/No
10.
Do you feel you have more problems with 
memory than most?
Yes/No
11.
Do you think it is wonderful to be alive now?
Yes/No
12.
Do you feel pretty worthless the way you are 
now?
Yes/No
13.
Do you feel full of energy?
Yes/No
14.
Do you feel that your situation is hopeless?
Yes/No
15.
Do you think that most people are better off than 
you are?
Yes/No
The following answers count one point
A total score greater than five indicates probable depression
1.
No
2.
Yes
3.
Yes
4.
Yes
5.
No
6.
Yes
7.
No
8.
Yes
Table 7.3  Geriatric Depression Scale
Management
Significantly depressed patients can be treated successfully with drugs. 
Drugs commonly used for treating depression in older people include:
	 Citalopram: a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) 8–32 mg 
daily.
	 Mirtazapine: a pre-synaptic alpha-2 antagonist is particularly useful in 
patients with poor appetite – 15 mg daily, increased according to 
response to 45 mg daily.
	 Venlafaxine: a serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor, 75–
150 mg daily.
Severely depressed patients with or without suicidal ideation need urgent 
referral to a psychiatrist for further assessment.
9.
Yes
10.
Yes
11.
No
12.
Yes
13.
No
14.
Yes
15.
Yes
From Sheikh JI, Yesavage JA. Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS). Clinical 
Gerontologist 1986; 5: 165–173.
161
Non-specific presentation of illness in the elderly
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Case history (1)
Mr S. is 85 years old and lives alone in a bungalow. His 
neighbours noticed that he had failed to collect the milk from the 
front door for 2 days. They called the family doctor, who found Mr 
S sitting in a chair with grossly swollen feet. In his letter referring 
the patient to hospital the doctor confirmed that Mr S had been on 
salbutamol and ipratropium inhalers for 5 years. However, he 
hadn’t visited the surgery for some time.
On arrival in hospital Mr S was very confused and unable to 
give a detailed history. His abbreviated mental test (AMT) score 
(see Table 7.1) was 3 out of 10.
On examination he had a low-grade temperature of 37.6°C, 
appeared breathless on minimal exertion, with central cyanosis 
and had signs of congenitive heart failure: high JVP, an enlarged 
liver and leg swelling up to the groin.
A chest X-ray showed signs of left heart failure and there was 
right basal shadowing suggestive of right lower lobe pneumonia.
It was not clear how long he had been confused or how mobile 
he had been before these problems.
His next of kin was a younger brother who lived far away. He 
was contacted by telephone and confirmed that the patient was 
not married and had been able to go out to the local shops (a 
quarter of a mile away) until 3 weeks ago. He also commented 
that the patient had been mildly confused and needed some help 
in running his own affairs for several years, but was self-caring and 
didn’t need help at home.
• Progress and treatment.  Management of this patient consisted of 
multi-disciplinary support in the community with short-term use of 
venlafaxine 75 mg daily to help his depression.
Further reading
Frye MA. Bipolar disorder – a focus on depression. NEJM 2011; 363: 
51–59.
NON-SPECIFIC PRESENTATION OF ILLNESS IN 
THE ELDERLY
Many illnesses in the elderly population can present in a non-specific 
manner. Taking a detailed and informative history can be very difficult 
because underlying memory loss due to dementia can be exacerbated by 
an acute medical problem (delirium). Information regarding the previous 
medical, mental, functional and social conditions is needed to make an 
accurate assessment of the patient’s current state.
History obtained from the patient should be augmented by information 
from the patient’s doctor, district nurse, carers, relations and neighbours, 
if necessary, particularly if the patient is confused.
These problems are highlighted in the following case. MEWS (Table 7.4) 
is a simple physiological scoring system that can be used at the bedside in 
a medical admission unit. It identifies patients at risk of deterioration and 
who may require more specialised care.
162
Care of the Elderly
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
• Treatment.  Mr S was started on antibiotics – amoxicillin 500 mg × 3 
daily, bendroflumethiazide 2.5 mg daily and enalapril 2.5 mg × 2 
daily for his pneumonia and heart-failure. He was also found to be 
hypothyroid and was started on levothyroxine 25 µg initially. His 
general condition gradually improved and his AMT rose to 7 out 
of 10.
• Progress.  With the help of the physiotherapist Mr S was able to get 
back on his feet using a Zimmer frame. A home visit was successful 
and he went home with daily home-care support and follow-up in 
the day hospital, with adjustment of his medication, to maintain his 
mobility.
Case history (2)
A 79-year-old man was admitted after having had an unexplained 
fall. He was mildly confused but on direct questioning denied any 
symptoms.
On examination he had a tachycardia of 100/min, normal heart 
sounds and a clear chest. An ECG revealed raised ST segment in 
leads II, III and AVF, i.e. an acute inferior myocardial infarct 
(STEMI). He had a raised serum troponin.
Remember
All elderly persons presenting to hospital with non-specific 
complaints should have full physical examinations and 
investigations that include FBC, U&Es, LFTs, Ca2+, phosphate, 
TFTs, ECG, MSU, CXR plus any other investigations as indicated 
by the findings on examination.
	 Any illness in old age can present with any of the so-called ‘giants’ of 
geriatric medicine, i.e. confusion, falls/instability and incontinence.
	 In addition, some illnesses present atypically. Examples of this include:
•	 ‘Silent’ myocardial infarction
•	 Pneumonia without pyrexia or rise in white cell count
Score
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
Systolic BP 
(mmHg)
<70
71–80
81–100
101–199
>200
Heart rate 
(bpm)
<40
41–50
51–100
101–110
111–129
130
Respiratory 
rate (bpm)
<9
9–14
15–20
21–29
30
Temperature 
(°C)
<35
34–35
35–38.4
>38.5
AVPU score
Alert
Reacting 
to voice
Reacting 
to pain
Unresponsive
Table 7.4  Modified Early Warning Score (MEWS)
163
Stroke
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
•	 ‘Silent’ peptic ulcer perforation, i.e. peptic ulcers might perforate 
with little or no pain but the patient becomes non-specifically unwell, 
anorexic and bed-bound.
• Diagnosis.  This patient has had a ‘silent’ myocardial infarction.
Management
Aspirin 300 mg chewed with clopidogrel 300 mg oral gel were given. He 
was assessed urgently by the cardiac team who felt that despite his age he 
should be treated urgently with fibrinolytic therapy (p. 286). He responded 
well, with a fall in the ST segment to normal, without any complications 
of treatment.
• Progress.  He was discharged and given post MI drug treatment (see 
below) and follow-up by the cardiac rehabilitation nurse.
Remember
Older patients often do well with active treatment of STEMI 
(fibrinolysis or PCI). There is no evidence to support not giving 
therapy to elderly patients.
APPROPRIATE ASSESSMENT SCALES
The Royal College of Physicians has produced a list of useful assessment 
scales/tools for the day-to-day management of the elderly. The following 
scales are recommended:
	 Barthel Index: for activities of daily living (ADL) (Table 7.5).
	 Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE): cognitive screening test for 
dementia and delirium.
	 Geriatric Depression Scale: screening instrument test for depression (see 
Table 7.3).
	 Waterlow Score: for risk quantification for pressure ulcers (Table 7.6).
	 Philadelphia Geriatric Center Morale Scale: for quality of life (Table 7.7); 
provides a multi-dimensional approach to assessing the psychological 
state of older people, i.e. well-being/life satisfaction/quality of life.
Other scales, e.g. Braden, Walsall and Maelor are also available.
The Barthel Index should be used as a record of what a patient does (not 
as a record of what the patient could do). The main aim is to establish the 
degree of dependence on any help, physical or verbal. A need for supervi­
sion means that the patient is not independent. Performance over the 
preceding 24–48 h is used when completing the Barthel Index but longer 
periods of assessment might be more relevant. A patient’s performance 
should be established using the best available evidence. Ask the patient or 
carer but also observe what the patient can do. The use of aids to be inde­
pendent is allowed. Direct testing is not needed. Unconscious patients 
score ‘0’ throughout.
STROKE
This is the sudden onset of focal neurological symptoms caused by inter­
ruption of the vascular supply to the brain (ischaemic stroke) or intracer­
ebral haemorrhage (haemorrhagic stroke).
164
Care of the Elderly
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Item
Categories
Bowels
0 = incontinent (or needs to be given an enema)
1 = occasional accident (once per week)
2 = continent
Bladder
0 = incontinent/catheterised, unable to manage
1 = occasional accident (max. once every 24 h)
2 = continent (for over 7 days)
Grooming
0 = needs help with personal care
1 = independent face/hair/teeth/shaving (implements 
provided)
Toilet use
0 = dependent
1 = needs some help but can do something alone
2 = independent (on and off, dressing, wiping)
Feeding
0 = unable
1 = needs help cutting, spreading butter, etc.
2 = independent (food provided in reach)
Transfer
0 = unable – no sitting balance
1 = major help (one or two people, physical), can sit
2 = minor help (verbal or physical)
3 = independent
Mobility
0 = immobile
1 = wheelchair independent (includes corners)
2 = walks with help of one (verbal/physical)
3 = independent (may use any aid, e.g. stick)
Dressing
0 = dependent
1 = needs help, does about half unaided
2 = independent, includes buttons, zips, shoes
Stairs
0 = unable
1 = needs help, (verbal, physical) carrying aid
2 = independent
Bathing
0 = dependent
1 = independent (may use shower)
Table 7.5  The Barthel Index
165
Stroke
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Build/weight for 
height
Visual skin type
Continence
Mobility
Sex/Age
Appetite
Average
0
Healthy
0
Complete
0
Fully mobile
0
Male
1
Average
0
Above average
2
Tissue paper
1
Occasionally incontinent
1
Restricted/Difficult
1
Female
2
Poor
1
Dry
1
14–18
1
Anorectic
2
Below average
3
Oedematous
1
Catheter/incontinent of faeces
2
Restless, fidgety
2
5–64
2
Clammy
1
65–75
3
Discoloured
2
Apathetic
3
75–80
4
Broken/spot
3
Doubly incontinent
3
Inert/traction
4
81 +
5
Special risk factors
Assessment value
1. Poor nutrition, e.g. terminal cachexia
8
At risk
10
2. Sensory deprivation, e.g. diabetes, paraplegia, cerebrovascular event
6
High risk
15
3. High dose anti-inflammatory or steroids in use
3
Very high risk
20
4. Smoking 10+ per day
1
5. Orthopaedic surgery/fracture below waist
3
The Waterlow assessment is mainly used in acute hospital settings in order to highlight patients at risk of pressure sores who will require special nursing 
care, including aids, and to prevent the development of pressure sores.
Table 7.6  Waterlow pressure ulcer risk assessment
166
Care of the Elderly
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
High morale 
response
Low morale 
response
Do little things bother you more this 
year?
No
Yes
Do you sometimes worry so much that 
you can’t sleep?
No
Yes
Are you afraid of a lot of things?
No
Yes
Do you get mad more than you used 
to?
No
Yes
Do you take things hard?
No
Yes
Do you get upset easily?
No
Yes
Do things keep getting worse as you 
get older?
No
Yes
Do you have as much pep as you had 
last year?
No
Yes
Do you feel that as you get older you 
are less useful?
No
Yes
As you get older, are things … than 
you thought?
Better
Worse or 
same
Are you as happy now as you were 
when you were younger?
No
Yes
How much do you feel lonely?
Not much
A lot
Do you see enough of your friends and 
relatives?
Yes
No
Do you sometimes feel that life isn’t 
worth living?
No
Yes
Do you have a lot to be sad about?
No
Yes
Is life hard much of the time?
No
Yes
How satisfied are you with your life 
today?
Satisfied
Not satisfied
References
Lawton MP. The Philadelphia Geriatric Center Morale Scale: a revision. 
Journal of Gerontology 1975; 30: 85–89.
Royal College of Physicians. Report of a joint workshop with the Royal 
College of Physicians and the British Geriatrics Society standardised 
assessment scales for elderly people. RCP, 1992, London.
Table 7.7  The Philadelphia Geriatric Center Morale Scale
167
Stroke
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Questions you need to address
	 Is it a stroke?
	 What type of stroke?
	 What part of the brain is affected?
	 What is the prognosis?
	 Are there complications to treat or prevent?
Pathology
	 80–90% of strokes are ischaemic, i.e. due to thrombosis or embolism.
	 10–20% are the result of primary cerebral haemorrhage or aneurysm 
rupture.
Common sources of emboli
	 Carotid artery and aortic arch atheroma
	 Intracardiac sources, e.g. left atrium in AF, left ventricle mural throm­
bus, left-sided heart valves
	 Vertebral artery atheroma or dissection.
Uncommon causes of thrombotic stroke
	 Giant cell arteritis
	 Other vasculitides
	 Haematological disorders, e.g. polycythaemia vera, hyperviscosity 
syndrome.
Typical signs of a stroke
The typical signs of a stroke are listed in Table 7.8.
Features of a stroke involving the brainstem
	 Hemiplegia/quadriplegia
	 Ataxia/vertigo/tinnitus
	 Dysphagia
	 Dysarthria
	 Gaze paresis
Information
Each year in England about 100 000 (1.6–2 per 1000) people have 
a first stroke. Stroke is the most common cause of severe 
disability in adult life. There are 64 000 deaths attributed to first or 
recurrent strokes, which makes it the third commonest cause of 
death in the UK.
Case history
A 78-year-old man presents with a reduced conscious level, GCS 
= 12, weakness of the right arm and leg and inability to speak. His 
daughter thinks that he has had a stroke. She also says that her 
father has been well and is still working 2 days a week.
168
Care of the Elderly
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Anatomical location
Common neurological deficits
Left middle cerebral 
artery
Right-sided weakness involving face and 
arm>leg with expressive, receptive or mixed 
dysphasia.
Right middle cerebral 
artery
Left-sided weakness, face and arm>leg, visual 
and/or sensory neglect or inattention of left 
side, denial of disability (anosognosia).
Lateral medulla 
(posterior inferior 
cerebellar artery and/
or parent vertebral 
artery)
Ipsilateral Horner’s syndrome, Xth nerve palsy 
(due to infarction of nucleus ambiguus), facial 
sensory loss (trigeminal nerve), limb ataxia 
with contralateral spinothalamic sensory loss. 
Typically, patients are vertiginous and unable 
to feed by mouth due (mainly) to failure of 
laryngeal closure during swallowing and 
ineffective coughing. Cervical radiculopathies 
may occur due to involvement of radicular 
branches of the vertebral artery.
Posterior cerebral 
artery
Homonymous hemianopia with variable 
additional deficits due to involvement of 
parietal and/or temporal lobe.
Internal capsule
Motor, sensory or sensorimotor loss, involving 
face, arm and leg to a roughly similar extent. 
There may be profound dysarthria due to 
involvement of corticobulbar fibres but the 
patient should not be dysphasic or have other 
cortical type deficits such as dyslexia or 
dysgraphia.
Bilateral paramedian 
thalamus (30% of the 
population have a 
single common 
arterial stem 
supplying the medial 
aspect of both 
thalami)
Coma or disturbed vigilance at presentation, 
ophthalmoplegia (internal and/or external) 
ataxia and memory impairment. Some 
patients require ventilation.
Carotid artery 
dissection
Ipsilateral Horner’s syndrome due to 
compression of the sympathetic plexus 
around the carotid artery; the same process 
can also affect the lower cranial nerves (Xth 
and XIIth most obvious clinically) in the carotid 
sheath, or the VIth nerve in the cavernous 
sinus. If ipsilateral cerebral infarction follows 
(due to hypoperfusion or embolisation) the 
clinical picture can minic a brainstem event; in 
this way, carotid artery dissection can mimic 
vertebral artery dissection.
Table 7.8  Clinical deficits associated with different vascular 
territories of the brain
169
Stroke
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Temperature control disturbance
	 Altered respiratory pattern.
Is your diagnosis of a stroke correct?
Most strokes are easily diagnosed clinically but errors do occur. Not all 
acute neurological impairments are due to stroke and other conditions can 
be misdiagnosed as stroke.
Unusual symptoms and signs should make you question the diagnosis, 
e.g.:
	 Papilloedema
	 Persistent headache
	 Fluctuating signs
	 Unexplained fever
	 History of trauma to head or neck.
Examples of misdiagnosis
	 Todd’s paresis secondary to epileptic fit
	 Space-occupying lesions:
•	 Primary tumours, metastases
•	 Subdural haematoma
•	 Cerebral abscess
	 Venous sinus thrombosis
	 Carotid or vertebral artery dissection
	 Infections:
•	 Meningitis
•	 Encephalitis
	 Metabolic disturbance:
•	 Hypo-/hyperglycaemia
•	 Hypo-/hypernatraemia
•	 Renal failure
	 Intoxication/overdose:
•	 Alcohol
•	 Drugs, e.g. sedatives, tricyclics. (Note: focal neurological signs are 
common with tricyclic overdose)
	 Hypotension:
•	 Hypovolaemia
•	 Cardiac dysrhythmia
•	 Cardiogenic shock
	 Old neurological deficits, e.g. previous stroke.
Clinical problems associated with a stroke (Table 7.8)
The neurological deficit
• Early management of a stroke
	 Thrombolytic treatment with IV alteplase (tPA) (p. 286) needs to be 
given in < 4 12  h (ideal 90 min) of onset of stroke, haemorrhage having 
been excluded on scanning.
	 Aspirin: 300 mg and clopidrogel 75 mg after CT scanning (to rule out 
haemorrhage), if fibrinolysis is not being used.
	 Hydration and/or feeding: early NG or PEG (percutaneous endoscopic 
gastroscopy) feeding improves outcome in stroke patients who have 
unsafe swallowing (see below).
	 Treatment of hyperglycaemia with insulin regimen initially.
	 Paracetamol for pyrexia: if present.
170
Care of the Elderly
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Prevention of complications:
•	 Chest infection: attention to swallow and chest physiotherapy
•	 DVT. TED stockings have been shown not to be helpful. Prophylactic 
low molecular weight (LMW) heparin (if haemorrhage has been 
ruled out) should be used early
•	 Pressure ulcers
•	 Contractures.
	 Rapid treatment of infection (most commonly chest and urinary tract).
	 Hypertension: BP often rises in acute stroke but usually settles. Lower­
ing of BP is only necessary in the early stage for severe hypertension. 
Persistently raised BP requires treatment for its secondary prevention 
benefits (see below).
	 Support and interventions for the patient and family: stroke is a major 
life event and both the patient and family need information and support.
Dysphagia and aspiration
Can occur in up to 50% of patients at presentation. The ability to swallow 
should be tested by asking the patient to swallow a teaspoon of water and 
not by putting a spatula in the throat. Some patients need further assess­
ment by Speech And Language Therapist (SALT) and investigation by 
videofluoroscopy.
If the patient’s conscious level is impaired, do not assess the swallow 
until it improves.
The condition of the skin
	 Are there any pressure ulcers?
	 Are there any areas of skin at risk?
Bladder function
	 Incontinence can result from the neurological problem or from 
immobility.
	 Catheterisation is required only if the patient is incontinent and there is 
a risk of pressure ulcers.
Remember
The specific symptoms and signs detected will depend on site of 
the lesion. 75% of strokes occur in middle cerebral artery territory; 
15% are in the vertebrobasilar territory.
How would you investigate and treat this patient?
A CT (MR not available) scan was performed approximately 3 h after the 
onset of the stroke. This showed a middle cerebral artery thrombus.
The National Stroke Guidelines state that fibrinolytic therapy be com­
menced; fibrinolytic therapy is indicated in patients with a cerebral infarct 
due to a thrombus which occurred less than 4.5 hours ago (see p. 476). 
Therapy, however, should be given as soon as possible to allow the 
damaged brain to recover. CT scan in first 24 h after an infarct might 
appear normal; if so, it will need to be repeated if no MRI can be per­
formed. Haemorrhage can usually be seen. An MRI scan shows an infarct 
early in the diagnosis.
171
Stroke
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Investigations
•	 FBCs
•	 U&Es
•	 Random blood glucose
•	 ESR
•	 ECG
•	 CXR
•	 CT or MRI scan of brain
Major risk factors for stroke
	 Smoking
	 Hypertension
	 Peripheral vascular disease
	 Diabetes
	 AF
	 Hypercholesterolaemia
	 Previous stroke
	 Coronary artery disease.
Remember
Poor prognostic signs in stroke are:
•	 Reduced conscious level on admission
•	 Gaze paresis
•	 Early and persisting urinary incontinence
•	 Sensory inattention
•	 Pre-existing disability
•	 Previous cognitive impairment.
Further management – rehabilitation
	 Physiotherapy 
to 
maximise 
functional 
recovery 
and 
prevent 
contractures.
	 Occupational therapy for functional assessment, aids and adaptations.
	 Speech and Language Therapist (SALT) for assessment and manage­
ment of speech and swallowing problems.
	 Continuing medical review.
Post-stroke care and rehabilitation in stroke units has been shown to 
reduce mortality and early disability.
Secondary prevention after stroke
	 Hypertension: persisting at 28 days after stroke should be treated 
according to British Hypertension Society Guidelines (p. 317).
	 Anti-platelet agents: aspirin (75–150 mg daily) and clopidogrel 75 mg 
daily should be started. Dipyradamole MR (200 mg) is used if clopidog­
rel 75 mg daily is contraindicated or not tolerated.
	 Anti-coagulation in patients with ischaemic stroke who make a reason­
able recovery and have AF, mitral valve disease, prosthetic heart valve 
or within 3 months of myocardial infarction.
172
Care of the Elderly
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Carotid endarterectomy if carotid stenosis of 70–90% is present in 
patients who are not severely disabled by their stroke. Early investiga­
tion and surgery should be performed within one week (p. 478).
	 Statins for those with cholesterol > 3.5 mmol/L.
	 Stop smoking – refer to anti-smoking clinic.
• Progress.  This 78-year-old man improved a few hours after the 
fibrolytic therapy. Two days later he was able to stand with help. 
With physiotherapy and speech therapy he became fully ambulant 
in 6 days and his speech was improving. At assessment, 3 months 
later, he was living an independent life.
Further reading
Hughes T. Stroke on the acute medical take. Clin Med 2011; 10: 68–72.
Langhorne P, Bernhardt J, Kwakkel G. Stroke Care 2. Lancet 2011; 377: 
1693–1702.
Rothwell PM, Algra A, Amarenco P. Stroke Care 1. Lancet 2011; 377: 
1681–1692.
www.dh.gov.uk/en/healthcare/stroke
www.rcplondon.ac.uk/stroke
HEART DISEASE IN THE ELDERLY
Case history
A 78-year-old man with long-standing atrial fibrillation was 
admitted with tiredness and breathlessness. He also complained 
of indigestion and recent falls.
Examination revealed a radial pulse of 96, apical rate 110 
irregular, a raised JVP, swollen ankles and crackles up to both 
lung mid-zones.
He was taking digoxin 125 µg daily and aspirin 75 mg daily.
What investigations would you do?
	 FBC, UE, LFTs, TFT, troponins
	 ECG
	 CXR.
Investigations revealed AF with no R wave progression on his ECG, sug­
gesting a possible acute myocardial infarct.
His CXR showed pulmonary oedema (Fig 7.2a). The FBC showed an Hb 
of 98 g/L with an MCV of 70 fL, suggesting an iron deficiency anaemia, 
possibly related to his aspirin intake.
Learning points
	 Cardiac failure in the elderly may present with non-specific symptoms 
such as tiredness and falls.
	 Aspirin, even at low dose, can be associated with occult GI blood loss.
	 Always check compliance in older people, especially if patient thinks 
that medication is not effective.
	 Benefits have been shown for anti-coagulation of elderly patients in AF 
up to age 85, but contraindications (e.g. falls or gastrointestinal 
173
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Heart disease in the elderly
a
b
Figure 7.2  A pair of chest X-rays taken from a patient before (a) and after 
(b) treatment of acute pulmonary oedema. The CXR taken when the oedema 
was present demonstrates hilar haziness, Kerley B lines, upper lobe venous 
engorgement and fluid in the right horizontal interlobar fissure. These 
abnormalities are resolved on the film taken after successful treatment. 
haemorrhage) are more common in this population. In this case the 
microcytic anaemia (see p. 79) would need to be investigated before 
starting warfarin.
	 Risks of anti-coagulation in the over 85s are high and no study has 
shown a benefit in this age group.
	 ACE inhibitors should be used in the elderly, starting with a low dose, 
and renal function closely monitored due to increased risk of renal 
impairment (p. 236).
Acute MI
The management principles of heart disease in the elderly are the same as 
those in young people, with a few exceptions:
Age alone is not a contraindication to thrombolysis/percutaneous coro­
nary intervention in acute MI; in fact the greatest benefits are seen in older 
patients. However, other co-morbidities causing contraindications are 
more common in older people.
Acute MI may present silently (with no pain) more commonly in the 
elderly.
Treatment
He was given diuretic therapy with furosemide 40 mg orally daily. This 
helped his breathlessness and his ankles became less swollen. His CXR 
improved (Fig. 7.2b). As his presentation was over a few days he was 
not given fibrinolytic therapy. He was started on an ACE inhibitor with 
enalapril 2.5 mg.
Endoscopy was performed and he was found to have gastric and 
duodenal erosions due to his aspirin intake. The aspirin was stopped. 
Colonoscopy showed no lesion.
• Progress.  Three weeks later he was feeling much better. He was 
given iron therapy. He was started on warfarin anti-coagulation.
174
Care of the Elderly
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
TRANSIENT ISCHAEMIC ATTACK
This is a transient episode of neurological dysfunction caused by focal 
brain, spinal cord or retinal ischaemia without acute infarction. The arbi­
trary time of <24 hours is no longer used; the criteria depend on having 
no demonstrable lesion.
Case history
A 68-year-old man presents to the A&E with weakness of the right 
arm and leg, expressive dysphasia and a facial palsy. While being 
examined his symptoms and signs start to improve and have 
resolved by the time he returns from the X-ray department. A 
diagnosis of a transient ischaemic attack (TIA) is made.
Investigations
•	 FBC
•	 ESR
•	 U&Es
•	 Blood sugar
•	 Cholesterol
•	 ECG/24-h tape in selected patients
•	 CXR
•	 CT head
•	 Echocardiogram in patients with suspected valvular disease or 
mural thrombus
•	 Carotid duplex ultrasonography in patients with carotid territory 
TIAs
What points do you need to ascertain in the history?
	 Previous similar episodes, especially recently
	 Previous episodes of amaurosis fugax (sudden transient loss of vision 
in one eye)
	 History of palpitations, hypertension, diabetes, high cholesterol or 
stroke
	 Smoking history
	 Current and previous medication
	 Functional status: mental and physical.
What are the major aspects of the examination?
	 The neurological examination
	 BP
	 Pulse rate and rhythm
	 Presence of cardiac murmurs, carotid bruits
	 Papilloedema, visual field deficit, signs of retinal emboli.
175
Hypothermia
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Should you admit this patient?
Updated National Stroke guidelines for the UK recommend that a patient 
with a TIA should be admitted to hospital if he/she cannot be assessed 
and investigated in a neurovascular clinic within 7 days of TIA.
Other reasons for admission:
	 Doubt over diagnosis, e.g. need to exclude space-occupying lesion.
	 Multiple TIAs in short time: these patients should also be fast-tracked 
to carotid endarterectomy.
	 Identification of pathology requiring immediate intervention, e.g. 
cardiac arrhythmia.
	 Background disability with poor social circumstances.
How would you manage a case of TIA?
	 Aspirin 75–150 mg per day and clopidogrel 75 mg.
	 Anti-coagulation with warfarin in patients with atrial fibrillation.
	 Statins for those with hypercholesterolaemia (cholesterol > 3.5 mmol/L).
	 Treatment of risk factors, e.g. hypertension.
	 Stop smoking.
	 Advice not to drive for 1 month following the event.
Further management – carotid endarterectomy 
(see also p. 478)
Carotid endarterectomy is recommended for patients with TIAs and minor 
strokes who have 70–90% stenosis of the relevant carotid artery and who 
are otherwise fit, with no major persisting disability.
Investigation and treatment should be performed within 1 week. MRI 
angiography is required prior to surgery. Carotid endarterectomy has a 
1–2% perioperative stroke risk in the most experienced hands but reduces 
the incidence of stroke by 75% over the next 2–3 years.
The ABCD2 score can help to stratify stroke risk in the first 2 days (see 
p. 478).
Note: asymptomatic carotid stenosis is associated with a lower stroke 
risk and benefit from surgery is not proven.
Prognosis after untreated TIA over 4 years
	 25% dead
	 25% stroke
	 10% MI.
• Progress.  This man had a carotid endarterectomy performed 6 days 
after his admission to hospital. He made a good recovery and at 
review at 6 months he was still taking treatment for stroke prevention 
and had started on an exercise programme.
HYPOTHERMIA
Information
Hypothermia is defined as core body temperature of < 35°C. It is 
associated with many clinical conditions and in most patients 
aetiology is multifactorial.
176
Care of the Elderly
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Case history
An 89-year-old female is found lying on the floor by her carer. On 
arrival at the A&E department she is noted to be confused and 
have a rectal temperature of 34°C.
Investigations
•	 FBC
•	 U&Es
•	 Glucose
•	 Amylase
•	 LFTs
•	 Calcium
•	 Arterial blood gases
•	 ECG
•	 CXR
•	 Thyroid function tests
Aetiological factors
	 Exposure to cold
	 Impaired thermoregulation
	 Impaired shivering thermogenesis
	 Low metabolic heat production
	 Impaired temperature perception
	 Drugs, e.g. phenothiazines, hypnotics, alcohol
	 Hypothyroidism
	 Intercurrent illness.
Clinical features
These vary with the degree of hypothermia. Whereas those with a core 
temperature of 33–34°C can be confused and have slow cerebration, those 
with a temperature of 30°C are more likely to be drowsy and have mus­
cular stiffness.
Some patients with hypothermia have features such as slow relaxing 
reflexes, which are suggestive of hypothyroidism.
The electrocardiograph can show changes such as sinus bradycardia, 
slow AF, prolonged PR interval, ‘J’ waves (commonly seen in leads V3-V4) 
(Fig. 7.3).
Complications of hypothermia include pancreatitis, oliguria, cardiac 
arrhythmias 
(particularly 
during 
re-warming) 
and 
aspiration 
pneumonia.
This patient was found to be grossly hypothyroid with a TSH of 14.3 mU/L 
and a T4 of 4 pmol/L.
How would you manage this patient?
This patient was managed as follows:
	 Nursed with space blanket in a warm room (allow temperature to rise 
by 0.5°C/h).
177
Pressure ulcers
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
J
Figure 7.3  ECG showing J waves. 
	 Oxygen: remember that patients with COPD might require 24% oxygen.
	 IV fluids (through blood warmer).
	 Her severe hypothyroidism was treated with triiodothyronine 5–10 µg 
slowly IV 12-hourly.
A severely hypothermic patient will require admission to ITU and require 
positive pressure ventilation, CVP line, and ECG monitoring may be 
necessary.
• Progress.  This woman made a slow but steady recovery and was 
discharged home on levothyroxine 125 µg daily with a follow-up 
appointment.
Further reading
Mallet ML. Pathophysiology of accidental hypothermia. Quarterly Journal 
of Medicine 2002; 95: 775–785.
PRESSURE ULCERS
Pressure ulcers are common. Ill elderly people are most at risk of develop­
ing pressure ulcers. The reported prevalence rates vary widely – on 
average 5–10% of this group.
Case history
A 78-year-old woman with a right hemiplegia from a previous 
stroke was brought to A&E having fallen at home. She had been 
on the floor for at least 24 h because she was unable to get up.
On examination she was conscious and aware of her 
surroundings. There were no specific abnormalities on physical 
examination, apart from evidence of a right hemiparesis. When 
examining her you notice a dusky area over the right hip overlying 
the greater trochanter.
Risk factors for developing pressure ulcers
	 Low body weight/excessive body weight
	 Poor nutritional state
	 Motor deficit/immobility
	 Sensory deficit
	 Presence of intercurrent illness
	 Incontinence: bladder/bowel
	 Use of certain medication, e.g. long-term prednisolone, sedatives and 
analgesics, which reduce sensation and hence stimulation to move.
178
Care of the Elderly
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Other patients at special risk
	 Undergoing surgery particularly orthopaedic surgery
	 With neurological disease
	 With spinal cord injury including cord compression
	 Having palliative care.
Why do pressure ulcers occur?
Pressure greater than the mean capillary pressure (25–32 mmHg) will 
occlude blood vessels and lead to anoxia of the skin. Hard surfaces can 
generate pressures greater than 100 mmHg, therefore the damage to the 
skin results from the pressure applied and the length of time exposed to 
the pressure. In addition to pressure, shearing force is another significant 
factor.
Pressure ulcers can be graded into superficial (grades 1 and 2) and deep 
(grades 3 and 4).
Clinical assessment
Document pressure ulcers fully:
	 The site, size and grade of pressure ulcer
	 The condition of the surrounding skin
	 The presence/absence of infection
	 Photography is a good method of recording pressure ulcers and moni­
toring change.
General examination of the patient with special regard to:
	 Nutritional state including body weight
	 Full neurological examination
	 Abdominal examination, especially bladder and bowel.
How would you investigate?
Investigations will be directed by the physical examination, but special 
attention should be paid to those in the Investigations box.
Investigations
•	 FBC: presence of anaemia will delay wound healing
•	 Albumin: marker of nutrition, low albumin will delay wound 
healing
•	 Blood sugar: hyperglycaemia delays healing
•	 Wound swabs for culture and sensitivity
•	 Blood cultures if concern about septicaemia
•	 If the wound is deep, overlies a bony prominence and has been 
present for some time, X-ray of the underlying bone should be 
performed to rule out osteomyelitis
How would you manage pressure ulcers?
Prevention is definitely better than cure and all at-risk patients require 
immediate assessment.
179
Urinary tract infection and incontinence
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Remember
•	 Pressure ulcers can develop in 1–2 h
•	 Beware of leaving patients on hard A&E trolleys or X-ray tables 
for too long.
	 Relief of pressure with appropriate support mattress and/or cushion 
for chair:
•	 Low-risk patients: a soft overlay to the mattress may be adequate
•	 High-risk patients: an alternating pressure support system, e.g. 
special pressure-relieving mattresses.
	 Appropriate dressings for wounds. Note: dry dressings should not be 
used on moist wounds. Examples of dressings include:
•	 Hydrocolloid for superficial granulating wounds
•	 Alginates for exuding or bleeding wounds.
	 Treatment of infection (cellulitis or associated septicaemia) when 
present, with appropriate systemic antibiotics.
	 General management of the patient:
•	 Pain relief
•	 Treatment of medical conditions, including anaemia
•	 Review of drug treatment: NSAIDs and steroids delay wound 
healing
•	 Review of nutrition: including use of supplements, including vitamin 
C and zinc
•	 Management of incontinence.
	 Severe pressure ulcers often require surgical debridement and skin 
grafting by plastic surgeons, when non-infected.
Most hospitals have tissue viability specialist nurses to advise on preven­
tion and treatment of pressure ulcers. For quantification of risk, these 
nurses can use the Waterlow score or Norton Scale (see p. 165).
• Progress.  This patient was admitted to MAU and the tissue viability 
nurse was contacted to assess her pressure areas. However, despite 
immediate treatment she developed a pressure ulcer over her right 
hip.
Further reading
National Institute for Clinical Excellence (NICE) 2001 Pressure ulcer risk 
assessment and prevention. NICE, London.
Reddy M, Gill SS, Rochon PA. Preventing pressure ulcers; a systematic 
review. JAMA 2006; 296: 974–984.
URINARY TRACT INFECTION AND INCONTINENCE
Case history
An 80-year-old woman with mild dementia presented with 24 h of 
increasing confusion and drowsiness. She had a 3-day history of 
urinary incontinence and diarrhoea. She was taking co-dydramol 
for arthritis.
Continued
180
Care of the Elderly
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Investigations
•	 Stix testing positive for both leucocytes and nitrites is highly 
specific and sensitive for infection: blood and protein Stix are 
much less useful. Note: bacteriuria without symptoms (urgency, 
frequency, dysuria or systemic symptoms) is common in 
hospitalised/institutionalised older people and should not be 
treated, even if bacterial count is > 105
•	 In–out catheterisation can be useful for obtaining specimens or 
assessing residual volumes. However, catheterisation should 
not be used as a treatment for incontinence
•	 FBC
•	 Blood cultures
•	 U&Es
•	 Creatinine (eGFR)
•	 AXR for evidence of constipation
•	 Consider further assessment of incontinence if it doesn’t settle 
on treatment of infection
Particular points to note in the history
	 Urinary tract infection in the elderly can present with non-specific 
symptoms such as confusion, drowsiness or falls.
	 Recurrent UTIs should be investigated (> 3 in a woman, > 1 in a man) 
with renal tract ultrasound, including assessment of post-micturition 
bladder volume.
	 New urge incontinence may be precipitated by infection leading to an 
unstable bladder.
	 Infection can be precipitated by obstruction: most commonly caused by 
constipation or prostatic hypertrophy.
	 Drug history for precipitating causes: drugs causing constipation, diu­
retics, sedatives.
Examination of this patient included:
	 Full physical examination for coexisting causes of confusion, e.g. chest 
infection.
	 Rectal examination – to assess for constipation/overflow (prostatic 
enlargement in men).
	 Neurological examination to exclude neurological causes of urinary 
retention and constipation.
Case history (continued)
Examination revealed a woman with confusion, with no 
knowledge of her surroundings or time of day. Her GCS score was 
12. Examination of her abdomen was normal but rectal 
examination showed constipation with faecal impaction and 
overflow diarrhoea. A urine sample was offensive, and positive to 
Stix testing for nitrites, leucocytes, blood and protein.
181
Arteritis
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
How would you treat this patient?
	 Treat infection with oral antibiotics.
•	 Trimethoprim 200 mg × 2 for 3–5 days is a good first line treatment. 
Only use parenteral antibiotics if the patient is very ill or vomiting.
	 Treat constipation: enemas and laxatives (see p. 36). Stop co-dydramol. 
Repeat residual volumes after constipation is treated as this patient’s 
constipation was likely to be due to the codeine in co-dydramol. The 
latter was replaced by paracetamol.
• Progress.  This patient’s confusion and drowsiness improved with 
successful treatment of her UTI. Her faecal impaction was relieved 
by the enemas but she is still inclined to constipation and this is 
treated symptomatically with Magrols.
Further reading
Elements of provisional discharge plan. Clinical Medicine 2011, 80.
ARTERITIS
Case history
An 82-year-old widower was admitted with left-sided temporal 
headache of 3 days’ duration. He is known to have Type 2 
diabetes (on insulin), visual impairment due to macular 
degeneration, hypertension and an old left hemiparesis. He lives 
alone in a house and has one son who lives far away.
Medical assessment
On examination he had signs of an old left hemiparesis and a peripheral 
neuropathy (probably due to longstanding diabetes) and visual impair­
ment. His BP was 150/80 on losartan therapy. In addition, it was noted 
that the left temporal artery was pulsatile but tender.
Investigations revealed a significantly elevated ESR (> 100 mm in 1 h).
A clinical diagnosis of temporal arteritis (see p. 212) was made. His 
response to steroids was very good, although he remained tired and 
slightly more frail than previously
How would you organise his discharge?
The patient needs a multidisciplinary assessment before his discharge to 
ensure his safety. His son should also be contacted, with the patient’s 
permission.
General points for discharge planning
Discharge planning of an elderly person should start as early as possible 
after admission. Once the person’s medical problems have been accurately 
diagnosed and treated, his/her potential for returning home should be 
assessed by a multidisciplinary team (MDT) of professionals, taking into 
account the elderly person’s views.
182
Care of the Elderly
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Remember
A competent adult has a right to decide whether he or she wishes 
to go home, even if this decision is against the advice offered by 
member(s) of the multidisciplinary team (MDT).
Case history
An 80-year-old man presents with a hot, painful, swollen knee 
joint. He takes a thiazide diuretic for hypertension and has recently 
had a chest infection treated by his GP.
The assessment by MDT includes:
	 Assessment by a physiotherapist to assess his/her mobility, transfers 
and ability to climb stairs.
	 Assessment by an occupational therapist to assess independence and 
safety in activities of daily living, kitchen assessment and/or a home 
visit.
	 Social work assessment that will take into account the assessments of 
other professionals to quantify his/her needs for care on discharge.
	 Assessment by a speech and language therapist, dietitian or a psycholo­
gist in some cases.
	 Referral to a district nurse, e.g. for treatment of leg ulcers, monitoring 
of diabetic control, monitoring of medication.
	 Discussion with GP about on-going medical care.
Following discharge it might be possible to continue further rehabilitation 
or monitoring of medical or nursing care in a day-hospital setting.
• Progress.  This patient was keen to go home, even though he was 
still frail. He required full support at home with community nurses 
managing his insulin therapy. His headaches disappeared on his 
steroid therapy which was reduced, making his diabetes easier to 
manage. He continues to improve.
ACUTE HOT JOINT
What are the possible causes?
	 Acute gout (see p. 209).
	 Acute pseudo-gout (pyrophosphate arthropathy) (see p. 211).
	 Septic arthritis (see p. 219)
	 Acute flare-up of chronic arthritis, e.g. rheumatoid arthritis (RA; see 
p. 200).
	 Traumatic haemarthrosis with fracture of patella or tibial plateau
	 Ruptured Baker’s cyst in osteoarthritis (see p. 191).
Particular points you should elicit in the history
	 Trauma or injury: entry for infection
	 Drug history: particularly diuretic
	 Known arthritis or previous episodes, e.g. of gout
	 History of intercurrent illness.
183
Acute hot joint
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
On examination you should look for:
	 Temperature, pulse: systemic signs of infection/inflammation
	 Joint colour, temperature and tenderness
	 Evidence of trauma
	 Other joint disease, including evidence of RA or osteoarthritis (OA).
Joint fluid should be sent for culture, cell count and examination under 
polarised light. Urate crystals are distinguished by being negatively bire­
fringent. Calcium pyrophosphate consists of weakly positively birefrin­
gent rhomboidal crystals.
Investigations
•	 X-ray joint
•	 Tap joint under sterile conditions: fluid for culture, crystal 
detection and cell count
•	 Blood cultures
•	 FBC for WCC and ESR
•	 Serum uric acid
•	 Rheumatoid factor, CCP and autoantibody screen if appropriate
How would you manage this patient?
This patient’s serum uric acid is in the high range 700 µmol/L which is 
compatible with gout.
His joint aspiration showed a cloudy viscous fluid containing 
4020 WCC/mm3 and negative birefringent needle shaped crystals.
• Diagnosis.  Gout.
Treatment
There are three acute options:
	 An NSAID: e.g. ibuprofen 400 mg × 3 daily or diclofenac with misopr­
ostol one tablet × 3 daily (Misoprostol is a cytoprotective agent to the 
gastric mucosa).
	 Colchicine (rarely used only because it causes diarrhoea): 1 mg initially, 
0.5 mg every 2 h until attack subsides or 0.5 mg × 2 daily for 5 days if 
symptoms are not severe.
	 Intra-articular corticosteroids: injection with methylprednisolone 40 mg 
with 1 mL of 1% lidocaine.
Allopurinol should not be used acutely. Prophylactically, it is started at least 
4 weeks after the acute attack has settled to prevent further attacks of gout.
• Progress.  This man’s knee became less painful and the swelling 
settled after 1 week’s NSAID therapy. His thiazide diuretic was 
stopped and replaced with losartan. He has had no further attacks of 
gout.
Further reading
Neogi T. Gout. NEJM 2011; 364: 443–452.
184
Care of the Elderly
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Case history
An 80-year-old man with a history of hypertension presents with a 
fall. He has had numerous falls recently and on questioning said 
he had slowed down generally.
You notice immediately a tremor in his left arm, lack of facial 
expression and a monotonous voice. The diagnosis is Parkinson’s 
disease (PD).
Remember
•	 The disease is often asymmetrical at presentation
•	 Depression is a common association, often missed.
PARKINSON’S DISEASE
Features of PD
	 Akinesia/bradykinesia:
•	 Poor initiation of movement
•	 Slowing of repetitive movements
•	 Fatigue.
	 Rigidity:
•	 Lead pipe
•	 And/or cogwheel (if tremor is present).
	 Tremor: 70% of patients present with tremor, usually unilateral:
•	 Rest tremor
•	 3–7 Hz
•	 Absent in 30% at presentation.
	 Postural instability is usually a late feature of idiopathic PD.
	 Response to L-dopa suggests idiopathic PD.
Clinical diagnosis of PD
PD is a clinical diagnosis; there are no diagnostic tests. Diagnosis requires 
two cardinal features, including:
	 Akinesia/bradykinesia of the upper body
	 Asymmetrical onset with resting tremor
	 Clear response to levadopa.
What is the differential diagnosis of PD?
	 Essential tremor:
•	 Isolated tremor, can affect the head (Yes/Yes or No/No pattern)
•	 Becomes more prominent with increasing age
•	 Autosomal dominant inheritance
•	 Responds to alcohol, beta blockers.
	 Arteriosclerotic parkinsonism:
•	 History of cerebrovascular disease and hypertension common
•	 Wide-based, short stepped gait: marche à petit pas
•	 Upper part of body not affected
•	 Limited/transient response to L-dopa.
185
Parkinson’s disease
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Drug-induced parkinsonism:
•	 Anti-psychotic drugs, especially depot preparations
•	 Metoclopramide: acute.
	 Rarer causes of parkinsonism:
•	 Multiple system atrophy, Shy–Drager parkinsonism: autonomic 
failure and dementia
•	 Steele–Richardson–Olszewski parkinsonism: with loss of voluntary 
conjugate deviation of gaze, and pseudobulbar dysarthria.
How would you manage this patient?
	 This patient was started on L-dopa as first-line treatment (e.g. 
Co-beneldopa 62.5 mg × 2 daily) as it is useful in the elderly. Dose 
requires titration depending on improvement and side effects of medi­
cation, e.g. postural hypotension, nausea, hallucinations.
	 Synthetic dopamine agonists (Ropinirole, Pramipexole) are less effective 
but might be useful in early disease. Hallucinations and somnolence are 
common side effects but they are tolerated by approximately 46% of 
very elderly patients. They may need to be used with domperidone to 
avoid gastrointestinal side effects. Other dopamine agonists have ergot 
side effects and are poorly tolerated by the elderly.
	 Monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI-B): selegiline – avoid in patients 
with postural hypotension or hallucinations.
	 Catechol-O-methyl transferase inhibitor (COMT) inhibitors (e.g. tolca­
pone, entacapone) are used as adjuncts to L-dopa.
	 Apomorphine SC infusion is used in specialist centres.
	 The frequency of his falls improved with PD therapy but nevertheless, 
exercise and balance training was started. He was referred to an 
MDT to assess need for walking aids and changes in the home 
environment.
• Progress.  The patient was commenced on Co-beneldopa 62.5 mg × 
2 daily and was able to return home with community support.
Further reading
Lees AJ, Hardy J, Revesz T. Parkinson’s disease. Lancet 2009; 373: 
2055–2066.
Remember
You must question a diagnosis of PD if there is:
•	 Poor response to L-dopa
•	 Early instability
•	 Pyramidal or cerebellar signs
•	 Early autonomic failure, e.g. postural hypotension, incontinence
•	 Dementia early in course of disease
•	 Voluntary downward gaze palsy.
186
Care of the Elderly
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
DRUG TREATMENT IN OLDER PEOPLE/DRUG 
TREATMENT AS A CAUSE OF ILLNESS AND 
ADMISSION TO HOSPITAL
Individuals over the age of 65 make up approximately 18% of the popula­
tion but represent 25–30% of drug expenditure. Approximately 87% of the 
elderly take one prescribed medication and one-third of this group take 
three or more drugs.
Age-associated increases in the incidence of adverse reactions have been 
well described for certain groups of drugs, e.g. benzodiazepines.
The most frequently used classes are cardiovascular drugs, analgesics, 
gastrointestinal preparations and sedatives (Table 7.9).
DRUGS AS A CAUSE OF ILLNESS AND DELAYED 
DISCHARGE
Drug
Adverse effects
Benzodiazepines
Sedation, drowsiness, confusion, ataxia
Non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory 
drugs
Gastric erosions, fluid retention, renal 
impairment and drug interaction, e.g. diuretics
Opiates
Sedation, confusion, constipation
Antimuscarinic
Urinary retention, glaucoma
Antiarrhythmics
Confusion, urinary retention, thyroid problems
Antipsychotics
Confusion, sedation, tardive dyskinesia, 
malignant hyperthermia
Diuretics
Dehydration, hyponatraemia, hypo- or 
hyperkalaemia, postural hypotension, renal 
impairment, gout
Antibiotics
Renal failure, diarrhoea, auditory complications
Table 7.9  Drugs that are more likely to produce adverse effects in 
the elderly
Case history (1)
A 75-year-old woman was admitted to MAU with a severe cough 
and purulent sputum. She was known to have COPD and this was 
thought to be an infective exacerbation.
On examination she was tachypnoeic but not cyanosed. 
Examination of her chest showed diffuse wheeze with some basal 
crackles. Her oxygen saturation was 92%.
She was started on amoxicillin 500 mg × 3 a day, and 
erythromycin 500 mg × 4 a day, in addition to nebulised 
salbutamol and ipratropium, with a good response.
A few days later she developed watery diarrhoea, which was 
bad enough to require IV fluids. Her stool analysis was positive for 
187
Drugs as a cause of illness and delayed discharge
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Case history (2)
A 71-year-old woman was admitted with malaise, fatigue, weight 
loss and generally feeling unwell.
On examination she looked anxious, underweight and 
tremulous with a tachycardia.
In the past she had suffered from atrial fibrillation and was 
taking amiodarone 200 mg once daily.
Investigations revealed thyrotoxicosis (thought to be due to 
amiodarone) with undetectable TSH < 0.05 mU/L and very high 
free T3 10 pmol/L and T4 35 pmol/L.
The amiodarone was stopped and her cardiologist contacted 
about alternative therapy for her AF (p. 275). She was started on 
anti-thyroid therapy (carbimazole 10 mg × 3 daily) and steroids 
(prednisolone 40 mg once daily). Her response was slow and she 
remained an inpatient for 2 weeks before her condition was 
brought under control. She was seen in the Endocrine Clinic for 
dose adjustment of her carbimazole.
Case history (1) (continued)
Clostridium difficile toxin (see p. 9). She was prescribed a 10-day 
course of metronidazole 400 mg × 3 a day. Apart from transient 
nausea, she made a good recovery from her diarrhoea and was 
able to go home after 6 days.
Case history (3)
A 79-year-old woman with a background of Type 2 diabetes and 
ischaemic heart disease was admitted to MAU with uncontrolled 
diabetes and progressive shortness of breath. She was taking 
gliclazide 160 mg × 2 a day and co-amilofruse (5 mg amiloride, 
40 mg furosemide) one tablet in the morning. A few weeks prior to 
admission she complained of back pain and her doctor prescribed 
diclofenac 50 mg × 3 a day (an NSAID).
On examination she was in acute left ventricular failure with a 
tachycardia, raised venous pressure, gallop rhythm and basal 
crackles. She was treated acutely with oxygen, IV furosemide 
50 mg and buccal glyceryl trinitrate 2 mg repeated every 20 
minutes. There was no evidence of an acute ischaemic episode or 
chest infection.
• Progress.  The NSAID was stopped. The dose of furosemide was 
doubled to 80 mg daily with 2.5 mg of amiloride. Her symptoms 
settled gradually over the next few days and her furosemide was then 
reduced without recurrence of her LVF. Her diabetes is well-
controlled on gliclazide with a HbA1c of 6.5% (48 mmol/mol).
188
Care of the Elderly
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
DO NOT ATTEMPT RESUSCITATION (DNAR) 
DECISION-MAKING
Case history (2)
A 75-year-old woman presents with hypercalcaemia secondary to 
disseminated lung carcinoma. You treat her hypercalcaemia 
aggressively. A nurse asks whether the patient should be recorded 
for resuscitation or not.
Case history (1)
A fit, elderly, 72-year-old man presents with an acute myocardial 
infarct. If he has a cardiac arrest would you resuscitate him?
Remember
NSAIDS cause fluid retention, and can precipitate heart failure in 
susceptible individuals (e.g. patients with diabetes, hypertension or 
renal failure).
What would you say?
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) is an everyday practice in most hos­
pitals. Despite the success in selected patients there is a consensus that CPR 
might be inappropriate (e.g. in terminal illness) or ineffective (e.g. very 
severe pneumonia) in some patients. Age alone is not a contraindication 
to CPR.
All decisions should be made by senior medical staff after discussion 
with a patient (if competent), other members of the team and family/carers 
(if patient lacks mental capacity).
What principles might guide you to decide 
to withhold CPR?
	 Likely effectiveness of CPR: only 6–15% of patients who undergo CPR 
leave hospital alive. A number of factors predict a poor outcome from 
CPR attempts. These include:
•	 Pneumonia
•	 Chronic kidney disease
•	 Anaemia (< 90 g/L)
•	 A high level of dependency including housebound lifestyle
•	 More than two acute medical conditions.
	 Patient’s wishes: these can be ascertained in advance or from advance 
directives and living wills. Mentally competent patients who express 
their wishes on treatment, including CPR, must have those wishes 
respected. The guidance also recommends that a patient can refuse to 
accept a DNAR (do not attempt resuscitation) order made by a clinician 
189
Do not attempt resuscitation (DNAR) decision-making
7 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
and that, under the Human Rights Act (in HR), doctors must respect 
this decision and record the change. However, if a patient is not men­
tally competent to decide whether to accept CPR, the doctor must 
consult family/carers and/or the family doctor to ascertain what the 
patient’s wishes would have been. He/she then uses this information 
to ‘act in the patient’s best interest’. Note: there is no provision in law 
in England and Wales for relatives to make medical decisions, including 
CPR, on behalf of an adult.
	 Quality of life: this is the most difficult aspect to address. It includes 
quality of life as it is now and also after a CPR attempt, which might be 
worse. Difficulties arise because it involves professionals making value 
judgements about other people’s lives.
• Case 1.  This man should be resuscitated. Many patients recover 
from a myocardial infarction, even if elderly.
• Case 2.  This woman should have a DNAR note in her clinical 
records as she is suffering from disseminated cancer.
Further reading
www.resus.org.uk
General further reading
www.bgs.org.uk. British Geriatric Society.
www.effectiveolderpeoplecare.org. Cochrane evidence for best practice in 
the care of frail elderly people.
Remember
•	 If no DNAR decision is documented: the patient is for 
resuscitation
•	 Any DNAR decision made should be communicated to all 
members of the healthcare team involved with the patient
•	 DNAR decisions should be reviewed if appropriate (i.e. not 
necessarily in terminal illness).
This page intentionally left blank
191
191
Rheumatology 8 
OSTEOARTHRITIS (OA)
Case history
A 75-year-old woman attends the A&E department with pain in the 
left groin. The pain has been present for several months but she 
has not sought medical advice until now. The pain is now so 
severe that she is unable to walk more than a few yards and it is 
keeping her awake at night. She lives alone and is unable to 
manage either her pain or to cope alone at home.
On examination movements at the left hip were decreased 
compared to the right and movement was painful, compatible with 
OA of the hip.
The SHO in A&E has arranged for a pelvis X-ray, which shows 
OA of the left hip. You are asked to see her for possible 
admission.
Describe the main radiological features of OA of the hip
The radiograph shows joint space narrowing, periarticular sclerosis, cyst 
formation and osteophytes. These are the four classic features of osteoar­
thritis (Fig. 8.1).
How would you assess this patient?
The long-standing history suggests a gradual onset of the pain. A short 
history or systemic symptoms might have indicated joint sepsis or a patho­
logical fracture.
The main site of the pain – especially in the left groin radiating into the 
left thigh/knee – indicates that the hip is the source of the pain. Beware 
referred pain either from the lumbar spine (common) or the knee (less 
common).
A full musculoskeletal examination is needed. The GALS (Gait, Arms, 
Leg, Spine) is a useful screen (Doherty et al., 1992) (Fig. 8.2).
Diagnostic clues
Look for Heberden’s (distal interphalangeal joints)/Bouchard’s (proximal) 
nodes, ‘square’ hands, painful thumb, carpometacarpal joints that indicate 
primary nodal OA. Figure 8.3 shows the distributions of generalised OA 
and pyrophosphate arthropathy.
Examine
	 Other joints for evidence of inflammatory arthritis, e.g. psoriatic arthri­
tis, rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
192
Rheumatology
8 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Figure 8.1  Severe osteoarthritis of the hip. 
Figure 8.2  Musculoskeletal examination: gait, arms, leg, spine. 
Watch the patient walk
away and then turn back
towards you
193
Osteoarthritis (OA)
8 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Hands down, hands up, palms open
Make a fist
Touch each finger
tip to the thumb
Hands in front and
bend at elbows
Squeeze gently
across MCP joints
Hands behind
your head,
elbow back
Figure 8.2, cont’d
194
Rheumatology
8 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Flex knee and hip to 90˚
and internally rotate
Squeeze gently
across MT joints
Try and touch
your toes
Try and touch each ear to your shoulder
Figure 8.2, cont’d
195
Osteoarthritis (OA)
8 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Lumbar spine for referred pain.
	 Hips:
•	 Ask patient to walk to assess gait
•	 Measure leg lengths
•	 Assess range of all movements fully and compare with right hip. 
Examine from behind to look for pelvic tilt and perform Trendelen­
burg’s test.
What points would you consider when deciding 
if admission is appropriate?
Full general medical examination is essential because co-morbid condi­
tions in this age group are common. For example, in a patient with 
Generalised OA
more commonly affected
less commonly affected
Pyrophosphate
arthropathy
Figure 8.3  Generalised nodal OA and pyrophosphate arthropathy. 
196
Rheumatology
8 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
significant disability, consider the possibilities of pneumonia, cardiac 
disease or urinary tract infection. The patient’s nutrition might be poor, 
raising the possibility of osteomalacia – a well-described problem in the 
elderly.
A full assessment of the patient’s ability to cope is essential and you 
should ask her about her ability to wash, dress and feed herself. This dis­
ability assessment will weigh strongly when discussing admission to 
hospital.
Initial treatment
	 Admit because:
•	 The patient lives alone
•	 She needs pain control
•	 Considerably disabled.
	 Analgesia: simple or compound analgesia as first-line therapy, e.g. para­
cetamol up to 4 g/day. If this fails, a short course of an NSAID, e.g. 
Diclofenac usually helps the pain. There is a high risk of GI toxicity with 
long-term NSAID use in her age group. A gastro-cytoprotective agent, 
e.g. omeprazole, should be co-prescribed. Opiates should be avoided 
unless other analgesia has not worked because of sedation/confusion 
and constipation.
Investigations
•	 FBC
•	 CRP or ESR
NB. If she had been febrile, blood cultures must be taken
Later management
Refer to rheumatologist or medicine for the elderly consultant. In the 
meantime, organise:
	 Physiotherapy:
•	 Mobilise hip, joint protection exercises
•	 Assess walking aids, e.g. stick, Zimmer frame
•	 Consider hydrotherapy.
	 Occupational therapy and social work assessments.
There should be detailed planning before discharge, including liaison with 
the doctor and a home visit.
Indications for surgery
Referral to orthopaedics for surgery:
	 Severe pain especially night pain
	 Poor mobility.
• Progress.  The general health of the patient was good and hip 
surgery is a very effective treatment. She therefore underwent a total 
hip replacement (THR). The postoperative recovery was excellent 
and she was able to walk without pain.
Further reading
Doherty M, Dacre J, Dieppe P, Snaith M. The GALS Locomotor Screen. 
Annals of Rheumatological Disease 1992; 51: 1165.
197
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA)
8 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS (RA)
Case history
A 26-year-old woman presents at A&E with sudden onset of 
severe, widespread joint pain and swelling affecting her hands, 
wrists and feet symmetrically. She has lost half a stone in weight 
and feels systemically unwell.
On examination you find that she has hot joints with a 
symmetrical synovitis, joint restriction of the wrists, MCP and PIP 
joints and painful MTP joints. You suspect this is an acute onset 
of RA.
What other conditions could give a similar clinical picture?
	 Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
	 Erythrovirus B19 infection
	 Post-streptococcal arthritis
	 Psoriatic arthritis
	 Primary Sjögren’s syndrome
	 Some systemic vasculitides.
In the first two differential diagnoses there are often other features. In SLE 
photosensitive rashes, hair loss, serositis and oral ulceration are seen. 
Erythrovirus B19 nearly always presents with flu-like symptoms and a 
widespread rash.
Post-streptococcal arthritis may be preceded by a sore throat but is rare. 
Psoriatic arthritis is usually asymmetrical but can occasionally present 
with a symmetrical pattern. Psoriatic nail changes and other evidence of 
psoriasis are usually present, although these might develop after the onset 
of arthritis.
Sjögren’s syndrome can be associated with intermittent parotid swelling 
and sicca symptoms: dry eyes (keratoconjuctivitis sicca) and dry mouth 
(xerostomia).
How would you manage this patient?
Remember
Rheumatoid arthritis is a multisystem disease so look carefully for 
pulmonary, cardiac or neurological involvement, although these are 
less common at presentation.
A full history and general medical examination is essential. Specific 
points:
	 Look for nodules or vasculitis: uncommon at first presentation.
	 A full musculoskeletal examination noting the symmetry of the joint 
involvement.
198
Rheumatology
8 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Look for persistent inflammatory symmetrical arthritis (PISA). The most 
common cause of this is rheumatoid arthritis.
The most commonly involved joints at onset in rheumatoid arthritis are: 
wrists, MCPs, PIPs and MTP joints.
Admission is necessary if the patient is very unwell systemically and to 
exclude other pathology.
Investigations
•	 FBC/ESR, biochemistry including globulin level, CRP (the 
finding of a high ESR but normal CRP is characteristic of SLE)
•	 ANA/rheumatoid factor
•	 Anti CCP is positive early in the disease
•	 X-ray hands and feet for erosions, periarticular osteopenia 
(Fig. 8.4) (MRI if necessary)
•	 ASO titre if sore throat
•	 Blood cultures if febrile
•	 Erythrovirus B19 titres if the ANA/RhF are negative
Figure 8.4  X-ray of early RA showing typical erosions at the thumb and middle 
MCP joints and at the ulnar styloid (arrows). 
Initial management
	 A short period of bed rest, ice packs if only a few joints involved.
	 NSAIDS: ibuprofen is the safest; other NSAIDs have a higher risk of GI 
toxicity, although this patient is young.
	 Disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs): these should be 
given at the earliest opportunity because RA is a systemic disease that 
199
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA)
8 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
leads rapidly to joint damage and disability. It is no longer acceptable 
to treat RA with NSAIDs alone. There is accumulating evidence to show 
that early DMARD use delays joint damage and functional disability.
Initial DMARDs commonly used include sulfasalazine, methotrexate or 
azathioprine. Others, such as IM gold and D-penicillamine, are less com­
monly used but still effective. Hydroxychloroquine and auranofin are the 
least effective but can be used in combination regimens. Combination 
therapies are showing good results.
Anti-TNFα agents, e.g. infliximab and etanercept, are effective when 
initial DMARD therapy has failed. Infectious complications such as tuber­
culosis are a concern with these agents.
Late manifestations of RA
Changes in the hand are shown in Figure 8.5. Other joints such as knees 
and hips become involved later in the disease course.
Figure 8.5  Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) – late manifestations. 
Ulnar deviation
Boutonnière deformity
Swan-neck deformity
B
A
200
Rheumatology
8 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
All drugs need careful explanation to the patient and close monitoring 
for toxicity.
Prednisolone is not used in young patients but intramuscular methyl 
prednisolone 40–120 mg gives excellent short-term benefit.
The addition of prednisolone 7.5 mg to existing DMARD therapy might 
retard the progression of erosions, but studies in this area remain contro­
versial and this is not recommended for general use at present.
• Diagnosis.  This patient had a high ESR of 60 mm/h and a CRP of 
90 mg/L, suggesting active disease. Her anti-CCP antibodies and 
rheumatoid factor were positive in the serum, typical of rheumatoid 
arthritis. The X-rays of her hands showed only soft tissue swelling. 
An MRI was therefore performed and showed early erosions, con­
firming the diagnosis.
• Progress.  This patient was admitted and symptomatically treated 
with analgesics. She was started on prednisolone and methotrexate. 
The pain and swelling improved and she was discharged with still 
some remaining residual problems. She was given a follow-up in 
clinic for 2 weeks.
SLE AND VASCULITIS
Case history
A 28-year-old woman is referred to you by her doctor. Six weeks 
ago she delivered her first baby and the pregnancy and delivery 
were uneventful. Two weeks after delivery she developed a 
widespread polyarthritis affecting her hands, feet and knees and a 
photosensitive rash on her face. In the last week or two she has 
become extremely unwell with weight loss and painful lesions on 
her hands and feet.
On examination she is clearly unwell with a facial rash and 
severe oral ulceration. Examination of her hands and feet shows 
extensive digital infarcts with necrotic ulceration on the palms, 
finger pulps and soles of the feet. There are splinter haemorrhages 
and nail-fold infarcts.
Discuss the differential diagnosis, investigation 
and management
The differential diagnosis includes an inflammatory autoimmune rheu­
matic disease such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), which has 
developed after delivery of her baby. The lesions on her hands (Fig. 8.6) 
and feet are strongly suggestive of vasculitis, which is a serious prognostic 
factor that requires immediate therapy.
Investigations (Table 8.1) are performed to look for the possibility of 
major organ involvement, which might be vasculitic. Her urine must be 
tested immediately for blood and protein and sent for urine cytology 
looking for fragmented red cells and/or casts. The presence of an ‘active’ 
urine sediment with fragmented or dysmorphic red cells and granular 
casts has a > 90% specificity for glomerulonephritis.
201
SLE and vasculitis
8 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Figure 8.6  Vasculitic lesions seen in the fingers. 
Digital
vasculitic lesion
Periungual
vasculitic lesion
Splinter haemorrhages
Abnormal nailfold
capillary loops
Investigation
Typical finding
FBC
Immune cytopenias, especially neutropenia 
and thrombocytopenia, are common 
in SLE
There may be anaemia of chronic disease 
or haemolytic anaemia – check Coombs’ 
test.
ESR and CRP
The pattern of a high ESR but normal CRP 
is characteristic of SLE
Renal function
U&E, 24-h urine protein/eGFR
Liver biochemistry
Hypoalbuminaemia is common
Lupus serology
ANA
Present in 95% of SLE patients
dsDNA
Specific marker for SLE. A negative 
dsDNA, however, does not exclude SLE
ENA
Ro/La photosensitivity/Sjogren’s
RNP/Sm often seen in severe SLE
Complement
Low values indicate activation of 
complement or rarely congenital deficiency
ANCA
A marker of vasculitis: a systemic 
vasculitis is an alternative to SLE
Table 8.1  Investigations for SLE and vasculitis
202
Rheumatology
8 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Remember
Specialist advice from a rheumatologist or immunologist should be 
sought.
• Diagnosis.  She was found to be anaemic with an Hb of 0.5 g/L, a 
raised ESR of 80 mm/h, normal CRP, a raised ANA and anti-ds DNA 
autoantibodies. A diagnosis of systemic lupus erythematosus.
Once the diagnosis of lupus and vasculitis is established on clinical and 
serological grounds, therapy is with prednisolone and IV pulse methyl 
prednisolone 500 mg on alternate days for three doses.
Immunosuppressive therapy is commonly used to treat vasculitis. 
One commonly used approach is intravenous 500 mg cyclophosphamide 
therapy given 2-weekly or monthly. The patient should be carefully coun­
selled about the risks and benefits of cyclophosphamide; these include the 
adverse effects such as cytopenias, haemorrhagic cystitis, infections includ­
ing herpes zoster and infertility. If the patient is breastfeeding she should 
discontinue this because cyclophosphamide and other immunosuppres­
sives such as azathioprine are excreted in breast milk.
• Progress.  On treatment with steroids (see above) her symptoms 
settled and it was decided to delay immunosuppressive therapy until 
after she had stopped breastfeeding.
ACUTE AUTOIMMUNE RHEUMATIC DISEASE
Remember
The major risk of vasculitis is organ involvement including renal, 
cerebral and pulmonary disease, which can be life-threatening.
Case history
A 33-year-old woman of African origin is admitted through A&E 
complaining of breathlessness and swollen legs. Two years ago 
she was admitted with a psychotic illness that had features of 
schizophrenia and improved with anti-psychotic medication.
In the last 6 months she has developed a symmetrical small 
joint inflammatory arthritis, mouth ulcers and photosensitive facial 
rashes. Over the last 2 weeks she has become breathless and her 
legs have become severely swollen.
203
Acute autoimmune rheumatic disease
8 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
What is the likely diagnosis?
Diagnosis is likely to be SLE complicated by the nephrotic syndrome. In 
addition, she may have cardiac tamponade from a pericardial effusion.
SLE is nine times more common in females than in males, and is more 
common in people of African and Far Eastern ancestry; it is often more 
severe in these ethnic groups.
This patient has many characteristic features of SLE: inflammatory 
polyarthritis, mouth ulcers, photosensitive rashes, psychotic illness, serosi­
tis with pleural and probably pericardial effusions and renal disease 
with nephrotic syndrome (Fig. 8.7). The high JVP might indicate early 
tamponade.
How would you manage this patient?
The most urgent priority is whether this patient has cardiac tamponade. 
The low BP and the presence of pulsus paradoxus, tachycardia and raised 
JVP with increased distension during inspiration and cardiomegaly on 
CXR are strong pointers to this. An echocardiogram is performed urgently, 
which shows an echo free region between the myocardium and the intense 
echo of the parietal pericardium. This confirms the effusion and the clinical 
signs confirm tamponade.
The overwhelming majority of patients with lupus who have cardiac 
tamponade associated with a pericardial effusion respond to high-dose 
oral corticosteroids and do not need pericardiocentesis. This, however, 
should be performed if the patient deteriorates despite corticosteroid 
therapy or if sepsis is present. A normal CRP makes infection less likely.
The next priority is to determine the extent and severity of the renal 
disease. Serum creatinine, eGFR, albumin, 24-h urine protein are essential. 
If there is an ‘active’ (p. 245) urine sediment, e.g. fragmented red cells and 
granular casts, indicating glomerulonephritis, renal biopsy is indicated.
Case history (continued)
On examination she is anaemic and has a pulse rate of 120/
min with pulsus paradoxus. Her BP is 90/60. She has bilateral 
pleural effusions, a raised jugular venous pressure with a sharp 
rise and y descent (Friedreich’s sign) and pitting oedema to her 
waist. There is synovitis of the small joints of her fingers and she 
has florid splinter haemorrhages. Her urine showed heavy 
proteinuria.
Investigations
•	 FBC with reticulocyte count/Coombs’ (direct anti-globulin test) if 
positive: the anaemia is haemolytic
•	 U&Es (eGFR): renal impairment may be present
•	 Biochemistry: serum albumin will be low
•	 24-h urine protein should be started
Continued
204
Rheumatology
8 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Figure 8.7  Clinical features of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). 
General
Fever (50%)
Depression
Fatigue (75%)
Weight loss (50%)
Skin (85%)
Photosensitivity
Butterﬂy rash
Vasculitis
Purpura
Urticaria
Chest (50%)
Pleurisy/
 effusion
Restrictive
 lung defect
 (rare)
Joints (90%)
Aseptic necrosis
 of hip (rare)
Arthritis in
 small joints
Raynaud’s
phenomenon
(20%)
Nervous system (60%)
Fits
Hemiplegia
Ataxia
Polyneuropathy
Cranial nerve lesions
Psychosis
Demyelinating syndromes
Heart (25%)
Pericarditis
Endocarditis
Aortic valve lesions
Abdominal
pain (20%)
Renal disease (30%)
Glomerulonephritis
Myositis (<5%)
Blood (75%)
Anaemia (normochromic
 normocytic or haemolytic
 Coombs' positive)
Leucopenia/lymphopenia
Thrombocytopenia
Eye
Sjögrens (15%)
205
Acute autoimmune rheumatic disease
8 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Other points
A normal protein diet is necessary with salt restriction and diuretic therapy 
with a thiazide, e.g. bendroflumethiazide 5 mg daily.
	 Thrombosis prophylaxis: this patient is at high risk of deep vein throm­
bosis (DVT)/pulmonary embolus (PE). TED stockings and prophylactic 
low molecular weight heparin should be given.
	 Is the anaemia haemolytic? If so, it should respond to corticosteroids.
	 When the blood pressure has normalised as a result of treatment of the 
tamponade, start an ACE inhibitor. This is especially useful in proteinu­
ric patients.
	 If renal biopsy confirms proliferative glomerulonephritis: the treatment 
of choice is corticosteroid therapy and intermittent intravenous cyclo­
phosphamide followed by azathioprine.
Figure 8.8  Diagram of a CXR showing pleural effusions and cardiomegaly. 
Interstitial
pulmonary
shadows
Bilateral pleural effusions
Globular heart
Investigations (continued)
•	 Urine cytology for fragmented red cells and granular casts: a 
useful marker of glomerulonephritis
•	 CXR: to document pleural effusions and cardiomegaly (Fig. 8.8)
•	 Echocardiogram: to document pericardial effusion and possible 
valve lesions
•	 ECG
•	 Blood gases
•	 Blood cultures/urine cultures: to exclude sepsis, especially 
endocarditis, prior to corticosteroid and immunosuppressive 
therapy
•	 Full autoantibody screen: ANA, DNA, ENA, Rh factor, anti CCP, 
anti-cardiolipin antibodies, lupus anti-coagulant, ANCA
•	 Complement studies
•	 A diagnostic renal biopsy may be required later
206
Rheumatology
8 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 This patient’s lipid profile might well be deranged, especially in the 
nephrotic syndrome. This will need to be assessed and managed 
actively. Measurement of serum lipids is performed and the patient 
started on a statin immediately if hypercholesterolaemia is present.
	 Prophylaxis against corticosteroid-induced osteoporosis. A baseline 
dual energy X-ray absorptimetry (DXA) scan should be performed and 
calcium supplementation should be started.
Long-term prognosis
The majority of patients with SLE have a good prognosis, although clearly 
this patient has a serious disease with life-threatening complications. Mor­
tality in SLE occurs at two peak periods: those patients who die from 
overwhelming disease, thrombosis or sepsis and those who die prema­
turely from accelerated atherosclerosis. Prognosis has been considerably 
improved by earlier recognition and effective therapy.
• Progress.  This patient had several problems. Her cardiac effusion 
responded to high dose oral steroids gradually and her blood pres­
sure improved. She had a haemolytic anaemia of 95 g/L. She was 
discharged on steroids and an ACE inhibitor after an inpatient stay 
of 2 weeks. She later had a renal biopsy which confirmed a prolifera­
tive glomerulonephritis and was seen by the neurologists for treat­
ment. A DXA scan did not show osteoporosis.
Further reading
Tsokos GC. Systemic lupus erythematosus. New Eng J Med 2011; 365: 
2110–2121.
THROMBOSIS AND THE ANTI-PHOSPHOLIPID 
SYNDROME
Case history
A-25-year old woman presents with a 2-day history of left leg 
swelling and on the day of admission she notices breathlessness 
and chest pains that are worse on deep inspiration.
In her past medical history you find that she has had three 
miscarriages and one successful pregnancy. This pregnancy was 
complicated by hypertension and intrauterine growth retardation 
with a premature delivery at 31 weeks. On further questioning you 
note that she has had oral ulceration, rashes that are worse in the 
sunlight and has also been having headaches.
Drug history
She is on the oral contraceptive pill.
On examination
She has extensive splinter haemorrhages on most fingers. Her pulse is 100 
and BP 110/70 but she is not cyanosed. Her heart sounds are normal but 
207
Thrombosis and the anti-phospholipid syndrome
8 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
there is a soft murmur of mitral regurgitation. She also has a soft left 
pleural rub.
Abdominal examination and neurological examination are normal. The 
left calf is swollen and the calf circumference is 3 cm greater than on the 
right. You note extensive livedo reticularis on her arms, thighs and knees.
What is the differential diagnosis and your management?
This young woman (who is on the oral contraceptive pill) has a deep 
venous thrombosis (DVT) and a pulmonary embolus (PE) until proved 
otherwise.
A full blood count revealed thrombocytopenia, which is commonly seen 
in the anti-phospholipid syndrome.
Investigations
•	 An ECG: looking for the classic (but seldom seen) S1, Q3, T3 
pattern of PE (Fig. 8.9)
•	 A CXR: but this is likely to be normal. However, it is useful to 
exclude other causes of pleuritic chest pain, including infective 
causes
•	 An ultrasound scan of the leg veins to document the extent of 
the left calf thrombosis
•	 A V/Q scan to show the extent of the pulmonary emboli is still 
useful if CT not available
•	 Plasma D-dimers: if undetectable the diagnosis of PE and DVT 
is excluded
•	 Multidetector CT with contrast: good specificity 96% and 
sensitivity 85% for medium-sized PEs
•	 Choose the imaging techniques according to local availability
An echocardiogram and blood cultures in women are essential because 
differential diagnosis includes Libman–Sacks endocarditis or infective 
endocarditis.
Differential diagnosis
In this case this includes the anti-phospholipid syndrome with a DVT and 
pulmonary emboli, along with an increased risk of thrombosis from the 
oral contraceptive pill. The history is rather suggestive of SLE, and this 
should be investigated further with autoantibodies to ANA, DNA and 
ENA with complement studies. The features favouring a diagnosis of the 
anti-phospholipid syndrome in this case would include the three previous 
miscarriages and one pregnancy complicated by intrauterine growth retar­
dation and premature delivery. There is accumulating evidence in the 
literature to suggest that the intrauterine growth retardation is due to 
recurrent placental thrombosis and this is often manifested by reduced 
umbilical artery flow patterns on Doppler studies, with an increased resist­
ance index, notching or even reversed flow in the umbilical vessels.
208
Rheumatology
8 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Figure 8.9  Acute pulmonary embolism shown by a 12-lead ECG. There is an S 
wave in lead I, a Q wave in lead III and an inverted T wave in lead III (the S1, Q3, 
T3 pattern). There is sinus tachycardia (160 bpm) and an incomplete right bundle 
branch block pattern (an R wave in AVR and V1 and an S wave in V6). 
I
II
III
AVR
AVL
AVF
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
Information
•	 The anti-phospholipid syndrome is due to the presence of 
antibodies that bind phospholipids, leading to both venous and 
arterial occlusion
•	 The syndrome is most commonly seen in SLE but can occur in 
isolation: primary anti-phospholipid syndrome
The anti-phospholipid syndrome
Anti-cardiolipin antibodies and the lupus anti-coagulant should be per­
formed. Both the anti-cardiolipin antibodies and the lupus anti-coagulant 
are anti-phospholipid antibodies and both should be requested because a 
small percentage of patients have either one or the other antibody but not 
both. A thrombophilia screen can exclude other factors, including the 
factor V Leiden mutation. Patients with the anti-phospholipid syndrome 
also have reduced protein C and S levels, which are associated with the 
lupus anticoagulant.
Libman–Sacks endocarditis
Splinter haemorrhages and a mitral murmur indicate Libman–Sacks endo­
carditis, which is a feature of the anti-phospholipid syndrome and SLE. 
209
Crystal arthritis
8 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
These patients get a mucinous degeneration of the mitral valve leaflets and 
occasionally thrombus (which might embolise) is seen on the damaged 
valves. Similarly, the damaged valves might become secondarily infected, 
leading to infective endocarditis. The splinter haemorrhages could repre­
sent micro-emboli and are a feature of both anti-phospholipid syndrome 
and infective endocarditis.
How would you manage this patient?
• Progress.  This woman should be admitted and commenced on 
heparin. The heparin can be given intravenously as a continuous 
infusion but many hospitals use once-daily low molecular weight 
heparin. Warfarin should be commenced and the eventual target INR 
should be 2.5.
The diagnosis of the anti-phospholipid syndrome was confirmed and 
therapy with life-long warfarin at the target INR was started. These 
patients are often resistant to warfarin and occasionally require high doses, 
e.g. 15–20 mg warfarin daily.
In terms of the mitral valve disease, this patient needed counselling 
about appropriate antibiotic therapy for any infection. Prophylactic anti­
biotics are not required. Infective endocarditis was excluded and she was 
monitored regularly because a small percentage of these patients require 
mitral valve replacement.
Further reading
Hughes GRV. Hughes’ syndrome: the anti-phospholipid syndrome. 
Journal of the Royal College of Physicians of London 1998; 32: 260–264.
Ruiz-Irastorza G, Crowther M, Branch W, Khamashta MA. Antiphospholi­
pid syndrome. Lancet 2010; 376: 1498–1509.
CRYSTAL ARTHRITIS
Two main types of crystal account for the majority of crystal-induced 
arthritis. They are sodium urate (gout) and calcium pyrophosphate 
(pseudo­gout) and are distinguished by their different shapes and refrin­
gence properties under polarized light with a red filter. Rarely, crystals of 
calcium apatite or cholesterol cause acute synovitis.
Case history
A 73-year-old woman was admitted a week ago to the Stroke 
Unit, having had a right hemiparesis. She has developed a hot, 
swollen right knee. You have been asked to see the patient for 
your advice on whether this might be a septic arthritis.
On further questioning, you discover that the patient has 
attended the hypertension clinic for many years and has been 
taking bendroflumethiazide. She has also complained of knee pain 
intermittently over the last 5 years but the joint has never 
previously swelled up. She is making a reasonable recovery from 
her stroke and there is no other relevant history.
Continued
210
Rheumatology
8 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Investigations
•	 Full blood count
•	 ESR
•	 U&Es
•	 Bone and liver biochemistry
•	 Serum urate
•	 X-ray of the knee
•	 Blood cultures
•	 The joint should be aspirated with a sterile technique and fluid 
sent for cells, crystals and culture
Case history (continued)
Clinically, there is no evidence of tophi. The knee is hot and 
movement is restricted due to a large tense effusion. She is 
afebrile.
How would you manage this patient?
The X-ray showed chondrocalcinosis (Fig. 8.10) and patello-femoral and 
tibio-femoral osteoarthritis. The serum uric acid was elevated (520 µmol/L); 
she is taking a thiazide diuretic. The differential diagnosis thus includes 
gout or pseudo-gout, of which pseudo-gout is probably more likely in this 
clinical context. The uric acid level, although high, is usually > 600 µmol/L 
with gout.
Figure 8.10  Chondrocalcinosis of the knee. Note the linear calcification in 
the hyaline cartilage and calcification of the lateral meniscus (plus mild 
secondary OA). 
Linear calcification
Calcification in the
lateral meniscus
211
Crystal arthritis
8 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Pseudo-gout
This patient has the typical presentation of pseudo-gout – an acute onset 
of a swollen joint in an elderly patient who has been admitted for other 
reasons – usually a stroke, MI or chest infection.
Calcium pyrophosphate is the most common crystal associated 
with pseudo-gout (Fig. 8.11). The crystals are diagnosed on synovial 
fluid analysis using polarised light microscopy. They are rhomboidal and 
positively birefringent and can be idiopathic or associated with osteoar­
thritis. A number of metabolic conditions are also associated with calcium 
pyrophosphate deposition; these include hypothyroidism, hyperparathy­
roidism, acromegaly, Wilson’s disease, haemochromatosis, hypophos­
phatasia and hypomagnesaemia.
The differential diagnosis of gout is also confirmed on crystal examina­
tion. These urate crystals are negatively birefringent needle-shaped 
crystals.
Management
Septic arthritis, although unlikely, should be excluded and, providing joint 
aspiration and synovial fluid culture and blood cultures are all negative, 
the knee should be aspirated to dryness and injected with a steroid such 
as 40 mg of methylprednisolone. Risk factors should be minimised and, in 
particular, the thiazide diuretic (which can precipitate gout) should be 
switched to an alternative anti-hypertensive medication. Intensive physi­
otherapy is necessary, with particular attention to quadriceps exercises and 
maintaining mobility and hydration in the patient.
• Progress.  She was started on diclofenac 50 g × 3 daily and was able 
to be gradually mobilised with the help of physiotherapy. Her speech 
improved over the first 2 weeks but she was left severely disabled by 
her right sided weakness. She was eventually transferred to long-
term care.
Further reading
Neogi T. Gout. N Engl J Med 2011; 364: 443–452.
Figure 8.11  Calcium pyrophosphate and urate crystals. 
Needle-shaped
urate crystals
Rhomboidal crystals of
calcium pyrophosphate
212
Rheumatology
8 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
POLYMYALGIA RHEUMATICA/CRANIAL ARTERITIS
Polymyalgia rheumatica (PMR) and giant cell (cranial) arteritis are a sys­
temic vasculitis affecting people over 50 years of age. Both are associated 
with the finding of a giant cell arteritis on temporal artery biopsy.
Case history
A 73-year-old woman presents to A&E feeling non-specifically 
unwell. On further questioning she has a headache and joint 
aches, particularly of her shoulders and hips, in addition to 
widespread aches and pains. She has marked joint stiffness 
particularly of the shoulders and hips, lasting for several hours 
each morning, and occasionally all day. The headache is 
predominantly right-sided and the patient says that it is painful 
when she brushes her hair. In addition, she has pains in the left 
jaw on talking or eating.
On examination the scalp is tender and it is difficult to palpate 
the temporal arteries. The rest of the examination is normal. Her 
shoulders and hips ache at the extremes of the range of 
movement but are otherwise normal.
Investigations
The following investigations are essential:
•	 Full blood count
•	 ESR or CRP
•	 U&Es
•	 Liver biochemistry
•	 Temporal artery biopsy
Differential diagnosis and management
The most likely diagnosis in a patient over 50 years is temporal arteritis 
with PMR and there is therefore a significant risk of blindness from arteritis 
of the ophthalmic artery. A differential diagnosis includes malignancy of 
any cause and myeloma which can, rarely, mimic PMR. The ESR is nearly 
always significantly elevated but approximately 1–5% of patients with 
polymyalgia rheumatica have a normal ESR.
This patient should be commenced on 60 mg of prednisolone immedi­
ately and a temporal artery biopsy should be arranged within the next 
24 h. The clinical diagnosis is giant cell arteritis.
213
Acute back pain
8 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
The histological features of GCA are:
Histological features of cranial arteritis
•	 Intimal hypertrophy
•	 Inflammation of the intima and sub-intima
•	 Breaking up of the internal elastic lamina
•	 Giant cells, lymphocytes and plasma cells in the internal elastic 
lamina
Case history
A 36-year-old publican presents to A&E having just lifted a barrel 
of beer. He experienced severe buttock and back pain. The pain 
radiated down the left leg to the sole of the foot with associated 
paraesthesiae. On further questioning he finds that it is extremely 
painful to move his back and that the pain is worse on coughing 
or sneezing. The pain is also worse in the leg than in the back. He 
says that he has not passed any urine for 6 h.
The response to steroids is usually dramatic in these patients and a 
response is often seen within 24–48 h. The steroid therapy can then be 
reduced reasonably quickly, over a few months, to 15–20 mg daily, and if 
this is not possible, then a steroid sparing agent such as azathioprine 
should be added to achieve this. The addition of low-dose aspirin may 
reduce the risk of blindness. This patient is also at high risk of osteoporosis 
and subsequent vertebral fractures, and calcium and vitamin D supple­
mentation should be co-prescribed routinely. A baseline DXA should be 
requested. If there is already osteoporosis, bisphosphonates should be 
given.
• Progress.  This patient’s headache quickly went on steroid therapy 
and in 6 months she was well on prednisolone 10 mg daily with a 
normal ESR. Her steroids will be continued for at least 1 year, with 
regular checks of her ESR.
Patients who fail to respond to steroids
Such patients should be investigated in detail for an underlying malig­
nancy, especially multiple myeloma. Occasionally, other conditions such 
as severe hypothyroidism might also present with similar joint aches but 
the clinical picture of temporal arteritis with a good response to steroids 
is usually characteristic enough to establish the diagnosis.
ACUTE BACK PAIN
This is usually due to acute lumbar disc prolapse. The central disc gel may 
extrude into a fissure in the surrounding fibrous zone and cause acute pain 
and muscle spasm, which in turn leads to a forwards and sideways tilt 
when standing.
214
Rheumatology
8 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
On examination
He is in severe pain and is lying flat on the examination couch. He finds 
it too painful to stand up but the hips, knees and other joints are all normal 
on examination. Straight leg raising on the right is 40° and on the left is 
only 10°, with a strongly positive sciatic stretch test. The femoral nerve 
stretch test is also strongly positive on the left and neurological examina­
tion reveals an absent left ankle jerk and sacral anaesthesia.
Discuss your further investigations, diagnosis 
and management
The history and clinical examination are almost diagnostic for a large L5/
S1 disc protrusion with compromise of the cauda equina, which can lead 
to urinary retention. This is therefore a neurosurgical emergency.
The most urgent investigation is imaging of the lumbar spine 
and pelvis; magnetic resonance imaging (MRI; Fig. 8.12). The patient 
should be catheterised and analgesia given. This includes intramuscular 
non-steroidals such as IM diclofenac or opiate analgesics including mor­
phine if needed. The patient should be referred immediately to a neuro­
surgeon or orthopaedic surgeon with an interest in acute spinal problems 
for urgent decompressive surgery with a laminectomy and discectomy. 
Any delay in diagnosis or decompression might lead to a permanent 
neurological deficit.
Figure 8.12  MRI of lumbar spine showing a central disc prolapse at the L4/L5 
level (arrow). The signal from the L4/L5 and L5/S1 discs indicates dehydration, 
whereas the appearance of the L3/L4 signal is normal. 
L3
L4
L5
S1
215
Severe back pain/osteoporosis
8 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
In patients without sacral anaesthesia or neurological deficit, the 
evidence-based advice is not to recommend bed rest but to mobilise the 
patient as soon as possible using adequate analgesia. Rapid access to 
physio­therapy can improve outcome, and procedures such as sacral or 
lumbar epidurals might be necessary to relieve pain while recovery occurs.
• Progress.  This patient required urgent surgery as the MRI showed 
a large L5/S1 disc protrusion. He made a good recovery and had no 
permanent neurological deficit.
SEVERE BACK PAIN/OSTEOPOROSIS
Osteoporosis is characterised by reduced bone density and micro-
architectural deterioration of bone tissue, leading to increased bone fragil­
ity and the susceptibility to fracture.
Case history
A 71-year-old woman presents with severe thoracic spinal pain, 
which came on suddenly 6 h previously. The pain is severe and 
radiates around the thoracic spine and front of the chest and is 
worse on coughing or sneezing. In the past medical history she 
has had rheumatoid arthritis for the last 25 years and is currently 
taking 7.5 mg of prednisolone daily. Her rheumatoid arthritis has 
been in remission for 5 years on this therapy and she is on no 
other medication. Disease-modifying drugs used in the past have 
either induced toxicity or have been ineffective.
On examination there is evidence of quiescent rheumatoid 
arthritis with classic rheumatoid deformities, nodules and synovial 
thickening, but no active synovitis. On examination of the thoracic 
spine there is a marked kyphosis and she is exquisitely tender 
over T8. The thoracic spine is markedly restricted on rotation, 
reproducing her pain radiating around the chest to the anterior 
aspect of the chest.
Investigations
•	 Full blood count
•	 ESR
•	 Renal function
•	 Bone and liver biochemistry
•	 C-reactive protein
•	 X-ray chest and thoracic spine
What investigations would you do?
Discuss your differential diagnosis and management 
in this case
The most likely diagnosis is steroid-associated osteoporosis with an 
acute vertebral fracture. The differential diagnosis should include myeloma 
216
Rheumatology
8 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
and other malignancies because these can also present with vertebral 
fractures.
Imaging should include a chest X-ray and specific views of the dorsal 
spine, which are likely to show one or more vertebral crush fractures. 
Crush fractures have a fairly characteristic appearance and on the AP view 
of the thoracic spine all the pedicles should be visible. Should any pedicles 
be missing, this should immediately raise the suspicion of metastatic 
malignancy as a cause of the vertebral fracture.
Later, a myeloma screen including a protein electrophoresis strip, serum 
light chain assay and urine for Bence Jones protein should be done.
A DXA scan is performed to establish the degree of osteoporosis (Fig. 
8.13). This gives an accurate index of bone mineral density in relation 
to the normal range for an age-, sex- and race-matched population. The 
World Health Organization definition of osteopenia is a T score of between 
–1.5 and 2.5. The definition of osteoporosis is a T score of greater than –2.5 
standard deviations below the mean and established or severe osteoporo­
sis is a T score of greater than –2.5 with an established fracture.
Initial management
In the acute setting of a recent vertebral fracture, strong analgesia, e.g. 
meptazinol 200 mg every 3–6 hours intramuscularly or intravenously if 
Figure 8.13  DXA scan. Graph showing BMD (vertical axis) against age. 
T score = number of standard deviations that patient’s BMD differs from 
population average for healthy young adult. Z score: as T score but BMD 
deviations from population average for patient’s age. 
T score
–3.8
–1.9
–3.1
–2.7
Z score
–2.5
–1.1
–2.6
–2.5
L1
L2
L3
L4
0
45
Post-menopausal
bone loss
Age-related
bone loss
60
X-ray
Patient’s
spine
Detecting
plate
BMD g/cm2
T
Z
Age
217
Severe back pain/osteoporosis
8 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
necessary. Salmon calcitonin 50 units daily, increasing to 100 units intra­
muscularly or 200 units daily by nasal spray for 6 weeks has a very good 
analgesic effect and works rapidly. Its main adverse effects include hypo­
tension and flushing with nausea although most patients are able to toler­
ate 50 units daily. A single intravenous infusion of a bisphosphonate 
(pamidronate 60–90 mg) also gives some pain relief.
• Progress.  This woman’s pain proved difficult to control and kypho­
plasty was performed. This involves injecting methyl methacrylate 
through a needle placed directly into the damaged vertebra. This 
allowed mobilisation with physiotherapy help.
Later management
This patient should commence specific therapy for osteoporosis.
Therapies include cyclical etidronate with calcium or weekly alendro­
nate or risedronate. These therapies are well tolerated in this age group 
but alendronate and risedronate are associated with a small but significant 
risk of oesophagitis. All the bisphosphonate drugs are poorly absorbed and 
should be taken at least 2 h before a meal with a full glass of water and, 
in particular with alendronate, the patient should not lie down for at least 
2 h after taking the medication to reduce the risk of oesophagitis. Stron­
tium ranelate is used in post-menopausal osteoporosis. These medications 
increase bone mineral density over a 3- to 5-year period and also reduce 
fracture risk.
Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) is not usually used in women of 
this age because of the adverse effects, which include breast tenderness 
and a return of menses. Raloxifene, a selective oestrogen-receptor modula­
tor (SERM) has been shown to increase bone mineral density. The main 
adverse effects of raloxifene include a risk of thrombosis and possible 
endometrial/uterine malignancy. There is evidence that raloxifene pro­
tects against the risk of breast cancer.
Other factors used in the treatment of osteoporosis include stopping 
smoking, keeping alcohol intake to a moderate level and encouraging 
active weight-bearing exercise. Attention to diet is necessary, particularly 
in this age group, and a broad varied diet containing a reasonable calcium 
intake should be advised; if necessary a specific dietitian referral would be 
helpful. These patients should be monitored with DXA scan to check on 
progress.
• Progress.  This woman had not been given prophylactic bisphonate 
therapy, which is usually necessary in addition to calcium for 
patients on long-term steroids. Nor did she have regular DXA scans 
to assess the development of osteoporosis.
Her prednisolone 7.5 mg daily was gradually tapered and stopped and 
her RA remained in remission, with some analgesia with an NSAID being 
required. She has continued on alendronate calcium and has regular 
DXA scans.
218
Rheumatology
8 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Investigations
•	 Hb 106 g/L, MCV 83
•	 ESR 102 mm/hour, CRP 94
•	 U&Es normal
•	 Biochemistry – Serum Ca 2.3 mmol/L; phosphate 1.2 mmol/L; 
serum alkaline phosphatase 103 IU/L
OSTEOMYELITIS
Case history
A 56-year-old Asian woman presents with a 2-month history of 
upper back pain and weight loss. She has just arrived home after 
visiting relatives in Bangladesh for the last year.
There is no relevant past history and she is taking no 
medication.
On examination she is in pain and looks thin. Her pulse is 110 
per minute and regular; her temperature is 38°C. Cardiovascular, 
respiratory and abdominal examinations are all normal and 
neurological examinations including power, tone and reflexes are 
within normal limits. There are no sensory signs.
All her joints are normal but she is tender over the thoracic 
spine, which is exquisitely painful on rotation of the thoracic spine.
A thoracic spine radiograph was normal. A chest X-ray showed no 
evidence of tuberculosis.
What is the differential diagnosis?
The differential diagnosis is spinal tuberculous osteomyelitis (Pott’s 
disease) despite the normal chest X-ray. A differential diagnosis would 
include Staphylococcus aureus discitis, although this tends to affect the 
lumbar spine whereas tuberculous spinal disease characteristically affects 
the thoracic spine or the thoraco-lumbar junction.
The most useful investigation is an MRI scan of the thoracic spine. This 
showed destruction of the vertebral body T4 with evidence of discitis T4/
T5. A paravertebral abscess accompanied the bone destruction. These find­
ings are typical of thoracic spine tuberculosis. There was no evidence of 
cord compression so a neurosurgical opinion was not required. Aspiration 
of the vertebral abscess was carried out to culture the tubercle bacillus and 
to obtain the sensitivities. She was commenced on isoniazid, pyrazina­
mide, rifampicin and ethanbutol, to be given for 9 months (reducing drugs 
when sensitivities known, p. 362). Other risk factors should always be 
considered, such as immunosuppression and HIV disease.
As vertebral collapse was not present, the prognosis is usually excellent 
in these patients if the organism is fully sensitive to therapy and compli­
ance with therapy is maintained.
219
Septic arthritis
8 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
• Progress.  This patient made an excellent recovery and was left with 
no sequelae from her spinal abscess.
SEPTIC ARTHRITIS
Septic arthritis is due to haematogenous spread from skin or a respiratory 
tract infection. It is also seen occurring after surgery or sometimes follow­
ing trauma to the joint.
Case history
A 21-year-old man presents with pain and swelling of his right 
knee. On further questioning he had no other symptoms. He had 
no relevant past medical history. Specifically, he has had no 
diarrhoea, urethritis, rashes or oral ulceration and has had no 
problems with inflammation of his eyes. His sexual history revealed 
many sexual contacts, including oral/anal sex with other men.
How would you investigate and manage this patient?
The most common diagnosis in a young man with a monoarthritis is a 
reactive arthritis associated either with diarrhoea or with urethritis, 
usually chlamydial in origin (Fig. 8.14). However, clinical questioning with 
this man has excluded any associated features that would point to reactive 
arthritis (a triad of urethritis, arthritis and conjunctivitis – Reiter’s disease)
and septic arthritis should be considered as the most likely diagnosis, 
raising the possibility of HIV disease.
Investigations
•	 Full blood count normal
•	 ESR 74 mm/1 hour
•	 Biochemistry, including a serum uric acid 420 µmol/L
The joint should be X-rayed and a series of blood cultures performed 
following admission to MAU.
Using sterile technique the joint should be aspirated and the fluid sent 
for microscopy, culture and crystals.
Information – knee aspiration
•	 Explain procedure and obtain consent
•	 Strict aseptic technique
•	 2% lidocaine as local anaesthetic
•	 Medial or lateral approach 0.5–1 cm below the patella
•	 Use a white needle to ensure that even viscous or purulent fluid 
can be aspirated easily
•	 Caution in patients on warfarin
•	 Do not inject steroids if fluid is purulent
220
Rheumatology
8 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
The most common organism is Staphylococcus aureus, which is seen 
in between 40% and 70% of patients. Gram-negative organisms are the 
next most common but a careful search for gonorrhoea should be con­
ducted and the patient should be referred to the genitourinary medicine 
clinic for urethral swabs and other tests.
This man is at risk for HIV and should be counselled carefully 
before arranging an HIV test. Should HIV be proven then microbiology 
assessment of the synovial fluid is crucial, particularly for atypical organ­
isms such as Mycobacterium avium intracellulare and other forms of 
tuberculosis.
Figure 8.14  Clinical features of reactive arthritis. 
Urethritis
Circinate
 balanitis
HLA B27
associated
spondylitis
Keratoderma
blennorrhagica on sole
Achilles
 tendonitis
Plantar
 fasciitis
Enthesitis
Conjunctivitis
Oral ulceration
Arthritis
Dactylitis
(sausage toes)
Dactylitis
(sausage
fingers)
MTP joint synovitis
Knee effusion
221
Septic arthritis
8 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Characteristics of 
synovial fluid
Diagnosis
WCC per mm3
Colour: clear, yellow 
and viscous
Osteoarthritis
< 3000
Translucent and thin
Very cloudy
Rheumatoid arthritis
Seronegative arthritis
Reactive arthritis 
(Reiter’s disease)
Crystal arthritis
3000–40 000
Sepsis
750 000
Polarised light microscopy with a red filter needs to be undertaken by 
an expert:
•	 gout: negatively birefringent, needle-shaped crystals of sodium 
urate
•	 pyrophosphate arthropathy (pseudo-gout): rhomboidal, weakly 
positively birefringent crystals of calcium pyrophosphate
Gram staining is essential if septic arthritis is suspected and may 
identify the organism immediately. Joint fluid should be cultured and 
antibiotic sensitivities requested
The fluid can be examined directly in a clear syringe or sterile pot. 
The characteristics of synovial fluid show a trend from clear to 
purulent, which indicates roughly the type of arthritis.
From Kumar and Clark Clinical Medicine 7th edn, 2009.
Table 8.2  Examination of synovial fluid
• Progress.  In this man, a septic arthritis was confirmed on blood and 
synovial fluid culture (Table 8.2) due to Staph. aureus infection. He 
required 6 weeks of intravenous antibiotics, flucloxacillin plus oral 
fucidic acid. Arthroscopic drainage and washout of the joint was 
performed at 48 hours, which minimised joint damage.
He made a good recovery.
This page intentionally left blank
223
223
Kidney and Urinary 
Tract Disease 9 
PRESENTATION OF KIDNEY AND URINARY TRACT 
DISEASE
 Patients’ complaints are directly related to the urinary tract or urine 
output, e.g. frequency, dysuria, burning micturition, urgency, colic, 
polyuria, nocturia, haematuria, oliguria, and anuria.
 Discovery of abnormal laboratory findings during routine investiga­
tions, e.g. proteinuria, haematuria, elevated plasma creatinine, electro­
lyte and acid–base disturbances.
 Symptoms and signs of renal failure (e.g. uraemia, anaemia, anuria, 
hypertension and oedema) in the absence of prior renal disease.
 Discovery of renal and urinary tract disease as part of involvement in 
systemic disease, for example:
• Metabolic disease (e.g. diabetes mellitus): the most common cause of 
end-stage renal disease (ESRD) in the Western world
• Autoimmune rheumatic diseases (e.g. SLE, vasculitis, systemic scle­
rosis, rheumatoid arthritis)
• Infectious diseases (e.g. Gram-negative sepsis, infective endocarditis, 
mycobacterial, protozoal, viral)
• Cardiovascular diseases (e.g. hypertension, heart failure)
• Blood dyscrasia (e.g. multiple myeloma, amyloidosis, lymphoma, 
HUS/TTP).
Information
• Decline in GFR: is this due to pre-renal, post-renal or intra-renal 
disease?
• Intrinsic renal disease: divide into glomerular or non-glomerular 
disorders (e.g. tubular, interstitial or vascular)
• Differentiate between primary renal diseases and renal disorders 
secondary to systemic disease
• Identify preventable or reversible diseases
FLUID BALANCE AND ELECTROLYTES: ASSESSING 
FLUID STATUS
Clinical assessment
Take a quick history, particularly of fluid and electrolyte intake (oral or 
intravenous) and output (renal, GI tract or skin), then examine the patient 
(Fig. 9.1, Table 9.1).
224
Kidney and Urinary Tract Disease 
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Figure 9.1  Examining the patient: underfill and overload. 
Underfill
Overload
JVP↓
JVP↑
Basal crackles
– SOB
Cool
peripheries
Sacral/
peripheral
oedema
Postural
drop
BP↓
↑↓BP
Falling weight
Rising weight
Pulse↑
Pulse↑
∗∗∗∗∗
225
Fluid balance and electrolytes: assessing fluid status
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Useful
Not so useful
Clinical 
examinations
BP (especially postural or 
post-exercise drop)
Skin turgor
Oedema
Eye turgor
JVP
Mucous 
membranes
Peripheral perfusion
Pulse
Basal crackles
Charts
Serial weight (on same 
machine)
Fluid balance 
(input/output)
Additional tools
CVP line – use dynamically
CVP – absolute
CXR
Urine Na+
Pulmonary artery flow 
catheter
Osmolality
Table 9.1  Tools to assess fluid status
Case history (1)
A 43-year-old man is brought to A&E with a 4-day history of 
severe abdominal pain and watery diarrhoea up to 10 times daily. 
He has felt so bad that he has hardly drunk or eaten anything over 
the last few days. He has lost 5 kg in weight.
He is normally fit and well and he wonders whether he has 
some form of severe gastroenteritis.
On examination he is dehydrated with dry tongue. Abdominal 
examination reveals some generalised tenderness.
Figure 9.1 (a) shows the other signs of hypovolaemia.
Investigations
Serum Na 123 mmol/L
Serum K 2.1 mmol/L
Chloride 86 mmol/L
Urea 35 mmol/L
Creatinine 120 µmol/L
Hb 154 g/L
PCV 0.58.
• Diagnosis.  Dehydration, secondary to gastrointestinal fluid loss 
plus pre-renal failure.
• Management:  Volume replacement can often be achieved with oral 
rehydration solutions but because of hypotension, this man was 
given intravenous 0.9% saline initially over 1 hour, followed by 1 litre 
of 0.9% saline plus 20 mmol K+ 4-hourly for 24 hours. He quickly 
improved and clinically appeared euvolaemic (normal venous 
pressure, pulse and blood pressure) by the next day. (NB. Stool cul­
tures grew Campylobacter, which is a common cause of severe 
gastroenteritis.)
226
Kidney and Urinary Tract Disease 
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Management
Airways, circulation and breathing were quickly assessed and ventilation 
started with a very tight-fitting facial mask.
Intravenous access was achieved with a large bore intravenous cannula 
and 0.9% saline started. A urinary catheter was inserted.
An emergency CT scan confirmed the haemothorax and an intercostal 
tube drain was inserted.
Abdominal CT confirmed free fluid in the abdomen and an abnormal 
small intestine, suggestive of ischaemia. Liver, spleen and other organs 
seemed normal.
A CVP line was inserted to assess fluid balance. Fluid challenge (Table 
9.2 and Fig. 9.2) indicated hypovolaemia, and blood transfusion (2 units) 
was started with repeated checks on his fluid status.
A laparotomy was performed and 20 cm of small bowel resected.
On post-op, his vital signs were stable but he had not passed urine 
despite intravenous furosemide and adequate fluid replacement. His urea 
and creatinine have risen, indicating acute kidney injury due to acute 
tubular necrosis.
Case history (2)
A 24-year-old man is involved in an RTA, receiving injuries to his 
chest and abdomen.
On admission to the Trauma Unit he is shocked, with a 
tachycardia of 120 bpm, BP 90/55 and cold, clammy peripheries. 
His GCS score is 12.
Examination of his chest reveals a right haemothorax. 
Abdominal examination shows a tender, rigid abdomen with no 
bowel sounds, suggestive of peritonitis.
Remember
• Examine the patient again!
• Then again later (today)!!
• And again (tomorrow)!!!
Laboratory tests are no substitute for clinical assessment.
Use CVP dynamically (Fig. 9.2). Take reading
↓
Give IV bolus (100 mL 0.9% saline) fluid challenge
↓
Repeat reading
CVP ↑ – full
CVP ↓ – not full
There is no absolute value
Do this yourself! If done correctly this gives accurate information
Table 9.2  Fluid challenge
227
Fluid balance and electrolytes: sodium problems
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Figure 9.2  Fluid challenge. 
CVP (cm H2O)
1
0
10
5
0
2
3
4
5
6
Hypervolaemia
Normovolaemia
Hypovolaemia
Time (min)
Further management is provided by the Renal Unit with the aim of 
controlling fluid and electrolyte balance, and treatment of sepsis until the 
kidneys spontaneously recover. After 10 days’ management, including 
haemofiltration (necessary for uncontrolled hyperkalaemia), he started to 
pass urine and eventually made a good recovery.
FLUID BALANCE AND ELECTROLYTES: SODIUM 
PROBLEMS
What are you actually measuring when you measure the serum sodium?
A ratio of:
 Extracellular Na+ in mmol
 Extracellular water in litres.
Using this concept you can describe how serum Na+ becomes abnormally 
low (hyponatraemia) or high (hypernatraemia) (Table 9.3).
How do I work out why?
The key is to determine the extracellular water. Examine the patient (see 
Fig. 9.1).
Hyponatraemia
This is defined as sodium < 135 mmol/L.
Ratio (Na+ : water)
Extracellular water
Hyponatraemia
Water ↑
→ or ↓
Water ↑ > Na+ ↑
↓↓
Na+  ↓
↓
Hypernatraemia
Water ↓
→ or ↓
Water ↓ > Na+ ↓
↓↓
Na+  ↑
↑
Table 9.3  Hyponatraemia and hypernatraemia
228
Kidney and Urinary Tract Disease 
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Management
 Fluid assessment
 Examine fluid charts.
On examination there were no features of fluid depletion, which excludes 
true Na+ depletion.
You then discover that she had been receiving 5% glucose by IV infusion 
since surgery 3 days ago. This is probably the most common cause of 
hyponatraemia in a surgical patient.
Action
 Stop IV fluids, restrict oral fluids to 1 litre daily and food as requested 
by the patient. 48 hours later her serum sodium is 132 mmol/L.
Other causes of hyponatraemia
• Diuretic therapy: particularly loop diuretics cause large renal 
losses of salt and water and metabolic alkalosis.
• Severe heart failure, advanced liver cirrhosis or nephrotic 
syndrome: hyponatraemia with increased total body sodium and 
even greater excess of water resulting in ascites and oedema. 
Plasma osmolality is low. Increased water orally continues in the 
face of salt restriction, diuretic therapy or both and will 
aggravate the ascites and oedema.
• Syndrome of inappropriate ADH production (p. 459).
• Pseudohyponatraemia: e.g. hyperlipidaemic states where 
sodium is confined to the aqueous phase or monoclonal 
gammopathies, hyperglycaemia (10 mmol rise reduces sodium 
by approximately 2 mmol).
Remember
Wherever sodium goes, water is sure to follow, and vice versa.
Case history
The gynaecology SHO is worried about a 53-year-old woman who 
is 3 days post-op after a transabdominal hysterectomy. Her serum 
Na+ has fallen to 123 mmol/L. The SHO asks whether the woman 
should be given some 1.8% (twice-normal) saline? The polite 
answer is No!
Further reading
Sterns RH, Hix JK, Silver S. Treatment of hyponatraemia. Curr Opin Nephrol 
Hypertens 2010; 19(5): 493–498.
229
Fluid balance and electrolytes: sodium problems
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Hypernatraemia
Case history
A 47-year-old man is in the Neurosurgical Unit, having had a 
pituitary tumour removed by trans-splenoidal surgery. He has 
made a normal postoperative recovery but on review prior to 
discharge he complains of excess thirst and nocturia.
Review of the fluid balance charts show that he is drinking 
nearly 5 litres a day, with a urinary output of 3.5 L.
Recent blood tests show a serum Na+ of 153 mmol/L.
You diagnose cranial diabetes insipidus which you know occurs 
transiently for a few days or weeks after pituitary surgery.
Hypernatraemia is defined as sodium > 145 mmol/L.
 Iatrogenic: IV infusion of hypertonic sodium bicarbonate, hyperalimen­
tation by IV route or nasogastric tube, sodium chloride tablets, sea water 
drowning or mineralocorticoid excess; total body sodium is elevated in 
these conditions. Signs are of hypervolaemia.
 Impaired thirst/unconscious patient: total body sodium is low because 
of both sodium and water deficit but water losses are greater than the 
losses of sodium. Signs are of hypovolaemia.
 Osmotic diuresis, e.g. diabetic ketoacidosis, radiocontrast, mannitol: 
total body sodium is low because of both sodium and water deficit, but 
water losses are greater than sodium losses. Urine is not maximally 
concentrated despite hyperosmolar state, in contrast to GI losses of 
sodium and water where urine is maximally concentrated. Signs here 
are of hypovolaemia.
 Water loss, e.g. diabetes insipidus: normal total body sodium. Signs are 
of euvolaemia.
Remember
True Na+ overload is invariably iatrogenic and gives a clinical 
picture of fluid overload.
Treatment
 Reassure the patient
 Avoid rapid correction (Fig. 9.3). Serum Na+ should not fall > 1 mmol 
every 2 hours, i.e. 10 mmol/24 hours.
 Initially give IV 0.45% saline. This is followed by 5% glucose with 
20 mmol/L K+ with frequent monitoring of volume status and serum 
Na+ level. This stays in the extracellular compartment (see assessing 
fluid status, p. 223).
Key points
 Examine the patient: know where their water is.
 Slow correction.
230
Kidney and Urinary Tract Disease 
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
 Hyponatraemia is a more common problem in clinical practice than 
hypernatraemia.
 Hypernatraemia is generally found in ITU patients.
PATIENT STOPPED PASSING URINE
Figure 9.3  Effect on the brain of changes in sodium concentration. 
Na+↑
H2O
WARNING
Brain
Osm
Blood
Osm
 = Cerebral dehydration
Na+↓
H2O
Blood
Osm
Brain
Osm
 = Cerebral oedema
Rapid correction = risk of brain damage
↑ Osmolality by > 2 mOsm/h
 – risk of osmotic demyelination syndrome (ODS) 
↓ Osmolality by > 2 mOsm/h
 – risk of cerebral oedema
(normal plasma osmolality = 270–290 mOsm/kg
!
Information
• Oliguria: urine output < 500 mL/day
• Anuria: urine output < 50 mL/day
Case history
The surgical house officer calls you at 10 p.m. to say that she has 
a 62-year-old man who is 2 days post-laparotomy and who isn’t 
passing urine.
231
Patient stopped passing urine
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
What should you do?
 Do: see the patient.
 Don’t: simply give telephone advice.
Take a detailed history of type of surgical procedure. Ask about GI bleed­
ing, dehydration or other fluid losses, nephrotoxic drugs, drugs associated 
with hypersensitivity reaction causing tubo-interstitial nephritis (e.g. peni­
cillins, NSAIDs, cephalosporins), evidence of previous renal insufficiency, 
and any radiological procedure with contrast enhancement. Anuria 
usually means obstructive uropathy or vasculitides rather than acute 
tubulo-nephritis (ATN); evidence of these conditions should be sought.
On examination the patient has a tachycardia of 110 bpm with a low 
BP 90/50.
Examination of his abdomen shows a healing laparotomy scar, no ten­
derness and no evidence of a palpable bladder.
Common causes of poor urinary output
 Urine retention: always catheterise.
 Dehydration: assess fluid status (see Fig. 9.1). Look at fluid balance 
charts.
 Shock: see Table 9.4.
 Drugs: look at medicines chart.
Results in this man
 No urine from catheter
 Your clinical assessment – hypovolaemic
 Fluid charts incorrectly filled in but patient seems to have received 2 
litres of fluid (intravenous and oral) over the last 48 hours.
Initial management
This man is fluid depleted and needs fluid replacement (Table 9.5):
 0.9% saline IV ( 20 mmol/K+) added to each litre
 Write up initial regimen: modulate according to patient age, size and 
severity
 Reassess fluid status regularly
 When in doubt use a CVP line.
Aim
To establish a diuresis of at least 100 mL per hour. In most cases, a failure 
to achieve this is because of inadequate fluid replacement.
BP
Peripheral 
perfusion
CVP
Brief action
Hypovolaemia
↓
↓
↓
Look for overt/covert 
loss and replace with 
appropriate fluid, e.g. 
saline or blood
Cardiogenic
↓
↓
→↑
Myocardial infarction 
might need inotropes
Septic
↓
→↓
→↓
Look for source, give 
antimicrobials ± 
inotropes if hypotensive
Table 9.4  Shock – failure of organ perfusion
232
Kidney and Urinary Tract Disease 
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Modified from Kumar and Clark Clinical Medicine 8th edn, 2012.
Na+ (mmol/L)
K+ (mmol/L)
HCO3 or 
equivalent 
(mmol/L)
Cl– (mmol/L)
Ca2+ (mmol/L)
Indication 
(see below)
Normal plasma values
142
4.5
26
103
2.5
Sodium chloride 0.9%
150
–
–
150
–
1
Sodium chloride 0.18% + glucose 4%
30
–
–
30
–
2
Glucose 5% + potassium chloride 0.3%
–
40
–
40
–
3
Sodium bicarbonate 1.26%
150
–
150
–
–
4
Compound sodium lactate (Hartmann’s)
131
5
29
111
2
5
1. Volume expansion in hypovolaemic patients. Rarely to maintain fluid balance when there are large losses of sodium. The sodium 
(150 mmol) is greater than plasma and hypernatraemia can result. It is often necessary to add KCl 20–40 mmol/L.
2. Maintenance of fluid balance in normovolaemic, normonatraemic patients.
3. To replace water. Can be given with or without potassium chloride. May be alternated with 0.9% saline as an alternative to (2).
4. For volume expansion in hypovolaemic, acidotic patients alternating with (1). Occasionally for maintenance of fluid balance combined 
with (2) in salt-wasting, acidotic patients.
5. Used for maintenance of fluid balance after surgery. The potassium content may be dangerous in renal failure but occasionally useful in 
the diuretic phase of acute tubular necrosis where hypokalaemia occurs.
Table 9.5  Fluid replacement
233
Acute heart failure
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Other actions
 U&Es
 Stop potentially nephrotoxic drugs
 Stop anti-hypertensive drugs
 Ask nurses to record daily weights and to make careful note of fluid 
intake and urine output on the fluid chart.
Still no urine?
 Are you certain the patient is adequately fluid replete?
 Check that the urine catheter is not blocked or misplaced.
 Give a loop diuretic, e.g. furosemide.
 The patient might now have established acute kidney injury. Refer to 
nephrologist.
Fortunately this man responded to fluid replacement and produced urine, 
intitially 50 mL/hour.
Key points
 Don’t miss urine retention.
 Recognise shock.
 Assess fluid status regularly.
 Most cases will need fluid replacement, and failure to achieve this can 
result in established renal failure.
ACUTE HEART FAILURE
Acute heart failure occurs when cardiac function falls, causing elevated 
cardiac filling pressure. This causes severe breathlessness with fluid accu­
mulating in the interstitial and alveolar spaces of the lung (pulmonary 
oedema).
Case history
A 65-year-old, 50-kg woman who smokes 20 cigarettes per day 
and with a past history of intermittent claudication, presented to 
A&E with acute shortness of breath. She is on no medication.
On examination she was centrally and peripherally cyanosed, 
and peripherally cold and clammy, with a raised JVP, gallop 
rhythm and bilateral coarse crackles up to both mid-zones. She 
had absent foot pulses and bilateral femoral bruits. Her BP at 
presentation was 195/98.
Her ECG showed hypertensive changes (with left ventricular 
hypertrophy) and a CXR showed bilateral perihilar shadowing. 
Initially, her biochemistry was:
• Na: 142 mmol/L
• K: 3.1 mmol/L
• Urea: 12 mmol/L
• Creatinine: 115 µmol/L. eGFR 44 mL/min/1.73 m2.
• Diagnosis:  Flash pulmonary oedema.
234
Kidney and Urinary Tract Disease 
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Treatment
She responded well to oxygen, IV morphine 10 mg, IV furosemide 50 mg 
and a vasodilator (captopril 12.5 mg) but 4 days later her biochemistry 
was:
 Na: 142 mmol/L
 K: 6.0 mmol/L
 Urea: 54 mmol/L
 Creatinine: 500 µmol/L (Fig. 9.4). eGFR 8 mL/min/1.73 m2.
What has gone wrong?
It is very likely that she has developed acute kidney injury. This is because 
she has underlying renovascular disease.
Figure 9.4  Interpreting serum creatinine. The serum creatinine in the healthy 
population is normally distributed according to muscle bulk. Only large, 
well-muscled men will usually have a creatinine > 110 if their renal function is 
normal. Therefore, for small people, creatinine does not get into the ‘abnormal’ 
range until half their renal function has been lost. 
Body-builder
Granny
80
100
µmol/L
120
Grade
GFR Criteria
UO Criteria
Risk
SCr × 1.5 or GFR decrease 
>25% (within 48 hr)
UO < 0.5 mL/kg/h × 6 h
Injury
SCr × 2 or GFR decrease 
>50%
UO < 0.5 mL/kg/h × 12 h
Failure
SCr × 3, GFR decrease >75%, 
UO < 0.3 mL/kg/h × 24 h
SCr > 350 µmol/L
with an acute rise > 40 µmol/L
Loss
Persistent AKI > 4 weeks
ESKD
Persistent ESKD > 3 months
SCr = serum creatinine; UO = Urinary output; ESKD = end stage kidney 
disease.
(Bellomo R, Kellum JA, Ronco C. Acute kidney injury. Lancet 2012; 380: 
756–766.
There is a new consensus definition that merges RIFLE criteria and the Acute 
Kidney Injury network definition (Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes 
(K-DIGO) group 2012).
RIFLE criteria for acute kidney injury
235
Acute heart failure
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Clinical suspicion of renovascular disease
 Most patients will have disseminated atheroma with missing pulses 
and/or bruits and a history of smoking.
 Abdominal/renal bruits (although they have a very strong association 
with renal artery stenosis (RAS)) are rare.
 ‘Flash pulmonary oedema’ (without an obvious precipitant) is a good 
predictor of renovascular disease.
 Brittle response to volume loading or off-loading (Fig. 9.5).
Note: her renal function was abnormal at presentation.
ACE inhibitors can cause acute kidney injury in patients with renovas­
cular disease (Fig. 9.6).
Figure 9.5  Fluid status in normal and renovascular disease. 
NORMAL
RENOVASCULAR DISEASE
Fluid
depletion
Fluid
overload
Euvolaemia
Very sick
Acute pre-renal
uraemia
Pulmonary
oedema
Well
Fluid
depletion
Fluid
overload
Euvolaemia
Very sick
Acute pre-renal
uraemia
Pulmonary
oedema
Well
Patients with renovascular disease (who also often have
a stiff, non-compliant left ventricle) will develop acute kidney
injury or LVF rapidly in the face of mild depletion or overload
236
Kidney and Urinary Tract Disease 
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Efferent arteriole
Afferent arteriole
Glomerulus
Smooth muscle
Glomerular filtration
Blood flow
STIMULUS
Reduced renal perfusion
→ reduced trans-glomerular
 
pressure
→ reduced GFR
Figure 9.6  Effect of ACE inhibitors/blockers. 
How should patients like this be managed?
The key to successful management is very careful fluid control.
Managing acute heart failure (AHF) in the presence 
of suspected renovascular disease
 Treat the pulmonary oedema: it is a dangerous and very distressing 
condition.
 Avoid ACEIs/AII blockers: use other vasodilators (this patient was 
given captopril!).
 Avoid rapid volume off-loading: titrate the diuretic dose against renal 
function.
 Insert a CVP line and use it properly (see Fig. 9.1).
 Examine (and weigh) the patient regularly: use low-dose dopamine (can 
be given via peripheral line at 2.5 mg/kg/min) for its natiuretic effect 
if no response to initial therapy.
237
Acute heart failure
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
RESPONSE
Intra-renal activation
of renin/angiotensin
system leads to
preferential efferent
arteriolar vasoconstriction
→ restores
 
trans-glomerular
 
pressure
→ restores GFR
Note:
This process may be entirely
intra-renal, but once established
can spill over into the systemic
vasculature. This is how vascular
disease causes hypertension
Renin
A II
A I
Tissue ACE
ACE inhibitor (or A II blocker)
ACEIs block this response
and can therefore abolish the
trans-glomerular pressure
gradient, and with it reduction
of glomerular filtration
A II
A I
Tissue ACE
Note:
Although, in this context,
blocking angiotensin II leads
to decreased renal vascular
resistance, any resultant
increase in renal blood flow
is of no benefit if no glomerular
filtrate is generated
Figure 9.6, cont’d
238
Kidney and Urinary Tract Disease 
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Renal imaging investigations
 Ultrasound: unequal renal size (> 2 cm difference) is a good predictor 
of renovascular disease but its absence does not exclude RAS. Duplex 
ultrasound is used to demonstrate renal artery perfusion.
 Isotope renography: unequal function, slow transit and altered dynam­
ics with captopril are all suggestive of renovascular disease. In experi­
enced hands and with good renal function, its sensitivity and specificity 
are 70% (creatinine < 150 µmol/L); however, in inpatients with severe 
renal impairment its sensitivity falls below 30%.
 MR angiography is increasingly used to visualise the renal arteries.
 Intra-arterial angiography: the gold standard – should be done by expe­
rienced radiologists with minimal contrast load.
Outcome in this patient
She responded to treatment of her AHF, her pulmonary oedema resolved 
and her renal function returned to normal.
She was then investigated for renal artery stenosis with magnetic reso­
nance angiography showing a narrowing of the right renal artery, thought 
to be due to atherosclerosis.
She was continued on diuretics and amlodipine, with good control of 
her blood pressure. She is under regular review.
On the natural history of atheromatous renovascular 
disease
 ACEI/AII blockers will cause ARF only if both kidneys are affected by 
RAS, or if only one functioning kidney is present. However, the 
atheroma is diffuse and progressive. Complete renal artery occlusion 
with total loss of renal function on one side is usually clinically silent.
 Anatomical renovascular disease is very common and much of it is not 
physiologically significant (but you can’t tell which is which until it is 
too late).
 Small vessel (intra-renal) disease behaves identically to main renal 
artery disease (but you can’t treat it).
HYPERKALAEMIA
Don’t let your patient die tonight!
Case history
A 70-year-old woman has been admitted by the vascular surgeons 
with an acutely ischaemic lower limb. The right leg, below the 
knee, was cold, the skin was mottled and there was no pulse 
below the knee. The patient was in agony with the pain in the limb 
and she was given intravenous morphine 10 mg. She is on an ACE 
inhibitor and diuretic for hypertension and also on an NSAID.
It is 2 a.m. The surgical SHO calls you because her K+ has 
come back at 7.2 mmol/L. The surgical SHO wants your help.
239
Hyperkalaemia
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Remember
• This is a life-threatening condition
• There are no usual symptoms of life-threatening hyperkalaemia.
What do you do next?
As K+ > 6.5 mmol/L:
 Immediate cardioprotection:
• 10 mL of 10% Ca gluconate over 10 min.
• Note: action is relatively short lived but dose can be replaced every 
15 minutes.
 Get K+ inside cells: 50 mL of 50% glucose with (or followed by) 10 U 
insulin. IV 50 mL sodium bicarbonate 8.4% is given over 1 h for severe 
acidosis pH < 6.9. Salbutamol infusion is now rarely used.
• Note: if the patient has a nasogastric tube then put it on free suction 
because it will remove acid and potassium, causing systemic alkalo­
sis, encouraging influx of potassium intracellularly (Fig. 9.7).
Now you have time to stop and think. The K+ is telling you that something 
has gone badly wrong. Find it and treat it!
Common reversible causes of K+
 Tissue hypoxia/damage
 Acidosis
 K+-sparing diuretics
 ACEI
 Blood transfusion
 Acute kidney injury.
Quick and simple ways to stop or reverse underlying 
causes of raised K+
 Establish a diuresis.
 Stop ACEIs/NSAIDs.
 Stop blood transfusion.
 Successfully treat systemic sepsis.
Remember
If K+ is not responding, your patient might need dialysis – refer to 
nephrologist. If the patient’s early U&Es suggest acute or chronic 
kidney disease then make arrangements to move the patient to a 
dialysis unit after initial resuscitative measures.
Don’t sit too long on such patients – dialysis could be the only 
option.
While you are thinking
 Assess volume status.
 Assess ischaemic/damaged tissue. What do the surgeons think about 
the viability of the leg.
240
Kidney and Urinary Tract Disease 
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Figure 9.7  Potassium: some facts. 
Ca2+ – physiological
antagonist to effects
of extracellular K+ on
the cardiac myocyte
Peaked
T-waves
Increased potassium
Loss of
P-waves
‘Sine wave
pattern’
K+ lives inside happy cells and
leaks out of damaged cells.
You can push K+ back
inside cells with:
Salbutamol
Insulin
HCO3: ↑pH results in H+ release
            from cells as part of
            buffering reaction
by ↑activity of
Na–K–ATPase
pump
ATP
K+
Na+
K+
H+
 Repeat ECG.
 Check ABGs.
 Check drug chart.
As you can’t promptly reverse the cause
 Give a loop diuretic, e.g. furosemide.
 Treat tomorrow’s K+ with Ca2+ resonium (15 g orally with 10 mL lactu­
lose or 30 g PR).
Remember
1 mL of 8.4% NaHCO3 = 1 mmol Na+. Don’t kill your patient with 
sodium overload (see Fig. 9.1).
241
The acidotic patient
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Now go back to re-examine the patient and assess
 Fluid status
 Peripheral perfusion
 Acid-base status
 Re–check U&Es
 ECG changes.
Remember
These myths are NOT true:
• A normal ECG implies your patient is not in danger
• Ca2+ resonium will alter tonight’s K+.
Further management
An urgent angiogram was performed which showed a thrombosis in the 
right femoral artery near the junction of the popliteal artery.
Thrombolysis was initially used as the surgeons felt removal of the 
thrombus would not be feasible. She did not respond and gangrene 
occurred so that a below knee amputation then became necessary.
Less common causes of hyperkalaemia
• Endocrine:
– Addison’s disease
– Isolated hypoaldosteronism
– C-21 hydroxylase deficiency
– Congenital adrenal syndromes, e.g. 3-β 
hydroxydehydrogenase deficiency.
• Additional drugs:
– Ciclosporin
– Succinylcholine
– NSAIDs.
• Others:
– Tumour lysis syndrome
– Periodic hyperkalaemia paralysis
– Malignant hyperthermia
– Familial hyperkalaemia acidosis.
THE ACIDOTIC PATIENT
Case history
A 50-year-old woman with chronic kidney disease developed 
laryngeal oedema as an idiosyncratic reaction to a phenothiazine. 
She became hypotensive and oliguric. On admission, her blood 
gases showed:
Continued
242
Kidney and Urinary Tract Disease 
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Remember
Only <5% of patients admitted with pH 7.0 or less survive to 
discharge from hospital. This is because severe acidosis is usually 
a reflection of serious underlying problems.
7.1
0
79
40
0
7.4
[H+]
pH
• Remember pH is a log scale. A pH of <7.15 means that
 the [H+] (hydrogen ion concentration) has doubled.
• Before pH falls significantly, extensive buffering capacity must
 be consumed. Once this has happened patients are highly unstable.
Figure 9.8  pH: some facts. 
How to manage severe acidosis
 Airway
 Breathing
 Circulation.
Problems with any of these will contribute to acidosis and must be 
corrected.
Identify and treat the underlying problem
Tissue damage/hypoxia is by far the most common cause of metabolic 
acidosis due to lactic acidosis. Examples include:
Case history (continued)
• pH: 6.9 (Fig. 9.8)
• pO2: 6.0
• pCO2: 8.2
• HCO3: 15
Following intubation, ventilation and fluid resuscitation, her BP 
rose to 145/70. Her blood gases returned to normal over the next 
12 h.
243
The acidotic patient
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
 Sepsis:
• Hypotensive patient with warm peripheries
• Often apyrexial and/or normal WBC on presentation especially if 
very sick or elderly
• Sometimes develop low PO4.
 Rhabdomyolysis:
• Areas of muscle necrosis not always clinically evident
• PO4 ↑, K+ ↑
• Might have a biphasic Ca2+ pattern (initially this ↓ due to binding to 
damaged muscle, then ↑).
 Bowel ischaemia:
• Severe acidosis
• PO4 ↑, K+ ↑
• Often have evidence of peripheral vascular disease.
 Heart failure:
• Pump failure leading to tissue hypoperfusion
• Often accompanied by renal hypoperfusion and impaired renal 
function.
 Overproduction of acid or inability to excrete acid: Examples include:
• Diabetic ketoacidosis
• Renal failure
• Alcoholic ketoacidosis
• Salicylate intoxication
• Methanol poisoning
• Ethylene glycol ingestion.
Note: all the above result in metabolic acidosis with high anionic gap.
Examples of normal anionic gap acidosis (hyperchloraemic acidosis):
 Diarrhoea
 Renal tubular acidosis
 Dehydration
 Interstitial renal disease
 Ureterosigmoidostomy
 Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (acetazolamide)
 Arginine hydrochloride ingestion
 Ammonium chloride ingestion.
Remember
Find and treat the underlying cause.
The role of IV HCO3 in acidosis
 The role of IV HCO3 is not clear (Fig. 9.9)!
 Remember, 8.4% HCO3 = 1 mmol/mL Na+. It is very easy to precipitate 
volume overload.
 HCO3 might be indicated if pH < 7.25 in an attempt to reduce the depres­
sion of myocardial function produced by severe acidosis.
244
Kidney and Urinary Tract Disease 
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Figure 9.9  Theoretical reasons for adverse effect of HCO3 in small rodent 
models of lactic acidosis. Conclusions: if you are called to A&E to see a rat with 
lactic acidosis, do not under any circumstances give it IV NaHCO3. 
CO2
CO2
HCO3
HCO3
CO2 equilibrated more rapidly between ECF and ICF than HCO3
CO2
CO2↑
HCO3
HCO3 infusion
HCO3↑
HCO3 infusion titrates extracellular H+ causing a rise in CO2 which
equilibrates across ECF/ICF before the HCO3 can get into cells
Intracellular CO2 rises, leading to worsening intracellular acidosis
CO2 ↑
[H+] ↑
245
Acute kidney injury
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
ACUTE KIDNEY INJURY
Acute kidney injury is an abrupt deterioration of renal function over the 
course of a few days or weeks. It is usually (but not always) reversible.
Remember
Bicarbonate will not save your patient if you don’t correct the 
underlying cause of acidosis (but it might help keep them alive 
until you do).
Case history
A 75-year-old man has a 5-day history of anorexia, nausea, 
vomiting and lethargy. His doctor has noted the following findings:
• Hb: 100 g/L
• Urea: 48 mmol/L
• Creatinine: 820 µmol/L. eGFR 6 mL/min/1.73 m2. K+ 5.6 mmol/L.
The previous history includes mild hypertension and 
osteoarthritis.
Investigations
• Ultrasound (see below)
• Immunological markers: ANA, ENA, ANCA, anti-GBM 
antibodies, cryoglobulins, complements, ASOT
• Serum protein electrophoresis
• 24-h urinary protein loss
What are your priorities?
1.  Safety
 Treat his life-threatening hyperkalaemia (see p. 239).
 Fluid assessment (see Fig. 9.1):
• Dry: treat with fluids
• Wet: treat with fluid restriction
• OK.
In this case, the patient has a K+ of 5.6 mmol/L and his fluid status is OK. 
At this stage, review/stop any drug therapy. Now, you have to consider:
 Why does this man have acute kidney injury?
 Is it reversible?
 Do you need to refer to a renal unit?
2.  Test the urine (and send MSU)
Blood + protein = ‘active’ urine, suggests active glomerular disease in the 
absence of infection. Some hospitals provide a facility for urinary RBC 
morphology on fresh urine by polarising microscopy. Predominant dys­
morphic RBCs are highly suggestive of glomerular pathology.
246
Kidney and Urinary Tract Disease 
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
3.  Renal tract imaging
In this case the renal ultrasound is normal. This tells you:
 There is a low probability of obstruction
 There is the potential that there is a reversible component.
4.  Refer to a renal unit
 Don’t delay! The most common concern expressed by renal units is that 
referring teams wait too long to transfer cases and patients are in a 
critical condition when they arrive on the unit.
 Be prepared: see Questions you will be asked (below).
Guide to indications for dialysis
There is no magic level of urea or creatinine. Dialysis is indicated:
 In uncontrolled hyperkalaemia
 In unresponsive pulmonary oedema
 When patient symptoms demand.
Outcome
In this case, the patient turned out to be taking an NSAID. He required 
haemodialysis for uncontrolled vomiting and subsequently had a renal 
biopsy. This showed tubulo-interstitial nephritis secondary to NSAID 
therapy. He responded well to a short course of steroids.
Questions you will be asked when referring to a renal unit
 Is the patient passing urine?
 What is the fluid status of the patient?
 Have you done a renal ultrasound?
 Is the urine ‘active’?
 Any nephrotoxic drugs?
 Hepatitis status?
 Any information on patient’s prior renal function?
Renal tract imaging
Ultrasound
• Non-invasive
• Independent of renal function
• Can measure size (renal length and cortical thickening)
• Limited or no view of ureters
• Low detection rate of renal calculi
• Operator dependent
• CT KUB
Intravenous urogram (IVU)
• Good visualisation of pelvico-calyceal system and ureters
• Gives some functional information
CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE
Chronic kidney disease is used to describe long-standing, usually progres­
sive, impairment in renal function.
247
Chronic kidney disease
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Case history
A 35-year-old woman registers with a new doctor and is found to 
be hypertensive (180/105), with blood and protein in her urine. She 
has no specific symptoms.
On examination pallor, BP 180/105, grade II hypertensive, 
retinopathy, renal ultrasound – small non-obstructive kidney.
Investigations
 Hb: 85 g/L
 Urea: 18.0 mmol/L
 Creatinine: 310 µmol/L, eGFR = 20 mL/min/1.73 m2.
Estimation of creatinine clearance
Cockroft–Gault equation
Creatinine clearance
age
weight kg
constant
Serum cr
=
−
×
×
(
)
(
)
(
)
140
eatinine
mol/L
[
]
µ
Constant = 1.23 for males and 1.04 for women.
Modification of diet in renal disease (MDRD) equation
Calculation of estimated GFR by 4 variables:
Estimated GFR (mL/min/1.73 m2) = 186 × (SCr) – 1.154 × (age) 
– 0203 × constant (0.742 if female) × (1.210 if Black African)
To convert creatinine values in µmol/L to mg/dL multiply by 
0.0113.
From: MacGregor MS, Boag DE, Innes A. Chronic kidney disease. Quarterly 
Journal of Medicine 2006; 99: 365–375.
Clinical features seen in CKD are shown in Figure 9.10.
This woman has irreversible chronic kidney disease and subsequent 
follow-up showed a progressive rise in creatinine.
Classification of CKD
Stage
GFR
(mL/min/
1.73 m2)
Description
1
≥90
Normal or increased glomerular filtration 
rate (GFR), with other evidence of kidney 
damage
2
60–89
Slight decrease in GFR with other evidence 
of kidney damage
3A
45–59
Moderate decrease in GFR with or without 
other evidence of kidney damage
3B
30–44
Continued
248
Kidney and Urinary Tract Disease 
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Anaemia
Pallor
Lethargy
Breathlessness on exercise
CNS
Confusion, coma, fits
(severe uraemia)
CVS
Uraemic pericarditis
Hypertension
Peripheral vascular
   disease
Heart failure
Renal
Nocturia
Polyuria
Salt and water
   retention
Renal osteodystrophy
Osteomalacia
Muscle weakness
Bone pain
Hyperparathyroidism
Osteosclerosis
Adynamic bone disease
Oedema
Platelet
abnormality
Epistaxis
Bruising
Skin
Pigmentation
Pruritus
GI tract
Anorexia
Nausea
Vomiting
Diarrhoea
Endocrine/gonads
Amenorrhoea
Erectile dysfunction
Infertility
Polyneuropathy
Figure 9.10  Symptoms and signs of chronic kidney disease. From Kumar and 
Clark Clinical Medicine 8th edn, 2012.
Classification of CKD (continued)
Stage
GFR
(mL/min/
1.73 m2)
Description
4
15–29
Severe decrease in GFR with or without 
other evidence of kidney damage
5
<15
Established renal failure
Note: The suffix ‘P’ can be applied to the stage of CKD if the patient 
has significant proteinuria, defined as a urinary albumin:creatinine ratio 
>65 mg/mmol or protein:creatinine ratio >100 mg/mmol.
Source: NICE Clinical guidance 73. Chronic kidney disease. 2011.
249
Chronic kidney disease
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Note: Not all patients with CKD have small, shrunken kidneys. Normal 
or larger than normal kidneys can be seen in diabetic nephropathy, amy­
loidosis, polycystic kidneys and hydronephrosis (here cortical thinning is 
the sign of irreversibility).
How do you manage this case?
Remember
Control of hypertension is the single most useful factor in CKD.
 The approach should be multidisciplinary (Fig. 9.11).
PATIENT
Monitor first and
treat aggressively,
e.g. hypertension
Prepare for renal
replacement therapy
(dialysis/transplantation)
Correct anaemia
Dietary advice
Cardiovascular
risk management
Look for and treat
hyperparathyroidism
Note:
This approach can only be carried out in a
renal unit, so this case will need to be referred
Figure 9.11  Multidisciplinary approach to chronic kidney disease. 
Remember
• CKD is an insidious condition with no specific symptoms. In 
some cases, patients do not present until they have reached 
the stage when dialysis is required
• Preparing the patient for dialysis is a specialist task: refer!
• CKD is a major cardiovascular risk factor: the average dialysis 
patient is approximately 20 times at risk.
Preparing the patient
 Educate: a specialist counsellor should be consulted.
 Renoprotection.
250
Kidney and Urinary Tract Disease 
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
 Decide on mode of therapy: haemodialysis versus peritoneal dialysis 
versus pre-emptive renal transplantation if a live related or spousal 
kidney donor is willing to donate.
 Plan access surgery: an AV fistula requires at least 6 weeks before it can 
be used.
Specific conditions:
Hyperparathyroidism
 Measure PTH: radiographs only become diagnostic in advanced 
cases.
 Control phosphate:
• Dietitian
• Phosphate-binding drugs, e.g. calcium carbonate, calcium acetate, 
Sevelamer and aluminium hydroxide in selected cases.
 Vitamin D analogues (e.g. alphacalcidol).
 Monitor Ca2+, phosphate, PTH and alkaline phosphate levels.
Anaemia
 Correct iron deficiency (if present).
 Erythropoietin: can only be given by IV or by subcutaneous injection 
× 1 to × 3 weekly. Erythropoietin alpha can only be given by IV route 
because of increased risk of pure red cell aplasia (PRCA).
 Target Hb 115–130 g/L.
 Monitor BP.
In summary, this woman with CKD had well controlled BP but her renal 
function gradually deteriorated and she eventually agreed to have haemo­
dialysis and possible transplantation in the future.
Renoprotection
Goals of treatment
BP < 120/80
Proteinuria < 0.3 g/24 hours
Treatment
Patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) and proteinuria 
> 1 g/24 hours:
• ACE inhibitor increasing to maximum dose
• Add angiotensin receptor antagonist if goals are not 
achieved*
• Add diuretic to prevent hyperkalaemia and help to 
control BP
• Add calcium-channel blocker (verapamil or diltiazem) if goals 
not achieved
Additional measures
• Statins to lower cholesterol to < 4.5 mmol/L
• Stop smoking (threefold higher rate of deterioration in CKD, if 
smoker)
• Treat diabetes (HbA1c < 7%/53 mmol/mol)
• Normal protein diet (0.8–1 g/kg bodyweight)
*In type 2 diabetes start with angiotensin receptor antagonist.
251
Multisystem vasculitis/acute glomerulonephritis
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Further reading
Levey AS, Coresh J. Chronic kidney disease. Lancet 2012; 379: 165–180.
Appel LJ, Wright JT Jr, Greene T et al. Intensive blood pressure control 
in hupertensive chronic kidney disease. New Engl J Med 2010; 363: 
918–929.
MULTISYSTEM VASCULITIS/ACUTE 
GLOMERULONEPHRITIS
Case history
A 54-year-old man with a 1-month history of cough and shortness 
of breath (SOB), which has not responded to two courses of 
antibiotics from his doctor (amoxicillin, then clarithromycin and 
co-amoxiclav), re-presented to his doctor complaining of fatigue, 
muscle aches and pains. He requested a ‘tonic’.
A week later he came to A&E complaining of acute SOB. His 
CXR showed fluffy bilateral patchy alveolar shadowing, and his 
serum creatinine was 350 µmol/L. On further investigation, he was 
c-ANCA positive. Renal biopsy showed focal necrotising 
glomerulonephritis. He responded well to immunosuppression with 
corticosteroids and cyclophosphamide.
Information
Most doctors see many patients with vague muscular aches and 
pains in a working day; they will see few, if any, patients with 
multi-system vasculitis in their working lifetimes.
To identify patients with multi-system vasculitis, dipstick the 
urine and don’t ignore microscopic haematuria.
Inflammatory autoimmune vasculitis: microscopic 
polyangiitis/Wegener’s granulomatosis
Very non-specific presentation – typically vague arthralgia and myalgia 
with fatigue, anorexia and malaise. At a later stage, patients might develop:
 Vasculitic rash
 Mono-neuritis multiplex
 Arthritis
 Ear/nose/throat symptoms, such as epitaxis or deafness.
At this point the diagnosis is more obvious but these diseases respond well 
to treatment if diagnosed early.
Remember
If diagnosed late, these diseases have difficult and life-threatening 
complications.
252
Kidney and Urinary Tract Disease 
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Pulmonary haemorrhage
 Most common disease-related cause of death in ANCA +ve vasculitis 
and anti-GBM (glomerular basement membrane) disease (Goodpas­
ture’s syndrome).
 CXR appearances very variable but usually patchy alveolar shadowing 
(can mimic, or be accompanied by, pulmonary oedema or chest 
infection).
 Often precipitated by pulmonary oedema/infection/smoking.
 Can be diagnosed non-invasively by finding increased KCO (carbon 
monoxide (CO) binds to blood and gives falsely elevated KCO).
What to do
 The patient requires an urgent nephrology and ITU referral: these 
patients can become very sick very quickly, and may need ventilation 
and plasma exchange.
How to diagnose multi-system vasculitis
If you find microscopic haematuria in a patient with non-specific malaise/
myalgia:
 Enquire specifically for suggestive symptoms:
• Nasal 
congestion/nose 
bleeds 
with 
polyangiitis 
(Wegener’s 
granulomatosis)
• Rash
• Neurological symptoms.
 Examine carefully for:
• Splinter haemorrhages
• Nail-fold infarcts
• Mouth ulcers
• Rash
• Neuropathy.
 Don’t assume that microscopic haematuria is due to UTI: send an MSU.
 If there are suggestive symptoms or signs: discuss with a 
nephrologist.
 If there are no suggestive symptoms or signs but MSU is –ve for a 
urinary tract infection: Check renal function; if it is abnormal, discuss 
with a nephrologist.
ANCA points (Fig. 9.12)
 False +ves occur in situations of polyclonal B-cell activation (usually on 
immunohistology but not against specific target antigens).
 ANCA –ve small vessel vasculitis can be clinically and pathologically 
identical to ANCA +ve vasculitis.
 Changes in antibody titre might be unrelated to, lag behind or precede 
changes in disease activity in different patients.
 ANCA subtypes are being recognised.
Remember
These diseases will irretrievably damage your patient’s kidneys in 
a matter of weeks. Prompt diagnoses and treatment can make the 
long-term difference between life on dialysis and life on a small 
dose of steroids.
253
Multisystem vasculitis/acute glomerulonephritis
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Target
antigen
PR-3
(Proteinase 3)
Associated
with
Granulomatosis with
polyangiitis (Wegener's
granulomatosis)
MPO
(Myeloperoxidase)
Microscopic
polyangitis
= Indirect immunofluorescence
Cytoplasmic
Perinuclear
(Perinuclear pattern
is an artefact of
alcohol fixation)
Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody
c-ANCA
p-ANCA
Figure 9.12  Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody. 
Other markers of disease activity
↑ ESR, ↑ CRP, thrombocytosis.
Other rapidly progressive glomerulonephritides (GN)
 Goodpasture’s disease is rare: it is classically described as a ‘one-hit’ 
disease and is less likely to be preceded by a non-specific prodrome than 
ANCA +ve vasculitis.
 IgA nephropathy, mesangiocapillary GN due to cryoglobulins, and 
diffuse proliferative GN in SLE can all present with a rapidly progres­
sive, crescentric nephritis.
Further reading
Berden AE, Ferrario F, Hagen EC et al. Histopathological classification of 
ANCA-associated glomerulonephritis. JASN 2010; 21: 1628–1636.
254
Kidney and Urinary Tract Disease 
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
INTERCURRENT ILLNESS IN DIALYSIS AND 
TRANSPLANT PATIENTS
Case history (1)
A 72-year-old, type 2 diabetic, haemodialysis patient was brought 
in by urgent ambulance to the A&E department complaining of 
chest pain and shortness of breath. He was due to be dialysed 
later that day at the nearest renal unit (5 miles away).
On admission he had signs of mild biventricular heart failure 
with a tachycardia, raised venous pressure, gallop rhythm, basal 
crackles and peripheral oedema. His ECG showed lateral 
ischaemia and his Hb was 82 g/L.
He was given IV nitrates and 2 units blood under cover of 
40 mg furosemide. As the second unit of blood ran through, he 
complained of acute shortness of breath, then suffered a 
cardiorespiratory arrest, from which he could not be resuscitated.
Remember
• Don’t give blood transfusion in a dialysis patient unless a 
nephrologist tells you to – you could precipitate lethal 
hyperkalaemia and volume overload (and the normal methods 
of treating these complaints will be ineffective)
• Also: even if your patient survives, you might sensitise him or 
her to HLA antigens in the blood, thereby denying the chance 
of a renal transplant
• As a general rule: dialysis patients should not be transfused 
while on dialysis.
Other things not to do in dialysis patients
1.  Access preservation
Dialysis access is essential for life-preserving treatment and potential sites 
for it are limited and easily damaged irretrievably (Fig. 9.13).
Use veins in hands or feet or the antecubital fossa. For central access use 
the internal jugular vein.
2.  Fluids
Dialysis patients do not need 2 L/day of IV fluid or furosemide 
postoperatively.
Things to watch out for in dialysis patients
 Vascular disease: ischaemic heart disease is very common in dialysis 
patients – even young ones. It is often unmasked by anaemia.
 Infection: dialysis patients are significantly functionally immunosup­
pressed. They cope poorly with sepsis and rapidly become systemically 
255
Intercurrent illness in dialysis and transplant patients
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Figure 9.13  Things not to do in dialysis patients. 
Don’t use AV
fistulas or
dialysis lines
for routine
IV access
Don’t insert
subclavian lines
Don’t cannulate
forearm veins,
especially not
the cephalic vein
at the wrist
unwell. Infections in access sites (lines, fistulae, PD catheters) are 
common and might not be clinically evident, e.g. subacute infective 
endocarditis and osteomyelitis – always think of these complications.
 Electrolytes: haemodialysis patients are often chronically hyperkalae­
mic pre-dialysis (and invariably hypokalaemic immediately post-
dialysis). They will often present with hypercalcaemia (too much 
vitamin D or Ca2+-based PO4-binders) or hypocalcaemia (too little).
 Poorly compliant patients are routinely hyperphosphataemic; if they 
then start taking their ‘prescribed’ doses of vitamin D (1-α calcidol) and 
Ca2+-based phosphate binders, their Ca2+ × PO4 product might exceed 
7 mmol/L, precipitating ectopic calcification.
256
Kidney and Urinary Tract Disease 
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Case history (2)
A 23-year-old renal transplant recipient (primary renal disease was 
reflux nephropathy), on standard triple-therapy 
immunosuppression (prednisolone, azathioprine, ciclosporin) 
presented with a hot, swollen, exquisitely painful right ankle.
The joint was aspirated. The fluid contained 5000 WCC/mm3 
with negative birefringent needle-shaped crystals seen on 
microscopy.
Diagnosis: Gout
The symptoms responded to colchicine 500 µg × 2 daily; allopurinol was 
started (300 mg × 1 daily) after 4 weeks with continuation of the colchicine 
therapy.
Three weeks later, the patient presented, shocked with pancytopenia, 
developed multi-organ failure, and died.
Beware drug interactions that matter in transplantation
Allopurinol and azathioprine
Azathioprine is metabolised to 6-mercaptopurine, which is metabolised by 
xanthine oxidase. Allopurinol inhibits xanthine oxidase and effectively 
trebles or quadruples the functional dose of azathioprine, leading to sig­
nificant bone-marrow depression.
This was the cause of the man’s pancytopenia and multi-organ failure.
Ciclosporin
Increase CyA levels:
 Macrolides e.g. erythromycin
 Calcium channel blockers
 Triazoles.
Reduce ciclosporin levels:
 Rifampicin
 Anti-epileptics.
Things to watch out for in renal transplant patients
Infections
The level of immunosuppression is high initially, then reduced. A wide 
range of opportunistic infections can occur (Table 9.6).
Viral
Bacterial
Protozoal
Fungal
CMV
TB
Toxoplasma
Pneumocystis
EBV
Listeria
Candida
HSV
Nocardia
Aspergillus
VZV
Salmonella
Table 9.6  Opportunistic infections that can occur in renal transplant 
patients
257
Nephrotic syndrome
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Vascular disease
Remains very common after transplantation. Death (with a functioning 
graft) from IHD is the cause of death in 50% of patients.
NEPHROTIC SYNDROME
Nephrotic syndrome is not a diagnosis but a set of signs and symptoms:
 Peripheral oedema
 Proteinuria: usually > 3 g per day
 Hypoalbuminaemia
 Hypercholesterolaemia: this is a secondary phenomenon due to 
increased liver synthesis associated with increased protein synthesis:
• It can be very resistant to lipid-lowering drugs
• Treat the primary condition
 Hypertension, which accompanies the fluid overload
 Thrombophilia: nephrotic syndrome is associated with an increased 
clotting tendency and risk of thromboembolic disease. It is also a sec­
ondary condition. However, while the patient is nephrotic, anti-
coagulation is indicated, especially in membranous nephropathy.
Remember
In nephrotic syndrome there is a reduction in relative circulating 
volume in the presence of oedema.
Case history
An 18-year-old woman presents with a 2-week history of swollen 
ankles and mild breathlessness on exertion.
On examination she had dependent oedema of the lower limbs 
to the knee with some facial oedema. Her pulse was normal, BP 
150/90. She had bilateral pleural effusions.
Investigations
 Serum albumin 19 g/L
 24-h urine protein 5.6 g per day confirming the nephrotic syndrome
 Fasting cholesterol 8.7 mmol/L
 Urine analysis, proteinuria, no blood or red cell casts (‘Bland’ urine 
segments).
Management
The aim in all such cases is to find the cause.
How?
Although various non-invasive tests might hint at the diagnosis, in most 
adult cases a renal biopsy is required.
Renal biopsy findings
Don’t panic – you do not need to know about renal histopathology!
258
Kidney and Urinary Tract Disease 
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Table 9.7 lists some of the common diagnoses and therapeutic 
strategies.
This patient turns out to have ‘minimal change’ disease. She responds 
to oral steroids (60 mg/m2 daily) slowly with a significant reduction in 
urinary protein, only after 12 weeks of high-dose therapy.
Remember HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN) in high-risk patients 
as a cause of unexplained renal impairment. HIV patients can also develop 
drug nephrotoxicity and haemolytic uraemic syndrome. Modern anti-
retroviral therapies have resulted in good renal outcomes in patients with 
nephrotic syndrome due to HIVAN.
Diagnosis
Treatment
Minimal change disease
Steroids (first line)
Cyclophosphamide
Membranous nephropathy
None
or ACE inhibitors to reduce 
proteinuria
or steroids
Alkaloids (cyclophosphamide or 
chlorambucil)
Rituximab
Lupus nephritis
Prednisolone + cyclophosphamide/
mycophenolate
Diabetic nephropathy
ACEI or AII receptor antagonist
Control hypertension: aim BP
< 120/80
Improve glycaemic control
Vasculitis
Prednisolone +/– azathioprine
Amyloid
Treat underlying condition
HIVAN (collapsing FSGS)
Anti-retroviral therapy
FSGS, focal segmental glomerulosclerosis.
Table 9.7  Some common diagnoses and therapeutic strategies
Remember
The use of IV albumin is controversial but its use is declining. 
However, where severe reduction in circulating volume threatens 
renal function, it might help prevent acute kidney disease.
Future progress
This woman’s steroids were reduced but she subsequently relapsed and 
was therefore given prednisolone 15 mg daily with cyclophosphamide 
2 mg/kg daily for 12 weeks. She is presently in remission.
259
Haematuria without albuminuria
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Further reading
Tervaert TW, Moovaart AL, Amann K et al. Pathological classification of 
diabetic nephropathy. JASN 2010; 21: 556–563.
HAEMATURIA WITHOUT ALBUMINURIA
Information
• Macroscopic haematuria (red colour urine): can be confused 
with bile pigments, porphyrins, haemoglobin and myoglobin. 
Confirm haematuria by microscopy
• Microscopic haematuria: more than 3–5 RBC per HPF on 
microscopy
Remember
Haematuria cannot cause anaemia. Look for another cause of 
anaemia such TB, neoplasms, and blood dyscrasias.
Aetiology
 Systemic: fever, anti-coagulant therapy, sickle-cell trait or disease, stren­
uous exercise or coagulopathies.
 Renal: glomerulonephritis (GN; IgA nephropathy, Alport’s, thin 
basement nephropathy), interstitial tubulonephritis, renal infarcts, TB, 
polycystic disease, papillary necrosis, neoplasm, trauma, vascular 
malformations.
 Urinary tract: calculi, foreign bodies, neoplasms, endometriosis, trauma, 
infections.
History
 Menstrual history to exclude vaginal cause of blood in urine.
 Frequency, urgency, dysuria or urethral discharge suggests bladder or 
urethral involvement.
 Pain or colic might be seen with stones, obstruction, infarction, poly­
cystic kidney disease (PCKD).
 Bleeding at the beginning of micturition suggests urethral cause 
whereas terminal bleeding is associated with prostate or bladder 
pathology.
 Rectal or perineal pain suggests prostatitis.
 Weight loss might suggest a neoplasm.
 History of blood dyscrasia or anti-coagulant therapy: anticoagulant 
therapy usage and haematuria should be investigated further for under­
lying lesions of urinary tract.
 Family history of PCK, sickle-cell disease or GN (Alport’s or thin base­
ment nephropathy).
 Upper respiratory tract infections or gastroenteritis: suggests exacerba­
tions of IgA nephropathy.
260
Kidney and Urinary Tract Disease 
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
 History of easy bruising or vasculitic rash, arthralgia and abdominal 
pain suggests Henoch–Schönlein purpura. Occasionally anti-GBM 
disease, SLE or vasculitis can present as isolated haematuria.
Physical examination:
 Look for elevated blood pressure or oedema (usually implies renal 
lesion).
 Bilaterally palpable kidneys (PCK).
 Unilateral mass (neoplasm or cystic or hydronephrotic kidney).
 Fever and tenderness over renal angle (pyelonephritis).
 Tender prostate (prostatitis).
 Presence of atrial fibrillation or valvular heart disease suggests embo­
lism or renal infarction.
 Presence of petechiae, ecchymosis, lymphadenopathy or splenomegaly 
may signal blood dyscrasia or clotting disorder.
Investigations
• Complete urinalysis: polarised microscopy may reveal 
dysmorphic RBC (glomerular origin) or isomorphic RBC 
(urothelial origin). Pyuria and haematuria with bacterial growth 
suggest UTI. No bacteriological growth triggers search for TB
• Full nephritic screen
• Imaging
• Ultrasound scan of kidneys and bladder with residual bladder 
volume assessment
• IVU/CT: stones and urinary tract lesions can be missed on 
ultrasound scan alone
• Cystoscopy is the best procedure for evaluating urinary tract 
after KUB/CT
URINARY TRACT INFECTION (UTI)
Case history
You are called to see a 19-year-old woman in MAU who is 
complaining of a 2-day history of frequency, dysuria and urgency. 
She has a temperature of 39.8°C with some right loin pain. 
Yesterday she had a rigor. She has a urinary tract infection (UTI) 
and presumed acute pyelonephritis in view of her high fever and 
right loin tenderness.
Information
• Frequency is defined as voiding every 2 hours or more than 
seven times per day. A variety of factors can affect voiding 
intervals, including fluid intake, drugs (diuretics), alcohol and 
caffeine. Patients with polyuria from any cause complain of 
261
Urinary tract infection (UTI)
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Information (continued)
frequency with an increased urine flow. By contrast, bladder 
inflammation can cause frequency without an increase in urine 
flow.
• Urgency is described as powerful sensation to void, regardless 
of bladder volume. Typically, voided volumes of these patients 
are small – much less than the patient’s normal maximum 
bladder capacity. Urgency is often caused by bladder 
inflammation but prostatic enlargement and external 
compression of the bladder by masses (as in pregnancy) can 
also generate the feeling of urgency.
• Dysuria (painful micturition) suggests irritation or inflammation 
in the bladder neck or urethra, usually because of bacterial 
inflammation.
She tells you that this is her first episode of an UTI. She has recently 
started to have frequent sexual intercourse with a new partner. She has no 
vaginal discharge and has never had a history of sexually transmitted 
infections.
Physical examination
A complete physical examination shows no abnormality apart from right 
loin tenderness. There is no urinary bladder distension or suprapubic 
tenderness.
Investigations
• Urinary dipstix are positive for both nitrite and leucocyte 
esterase.
• Urine microscopy: pyuria, bacteriuria and leucocyte casts are 
consistent with UTI.
• Mid-stream urine specimens sent for culture and sensitivity 
show E. Coli 105 organisms/mL.
• Full blood count, serum urea and electrolytes and blood 
cultures show no abnormality.
• An abdominal ultrasound showed no abnormality of the right 
kidney. Ultrasound should be performed when pyelonephritis is 
suspected to rule out calculi obstruction and incomplete 
emptying.
How would you manage this patient?
The most common bacterial cause of a UTI is E. coli. Administer one of the 
appropriate broad-spectrum antibiotics intravenously while waiting for 
culture report; pay specific attention to patient’s state of hydration:
 Cefuroxime (750 mg 8-hourly) for 3 days, then switch to oral therapy as 
per sensitivities
 Ciprofloxacin (500 mg oral × 2 daily if no sensitivities are available)
 Total antibiotic therapy is for 10 days.
262
Kidney and Urinary Tract Disease 
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
She made a good recovery.
Prophylactic measures to prevent further UTIs were advised:
 A 2 L daily fluid intake
 Voiding at 2- to 3-hour intervals with double micturition if reflux is 
present
 Voiding before bedtime and after intercourse
 Avoidance of spermicidal jellies and bubble baths and other chemicals 
in bathwater
 Avoidance of constipation, which may impair bladder emptying.
Further reading
Hooton TM. Uncomplicated urinary tract infection. N Engl J Med 2012; 366: 
1028–1037.
RENAL AND URETERIC COLIC
Case history
A 36-year-old man presented to his local A&E with excruciating 
right flank pain. How will you approach this case?
Likely diagnosis
Renal colic, which is often unilateral, is characterised by excruciating inter­
mittent pain, usually originating in the flank or kidney area, which radiates 
across the abdomen towards the suprapubic region. The pain of ureteric 
colic has similar characteristics but typically radiates along the course of 
the ureter, frequently into the region of the genitalia and inner thigh.
Aetiology
 Renal colic is usually caused by stretching of the renal capsule due to 
acute inflammation or bleeding within the kidney. Acute pyelonephri­
tis, an expanding cyst or an acute expansion of the renal pelvis due to 
pelviureteric obstruction by calculus or blood clot are the usual causes.
 Ureteric colic is often caused by the passage of a calculus, sloughed 
papilla or blood clot.
 Renal stones are usually calcium oxalate or calcium phosphate and 
caused by hypercalciuric or hyperoxaluric states. Other types of stones 
are struvite (magnesium ammonium phosphate) stones, which are 
caused by urea-splitting organisms, cystine stones (the result of an 
inherited disorder of cystinuria) and urate stones (idiopathic or hyperu­
ricosuric state).
In the history, ask about:
 Pain: this is usually associated with GI symptoms (nausea, vomiting, 
abdominal distension).
 Chills, fevers and increased frequency are common.
 Age at which symptoms of stones were first noted.
 Family history of nephrolithiasis.
263
Renal and ureteric colic
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
 History of fractures or prolonged immobilization.
 Previous urinary infections or manipulations.
 Intake of milk, alkali, salt and vitamins A, D and C.
Physical examination
The physical examination is usually unremarkable except for the presence 
of flank tenderness.
How would you investigate this patient?
 Urinalysis: the urine might be normal despite multiple calculi. Macro­
scopic or microscopic haematuria is common. Pyuria with or without 
bacteria may be seen.
 CT-KUB (CT of kidney, ureter and bladder) is carried out during the 
episode of pain; a normal CT excludes the diagnosis of pain due to 
calculous disease. The CT-KUB appearances in a patient with acute left 
ureteric obstruction are shown in Figure 9.14.
How would you manage this patient?
Give adequate analgesia, e.g. IV infusion diclofenac 75 mg, repeating as 
necessary. Opioids can usually be avoided.
This patient passed a small stone later in the day; it was found to be a 
calcium oxalate stone. He was referred to the renal physician for the cause 
of his stone formation.
Cause of stone formation
 Urinary excretion of calcium, phosphate, oxalate, urate, cystine should 
be performed on at least two separate occasions.
a
Figure 9.14  (a) Left ureteric calculus. 
Continued
264
Kidney and Urinary Tract Disease 
9 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
(b) A dilated renal pelvis (arrow) proximal to the ureteric 
stone in (a). 
 Morphological and biochemical analyses should be performed on all the 
stones that are passed.
This patient was advised to take a high fluid intake and dietary oxalate 
restriction (refer to a dietitian).
Further reading
Worcester EM, Coe FL. Calcium kidney stones. New Engl J Med 2010; 363: 
954–963.
b
Figure 9.14, cont’d
265
265
Cardiology 10 
SYNCOPE
Simple faints are a common and benign condition. However, anyone wit­
nessing a faint will know that patients can look awful and it is not surpris­
ing that they are often brought to hospital for assessment. Patients who 
faint are often sat in a chair or even stood up – in both cases causing a 
recurrence or delaying recovery.
Case history (1)
A 25-year-old man is brought to hospital having fainted at work. 
He still appears pale but clinical examination is normal. He had a 
similar episode 2 years earlier. His resting 12-lead ECG is normal.
What are the key questions in establishing the diagnosis?
	 Reliable eye-witness account: if not available, make a phone call to the 
patient’s workplace.
	 Prodromal symptoms: non-specific but almost always present for some 
minutes before a vasovagal attack (faint).
	 Precipitating cause: anything from the sight of blood to a hangover!
	 Circumstance of event, frequently in:
•	 Pub (even without alcohol)
•	 Restaurant: before or after food
•	 Church, mosque or synagogue
•	 Warm environment.
In the absence of any abnormal investigations, the most likely diagnosis 
is vasovagal syncope (see Table 15.8, Features of fits and faints). You 
should be aware of some other specific forms of vasovagal syndrome:
	 Carotid sinus syncope: on turning head or shaving the chin. Due to 
carotid sinus hypersensitivity, usually in the elderly.
	 Cough syncope: after a paroxysm of coughing, usually in a patient with 
obstructive airways disease.
	 Micturation syncope: more common in men. Usually occurs in the night 
when going to pass urine or during micturation itself.
What is the differential diagnosis?
There are many other causes of syncope and all might need to be excluded.
	 Cardiac:
•	 Arrhythmia: associated with either profound bradycardia or tachy­
cardia. Symptomatic palpitations can be a pointer but are often not 
present.
266
Cardiology
10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
•	 Structural: e.g. outflow obstruction (notably aortic stenosis or 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy), ischaemia, tamponade, pulmonary 
embolism.
	 Neurological: seizures, cerebrovascular disease (TIA, CVA or vertebro­
basilar ischaemia) are the most common causes. A good eye-witness 
account is key to the diagnosis. Note: Some jerky movements of the 
limbs, and even incontinence, can occur in a prolonged vasovagal 
attack, especially if the patient remains upright.
	 Metabolic:
•	 Hypoglycaemia: well known in diabetics. Spontaneous hypoglycae­
mia from an insulinoma is a rare cause
•	 Hypoxaemia
•	 Drugs/alcohol.
	 Hyperventilation/anxiety (if suspected, symptoms can often be readily 
reproduced by voluntary hyperventilation): usually associated with a 
tachycardia. The patient often has symptomatic palpitations and might 
feel light-headed, a feeling of being distanced from the surroundings, 
chest pain and/or paraesthesiae with numbness in arms, hands or lips. 
Pallor and peripheral cyanosis can be striking in a full-blown attack. 
Circumstances provoking an attack can often be the same as for a faint 
(e.g. warm room, stressful situation).
	 Orthostatic hypotension: especially in elderly patients. This is often 
caused by drugs, e.g. for hypertension, but don’t forget autonomic 
neuropathy and Parkinson’s disease.
A cardiac cause of syncope should be sought in all patients with known 
structural heart disease.
• Progress.  This man was sent home, having made a full recovery 
from his ‘faint’.
Case history (2)
A 68-year-old man passed out suddenly at the wheel of his car 
and ran into the car in front. His wife reports that he was pale and 
sweaty but that loss of consciousness was brief and he recovered 
quickly.
On examination in A&E, pulse 78/min, BP 140/85, no 
abnormality found on examination.
His ECG showed left bundle branch block (LBBB).
Practice points
	 Sudden loss of consciousness without warning must be assumed to be 
a cardiac arrhythmia until proved otherwise.
	 Altered consciousness when driving has important legal implications 
and the patient must be warned not to drive again until the diagnosis 
is established.
Investigation
The history of the event is the key to further investigation and blanket 
investigations are unrewarding without some clinical pointers as to 
the cause.
267
Syncope 10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Generally, a single faint requires no further investigation but if there is 
some diagnostic doubt the symptoms can be reproduced by a tilt test. This 
is usually carried out with a mechanised tilt table giving a head-up tilt of 
60° for 45 min, with continuous ECG and BP monitoring. Although false 
positive results can occur, if the prodrome before the faint reproduces the 
symptoms it provides strong support for the diagnosis.
This patient required further investigation as the LBBB indicates cardiac 
disease.
• Diagnosis.  This man’s echocardiogram (echo) showed no abnormal­
ity. However, his ambulatory ECG monitoring subsequently showed 
periods of asymptomatic Mobitz type II second-degree heart block.
• Progress.  A pacemaker was implanted and he had no further 
problems.
Case history (3)
JR is a 26-year-old physiotherapist. Her first episode of 
unconsciousness occurred when she was at a party with her 
medical team. A nursing colleague thought that she was pulseless 
at the time of the collapse; the possibility of excess alcohol was 
considered. On arrival in A&E at a nearby hospital she was 
intubated and ventilated, and kept ventilated overnight. The next 
day she was well and therefore discharged. She had two further 
similar episodes requiring overnight admission to hospital.
Investigations
A 12-lead ECG and cardiac enzymes were normal on all three 
admissions. She was investigated with 24- and 48-h ECG tapes, 
echo and CT scanning of the head but no abnormalities 
were found.
An electrophysiological study was therefore performed, to 
exclude the possibility of tachyarrhythmia. During this study she 
spontaneously became bradycardic and hypotensive but no 
arrhythmias were induced.
A tilt table test performed the following day produced profound 
bradycardia, hypotension and syncope on 60° head-up tilting.
Remember
In a tilt test, syncope is often accompanied by 10–20 s of asystole. 
This recovers as soon as the patient is returned to the flat; for this 
reason a doctor should always be present.
268
Cardiology
10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Diagnosis
Neurally mediated syndromes are due to a reflex (called Bezold–Jarisch) 
that may result in both bradycardia (sinus bradycardia, sinus arrest and 
AV block) and reflex peripheral vasodilatation. These syndromes usually 
present as syncope or presyncope (dizzy spells).
Treatment and progress
A DDD pacing system (see p. 278) was implanted and programmed to 
produce a tachycardic response to counter any detected bradycardia of 
sudden onset. So far she has had no more syncopal attacks.
A CLINICAL APPROACH TO PATIENTS 
WITH TACHYCARDIA
The main reason people have difficulty assessing tachyarrhythmias is that 
they concentrate on the ECG changes without thinking about the patient 
to whom the ECG belongs.
Case history (1)
A 35-year-old man presents with a tachycardia at a rate of 180 per 
minute. He is not seriously compromised by his tachyarrhythmia 
and the BP is 128/64. The ECG shows narrow complex 
tachycardia.
There are three simple questions you need to ask yourself as you 
approach a patient with an acute tachyarrhythmia:
1. What is the heart rate? – i.e. 180 beats/min in this man
2. Has the patient collapsed?
In other words, is the patient clinically compromised by the tachycardia 
or not? In assessing the degree of cardiovascular collapse take the heart 
rate into account. Remember that the maximal heart rate you would expect 
a patient to achieve on the treadmill is 220 minus age.
Someone with a heart rate at this level (180 bpm) is going at the same 
rate you would expect if they had just hurried up several flights of stairs.
This man is not compromised by the tachycardia so it is likely that he 
has a good ventricle. People with heart rates substantially above their 
predicted maximum who tolerate the situation well are more likely to be 
suffering from a primary electrophysiological problem than from an 
arrhythmia secondary to LV disease.
3. Are the ECG complexes broad or narrow?
Divide tachycardias into broad complex (QRS complex of > 120 ms or three 
small squares on the standard ECG) or narrow complex, rather than try to 
split them into supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) and ventricular tachy­
cardia (VT) at the first glance. If you follow this approach you will not treat 
VT as an SVT, which is the error to avoid.
Having answered these questions, you should decide who needs admis­
sion to hospital (Table 10.1).
269
A clinical approach to patients with tachycardia 10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Broad complex
Narrow complex
Collapsed
Usually need immediate 
cardioversion and must be 
admitted from A&E. Do 
not give verapamil or other 
negatively inotropic drugs
Usually need admission into 
hospital, especially if the 
patient is in heart failure
Did not 
collapse
The most difficult category 
to sort out
Can probably go home if 
tachycardia stops on 
treatment (Case 1)
Probably need admission 
to sort out diagnosis
Need outpatient assessment
Irregular tachycardia in 
this group may be due to 
WPW with AF, so do not 
give verapamil
If this is a recurrent problem 
they need to be referred 
to a cardiologist to be 
considered for EPS, as 
they may benefit from 
radiofrequency ablation of 
their pathway or their 
arrhythmia focus
AF, atrial fibrillation; EPS, electrophysiological studies; WPW, Wolff–
Parkinson–White syndrome.
Table 10.1  Patients with tachycardia: who to admit to the Medical 
Assessment Unit?
Take a 12-lead ECG of the arrhythmia: this is essential to sort VT from 
the SVT. It is also valuable in sorting out the mechanisms in narrow 
complex tachycardias; the retrograde P waves can be seen in the ST–T 
segments in re-entrant tachycardias, but they may be seen only in some 
leads. Do not be fooled into thinking you can diagnose and manage 
arrhythmias with rhythm strips alone.
Remember
Think about the underlying state of the ventricle.
To be safe:
	 Always assume a broad complex tachycardia is VT until proved 
otherwise.
	 If in doubt use DC cardioversion rather than drugs.
	 Seek advice if your first drug does not work.
	 Beware of verapamil (which should not be used as first-line therapy) 
and other negatively inotropic drugs.
	 Check the electrolytes and correct them appropriately before using 
drugs, but do not delay treatment in a patient who is compromised 
because you are waiting for results. Remember in an emergency, K+ 
levels can be roughly measured using blood gas machines in A&E and 
used to guide replacement therapy.
270
Cardiology
10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
The ECG and classification of tachycardias
Broadly speaking, tachycardias are classified as either supraventricular 
(SVT) or ventricular (VT) in origin.
SVT
These are narrow complex tachycardias (Fig. 10.1), unless there is bundle 
branch block. Adenosine is very useful for their diagnosis and will termi­
nate some SVTs:
	 Atrial tachycardia: an SVT from a focus in the atrium, rather than due 
to re-entry.
	 Atrial flutter (Afl): look for regular rhythm, often with a rate of 150. 
Adenosine will help in the diagnosis, often revealing underlying flutter 
waves.
	 Atrial fibrillation (AF): look for lack of P waves, irregular rhythm and 
baseline; this can be very hard to see with very fast rates, in which case 
adenosine will help.
	 Re-entrant tachycardias:
•	 Wolff–Parkinson–White (WPW) is the classic example of a re-entrant 
tachycardia. The depolarisation wavefront ‘re-enters’ the atrium 
through the bundle of abnormal conducting tissue between ventricle 
and atrium. In some cases a bundle is present but is not visible on 
the resting ECG so that it is a ‘concealed pathway’. Never treat AF 
in WPW with digoxin or verapamil – this can lead to dangerous 
retrograde conduction down the accessory pathway leading to VF.
•	 AV nodal re-entry tachycardia (AVNRT).
Features suggesting that a tachycardia might be an SVT
	 Normal LBBB or RBBB morphology but be careful: VT from RV outflow 
tract with LBBB morphology can look like SVT. A small stubby R wave 
in V1–2 is characteristic of VT.
	 You might be able to see evidence of both atrial and ventricular activity. 
A constant relationship between the P waves and the QRS complexes 
suggests a supraventricular origin.
	 The frontal and horizontal QRS axes are in the same general direction 
as that in sinus rhythm.
	 It slows with manoeuvres designed to increase vagal tone, e.g. carotid 
sinus massage.
	 If the onset is witnessed you might see a P wave that is premature.
• Diagnosis.  Narrow complex supraventricular tachycardia.
Figure 10.1  Narrow complex tachycardia. 
271
A clinical approach to patients with tachycardia 10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Case history (2)
A 57-year-old woman presents with a tachycardia at a rate of 132 
per minute.
On examination she is hypotensive (90/50), looks pale and 
distressed and has bibasal crackles.
The 12-lead ECG shows an axis of –120° and the complexes 
are predominantly positive across the chest leads (regular broad 
complex tachycardia).
VT is more likely than SVT with bundle branch block where there is:
•	 a very broad QRS (> 0.14 s)
•	 extreme left axis deviation
•	 atrioventricular dissociation
•	 a bifid, upright QRS with a taller first peak in V1
•	 a deep S wave in V6
•	 a concordant (same polarity) QRS direction in all chest leads (V1–V6)
•	 presence of capture or fusion beats
•	 no response to adenosine
Table 10.2  Distinction between supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) 
with bundle branch block and ventricular tachycardia (VT)
Management
This rhythm responded to adenosine (see below), 3 mg IV going up in 
3-mg aliquots to a maximum of 12 mg. Intravenous beta blockade (Esmolol 
has a very short half-life of seconds and can be very useful) is also used. 
Synchronised DC cardioversion (start with 50 J) should be used if medica­
tion fails.
• Diagnosis.  This is broad complex tachycardia with gross axis devia­
tion, probably VT (see Table 10.2). She needs urgent treatment ( see 
below).
Ventricular tachycardia (VT)
This causes a broad complex regular tachycardia (Fig. 10.2), often called 
monomorphic VT. However, a broad complex pattern can be caused by 
any tachycardia if there is a pre-existing abnormality of the conduction 
system (usually bundle branch block). So, for example, AF with bundle 
branch block can cause a broad complex tachycardia that is irregular. 
Although adenosine (see below) can be useful for diagnostic purposes, do 
not waste time using it if the patient is compromised.
Features suggesting that a tachycardia might be a VT
	 A QRS duration of > 140 ms strongly suggests a ventricular origin.
	 The frontal and horizontal axes are grossly discordant with that seen in 
sinus rhythm. Most people are used to looking at the frontal QRS axis 
in the limb leads. The horizontal axis is estimated by seeing where the 
predominantly negative QRS complexes become equiphasic as you look 
272
Cardiology
10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
across from V1 towards V6. This equiphasic point is called the zone of 
transition and is usually at V3 or V4. In VT there might be no transition 
zone or it might be far to the right, or left, of V4.
	 QRS morphology: the pattern is not typical of LBBB or RBBB. These are 
specific appearances that strongly suggest VT, e.g. concordance; seek 
help if unsure.
	 Fusion beats: these are beats where there is simultaneous activation of 
the ventricles from a focus of arrhythmia and from the atria via the AV 
node at the same time. These beats will look like a cross between the 
standard VT complex and the patient’s normal complexes in sinus 
rhythm.
	 Capture beats: occasionally the atria ‘captures’ a normal complex in the 
midst of a tachycardia.
	 You might be able to see evidence of both atrial and ventricular activity. 
If there is no constant relationship between the P waves and the QRS 
complexes it suggests a ventricular origin and this is called atrioven­
tricular dissociation.
A word about torsade de pointes
Torsade de pointes is an uncommon form of VT with a characteristic ECG 
pattern (often called polymorphic VT (Fig. 10.3)). The complexes appear 
to twist around the baseline by virtue of their changes in amplitude. It is 
particularly associated with syndromes involving a long QT interval. 
Figure 10.2  Broad complex tachycardia after three normal beats. 
Figure 10.3  Torsade de pointes showing the complexes twisting around the 
baseline. 
273
A clinical approach to patients with tachycardia 10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Correct diagnosis of torsade de pointes is necessary because the treatment 
is very different from VT and treating the underlying cause can often have 
a marked effect.
Remember
Always think about the underlying state of the ventricle when 
treating an acute arrhythmia.
The acute treatment of arrhythmias
Problems with the use of any anti-arrhythmic drugs:
	 Many arrhythmias arise as a result of pre-existing LV disease. You need 
to be aware of any drugs that you give which could further suppress 
LV function and make matters worse.
	 A drug that is ineffective for the rhythm in question might also depress 
ventricular function without alleviating the rate-related stress on the 
ventricle.
	 The final catch when you are treating arrhythmias with drugs (Fig. 10.4) 
is that ischaemia might alter the electrophysiological activity of drugs. 
This means that drugs that are anti-arrhythmic under normal circum­
stances become pro-arrhythmic in ischaemic myocardium.
Figure 10.4  Drugs used to treat arrhythmias. The numbers in brackets refer to 
the Vaughan–Williams classification. 
AV node
β-blockers (II)
Verapamil (IV)
Digitalis
Adenosine
SA node
β-blockers (II)
Atropine
Digitalis
Atrium
Disopyramide (Ia)
Quinidine (Ia)
Procainamide (Ia)
Flecainide (Ic)
Propafenone (Ic)
Amiodarone (III)
Digitalis
Ibutilide
Dofetilide
Bypass tract
Disopyramide (Ia)
Quinidine (Ia)
Procainamide (Ia)
Flecainide (Ic)
Propafenone (Ic)
Amiodarone (III)
Ventricle
Disopyramide (Ia)
Quinidine (Ia)
Procainamide (Ia)
Lidocaine (Ib)
Mexiletine (Ib)
Flecainide (Ic)
Propafenone (Ic)
β-blockers (II)
Sotalol (II–III)
Bretylium (II–III)
Amiodarone (III)
274
Cardiology
10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Remember
Both digoxin and verapamil can be dangerous in WPW; if 
uncertain it is safer to cardiovert.
This limits the use of drugs in many patients because it is often difficult to 
exclude the possibility of coexisting ischaemia. Because of these problems 
it is often safer to use DC cardioversion than drugs.
A word on adenosine
Intravenous adenosine has revolutionised the diagnosis and management 
of acute tachycardias. It should be used in most SVTs and is safe because 
of its very short half-life. The major limitation is that is should not be used 
in asthmatics. It will not usually cardiovert AF or flutter but will slow the 
rate transiently (often for only one or two complexes – have the ECG 
running) and enable you to see the baseline, helping you make the diag­
nosis. It will cardiovert most other SVTs. Although it is safe to give adeno­
sine to patients in VT, it will not usually cardiovert the problem, although 
it might slow the rate. Remember to give it as a rapid bolus, warn the 
patient he or she will feel terrible transiently and remember that he or she 
might become transiently asystolic.
Management of this patient (Case 2)
This patient has a ventricular tachycardia with severe hypotension and 
pulmonary oedema. She requires emergency DC cardioversion. Measure 
and correct any electrolyte abnormality while preparing for DC cardiover­
sion. If in doubt, give empirical intravenous magnesium sulphate, 8 mmol 
over 10–15 min (it is not appropriate to give K+ because hypo- or hyper­
kalaemia can be arrhythmogenic, so you must know serum K+ before 
treating it). The arrhythmia did not settle with the DC shock, and IV amio­
darone was started with a view to repeat DC cardioversion.
This patient has clinical evidence of poor LV function but in a patient 
who has a good LV, a beta blocker such as sotalol might be used. Finally, 
in patients refractory to treatment, remember the possibility of torsade de 
pointes, with low magnesium and potassium levels.
• Progress.  This lady settled after the repeat DC cardioversion but as 
she is at risk of sudden death she was referred to the cardiologist for 
further management. She was given an implantable cardioverter 
defibrillator.
ATRIAL FIBRILLATION
Prevalence and risks
Atrial fibrillation (AF) remains one of the most common and challenging 
of arrhythmias. It is estimated that 10% of the population will suffer from 
AF at some stage of their lives. Patients who remain in AF after their 
hospital admission face a long-term risk of embolism and stroke. This is 
reduced by the use of anti-coagulation, but long-term anti-coagulation also 
carries a risk. In an ideal world, all patients would be cardioverted to sinus 
rhythm but this might not be possible when there is underlying heart 
disease.
275
Atrial fibrillation 10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Management
This woman has AF in association with heart failure. The CXR shows 
evidence of pulmonary oedema. You need to treat the heart failure (e.g. 
diuretics, ACE inhibitors) and control her ventricular rate with digoxin. 
Remember that a tachycardia might be an indication of poorly controlled 
failure or the AF might have tipped her into heart failure. Occasionally, 
poor LV function is secondary to poor rate control but more commonly 
poor rate control is secondary to poor control of CCF. In such cases where 
digoxin fails to control the rate (as in this patient), use amiodarone, which 
will improve rate control and the chance of cardioversion.
• Progress.  She was anti-coagulated and proceeded to cardioversion 
as an outpatient. She converted to sinus rhythm but had to continue 
anti-coagulation for a further 3 months.
Case history (2)
A 70-year-old woman with a history of hypertension presented to 
the hospital with a history of 6 h of palpitations. She had been 
taking 75 mg of aspirin prescribed by her GP for 2 years. The ECG 
showed atrial fibrillation at a rate of 132 beats per minute. The 
patient looked well and had a BP of 142/78 and there was no 
cardiomegaly on X-ray. She was clear that the symptoms started 
acutely 6 h previously so anticoagulation was not required.
Remember
AF alone, without evidence of heart failure, can cause 
breathlessness.
Case history (1)
A 76-year-old woman with a history of hypertension presents with 
a 6-week history of worsening palpitations accompanied by 
breathlessness.
On examination she is breathless getting undressed, she has a 
raised JVP, bibasal crackles, BP is 116/70 and her heart rate is 
160. The ECG is compatible with atrial fibrillation (AF).
Management
This patient reverted to sinus rhythm in response to a single DC shock 
(200 J). She remained in sinus rhythm at follow-up 6 months later.
The choices facing clinicians with a patient in AF are:
276
Cardiology
10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Should I cardiovert?
Yes, generally DC cardioversion is always worth trying at least once, 
provided there are no contraindications. Cardioversion can also be 
achieved with drugs but do not forget there is nearly as much of a risk of 
a thromboembolic event as with DC cardioversion, so these patients 
should be appropriately anti-coagulated. Amiodarone (200 mg × 3 daily 
for 1 week then 200 mg maintenance per day) and class 1c drugs (e.g. 
flecainide) both promote cardioversion. Figure 10.4 shows the sites of 
action of drugs on the heart but do not use flecainide in the presence of 
ventricular disease.
DC conversion (using a biphasic defibrillator) reverts AF to sinus 
rhythm in 80% of patients. This is the best treatment for AF of less than 
24 h duration (see Case history 2, above).
What precautions should I take to prevent embolism 
at the time of cardioversion?
The risk of cerebral embolism can be markedly reduced by anticoagulation 
and patients who have been in AF for more than 24 h should be adequately 
anti-coagulated (INR > 2) for a minimum of 3 weeks before and 4 weeks 
after elective cardioversion.
With a trans-oesophageal echo (TOE)-guided approach, patients do not 
need formal anti-coagulation prior to the cardioversion but should be 
covered with a full therapeutic dose of SC heparin before and during the 
procedure. If this is successful, they need another 4 weeks formal anti-
coagulation with warfarin (or dabagatrim) post-procedure.
Remember, a patient suffering a stroke because of lack of anticoagula­
tion in AF is negligent. A common misconception is that aspirin is as 
effective as warfarin, but this is not true. You need to make a careful risk–
benefit analysis of the use of warfarin in elderly patients but in most of 
them the benefits will outweigh the risks.
Chads 2 score
How to assess the risk of thromboembolism in atrial fibrillation
Congestive heart failure
Hypertension
Age > 75 years
Diabetes mellitus
Stroke (including TIA)
all score 1 point
scores 2 points
Total score
Stroke risk / y (%)
0: No anticoagulation
1.9
1: warfarin or aspirin
2.8
2 or greater: warfarin or apixaban
4.0
3
5.9
4
8.5
5
12.5
6
18.2
277
Bradycardia and pacing 10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
What should be done to promote good rate control 
in the long term if cardioversion fails?
Digoxin alone is often not effective in rate control and a second drug often 
needs to be added – beta blockers and verapamil are usually effective. 
There is no good evidence that digoxin promotes conversion to sinus 
rhythm and it should not be used in paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. The only 
good way to assess rate control is with a 24-h tape.
If this strategy fails, amiodarone is an excellent second-line treatment: 
it helps with rate control, makes cardioversion more likely and can be used 
with poor LV function, but remember that it does have long-term side 
effects. However, it can sometimes be effectively used at a lower dose 
(100 mg daily), with a lower risk of side effects, especially in the elderly.
Should I give prophylactic medication to prevent AF 
if sinus rhythm is achieved?
This depends on numerous clinical factors; the best drug is sotalol. You 
should discuss this with the cardiologist.
Which patients should I refer to 
an electrophysiologist (EP)?
Patients without evidence of underlying heart disease and who have either 
failed drug therapy or do not want to take any medication (usually young 
patients) should be referred for EP studies with a view to a definitive EP 
procedure to prevent further AF. However, any patient might potentially 
benefit from this approach, so if in doubt discuss any case with your 
cardiologist.
Remember
AF becomes more stable over time, and might be less easy to 
cardiovert the longer you wait.
Further reading
Camm AJ et al. Guidelines for management of atrial fibrillation. Europace 
2010; 12: 1–1360 European Society of Cardiology.
BRADYCARDIA AND PACING
Bradycardia due to increased vagal tone is a common finding in health and 
is also seen in an extreme form in vasovagal attacks when periods of 
asystole can occur.
Bradycardia is an increasing problem in the elderly and very elderly, 
and can reflect degenerative disease of the conducting system at all levels:
	 Sinus node: sick sinus syndrome
	 AV node: complete heart block, slow atrial fibrillation
	 His–Purkinje system: bifascicular block (left axis deviation and right 
bundle branch block; RBBB).
278
Cardiology
10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Diagnosis
	 Difficulties often arise in establishing arrhythmia as a cause of dizzy 
spells when the condition is intermittent, as it often is in the early stages.
	 24-h ECG is the best investigation but repeat tapes might be needed 
to demonstrate an abnormality when the history is very suggestive. 
Occasionally, in a patient with persistent symptoms and no findings 
on repeat ambulatory ECG monitoring, an implantable ECG recording 
device can help.
Classification of generic pacemaker code
Notation is by the following abbreviations:
	 Chamber paced (0 = none, A = atrial, V = ventricular, D = both or dual).
	 Chamber sensed (0 = none, A = atrial, V = ventricular, D = both or dual).
	 Response to sensing (0 = none, I = inhibited, T = triggered, D = both 
T + I).
	 Rate response (0 = none, R = rate modulation).
	 Anti-tachycardia function (0 = none, P = anti-tachycardia pacing, S = 
shock, D = pace and shock).
For example: VVI = ventricular pacing, ventricular sensing, inhibition of 
pacing when beat is sensed; DDD(R) = dual pacing, dual sensing, inhibi­
tion and triggered as appropriate when beat is sensed, rate response mode 
available.
Pacemakers in common use
	 VVI: usually for AF with slow ventricular rate and/or pauses.
	 DDD: for complete heart block.
Rate response (R) is used when a patient has lost the chronotropic response, 
i.e. cannot increase the heart rate with exercise/stress. The cardiologist 
inserting the pacemaker will decide this but will need to know the patient’s 
usual level of activity/independence to make this decision. AAI pacemak­
ers are not often used in practice because a small proportion of these 
patients go on to develop coexisting AV nodal disease, so in anticipation 
of this dual-chamber pacemakers are usually implanted.
Pacemaker problems
All problems with pacemakers need to be referred to the pacing clinic; 
they will check the pacemaker and adjust its function as necessary. They 
will also refer to a cardiologist when necessary.
Case history (1)
A 78-year-old man without any prior cardiac disease was brought 
to hospital after collapsing at home with brief loss of 
consciousness. On arrival he had fully recovered and the ECG 
showed bifascicular block. During monitoring overnight he was 
shown to have periods of complete heart block. He subsequently 
had a dual-chamber pacemaker (DDD) implanted without any 
recurrence.
279
Bradycardia and pacing 10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Surgical problems
	 Infection is potentially very serious. Even slight redness around the 
scar should be treated promptly with antibiotics, e.g. flucloxacillin 
500 mg × 3 daily; if relevant, send swabs first. Usually occurs early after 
implantation.
	 Haematoma can predispose to infection or technical problems.
Technical problems
	 Fibrosis occurring around the pacemaker tip: this can cause pacemaker 
thresholds to rise, which can affect pacemaker function.
	 Lead displacement: this will cause pacemaker malfunction, usually 
manifesting as failure to capture. It is most common in the first 6 weeks 
after implantation.
	 Lead or pacemaker erosion through the skin: usually occurs long term.
	 Pacemaker syndrome: vague feelings of weakness or dizziness in 
patients with VVI pacemakers and complete heart block. This is caused 
by loss of synchrony between atrial and ventricular contraction leading 
to episodic falls in BP and retrograde conduction of pacing impulse 
from ventricle to atria leading to simultaneous atrial and ventricular 
contraction. It is not seen with dual-chamber pacing and is treated by 
upgrading to a dual-chamber system.
Case history (2)
A 78-year-old man is admitted for a routine hip replacement. You 
are fast bleeped to the Orthopaedic ward; when you arrive the 
orthopaedic SHO tells you the patient is in ‘VT’. You rush to see 
the patient, who is sitting up reading his newspaper. His rhythm 
strip from his preoperative ECG is shown (Fig. 10.5). What do you 
tell the SHO and what do you do?
•	 This is a paced rhythm but there is evidence of failure to 
capture.
•	 You ask the pacing clinic to check his pacemaker; they find that 
the sensing threshold has risen but all other parameters are 
fine. They increase his pacemaker output and his pacemaker 
function returns to normal.
Remember
If you suspect a pacemaker problem, always send the patient to a 
pacing clinic – that day – to have the function checked. The clinic 
will consult with a cardiologist if necessary. Out-of-hours, call the 
cardiologist on call.
280
Cardiology
10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Figure 10.5  ECG showing pacing spikes (arrows) with failure to capture. 
Case history
You are walking alone along an isolated corridor of your hospital. 
Just ahead, you observe a man collapse to the ground. As you 
approach you notice he is one of the hospital porters. He is lying 
motionless.
Remember
•	 Bradycardia and even transient conduction disturbance 
(first-degree and Mobitz type I or Wenckebach) can occur in 
healthy people during sleep. Great caution is needed when 
interpreting rhythm disturbances at night.
•	 Always take dizzy spells in a patient with a pacemaker 
seriously. Formal evaluation and an urgent pacing clinic check 
are required.
CARDIAC ARREST AND BASIC LIFE SUPPORT
What should you do?
An assessment and initial resuscitation of the critically ill patient should 
be undertaken (ABCDE):
	 Airway – remove any obstructing material and make sure airway is 
clear.
	 Breathing – look, listen and feel for signs of breathing.
	 Circulation – check carotid and peripheral pulses and start external 
chest compression if cardiac arrest.
	 Disability – conscious level – Glasgow Coma Scale (see Table 15.3, 
p. 492).
	 Examination/exposure. – to allow a full examination to be carried out.
Recent evidence emphasises that maintaining the circulation is the key 
factor overall.
281
Cardiac arrest and basic life support 10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
The order of resuscitation should be CAB, i.e. Circulation, Airways, 
Breathing.
	 Check for danger then shake and shout to check responsiveness.
	 If there is no response shout for help.
	 If no one responds to your call open the airway (Fig. 10.6).
What two methods could you use to open the airway?
1.	 Head tilt, chin lift.
2.	 A jaw thrust in suspected cervical spine injury.
There are no signs of breathing, you remain alone. 
What must you do now?
You must leave the patient and go to the nearest telephone to initiate the 
cardiac arrest call.
You have initiated the emergency call from a telephone further along 
the corridor.
What should be your next action?
There are no signs of circulation after your assessment. The patient is 
cyanosed and motionless.
Commence basic life support (see Fig. 10.6).
Chest compressions – carefully note the following:
	 Hand position: place the heel of the hand on the sternum, two fingers’ 
breadth above where the rib margins meet.
	 Arm position: lock the elbows and lean directly over the porter.
	 Rate: aim to maintain a rate of 100 per minute.
	 Depth: compress the chest one-third of the resting diameter of the chest.
Figure 10.6  Basic life support. With permission from the Resuscitation Council. 
Basic life support
Unresponsive?
Not breathing normally?
Shout for help
Open airway
Call emergency services
30 chest compressions
Send or go for help as soon as possible according to guidelines
2 rescue breaths
30 compressions
282
Cardiology
10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Figure 10.7  Universal advanced life-support algorithm. 
Shockable
(VF/pulseless VT)
Non-shockable
(PEA/asystole)
 1 Shock
Unresponsive?
Not breathing or only
occasional gasps
CPR 30:2
Attach defibrillator/monitor
Minimise interruptions
Assess
rhythm
Call resuscitation team
• Hypoxia
• Hypovolaemia
• Hypo/hyperkalaemia/
  metabolic
• Hypothermia
• Thrombosis - coronary or
   pulmonary
• Tamponade - cardiac
• Toxins
• Tension pneumothorax
Reversible causes
• Ensure high quality CPR: rate, depth, recoil 
• Plan actions before interrupting CPR
• Give oxygen
• Consider advanced airway and
  capnography
• Continuous chest compressions when
  advanced airway in place
• Vascular access (intravenous, intraosseous)
• Give adrenaline every 3-5 min
• Correct reversible causes
During CPR
Immediate post cardiac
arrest treatment
• Use ABCDE approach
• Controlled oxygenation
   and ventilation
• 12-lead ECG
• Treat precipitating cause
• Temperature control/
   therapeutic hypothermia
Return of spontaneous
circulation
Immediately
resume
 CPR for 2 min
Minimise
interruptions
Immediately
resume
 CPR for 2 min
Minimise
interruptions
283
Cardiac arrest and basic life support 10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 CPR at a ratio of 30 : 2 (30 compressions to 2 breaths), irrespective of 
number of rescuers.
	 Continue this until the defibrillator arrives (Fig. 10.7).
• Progress.  The patient showed VF on the defibrillator and was suc­
cessfully brought back into sinus rhythm with DC cardioversion. He 
was admitted and referred to the cardiologists.
He will need investigations to rule out structural heart disease (echo and 
angiogram). He will then need electrophysiological studies and an auto­
matic implantable cardioverter defibrillator (AICD; Table 10.3) implanted 
to prevent recurrence because he has, in effect, had an ‘out of hospital’ 
VF arrest.
Information
•	 The chance of survival from ventricular fibrillation is generally 
agreed to deteriorate by 5–10% per minute. It is therefore 
imperative that a defibrillator is brought as soon as possible
•	 Alerting the team is a priority
•	 Give a praecordial thump if appropriate
Indications for implantation of AICD
Primary prevention
Coronary disease, LV dysfunction (EF ≤ 
35%) and inducible VT
High risk, inherited or acquired 
conditions, e.g. long QT syndrome, 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, Brugada’s 
syndrome
Chronic coronary disease, a history of MI 
and LV ejection fraction ≤ 30%: from 
MADIT II*
Secondary prevention
Cardiac arrest due to VT/VF
Sustained VT with structural heart 
disease
Unexplained syncope with inducible 
sustained VT or VF with advanced 
structural heart disease and no other 
identifiable cause
AICD plus biventricular 
pacing
Any of above with QRS ≥ 130 ms, LV 
dilation, LVEF ≤ 30% and advanced heart 
failure
*Although this indication is backed up by evidence from the MADIT II trial, the 
healthcare cost implications are enormous and this is neither a routine 
indication in the UK at present nor likely to be in the near future.
Table 10.3  AICDs – who needs referring for consideration of 
implantation of one?
284
Cardiology
10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
CHEST PAIN (p. 336) AND ACUTE CORONARY 
SYNDROMES
Case history (1)
You are called to assess a 73-year-old woman who gives a 40-min 
history of sudden-onset, tearing, severe central chest pain 
radiating down her left arm and through to her back. She has a 
history of treated hypertension and has not smoked for 15 years. 
How are you going to manage her?
Initial assessment
Immediately, when she arrives:
	 Brief history
	 Risk factor profile (smoking, hypertension, lipids, diabetes, family 
history, age, gender, ethnic origin)
	 Brief examination (BP, pulse, murmurs, chest signs)
	 12-lead ECG
	 Give aspirin 300 mg orally
	 Relieve pain, e.g. if ischaemic ECG give diamorphine 5–10 mg IV and 
an anti-emetic
	 Take blood for markers of cardiac damage (troponins).
Remember
Every year patients are inappropriately discharged from A&E 
departments with acute coronary syndromes because their initial 
ECG is normal. If in doubt, admit the patient.
Causes of chest pain to consider
	 Aortic dissection (see later)
	 Acute coronary syndrome
	 Pericarditis: sharp central pain, related to posture and respiration
	 Pleurisy: sharp, usually lateral, related to respiration
	 Muscular: related to posture, localised tenderness
	 Herpes zoster: nerve root distribution, rash might appear later
	 Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease: retrosternal burning pain but can be 
very similar to angina.
Note: Many episodes of chest pain do not easily fit into any category and 
patients are often admitted and treated for acute coronary syndromes. 
Their symptoms should be assessed in conjunction with their risk factor 
profile. If in doubt, it is safer to admit.
What features would make you suspect 
a dissecting aneurysm?
	 Pain tends to radiate to back, starts abruptly and is often intense and 
described as tearing.
285
10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Chest pain and acute coronary syndromes
	 On examination: absent arm or leg pulses, murmur of aortic regurgita­
tion, different BP in arms, neurological signs.
	 ECG might be normal or show inferior ischaemia or MI.
	 As the dissection in the aortic wall extends proximally, first it disrupts 
the origin of the subclavian arteries (affecting arm BP), then the carotid 
arteries (causing neurological sequelae), the origin of the right coronary 
artery – causing inferior ischaemia – and finally the aortic valve is 
disrupted causing aortic regurgitation.
If you clinically suspect a dissecting aneurysm you must
	 Get a chest X-ray to look for mediastinal widening.
	 Get a senior opinion.
	 Never give thrombolytic therapy, heparin or anti-platelet therapy.
	 Carefully reduce BP with IV labetolol or sodium nitroprusside.
	 Discuss with a cardiothoracic centre.
	 CT with contrast or an MRI with contrast: although trans-oesophageal 
echo (TOE) is an excellent investigation it must be done by a very senior 
operator and should really be done in the cardiothoracic centre with 
surgeons on standby.
Case history (continued)
The patient’s ECG now changes at approximately 20 min with 
4 mm of convex up-sloping ST elevation in leads II, III and AVF. 
The diagnosis is, of course, an inferior ST elevation MI (STEMI).
Immediate medical management in A&E
All hospitals are expected to have a rapid triage for chest pain to ensure 
that all suspected ACS patients are seen without delay. There should be a 
multi-disciplinary team approach with defined guidelines. With all ACS 
patients:
	 IV access should be gained and bloods sent for cardiac markers, bio­
chemistry, lipid profile, FBC and clotting profile.
	 Oxygen is no longer recommended in the 2008 British Thoracic 
Society guidelines, unless the patient is hypoxaemic (check on pulse 
oximeter).
	 Aspirin 300 mg chewed, then 75–150 mg daily, should be given.
	 Sublingual glyceryl trinitrate (GTN) 0.3–1 mg should be given for pain 
relief, repeated as necessary (provided BP is not compromised). This 
can be followed by an IV infusion of 1–10 mg/hour, which is titrated to 
pain whilst aiming to keep systolic BP > 100 mmHg.
	 IV diamorphine 2.5–5 mg or morphine 10 mg is used as analgesia, with 
metoclopramide 10 mg as an antiemetic.
	 IV β-blockade with metoprolol is given in 5 mg boluses (up to a total 
of 15 mg), provided the patient is not in cardiogenic shock and/or 
hypotensive, and that there are no contraindications (e.g. asthma).
	 Patients with a STEMI ideally should start β-blockers on the first day, 
provided they are definitely haemodynamically stable. If there is any 
doubt, wait until they are stable, to avoid the possibility of cardiac shock 
developing.
286
Cardiology
10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 All ACS patients should be transferred to a coronary care unit (CCU) 
for continuous monitoring and further specialist care.
	 Patients with ACS should have clopidogrel 600 mg loading dose, unless 
PCI is not being done, in which case the loading dose should be 300 mg; 
thereafter 75 mg daily is given in addition to aspirin. It has been shown 
to reduce mortality and the occurrence of major vascular events without 
an increase in the risk of bleeding in STEMI ACS. Prasugrel 60 mg is an 
alternative
	 N.B. Proton pump inhibitors, particularly omeprazole, reduce the 
antiplatelet effect of clopidogrel because they are inhibitors of cyto­
chrome p450 (CYP2C19), but have only a small therapeutic effect.
	 In addition, urgent reperfusion (see below) is needed.
THROMBOLYSIS
Thrombolysis is still used in some hospitals.
You must know the indications for thrombolysis:
	 A history of typical ischaemic chest pain, which started within the 
last 12 h.
	 A 12-lead ECG that shows at least one of:
•	 1 mm or more of ST elevation in two or more limb leads or
•	 2 mm or more of ST elevation in two or more adjacent precordial 
leads or
•	 New-onset left bundle branch block.
• Progress.  This patient fulfils the criteria for PCI but this is not avail­
able. She should have thrombolysis, unless there is a contraindication 
(Table 10.4).
Thrombolytic therapy
Alteplase (‘accelerated’ recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator; 
rtPA) 1 mg/kg over 60 min (remember you must give concomitant IV 
heparin or LMWH for the first 24 h with rtPA).
Absolute contraindications
Aortic dissection
Surgery or procedure within last month
Stroke within the last 6 months or coma
Recent GI haemorrhage or symptoms suggesting active peptic ulcer
Severe liver disease, oesophageal varices or acute pancreatitis
Trauma with risk of haemorrhage
Haemorrhagic diathesis
Systolic BP > 200 mmHg
Relative contraindications
Pregnancy or active menstruation
Proliferative diabetic retinopathy
Known aortic aneurysm or intracardiac thrombus
Known anticoagulant therapy
Table 10.4  Contraindications to giving thrombolytic therapy
287
Thrombolysis 10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Remember the other thrombolysis drugs that are available. For example, 
some hospitals use tenecteplase, which is an easy-to-administer single 
bolus thrombolysis agent of proven benefit in large trials. If a patient has 
any type of contraindication to thrombolysis you must discuss the case 
with a cardiologist immediately.
Don’t forget pericarditis!
ST changes in pericarditis are often widespread, involving inferior as well 
as anterior leads (Fig. 10.8) but the ST changes are concave with peaked T 
waves and there is often associated widespread PR depression (a feature 
specific to pericarditis).
Also beware
	 LBBB: if this is known to be old, the diagnosis will rest on the history 
and cardiac enzymes; it can be difficult to distinguish acute changes on 
a background of LBBB. If it is known to be new it can be used to support 
the diagnosis.
	 Other (non-ischaemic) causes of ST elevation:
•	 High S-T take-off is seen more commonly in certain racial groups, 
e.g. Afro-Caribbean
•	 There are other causes you should be aware of such as the ST eleva­
tion seen in leads V1–3 in patients with Brugada’s syndrome.
Cardiac markers in the early assessment of a patient 
with chest pain (Fig. 10.9)
Troponins start to be released within minutes of myocardial damage and 
are very useful. But, apart from the patient with known LBBB, they rarely 
play a role in the initial management decisions at the time of admission in 
patients with acute coronary syndromes. They should, however, be meas­
ured both at admission and at 24 h in all patients with a suspected acute 
coronary syndrome. Most other cardiac markers take several hours to rise, 
might be misleading and are now used much less, given the availability 
of troponin assays.
• Progress.  This 73 year old lady with a STEMI was given thromboly­
sis with alteplase. She was seen by the coronary rehabilitation team.
Figure 10.8  ECG changes in pericarditis and myocardial infarction. 
Pericarditis
S-T elevation is concave upwards in pericarditis
MI
288
Cardiology
10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Figure 10.9  Enzyme and troponin profile in acute myocardial infarction. 
24
0
48
72
96
LDH
AST
CK
Troponin
Serum level
Time (h)
The classification of acute coronary syndromes
The term ‘acute coronary syndrome’ covers the spectrum from unstable 
angina to MI. This has been a rapidly evolving area (Table 10.5). With this 
in mind, the decisions to make, using this definition, are:
1.	 Is this an ST elevation MI (STEMI) or a non-ST elevation MI (NSTEMI)?
2.	 Or is this unstable angina?
This helps you direct your therapy; patients with an STEMI should 
receive PCI or thrombolysis. It is easy to appreciate from the pathogenesis 
(Fig. 10.10) how failure to treat unstable angina can allow progression 
to an MI. All the patients should initially be admitted to CCU for 
management.
Symptoms suggestive of an acute coronary syndrome
	 Angina occurring at rest, at night or on minimal effort.
	 The pain might require escalating doses of GTN.
	 It might be associated with sweating, nausea or breathlessness, espe­
cially in an MI.
	 There might be a background of worsening exertional symptoms prior 
to the admission episode of pain.
Both the following definitions satisfy the diagnosis of an acute, 
evolving or recent MI.
1.	Typical rise and gradual fall of troponin with at least one of the 
following:
Ischaemic symptoms (chest pain)
ECG changes indicative of ischaemia (e.g. ST depression or 
elevation, T wave changes)
Development of pathological Q waves on the ECG
Following coronary artery intervention, e.g. angioplasty
2.	Pathological findings of an acute MI (usually dead patient)
Table 10.5  Definition of myocardial infarction (MI)
289
Thrombolysis 10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Figure 10.10  The pathology of unstable angina (UA) versus acute myocardial 
infarction (MI). 
Bleeding into
crack in
plaque leading
to expansion
UA
MI
Crack in plaque
with bulging
non-obstructive
thrombus
Occlusion thrombus
Case history (2)
You are about to finish your shift when a casualty officer asks you 
‘while you are here’ to look at the ECG of a patient who is about 
to be sent home. The patient is a 44-year-old male smoker who 
has had anterior central chest pain on and off at rest for the past 2 
days. The first ECG shows some subtle T wave changes in the 
anterior leads but his repeat ECG is normal and he is now pain 
free, having had the GTN. The casualty officer has told him he can 
go home with a GTN spray and come back to clinic in 6 weeks. 
The patient is pleased and is sitting, fully dressed, waiting for his 
GTN spray, because he is keen to get home to watch the football. 
Can he go home?
What do you say and do?
	 This patient absolutely cannot go home! He needs admission, treatment 
for unstable angina and risk stratification. This is exactly the type of 
patient who, if sent home, will go on to have an MI. Admit him to CCU.
Remember
Management of MI depends on a fast-track approach: ‘time is 
muscle’.
•	 Therapy:
–	 Aspirin 300 mg loading dose then 75 mg daily thereafter; in 
addition to this give him 300 mg loading dose of clopidogrel 
and 75 mg daily thereafter (CURE trial).
Continued
290
Cardiology
10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Remember (continued)
–	 Start the patient on SC low molecular weight heparin 
(LMWH), usually Enoxaparin (1 mg/kg × 2 daily).
–	 Start him on a beta blocker, such as metoprolol 25 mg × 3 
daily (unless contraindicated); patients with a sinus 
tachycardia or hypertension will benefit most from this and 
should be given early IV beta blockade.
–	 Put him on an IV GTN infusion (0–10 mL/h, titrate according 
to pain and BP).
–	 Assess and correct risk factors (smoking, lipids, hypertension, 
diabetes).
–	 Ensure a troponin is sent at the time of admission and the 
following day.
Remember
•	 If the initial ECG is normal: do not discharge the patient. It is 
possible to have a normal ECG in an acute coronary syndrome
•	 Repeat the ECG every 20 min for at least 1 h
•	 Consider other causes of chest pain.
His further management will depend on risk stratification using his tro­
ponin (at 24 h), symptoms and ECG. If his symptoms settle:
	 If he is troponin positive (high risk) he should be referred for immediate 
inpatient PCI.
	 If he is troponin negative, low risk requiring further investigation, e.g. 
coronary artery imaging, he can be managed medically initially but will 
need discussion with the cardiology department.
Remember
There are many other causes of a raised troponin, e.g. pericarditis, 
pulmonary embolism, myocarditis.
If his symptoms do not settle:
	 He will need urgent inpatient angiography; in the meantime his medical 
therapy should be increased.
	 If he is troponin positive and has dynamic ECG changes he should be 
started on an IV glycoprotein IIb/IIIa antagonist infusion and referred 
for angiography that day.
Note: IIb/IIIa antagonist infusions have not been proven to be of benefit 
as medical therapy alone. A GP IIb/IIIa antagonist, e.g. abiciximab, should 
be given before PCI and for 12 hours post PCI. If a patient does not go 
straight away for a PCI, he should receive an infusion of either tirafibam 
291
Acute myocardial ischaemia – who needs acute intervention? 10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
or eptifibatide. The dosing is complex and you need to look it up (e.g. in 
a National Formulary).
A brief note on glucose and statins
Any patient with an abnormal admission glucose should be started on an 
IV insulin sliding scale (see p. 424); there is evidence that this improves 
outcome. High-dose statins (e.g. atorvastatin 80 mg daily) should be 
started on admission because there is evidence that they improve progno­
sis above and beyond their lipid-lowering effects, by stabilising the acute 
plaque.
Remember
•	 Do not miss an aortic dissection! Giving such a patient 
thrombolysis is dangerous and likely to be fatal
•	 If in doubt about whether to give thrombolysis discuss the 
patient with a cardiologist immediately; if thrombolysis is 
contraindicated coronary intervention may well be a 
viable option.
• Progress.  In this patient the troponins were normal. As his symp­
toms had settled he was sent home with medication for an angiogram 
as an outpatient.
Case history (3)
A 62-year-old man with type 2 diabetes was admitted to hospital 
with a 6-h history of central chest pain radiating to both shoulders 
and to his jaw. The ECG in A&E showed 2 mm of ST segment 
depression in the inferior leads. His troponin T was elevated at 0.9. 
The diagnosis was a NSTEMI. The pain settled with medical 
therapy and he was referred for PCI.
His angiogram showed a single tight mid-right coronary artery 
stenosis but no other significant disease. He went on to have a 
successful angioplasty and a stent, with excellent results.
ACUTE MYOCARDIAL ISCHAEMIA – WHO NEEDS 
ACUTE INTERVENTION?
This is a very rapidly evolving field because of constant advances in tech­
niques and biomechanical engineering, i.e. stent technology. As a result, 
there is a lot of clear evidence from numerous large trials showing 
improved outcome with percutaneous intervention in certain groups of 
patients (FRISC II, Tactics-TIMI 18, GUSTO IV ACS, RITA III – to name 
just a few). Broadly speaking, these can be put into one of three groups:
1.	 ST elevation MI (STEMI):
i	 Primary intervention: there is now clear evidence that percutaneous 
coronary intervention (PCI) is better than thrombolysis for acute 
292
Cardiology
10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
STEMI. There is no doubt that, given appropriate resources, 
infrastructure and staff, this is the treatment of choice. In the UK 
thrombolysis is still used although PCI is becoming more readily 
available.
ii	 Secondary intervention: patients who are reinfarcting, in whom 
thrombolysis has failed to resolve the ECG findings and symptoms, 
have post-infarct angina or have VT after the first 24 h should be 
discussed urgently with a cardiologist with a view to urgent PCI.
2.	 Non-ST elevation MI (NSTEMI): these patients should be referred for 
immediate PCI. If PCI is not available, give fondapurinox 2.5 mg sc 
daily with aspirin 75 mg as they represent a high-risk group for further 
subsequent events.
3.	 Unstable angina: patients with ongoing symptoms despite medical treat­
ment with evidence of ischaemia should be discussed with a cardiolo­
gist for consideration of PCI.
In the long term, the value of revascularisation – whether by surgery or 
PCI – in relieving persistent symptoms is beyond doubt. Revascularisation 
should be considered in all outpatients taking into account their symp­
toms, lifestyle and investigation results. Generally, bypass surgery is used 
in: left main stem disease, three-vessel disease, diffuse disease with a poor 
ventricle and diabetics.
Case history
You are called at 2 a.m. to see a 68-year-old diabetic woman who 
was admitted with a 12-h history of chest pain and ECG changes 
of an extensive anterior MI. She was treated with alteplase at 2 
p.m. the previous day. She has previously had an inferior 
myocardial infarct. She has remained hypotensive with a poor 
urine output since admission and is now feeling very unwell. Her 
current CXR is clear. What do you do?
Information
Definition: persistent hypotension (< 90 mmHg systolic) 
associated with reduced end organ perfusion due to low 
cardiac output.
This is usually the result of acute myocardial infarction and is 
manifested by poor peripheral perfusion and low urine output, 
often associated with clinical/radiological evidence of LVF. 
Mortality approaches 80% with treatment and is much higher 
without. Predisposing factors include:
•	 Old age
•	 Previous MI
•	 Large anterior MI
•	 Prior hypertension/diabetes
•	 Inadequate or late thrombolysis.
CARDIOGENIC SHOCK
293
Cardiogenic shock 10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Remember
Do not go to bed when you have a patient in cardiogenic shock 
(who is appropriate for aggressive treatment). Stay up, get on the 
phone to the cardiologists quickly and sort it out. It is hopeless 
referring a patient 36 h later: by this time he or she will not be 
treatable.
Remember
An urgent echocardiogram should be performed in every patient 
with cardiogenic shock.
Management (Fig 10.11)
	 Get a repeat ECG to look for evidence of reperfusion or continuing 
ischaemia.
	 Check that patient is not volume depleted; this must be done using at 
least a CVP line and preferably a Swan–Ganz catheter on CCU.
	 Check that there is no structural cause: get an urgent transthoracic echo:
•	 Ventricular septal rupture (murmurs at left sternal edge – may be 
inaudible if large) usually occurs after 2–3 days
•	 Papillary muscle rupture giving severe mitral regurgitation (usually 
murmur but might be silent).
	 Give inotropes intravenously if there is no response to volume 
replacement:
•	 Dobutamine and/or low dose dopamine
•	 If possible, try and avoid adrenaline (epinephrine) or noradrenaline 
(norepinephrine) because they will worsen any ischaemia.
	 Discuss with cardiologists immediately with a view to transfer for PCI:
•	 This is particularly appropriate in the patient with an anterior MI and 
no previous history of IHD where cardiac stunning might be present.
•	 In the SHOCK trial, patients referred for early intervention (within 
24 h of onset) had an improved prognosis – time counts.
	 Insert an intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP), if available: this is a highly 
effective way of improving cardiac perfusion, and should be used in 
any patient in whom there is a reasonable prospect of further definitive 
treatment (e.g. revascularisation/repair VSD). Cannot be used in the 
presence of significant aortic regurgitation.
• Progress.  This patient was treated with intravenous dobutamine 
with some initial improvement in BP and peripheral perfusion, but 
24 h later she remained anuric and developed acute pulmonary 
oedema and shock unresponsive to increasing inotropic support. By 
the time she was discussed with the cardiologists she had been anuric 
and shocked – with a systolic BP of 65 despite inotropes – for 36 h. 
She was too unstable to transfer and she died shortly after.
294
Cardiology
10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
SBP > 100 mmHg
SBP < 85 mmHg
SBP 85–100 mmHg
Acute heart failure with systolic dysfunction
Oxygen / CPAP
Furosemide ± vasodilator
Clinical evaluation (leading to therapy)
Key:
SBP = Systolic blood pressure
NTG  = Nitroglycerine (glyceryl trinitrate)
BNP  = Brain natriuretic peptide, e.g. nesitiride
CPAP = Continuous positive airway pressure
PDEI = Phosphodiesterase inhibitor
ACEI = Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor
No response:
reconsider
   mechanistic
   therapy
Inotropic agents
Good response
Oral therapy
furosemide,
ACEI
Vasodilator
and / or inotropic
(dobutamine, PDEI
or levosimendan)
Volume loading?
inotropic and / or
dopamine >
5µg / kg / min
and / or
norepinephrine
(noradrenaline)
Vasodilator
(NTG / nitrates
nitroprusside,
BNP)
Figure 10.11  Algorithm for the management of acute heart failure with systolic 
dysfunction. From Nieminen MS, Böhm M, Cowie MR et al. European Heart 
Journal 2005; 26: 364–416, Fig. 6, with permission from Oxford University Press 
and the European Society of Cardiology.
295
Right ventricular infarction 10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Information
Myocardial stunning and hibernating myocardium
•	 When heart muscle is subjected to acute ischaemia it might 
cease to contract but remain viable. This is a potentially 
reversible cause of haemodynamic problems in acute MI.
•	 Myocardial stunning. If the blood supply to the relevant area is 
restored as a result of natural recanalisation of occluded 
arteries, pharmacological thrombolysis or angioplasty, the 
functional capacity might return relatively quickly – over a 
matter of a few hours. Such myocardium is called stunned 
myocardium.
•	 Hibernating myocardium. A similar state of affairs might occur 
on a more chronic basis, usually in severe three-vessel disease. 
In this case, the cellular ultrastructure might become seriously 
deranged even though the ischaemic myocytes are still 
potentially viable. This is known as hibernating myocardium; 
such myocardium can be restored by revascularisation.
These major changes, which have occurred at the cellular level, 
mean that the period of recovery might be over weeks or even 
months. PET scanning, stress echocardiography and radionuclide 
myocardial perfusion scanning can all be used to identify 
hibernating myocardium.
Remember
•	 There is never a role for renal dose dopamine in any patient 
with renal failure
•	 In patients on prior beta blockers, competitive blockade may 
persist for 24 h or more and will require much higher doses of 
dobutamine/dopamine
•	 It is probably simpler in this situation to use milrinone/
enoximone, which bypasses the beta adrenoceptor.
RIGHT VENTRICULAR INFARCTION
Right ventricular infarction is often associated with volume-dependent 
hypotension that responds well to fluid replacement.
Case history
A 58-year-old man is admitted with an inferior MI (Fig. 10.12) and 
is given successful thrombolysis within 2 h of the onset of pain. 
Although ST elevation and pain largely resolve within 1 h, he 
remains hypotensive with a systolic BP of 70–80 mmHg 
associated with a low urine output.
296
Cardiology
10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Case history (continued)
A further ECG with right-sided chest electrodes (Fig. 10.13) 
suggests right ventricular infarction with ST elevation in V3R–V4R. 
A fluid challenge of one litre of 5% glucose, given over half an 
hour IV, restores the BP to 110 systolic with a good urine output.
Figure 10.12  An acute inferior wall myocardial infarction. Note the raised ST 
segment and Q waves in the inferior leads (II, III and AVF). 
I
II
III
AVR
AVL
AVF
Figure 10.13  Right ventricular infarct. 
V4R
ST segment elevation of ≥ 1 mm
297
Heart failure following an MI 10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Case history
A 63-year-old man has been on CCU for 5 days following his 
second myocardial infarction. He has been managed with 
percutaneous coronary intervention and on this occasion has had 
two eluting stents in his left anterior and circumflex arteries.
You are asked to see him because he has felt breathless over 
the last hour.
On examination he is tachypnoeic with a pulse of 90/min and a 
BP of 140/80. His venous pressure is raised and he has a gallop 
rhythm and basal crackles. You diagnose acute heart failure.
Intravenous fluids in an acute MI should be given using an appropriate 
measure of the patient’s filling status, such as CVP (via a central line) or 
using Swan–Ganz (pulmonary artery) catheter readings.
Right ventricular infarction is:
	 Diagnosed readily by elevation of ST segment in V3R–V4R on right-
sided ECG
	 Associated with volume-dependent hypotension
	 Often associated with elevation of JVP without other evidence of heart 
failure
	 Associated with a higher incidence of all post-MI complications, e.g. 
arrhythmias, cardiac rupture.
Heart failure and cardiogenic shock usually reflect extensive cardiac 
damage but cardiac ‘stunning’ might be present, and active treatment can 
save lives.
• Progress.  He was given medical therapy with aspirin, clopidogrel, 
β blockers and LMWH and was stable after 5 days. He was referred 
for urgent PCI.
HEART FAILURE FOLLOWING AN MI
The presence of heart failure, even if transient or only evident on CXR 
or echo, places the patient with an MI in a far worse prognostic group.
Acute heart failure in the context of an acute MI is associated with a 
very high inpatient mortality.
Treatment
	 IV diamorphine boluses 2.5–10 mg.
	 An IV nitrate infusion (0–10 mL/h), titrated to blood pressure and 
symptoms.
	 Boluses of IV furosemide 40–80 mg, although an infusion is better in 
severe heart failure.
	 Invasive monitoring to help to guide therapy.
	 IV inotropes if patient remains hypotensive despite the above 
measures.
Treatment of underlying poor ventricle
	 Introduce ACE inhibitor (or angiotensin receptor antagonist) as soon as 
possible: ACE inhibitors have been shown to reduce the mortality of 
298
Cardiology
10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
this high-risk group by 20–30%. Initiate this therapy as soon as the 
patient is off inotropes, haemodynamically stable and has stable renal 
function. Ramipril (1.25 mg initially) is a good choice given its simple 
dosing regime. A slight deterioration in renal function (up to 30%) 
might be seen, and if this happens do not increase the dose. If, despite 
this, renal function continues to worsen, withdraw the ACE inhibitor 
and reconsider at a later date.
	 The introduction of a beta blocker as soon as it is safe: there is a wealth 
of evidence supporting the use of beta blockers in heart failure to 
improve prognosis. Evidence from the CAPRICORN and COPERNI­
CUS trials showed that even patients with severe heart failure benefit 
from the cautious introduction of beta blockers, (provided the patients 
are not on IV inotropes or vasodilators) e.g. carvedilol, starting at 
3.125 mg × 2 daily or bisoprolol, starting at 2.5 mg daily).
	 Spironolactone 12.5–25 mg daily (if the heart failure is moderate to 
severe).
	 Consider further revascularisation: remember patients will benefit from 
revascularisation if part of their poor ventricular function is due to 
viable stunned or hibernating myocardium. All patients with post-
infarct cardiac failure should be seen by a cardiologist.
• Progress.  The patient was treated intensely with diuretics, an 
ACE inhibitor and a β blocker. He made a very slow recovery but 
was able to be discharged in 2 weeks and followed up by the 
cardiologists.
POST-INFARCTION ARRHYTHMIAS AND HEART BLOCK
Case history (1)
A nurse on CCU calls you at 5 a.m. A 56-year-old man without 
previous heart disease was admitted with an inferior MI and had 
had successful thrombolysis at 11 p.m. the previous evening. The 
nurse had been looking at the monitor and noticed that the patient 
kept having ectopics and has had two short five-beat bursts of 
non-sustained VT. The nurse wants you to ‘review’ the patient. 
When you arrive the patient is lying flat, fast asleep with a heart 
rate of 50 (sinus rhythm) and haemodynamically stable. He was 
given a beta blocker on admission and when you look at his 
results all his electrolytes (including Mg2+ and Ca2+) are normal. 
You reassure the nurse who, however, is ‘just not happy’ and 
wants you to prescribe something.
What do you do?
	 Reassure the nurse that anti-arrhythmics are not indicated. In the CAST 
trial, post-MI patients with asymptomatic ventricular arrhythmias were 
randomised to anti-arrhythmic drugs or placebo; the patients given 
anti-arrhythmics had a worse outcome.
	 There is no role for giving empirical IV Mg2+ to all patients with an acute 
MI, as shown by the MAGIC trial.
299
Post-infarction arrhythmias and heart block 10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Arrhythmias – atrial and ventricular – are common in the first 24 h after 
an MI and might be life threatening. For this reason, all these patients must 
be in monitored beds on CCU. Late arrhythmias (after the first 24 h) are 
of more prognostic significance and will require specialist evaluation.
Early ventricular arrhythmias
	 Ectopics and non-sustained VT are very common, particularly in the 
1–2 h after thrombolysis (‘re-perfusion arrhythmias’) and usually 
require no treatment. Check K+, Mg2+ and Ca2+ and correct if needed.
	 Sustained VT or after VF: Standard practice is IV bolus 100 mg over 
5 mins, then infusion of 2-4 mg/min) for 24 hrs after cardioversion. 
Amiodarone is also used.
	 Early use of IV beta blockers, e.g. metoprolol, often reduces incidence 
of ventricular arrhythmias.
• Progress.  This patient’s arrhythmias settled without the need for 
anti-arrhythmics. He was discharged with an outpatient appoint­
ment with the cardiologist.
Case history (2)
A 72-year-old woman with diabetes was admitted with an anterior 
MI and received thrombolysis 8 h after the onset of pain. The CXR 
showed pulmonary venous congestion. The ECG after 
thrombolysis is shown in Figure 10.14.
During the night, nurses observed isolated non-conducted P 
waves but no action was taken. The next morning the patient 
collapsed with a heart rate of 28/min and complete heart block; 
she had not passed urine since admission. A wire was passed via 
the internal jugular route and she was successfully paced. Despite 
this, she developed increasing heart failure and died 2 days later.
Figure 10.14  ECG following thrombolysis in this patient. 
Before
Note: ST elevation and Q waves typical of acute MI
Bifascicular block – note prolonged PR interval and broad QRS complexes
After
V3
V4
V5
300
Cardiology
10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Heart block
Management is usually very different for inferior and anterior MI. In 
inferior infarcts a conduction disturbance is common and, provided the 
patient is not haemodynamically compromised, temporary pacing is 
usually not required and the problem resolves within 2 weeks; permanent 
pacing is rarely required. However, heart block in anterior infarcts invari­
ably represents extensive myocardial damage and nearly always needs 
pacing (temporary and permanent).
Remember
Ventricular ‘escape’ rhythms are common in bradycardia due to 
increased vagal tone, and usually respond to atropine.
Information
Indications for temporary pacing post-MI
•	 Mobitz II heart block with anterior MI.
•	 Third-degree (complete) heart block (CHB) with inferior MI if 
hypotensive or cardiac failure, always with anterior MI.
•	 Bifascicular block (RBBB with left or right axis deviation): 
usually anterior MI and at risk of CHB.
•	 Trifascicular block (long PR interval and either LBBB or RBBB 
with axis deviation): usually anterior MI and at risk of CHB.
•	 Alternating LBBB and RBBB: usually extensive myocardial injury 
and high risk of CHB.
Note: Do not use the subclavian route after thrombolysis 
– instead use either the jugular or femoral route because there is 
less risk of haemorrhagic complications.
Management of late arrhythmias
	 Atrial fibrillation/SVT: commonly associated with pericarditis or heart 
failure. Usually self-limiting or responds to digoxin. Consider cardio­
version if this fails or the patient is compromised. Treat pericarditis or 
cardiac failure actively.
	 Ventricular tachycardia: as a late event carries a bad prognosis.
	 Beta blockers: all patients should be on these unless contraindicated.
	 IV amiodarone: if recurrent VT that has not settled with beta blockers.
	 All patients must be referred for early inpatient angiography and appro­
priate electrophysiological investigations and management as necessary 
(usually implantation of an internal defibrillator).
	 Avoid other anti-arrhythmics, especially those that are negatively ino­
tropic, e.g. flecainide.
301
Myocardial infarction – secondary prevention 10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION – SECONDARY 
PREVENTION
The greatest concern of patients who have recovered from a heart attack 
is whether they will have another. As well as lifestyle changes, there are a 
wide range of drugs available for secondary prevention, with strong evi­
dence to support their use. The following should be undertaken:
	 Stop smoking
	 Strict control of blood pressure
	 Diet modification with a view to appropriate weight loss: low fat, low 
salt, fish oils, high vegetable content
	 Exercise
	 Drug therapy.
Drug therapy
Antiplatelet therapy
Aspirin
	 Dose: 75 mg daily.
	 Contraindications: clear history of type 1 allergic reaction (angio-
oedema, anaphylaxis), in which case give clopidogrel 75 mg daily. If 
there is a history suggestive of peptic ulceration disease, give a proton 
pump inhibitor. Note: later check for the presence of Helicobacter pylori 
and eradicate.
Clopidogrel
	 Dose: 75 mg daily for 12 months after acute episode. Alternatively, 
Prasugrel 10 mg daily can be used.
Beta blockers
	 Should be used in all patients.
	 Evidence: 20–25% mortality reduction; greatest benefit in the high-risk 
group (prior MI, diabetes, transient heart failure). Probably a class effect 
but documentary evidence for: propranolol, timolol, metoprolol, acebu­
tolol (not atenolol, although this is the most widely used drug in British 
practice).
	 Contraindications: reversible airways disease.
Calcium channel blockers
	 Non-dihydropyridines: should not be routinely used and in STEMI 
have not been shown to improve mortality (INTERCEPT trial). However, 
they can be given in patients in whom beta blockers are contraindicated 
when rate control is needed.
	 Dihydropyridines, e.g. nifedipine: have no place in secondary preven­
tion and might be harmful.
Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEI)
Should be given to all patients with post-acute coronary syndrome (HOPE 
trial); those with reduced ventricular function obtain most benefit. There 
are many large trials to show this. Although it is probably a class effect, 
Information
Anterior MI and complete heart block carry a very high in-hospital 
and 1-year mortality.
302
Cardiology
10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
ramipril, lisinopril and tranolapril are most commonly used; captopril is 
less used because it causes the worst first-dose hypotension.
Monitor BP and renal function (see earlier). If ACEI are contraindicated 
or not tolerated due to cough, an angiotensin receptor antagonist such as 
losartan is given. In the VALIANT trial it was shown that valsartan is 
equivalent in efficacy to, but no better than, an ACE inhibitor.
Lipid-lowering drugs
‘Statins’ should be given to all patients because there is a huge amount of 
evidence backing their use in primary (WOSCOPS) and secondary preven­
tion (4S trial) in ischaemic heart disease. This is highly likely to be a class 
effect. Pravastatin has the best side effect profile but atorvastatin is more 
powerful in reducing cholesterol. According to UK National Service 
Framework (NSF) guidelines, you should aim for a total cholesterol of less 
than 5, or a 25% reduction, whichever produces the best effect. These 
should be started on the day of admission (ensure a lipid profile has been 
sent; see earlier). Occasionally, myalgia/myositis can occur in the first few 
weeks in some patients. Do not forget to look at and treat low HDLs.
Anti-coagulation
There is no evidence that this is routinely of any benefit. However, it might 
be valuable in some patients:
	 Those with proven LV thrombus, those at risk of LV thrombus (large 
ventricle and LV dysfunction)
	 Those with AF.
Summary of drugs required for secondary prevention
	 Aspirin for all
	 Statins for all
	 Beta blockers for all, unless contraindicated or not tolerated
	 ACEI for all, unless contraindicated or not tolerated
	 Calcium antagonists for selected patients, e.g. intolerance to beta 
blockers.
	 Anti-coagulation for selected patients.
Identifying ‘high-risk’ survivors of MI
	 Prior IHD, hypertension, diabetes mellitus
	 Heart failure (even transient)
	 Late arrhythmias (> 24 h after MI)
	 Age > 60 years
	 Impaired ventricular function
	 Unable to perform exercise tolerance tests (ETT) because of cardiac 
symptoms.
Remember
•	 All patients should be offered cardiac rehabilitation
•	 Strict blood sugar control improves prognosis in diabetics; a 
3-month regime of SC insulin is often needed
•	 After MI, the lipid levels might fall for up to 2 months. Ideally, 
check the lipid profile at this stage, although statin therapy is 
given (after a random cholesterol has been sent) at presentation
•	 High-risk patients benefit most!
303
Heart failure recognition and acute management 10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
HEART FAILURE RECOGNITION AND 
ACUTE MANAGEMENT
Differentiating heart failure from lung disease as a cause of breathlessness 
can be difficult because there is often coexisting cardiac and respiratory 
disease. In the case of smokers, this usually consists of ischaemic heart 
disease and COPD. There is thus a tendency to give a concoction of therapy 
to cover both cardiac failure and an exacerbation of COPD, often with 
antibiotics being added in to cover infection, especially in the elderly. This 
section will attempt to provide a diagnostic route to clarify the problem 
and seek therapeutic solutions.
Case history
At 3 a.m., an SHO in A&E refers you an 80-year-old man with a 
4-day history of increasing breathlessness, wheeze and non-
productive cough. He lives alone in a first-floor flat and smokes 10 
cigarettes a day. The SHO is not sure what the diagnosis is but 
thinks it might be a ‘chest infection’.
Is it heart failure?
Remember that wheeze and cough occur in heart failure as well as respira­
tory disease. Although the onset of breathlessness is often rapid in heart 
failure, it can also be rapid in respiratory disease. Clinical examination 
might help you further differentiate the two but you often need the results 
of investigations to help differentiate the causes.
	 In heart failure the ECG will almost always be abnormal.
	 The echo will invariably show depressed systolic function (but beware 
of a small percentage of patients with diastolic heart failure and normal 
systolic function).
	 The CXR will help as will respiratory function tests (but remember 
respiratory function tests may be of no help in the acute phase).
	 Serum naturietic peptides are useful in the diagnosis of heart failure; 
serum BNP >200.
	 Assess response to therapy.
Case history (continued)
The patient gives you a history of a sudden onset of 
breathlessness, preceded by dull chest pain, which started 4 days 
ago. On examination he is apyrexial, tachypnoeic and sitting up; 
he has crackles at both his lung bases, a small left-sided pleural 
effusion, a raised JVP and a BP of 160/95. His ECG showed an 
old anterior myocardial infarction.
He clearly has left ventricular failure, the aetiology of which is 
likely to be due to ischaemic heart disease with hypertension.
304
Cardiology
10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Common causes of acute cardiac failure include:
	 Ischaemic heart disease
	 Hypertension
	 Valvular heart disease
	 Profound tachy- or bradycardia
	 Myocarditis
	 Myocardial depression by drugs
	 Cardiac tamponade.
Practice point
If you can’t identify an aetiology for the cardiac failure, and the ECG is 
normal, reconsider your diagnosis, but don’t forget the possibilities of 
constrictive pericarditis or diastolic ventricular dysfunction. This latter 
diagnosis is difficult to make but is more common in elderly hypertensives 
and can be diagnosed with echocardiography.
When cardiac failure appears, consider what has precipitated it and 
treat this as well as the failure itself; such precipitating factors include:
	 Arrhythmia: tachy- or brady- (e.g. atrial fibrillation, complete heart 
block)
	 Myocardial infarction
	 Excess fluid intake (e.g. post-op IV fluids)
	 Excess fluid retention (e.g. NSAIDs, acute kidney injury)
	 Anaemia, thyrotoxicosis or any precipitating illness, such as infection 
in the elderly
	 Either precipitating drugs or poor medication compliance in a patient 
on anti-failure drugs.
Rule out the above with the appropriate investigations and correct them 
if possible.
Case history (continued)
The patient remained breathless despite an initial bolus of 
furosemide 80 mg. His chest X-ray confirmed that he had 
pulmonary oedema.
Management
He needs rapid therapy to improve his clinical condition, with acute treat­
ment to correct his breathlessness, followed by further therapy to maintain 
and improve left ventricular function.
The acute phase of therapy consists of:
	 IV nitrates (e.g. glyceryl trinitrate 10–200 µg/min titrated to reduce 
systolic BP by 10–15% and not below 90 mmHg): these provide excellent 
rapid symptomatic relief by offloading the ventricle, and should be 
first-line therapy. Continue IV diuretics, initially boluses (e.g. furosem­
ide 40 mg) but he might need a furosemide infusion.
	 IV diamorphine (5 mg slowly): this not only relieves symptoms, by 
offloading the ventricle, but is an excellent anxiolytic.
	 ACE inhibitor or angiotensin receptor antagonist:
•	 Start after acute symptoms have settled and patient is haemodynami­
cally stable.
305
Heart failure recognition and acute management 10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
•	 Remember to watch renal function.
•	 Use an appropriate dose of ACEIs, or they will be ineffective.
	 Beta blockers:
•	 There is excellent evidence to back their use (e.g. CIBIS II, MERIT) 
and these should be started as soon as the patient is haemodynami­
cally stable and off IV inotropes and IV vasodilators. There is now 
evidence to back their use even in patients with severe heart failure. 
Either carvedilol or bisoprolol is the first-line drug (see starting dose, 
mentioned above).
•	 Up-titration of the drugs must be very gentle (every 2 weeks) and 
warn patients they might initially feel worse. If their symptoms 
worsen do not increase the dose; if they continue to worsen, reduce 
or stop the beta blockers.
	 Spironolactone: 12.5–25 mg daily should be given to all patients with 
moderate to severe heart failure (RALES trial); check the potassium 
because of risk of hyperkalaemia.
	 Digoxin:
•	 Valuable in atrial fibrillation
•	 Shown to reduce rate of hospitalisation in patients, not mortality 
(VA study).
	 Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation (NIV): patients often respond 
very well to just CPAP alone, but might need BIPAP. You should be 
aware that positive pressure ventilation might cause hypotension: 
monitor the patient appropriately.
Other lifestyle changes
	 Reduce alcohol intake
	 Reduce weight
	 Reduce salt intake
	 Take moderate regular exercise.
His breathlessness and pulmonary oedema resolved after 2 days and plans 
were made to discharge him when his condition was stable.
Practice point
Patients are often left on excessively high doses of diuretics and can easily 
become dehydrated on discharge unless their therapy is reduced. However, 
patients developing heart failure while on diuretics usually require to be 
discharged on a higher dose than on admission.
The trend would be to increase the dose of the ACEI while reducing the 
diuretic dose, assessing the response by monitoring symptoms, signs and 
weight. Ideally this should be done by a heart failure clinic; these are often 
nurse led and excellent for such patients.
Selected points
	 Heart failure may be difficult to diagnose – especially with diastolic 
dysfunction.
	 A proportion of elderly patients are on diuretics but have no objective 
evidence of heart failure (systolic or diastolic).
	 Echocardiography should be performed in all patients to identify an 
aetiology.
	 ACEIs should be given to all patients unless contraindicated (i.e. renal 
impairment, aortic stenosis, renal artery stenosis).
306
Cardiology
10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Case history (1)
A 75-year-old man is brought to hospital after he had blacked out 
when running for a bus. He had fully recovered when he reached 
hospital.
Cardiac examination revealed normal pulse, with normal 
rhythm and BP 180/90. The heart sounds were soft with an 
ejection systolic murmur heard all over the praecordium.
The CXR was normal and the ECG showed LBBB.
A clinical diagnosis of aortic sclerosis was made. The house 
officer has seen him and has asked you to review him.
Information
•	 Systolic heart failure is associated with a decreased left 
ventricular ejection fraction. The heart is enlarged and there is 
frequently accompanying diastolic heart failure. The cause is 
often IHD.
•	 In diastolic heart failure there is normal left ventricular systolic 
function with a small heart and impaired left ventricular filling. It 
often occurs in the elderly associated with hypertension. At 
present there are no data from large trials on treatment of 
diastolic failure but the expert consensus opinion at present is 
that it should be treated in the same way as systolic failure.
• Progress.  This 80-year-old man was treated according to the algo­
rithm in Fig. 10.11. He made a gradual recovery but was unable to 
go home. He was placed in a nursing home but was readmitted with 
pulmonary oedema again and died.
VALVULAR HEART DISEASE
Aortic stenosis
In the UK, the most common cause of aortic stenosis in the elderly is 
degenerative calcific disease; in younger patients it is more often on the 
basis of a congenital bicuspid valve. Although it is now less common, do 
not forget rheumatic heart disease as a cause.
How should you manage him?
	 You must admit him to MDU; you need to quantify the severity of his 
aortic stenosis with an echocardiogram.
	 Patients with severe aortic stenosis have a very high 1-year mortality.
	 If he has severe aortic stenosis he should be referred for consideration 
of aortic valve replacement as an inpatient.
• Progress.  His echo showed him to have a gradient across the aortic 
valve of 70 mmHg with good LV function and he had an aortic valve 
replacement on that admission without complications. He was well 
at follow-up 18 months later.
307
Valvular heart disease 10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Practice points
In aortic stenosis, the physical signs can be misleading and do not neces­
sarily correlate with its severity:
	 Post-exercise syncope in someone with a systolic murmur is suggestive 
of significant aortic stenosis.
	 A diagnosis of aortic sclerosis should not be made without full echo 
assessment.
	 Soft heart sounds in the context of an aortic murmur often suggest 
significant stenosis.
	 Although the pulse might be useful in diagnosing aortic valve lesions 
(Fig. 10.15), you should note that in elderly patients the pulse might not 
be reduced because of loss of arterial tree elasticity.
	 Severe aortic stenosis with symptoms needs referral for inpatient 
surgery.
	 Elective aortic valve replacement of aortic stenosis is associated with a 
very low mortality and is excellent curative surgery for symptomatic 
aortic stenosis with good ventricular function.
Aortic regurgitation (AR)
There are many causes of aortic regurgitation, including both valve and 
aortic root disease. Degenerative disease, rheumatic disease, congenital 
valvular diseases and infective endocarditis are some of the more common 
causes.
Remember
If in doubt refer for echo and cardiac assessment.
Figure 10.15  Pulse patterns in aortic valve disease. 
Normal
Slow rising pulse
AS
Collapsing pulse
AR
Remember
In acute AR (e.g. endocarditis) the murmur might become 
inaudible and be replaced by a third heart sound. If this happens 
the patient needs urgent surgical referral.
Practice points
In aortic regurgitation the physical signs do tend to correlate with its sever­
ity, i.e. the worse the lesion, the more marked the collapsing pulse, the 
wider the pulse pressure and the longer the murmur:
308
Cardiology
10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Echocardiography to quantify the severity and left ventricular size and 
monitor these parameters on a regular basis thereafter.
	 When the ventricle begins to dilate, referral for consideration of surgery 
is necessary.
	 Medical therapy with an ACE inhibitor may delay the time until surgery 
is needed.
Mitral valve disease
Remember
Age is not a barrier to valvular surgery if LV function is good and 
no major coronary disease is present.
Case history (2)
A 64-year-old man was admitted in heart failure with signs of 
mitral regurgitation. He had been in hospital 6 months earlier with 
heart failure and had been well since then on maintenance medical 
therapy including an ACE inhibitor. He had cardiomegaly on chest 
X-ray but the ECG showed no ischaemic changes. Echo 
assessment confirmed papillary muscle dysfunction causing 
posterior valve leaflet prolapse with resultant severe MR; the left 
ventricle was dilated and had some impairment of function. 
Cardiac catheterisation showed normal coronary arteries and 
confirmed the echo findings. He had an intra-operative TOE and 
then mitral valve repair and made a good recovery.
In mitral regurgitation, the underlying cause must be adequately 
treated; this alone can cause a marked improvement in the 
severity of the MR. Surgery should be considered in all patients 
with functional disability (despite adequate medical therapy) and/or 
worsening LV function documented by echo. The threshold for 
surgery is constantly dropping with improving technique. Outcome 
often depends on LV function, so refer early. All patients with MR 
should be discussed with a cardiologist to arrange appropriate 
follow-up, investigation and surgical referral.
When should you consider surgery in valvular disease?
	 Aortic stenosis: this is usually well compensated but deterioration is 
rapid once symptoms have developed. Refer for operation if dyspnoea, 
chest pain or syncope. Note: as an inpatient if stenosis is severe.
	 Aortic regurgitation: refer for operation when LV starts to dilate (end 
systolic dimension > 5.5 cm).
	 Mitral stenosis: refer for opinion when symptoms uncontrolled on 
medical treatment. Remember percutaneous valvuloplasty may be a 
first-line option. Generally when the valve area < 1 cm2 then interven­
tion is needed.
	 Mitral regurgitation: progressive symptoms despite medical therapy 
and/or LV dilatation.
309
Infective endocarditis 10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Prosthetic valve problems (all these should be referred 
to a cardiologist urgently)
	 Heart failure: must be assumed to be due to valve malfunction until 
proved otherwise.
	 Murmurs: paraprosthetic leaks common but should be formally 
assessed by urgent echo followed by TOE.
	 Infection: blood cultures must be taken for any febrile illness before 
giving antibiotics. Endocarditis of prosthetic valve should be referred 
to cardiothoracic centre.
	 Anti-coagulants: control is essential (INR 3.5). Always take specialist 
advice before any surgical intervention. Do not stop a patient’s warfarin 
or reduce the dose until he/she is fully anti-coagulated with IV heparin.
INFECTIVE ENDOCARDITIS
Infective endocarditis is an endovascular infection of cardiovascular struc­
tures, including cardiac valves, atrial and ventricular endocardium, large 
intrathoracic vessels, and intracardiac foreign bodies e.g. prosthetic valves, 
pacemaker leads, and surgical conduits. The annual incidence in the UK 
is 6–7 per 100 000, but it is more common in developing countries. Without 
treatment the mortality approaches 100% and even with treatment there 
is a significant morbidity and mortality.
Untreated infective endocarditis is invariably fatal. Delay in the diag­
nosis of infective endocarditis might:
	 Make medical treatment more prolonged
	 Increase the risk of death
	 Promote the need for surgery which might have been avoided had 
treatment been started earlier.
It follows that endocarditis is a diagnosis that needs to be kept in mind 
when dealing with any pyrexial or constitutional illness in patients with 
valvular or congenital heart disease.
Remember
The main problem with endocarditis is delay in the diagnosis. 
Never delay empirical antibiotic therapy; take the appropriate 
cultures and start treatment.
Diagnosis is made using the modified Duke criteria (Table 10.6).
Case history
One of your colleagues hands over a patient who has just been 
admitted. He is a 28-year-old man who presented with a pyrexia 
and history of feeling unwell for 6 weeks. His doctor had 
prescribed amoxicillin for a flu-like illness 3 weeks previously. He 
has a pyrexia of 38.5°C and looks unwell. There is a mid-systolic 
murmur radiating to the neck and the apex. Careful inspection of 
the nail beds showed some splinter haemorrhages. Blood cultures 
were taken in A&E on arrival. Your colleague wants you to look 
these up tomorrow and, depending on the results, start antibiotics.
310
Cardiology
10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Major criteria
←	A positive blood culture for infective endocarditis, as defined by the 
recovery of a typical microorganism from two separate blood 
cultures in the absence of a primary focus (viridans streptococci, 
Abiotrophia species, and Granulicatella species; Streptococcus 
bovis, HACEK† group, or community-acquired Staphylococcus 
aureus or enterococcus species); or
←	Persistently positive blood cultures, defined as the recovery of a 
microorganism consistent with endocarditis from either blood 
samples obtained more than 12 hours apart or all three or a 
majority of four or more separate blood samples, with the first and 
last obtained at least 1 hour apart; or
←	A positive serologic test for Q fever, with an immunofluorescence 
assay showing phase 1 IgG antibodies at a titre >1 : 800; or
←	Echocardiographic evidence of endocardial involvement
←	an oscillating intracardiac mass on the valve or supporting 
structures, in the path or regurgitant jets, or on implanted material 
in the absence of an alternative anatomical explanation; or
←	an abscess; or
←	new partial dehiscence of prosthetic valve; or
←	New valvular regurgitation.
Minor criteria
←	Predisposition: predisposing heart condition or intravenous drug use
←	Fever: temperature ≥ 38°C (100.4°F)
←	Vascular phenomena: major arterial emboli, septic pulmonary 
infarcts, mycotic aneurysm, intracranial haemorrhage, conjunctival 
haemorrhages, Janeway’s lesion
←	Immunologic phenomena: glomerulonephritis, Osler’s nodes, Roth’s 
spots, rheumatoid factor
←	Microbiological evidence: a positive blood culture but not meeting a 
major criterion as noted above, or serological evidence of an active 
infection with an organism that can cause infective endocarditis‡
←	Echocardiogram: Findings consistent with infective endocarditis but 
not meeting a major criterion as noted above.
*The diagnosis of infective endocarditis is definite when: (a) a microorganism 
is demonstrated by culture of a specimen from a vegetation, an embolism, or 
an intracardiac abscess; (b) active endocarditis is confirmed by histological 
examination of the vegetation or intracardiac abscess; (c) two major clinical 
criteria, one major and three minor criteria, or five minor criteria are met.
†HACEK denotes haemophilus species, Actinobacillus 
actinomycetemcomitans, Cardiobacterium hominis, Eikenella corrodens, and 
Kingella kingae.
‡Excluded from this criterion is a single positive blood culture for coagulase-
negative staphylococci or other organisms that do not cause endocarditis. 
Serologic tests for organisms that cause endocarditis include tests for 
Brucella, Coxiella burnetii, Chlamydia, Legionella, and Bartonella species.
After Raoult D, Abbara S, Jassal DS, Kradin RL. Case records of the 
Massachusetts General Hospital. Case 5-2007. A 53-year-old man with a 
prosthetic aortic valve and recent onset of fatigue, dyspnea, weight loss, and 
sweats. NEJM 2007.
Table 10.6  Modified Duke criteria for endocarditis*
311
Infective endocarditis 10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
What do you do and what else do you want 
to ask the patient?
	 If you have good clinical grounds for a diagnosis of endocarditis you 
must start empirical treatment, as soon as you have taken at least three 
sets of cultures (from different sites). You take blood for a full blood 
count and a further blood culture now so that he can have his first dose 
of antibiotics without delay.
	 You will ask him if he has had any recent dental work, if he is an IV 
drug user or if he has ever been told he has a murmur (pre-existing 
lesion).
	 You will send off baseline U&Es, CRP, ESR, urinalysis and microscopy 
and get an ECG.
While taking the cultures you ask him a few questions and he tells 
you someone mentioned he had a murmur when he was a child 
but nothing further was done. He also tells you he had root canal work 
8 weeks ago. You start him on a slow injection of benzylpenicillin (1.2 g, 
to be given 4-hourly thereafter) and gentamicin (80 mg 12-hourly) for the 
first 2 weeks. You must subsequently discuss anti-microbial therapy with 
a microbiologist.
His cultures subsequently show he has Streptococcus viridans in all sets 
of cultures and his echo shows a vegetation on a bicuspid aortic valve but 
no significant gradient (stenosis) or regurgitation.
• Progress.  He makes an uneventful recovery on 2 weeks IV therapy 
penicillin 1.2g 4-hourly + gentamicin 80 mg2 12-hourly followed by 
oral penicillin for a further 4 weeks.
What advice and follow-up do you give him?
You tell him prophylactic antibiotic therapy is unnecessary for dental 
procedures unless there is an infective process already present.
A few practical points
	 Prosthetic valve endocarditis is very difficult to manage and must be 
referred to a cardiothoracic surgical centre.
	 Haemodynamic deterioration might precipitate the need for surgery in 
endocarditis. The difficulty is that operative results are clearly better if 
the surgeons can wait to allow adequate antibiotic therapy to enable 
them to operate in a field that is no longer infected. However, in some 
cases this might not be possible because fatal haemodynamic deteriora­
tion can only be prevented by early surgery.
	 Endocarditis often needs surgical intervention. Always involve the car­
diologists as soon as possible.
	 Transthoracic echocardiography does not always exclude a diagnosis of 
endocarditis and TOE will often help; the cardiologist will give appro­
priate advice.
	 Development of first-degree AV block strongly suggests an aortic root 
abscess, hence the need for regular ECGs in all cases.
	 A fever as a result of antibiotic sensitivity can develop after a prolonged 
course of intravenous antibiotics (especially penicillins). This can lead 
to a false suspicion that the endocarditis is not successfully treated: 
always liaise closely with the microbiologist.
	 Always discuss cases that are either not responding or worsening with 
the surgeons, via the cardiologist.
312
Cardiology
10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Right-sided endocarditis is a disease characteristic of intravenous drug 
users. The condition presents with cardiac signs such as a murmur or 
evidence of tricuspid regurgitation on the JVP. However, there might 
be few signs at the outset and the major abnormality could be on the 
chest X-ray, with areas of apparent consolidation suggestive of a bron­
chopneumonia. The condition can present with a ‘white-out’ of the two 
lung fields.
Remember
Always involve the cardiologist early in patients with endocarditis.
Further reading
Thuny F, Grisoli D, Collart F et al. Management of infective endocarditis: 
challenges and perspectives. Lancet 2012; 379: 965–975.
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION
Case history (1)
A 54-year-old woman presents with increased breathlessness over 
2 weeks. She is a heavy smoker with a chronic productive cough. 
She recently developed a cold, followed by a cough with purulent 
sputum and increased breathlessness.
On examination she is cyanosed and tachypnoeic at rest. Her 
pulse is 120/min, irregularly irregular (atrial fibrillation).
Her JVP is raised 5 cm. She has a systolic murmur at the left 
sternal edge with an enlarged pulsatile liver and bilateral leg and 
ankle oedema.
On examination of her chest she had generalised wheezing 
with bilateral basal crackles.
Investigations
ECG confirms atrial fibrillation with right ventricular hypertrophy.
Chest X-ray shows evidence of pulmonary hypertension with promi­
nent pulmonary arteries.
Echo shows enlarged right ventricle. Doppler shows PA pressure to be 
28 mmHg.
• Diagnosis.  Cor pulmonale – pulmonary hypertension, secondary to 
COPD.
Pulmonary hypertension/cor pulmonale
Pulmonary hypertension/cor pulmonale is defined as fluid overload sec­
ondary to lung disease in hypoxic patients with COPD. Pulmonary hyper­
tension can be present for years without causing symptoms.
Cor pulmonale is enlargement of the right ventricle secondary to 
increased afterload due to primary lung disease in patients who have no 
313
Pulmonary hypertension 10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
other cause of ventricular dysfunction. Symptoms include worsening exer­
tional dyspnoea, fatigue and chest pain. On examination JVP is raised and 
there is a right ventricular parasternal heave, a loud pulmonary compo­
nent of the second heart sound, fluid retention and peripheral oedema.
Pathophysiology of cor pulmonale
Pulmonary hypertension leads to the elevation of right ventricular pres­
sure and dilatation of both the right ventricle and the right atrium. This 
leads to the physical findings of peripheral oedema, raised JVP, hepatic 
enlargement (which might be pulsatile because of the tricuspid regurgita­
tion) and ascites. The cause of the fluid retention in cor pulmonale is still 
debated because there is little evidence that it is truly due to haemody­
namic dysfunction of the right ventricle. The most likely explanation is that 
hypercapnia – an almost invariable feature of cor pulmonale – interferes 
with the humoral mechanisms controlling sodium and water balance, 
leading to fluid retention.
In practice, it is relatively common to encounter patients in whom there 
is evidence of fluid retention, right ventricular hypertrophy and left ven­
tricular problems. Presumably this occurs because of coexistent primary 
problems such as ischaemic heart disease and hypertension.
How would you manage a case of cor pulmonale?
You must treat the underlying disease process, hopefully with the aim of 
avoiding this final common pathway. Some of these patients are at risk of 
pulmonary emboli and need anti-coagulation: discuss with the cardiolo­
gist. Otherwise, treatment of cor pulmonale is symptomatic, with diuretics 
for fluid retention. There is not yet any direct evidence of benefit from ACE 
inhibitors for RV dysfunction alone. However, patients will often have 
coexisting LV disease that benefits from ACE inhibitors.
In COPD, a PaO2 of less than 7.3 kP is an indication for home oxygen 
treatment. This has been shown to reduce mortality, pulmonary resistance 
and hypoxia and might produce symptomatic relief.
What is the prognosis?
In COPD, the development of cor pulmonale is always a sinister sign 
because it invariably represents the final common pathway. The prognosis 
of cor pulmonale in COPD without treatment is poor (5-year survival is 
about 30%) compared with treatment (5-year survival of about 60%). 
Although cor pulmonale is not an invariable feature of COPD, it usually 
heralds the terminal phase of the illness in those who develop it.
Remember
Patients with long-standing lung disease may develop pulmonary 
hypertension.
314
Cardiology
10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Investigations: cor pulmonale
•	 Arterial blood gases
•	 Chest X-ray: showing large pulmonary arteries ± evidence of 
underlying lung disease
•	 ECG: showing right ventricular strain pattern with right axis 
deviation and often P-pulmonale
•	 Echo: showing large right ventricle and atrium, tricuspid 
regurgitation and high PA pressures
•	 CT chest with contrast: to further delineate underlying lung 
disease and pulmonary vasculature
• Progress.  This patient’s underlying COPD was treated with bron­
chodilators, antibiotics and she was told to stop smoking. Her blood 
gases after recovery from the acute episodes showed PO2 of 7.1κp 
and arrangements were made for domiciliary oxygen. She was con­
tinued on anticoagulation with warfarin and her AF was controlled 
with digoxin 0.125 mg. She is being followed by the pulmonary reha­
bilitation nurse and outpatients.
Case history (2)
A 21-year-old man presents with an 8-week history of increasing 
breathlessness; he is now able to walk less than 20 yards, having 
previously been able to keep up with his peers at weekly soccer 
games. He has no past medical or drug history and has never 
smoked.
On examination he is cyanosed, has a JVP raised to his ears 
with ‘cv’ waves, a right ventricular heave, pansystolic murmur at 
the right sternal edge and peripheral oedema.
His chest X-ray shows strikingly enlarged pulmonary arteries but 
clear lung fields. His echo shows an enormous right heart with 
torrential tricuspid regurgitation but no significant left-sided 
problems.
What is the likely diagnosis and prognosis?
Primary pulmonary artery hypertension is the most likely diagnosis. This 
is an aggressive disease process with a very poor outlook. Heart–lung 
transplantation is usually the only chance for survival. Prostacyclin, high-
dose calcium channel antagonists, Bosentan (an oral antagonist of 
endothelin-1 receptors) and sildenafil have all been shown to be of limited 
benefit as medical therapy.
• Progress.  This man was assessed in the Transplantation Centre and 
is now awaiting heart and lung transplantation.
315
Cardiomyopathies 10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
CARDIOMYOPATHIES
A cardiomyopathy is a primary disease of the heart muscle. Generally, 
these fall into three functional categories: dilated, hypertrophic and restric­
tive cardiomyopathies.
Remember
•	 Cardiomyopathies are rare in acute medical practice but don’t 
forget them
•	 Echocardiography is essential in defining the problem.
Case history (1)
A 42-year-old man is admitted to MAU with increasing 
breathlessness and signs of pulmonary oedema. There is no 
history of chest pain or palpitations. He had a severe episode of 
flu 3 months ago and has since not been able to return to his 
marathon running. He has never smoked and drinks less than 10 
units per week.
On examination he is tachypnoeic. His pulse is 120/min and 
regular, with blood pressure 100/60. His venous pressure is raised 
and he has a gallop rhythm on auscultation. He also has bilateral 
basal crackles but no peripheral oedema. His chest X-ray confirms 
cardiomegaly and pulmonary oedema.
• Diagnosis.  Acute heart failure with pulmonary oedema. He is 
given immediate treatment for this (p. 294).
He has a dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM)
There are a number of causes of dilated cardiomyopathies. The above 
case history is suggestive of either a post-viral or idiopathic cardiomyopa­
thy. A thorough history, examination and investigations will enable 
you to rule out many causes of cardiomyopathy, e.g. alcohol-induced 
cardiomyopathy.
Further investigations show no ischaemia on the ECG and global ven­
tricular systolic dysfunction on his echo. Cardiac MR shows dilatation. 
Viral titres to enteroviruses are positive.
Treatment is as for acute heart failure (p. 304). He recovers well and is 
able to get back to normal after 4 months.
Some tips on the management of dilated 
cardiomyopathies (DCMs)
	 In principle, the treatment is the same as treatment of heart failure but 
you should get cardiology input early for advice on specialist investiga­
tions and further treatment.
	 Define an aetiology if possible, as this might identify a reversible/
treatable cause, e.g. alcohol excess:
•	 An echo is essential
•	 An endocardial biopsy might be helpful.
316
Cardiology
10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 It is possible to make a complete recovery from a dilated cardiomyopa­
thy, especially those of viral aetiology (remember to check viral titres).
	 Some acute DCMs run an aggressive course with rapidly worsening 
ventricular function, and cardiac transplantation might be required. 
Surgically implanted left ventricular assist devices (LVADs) are 
becoming increasingly common as a bridge to either recovery or 
transplantation.
Remember
Ischaemic heart disease can present as a dilated cardiomyopathy; 
it can respond well to treatment with secondary prevention and, 
where appropriate, revascularisation.
Case history (2)
You are a junior doctor in clinic and you see a new GP urgent 
referral. She is a 35-year-old woman who presented to the A&E 
department with syncope and palpitations. She was noted to have 
a soft systolic murmur. She was sent home by A&E as her 
palpitations had settled and her ECG was thought to be normal. 
The GP has asked you to see her because she is concerned as 
the patient’s sister, age 28, dropped dead whilst ironing. Her ECG 
shows left ventricular hypertrophy with an S in V1 of 21 mm plus 
an R wave in V6 of > 35 mm (see Figure 10.17).
What are you concerned about?
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
This is an autosomal dominant condition with variable penetrance. There 
is disorganisation of myocytes and myofibrils, which often results in ven­
tricular hypertrophy that most often affects the septum. The septal hyper­
trophy can cause left ventricular outflow obstruction, resulting in 
symptoms such as exercise-induced syncope. The main risk with which 
you should be concerned is that of sudden death.
Some practice points for hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy (HCM)
	 On echo (which all patients must have) cardinal features include: asym­
metrical septal hypertrophy, systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve 
and an outflow gradient.
	 The degree of outflow obstruction and hypertrophy do not reliably 
correlate with risk of sudden death.
	 Screening of family members and referral to a geneticist are essential 
because certain HCM mutations are associated with a higher risk 
of sudden death. Don’t forget, HCM can be sporadic as well as 
hereditary.
	 Beta blockers are the mainstay of medical therapy but amiodarone can 
be useful. However, certain patients will benefit from an automatic 
implantable cardioverter defibrillator (AICD).
317
Hypertension (HT) 10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Patients with outflow obstruction might benefit from septal reduction 
by either percutaneous alcohol ablation or surgical myomectomy.
	 Sometimes, differentiation of HCM from aortic stenosis can be difficult 
(Fig. 10.16; Table 10.7) – get specialist advice!
• Progress.  This patient was treated with β blockers but had further 
episodes of syncope. She has been fitted with an ICD.
HYPERTENSION (HT)
Figure 10.16  The difference between aortic stenosis (AS) and hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy (HCM). 
AS
HOCM
Obstruction to outflow
at valvular level
Thickened intraventricular
septum with distorted
ventricular contraction and
obstruction at subvalvular level
Case history (1)
An anxious 33-year-old woman comes to A&E with a bad 
migraine. Her BP has been recorded as 180/120 on a number of 
occasions while she is waiting to be seen by the medical team.
How will you assess her?
First you need to decide on the significance of the BP reading:
	 Relevance of anxiety: a raised BP is a common response to stress, more 
so in some individuals than in others. 24-h ambulatory BP monitors can 
be of help in these situations.
	 Prior history of high BP: adds significance to the present reading.
	 Presence of family history of hypertension (HT): probably the single 
most useful determinant in essential HT.
	 Relationship to migraine: no direct link between this and HT has been 
established.
	 Relationship to age: BP does rise with age, but still carries an adverse 
cardiovascular risk. The WHO International Society of Hypertension 
318
Cardiology
10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
AS
HCM
Murmur
Ejection systolic
Ejection systolic
May be additional MR 
murmur
Pulse. 
Additional heart 
sounds
May be slow rising
Described as jerky fourth 
sound possible (associated 
with double apical 
pulsation)
ECG
LVH in later stages 
may be normal even 
when severe
LVH (including early 
stages) May be bizarre 
changes including large 
septal Q waves
CXR
Heart size may be 
normal even when 
severe
Heart size may be normal
Echo
Aortic valve thickened
Characteristic:
Gradient on Doppler 
across valve
1. Asymmetric septal 
hypertrophy
2. Systolic anterior motion 
of mitral valve
Left ventricular 
hypertrophy if severe
3. Mid-systolic closure of 
aortic valve
Table 10.7  Differentiation of aortic stenosis (AS) and hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy (HCM)
classify hypertension as a systolic of > 130 mmHg and a diastolic of > 
85 mmHg
	 Relationship to lifestyle: high alcohol intake, obesity and lack of exercise 
are common contributory factors in patients with high BP.
What should you be looking for?
	 Clinical signs of end organ damage:
•	 Fundoscopy: hypertensive retinopathy grades I–IV
•	 LVH: forceful/displaced apex beat, loud A2
•	 Proteinuria.
	 Causes of secondary HT:
•	 Coarctation of the aorta: have you felt the femorals, especially in the 
young patient?
•	 Renal disease: renal bruits/proteinuria/urea and electrolytes
•	 Cushing’s syndrome: obesity, striae; might have low K+
•	 Conn’s syndrome: no signs; usually low K+ and high normal Na+
•	 Phaeochromocytoma: presentation often atypical (e.g. acute pulmo­
nary oedema, sweating attacks) rather than textbook flushing/
palpitations.
	 Baseline investigations:
•	 U&Es, eGFR and glucose: look for electrolyte imbalances (e.g. Conn’s, 
renal disease and diabetes)
319
Hypertension (HT) 10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Figure 10.17  ECG showing left ventricular hypertrophy (S in V2 + R in V5 
> 35 mm). 
V1
V2 × 1/2
V3
V4
V5
V6
•	 ECG: a very insensitive detector of LVH but when voltage criteria 
are present this carries considerable prognostic risk and should not 
be ignored. Figure 10.17 shows LVH with S in lead V2 and R in V5 
more than 35 mm
•	 CXR: cardiomegaly might be present but rarely adds much to good 
clinical examination (rib notching exciting, but coarctation should not 
have been missed clinically!)
•	 Echo: a more sensitive indicator of LVH.
When should you look for secondary causes?
	 Young patient (under 45) and no family history of hypertension.
	 HT resistant to treatment or those with accelerated HT.
Investigations in this group include:
	 Renal ultrasound: non-invasive, readily available, excludes major renal 
pathology.
	 Isotope renogram (+ captopril stress): reasonable screening test for renal 
artery stenosis but not very sensitive (might miss some).
320
Cardiology
10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) with contrast will give a defin­
itive diagnosis in renal artery stenosis. Although renal angiography is 
the gold standard this tends to be used only when intervention (renal 
angioplasty) is considered.
	 24-h urine collection: catecholamines and cortisol: these require separate 
bottles! Plasma catecholamines are most accurate for phaeochromocy­
toma, if available.
	 CT/MRI abdomen: when adrenal disease suspected/confirmed + CT, 
MRI angiography for reno-vascular disease.
Remember
•	 High BP is a significant risk factor for future cardiac events and 
should be followed up, especially in diabetics
•	 Secondary causes apart from renal disease are rare – but you 
will see a few cases.
Case history (2)
A 50-year-old man is visiting from Ghana and is brought to A&E 
by his relatives after behaving oddly. His BP is recorded by the 
nurses as 220/140 in both arms. This is accelerated 
hypertension.
Investigations
•	 Renal function: renal impairment likely in severe HT and may be 
accompanied by electrolyte disturbance
•	 CT head scan: if focal signs present to exclude stroke
• Progress.  This patient’s hypertension was treated with candesartan 
8 mg daily. Her BP fell to 160/100 and therefore bendroflumethiazide 
2.5 mg daily and amlodipine 5 mg daily have been added to her 
treatment. She was also prescribed a statin. Her BP is now controlled 
at 140/85.
What is your immediate management?
Clinical assessment:
	 CNS: orientation, focal neurological signs (differentiation of hyperten­
sive encephalopathy and a small stroke might be difficult).
	 Fundi: haemorrhages/exudates and/or papilloedema indicate acceler­
ated hypertension.
	 LVH: clinical and ECG. Most patients with severe HT have ECG evi­
dence of LVH.
	 Urinalysis to look for renal disease and diabetes.
	 Remember to look for secondary causes and treat as appropriate.
321
Hypertension (HT) 10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
What drugs are available for treatment in this case?
	 Oral:
•	 ACE inhibitors (Fig. 10.18)
•	 Diuretics, e.g. thiazides
•	 Calcium channel blockers, e.g. nifedipine, diltiazem.
	 Intravenous treatment (labetalol, nitroprusside) should be reserved for 
a real emergency, e.g. aortic dissection, when minute-to-minute control 
is needed. But lower BP cautiously.
	 In this man, a reasonable approach would be 10 mg capsule of nifed­
ipine intrabuccally, which will gradually reduce his BP over the next 
half an hour or so.
Information
•	 Lowering BP is crucial in the management of accelerated HT. 
Be cautious, because of the risks of causing a stroke if you 
lower BP too quickly
•	 Very high BP readings can occur in an ischaemic stroke and 
should be treated very cautiously because of the risk of 
extending the stroke
Long-term treatment of hypertension
Do not forget non-pharmacological measures, including weight loss, diet, 
stopping smoking and regular exercise; these are often glossed over and 
can have a significant impact. Current practice includes all major classes 
of anti-hypertensive drugs as first-line therapy. The ANBP2 trial showed 
that diuretics were as effective as any other treatment for first-line therapy. 
However, in many patients an ACE inhibitor would be a sensible choice. 
Remember, strict control is of paramount importance in diabetic patients.
Side effects of anti-hypertensive medication that might 
present acutely to hospital
	 Beta blockers:
•	 Asthma
•	 Symptomatic bradycardia (especially in the elderly)
•	 Cardiac failure
•	 Masking of hypoglycaemic symptoms
•	 Worsening of peripheral vascular disease symptoms.
	 Diuretics:
•	 Gout
•	 Hypokalaemia (if severe, i.e. < 2.5 mmol/L: consider Conn’s 
syndrome)
•	 Diabetes (often overlooked).
	 ACE inhibitors:
•	 Cough (often overlooked)
•	 Hypotension/falls (especially in the elderly)
•	 Renal failure (especially in diabetics and claudicants where renal 
artery stenosis is more common).
	 Calcium channel blockers:
•	 Non-dependent ankle oedema (especially nifedipine, amlodipine)
•	 Constipation (especially verapamil).
322
Cardiology
10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Figure 10.18  The renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system. ACE, angiotensin-
converting enzyme. 
Renin
inhibitors
Adrenal
Kidney
Beta-blockers
Angiotensin II
receptor
antagonists
ACE
inhibitors
Lungs
Heart
ACE
Angiotensin I
Angiotensinogen
Angiotensin II
Aldosterone
Vasoconstriction
Increased BP
Renin
Sodium
retention
Liver
Blood
vessel
AT1-R
AT1-R
AT2-R
323
The swollen/painful leg 10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
• Progress.  This patient was started on lisinopril 5 mg daily, increas­
ing to 15 mg over 3 weeks, along with bendroflumethiazide 2.5 mg 
daily. Six months later the BP was still not adequately controlled at 
150/88 and he has just been started on aliskerin (a renin inhibitor).
THE SWOLLEN/PAINFUL LEG
Common causes of a swollen leg include:
	 Deep venous thrombosis (DVT)
	 Acute rupture knee joint/Baker’s cyst
	 Trauma, e.g. rupture of tendon/muscle
	 Infection: cellulitis, osteomyelitis.
Case history (1)
A 36-year-old woman on the oral contraceptive pill developed pain 
in her left calf 3 days ago; it had become increasingly swollen 
since. Examination revealed oedema of the lower leg without any 
change in colour or prominence of the veins; there was tenderness 
along the line of the deep veins. Doppler studies showed early 
thrombus in the popliteal veins. She was anti-coagulated with 
heparin and warfarin for 6 months and given alternative 
contraceptive advice.
Many hospitals now have an excellent DVT service run by specialist 
nurses.
Investigation of DVT
	 D-dimer assay:
•	 Has a high negative predictive value, i.e. if low (< 500 ng/mL), a DVT 
is unlikely
•	 Is often used in conjunction with a clinical risk score to decide if a 
patient needs treatment and ultrasonographic studies.
	 B mode venous compression ultrasound: is generally the first-line inves­
tigation of choice. It detects clot reliably only in popliteal/femoral vein, 
not in calf veins. However, 30% of patients with calf vein clots will have 
an extension and anti-coagulation is now recommended.
	 Venography: although probably the gold standard, can be misleading 
if past history of venous thrombosis and is no longer used as first-line 
investigation.
Treatment
The patient should be started on subcutaneous LMWH and continued until 
formal anti-coagulation with warfarin is at target level; current recom­
mendations for warfarin are:
	 6 months: proximal DVT ± pulmonary embolus
	 3 months: localised calf DVT (6 weeks is probably enough for a first 
DVT with no persisting risk factors).
Target INR is 2.5. With recurrent DVT, screening for thrombophilia is 
necessary.
Dabigatran, a direct thrombin inhibitor, is now being used as it does not 
require therapeutic monitoring.
324
Cardiology
10 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Case history (2)
A 78-year-old man developed sudden pain and weakness of the 
left hand. The hand was cold and pulseless indicating acute limb 
ischaemia. He was in sinus rhythm but a systolic murmur was 
noted at the apex. Successful embolectomy was performed. 
Echocardiography showed a mass in the left atrium, which proved 
at surgery to be an atrial myxoma and was removed.
Some practical points
	 AF (even when paroxysmal) is the most common cause of embolisation 
but do not forget rare causes such as endocarditis, ventricular thrombo­
sis and atrial myxoma.
	 If you suspect a peripheral embolus involve the vascular surgeon early 
as minimising time to embolectomy is as vital as ‘door to needle’ time 
in an MI.
	 In the patient with acute abdominal pain and AF, whom the surgeons 
say is not ‘surgical’, do not forget mesenteric ischaemia.
• Progress.  This patient’s hand recovered following embolectomy. He 
was left with a mild sensory loss. He has had no further problems.
325
325
Respiratory Disorders 11
ACUTE BREATHLESSNESS
Case history (1)
You are called by the nurses to see a 63-year-old man who has 
become breathless. As you walk over to the ward you consider 
what the causes might be on this rather scanty history.
Remember
Respiratory diseases can cause breathlessness within minutes or 
hours, or slowly over days, weeks or months.
The systems involved would most probably be cardiac or respiratory. You 
go through the list in Box 11.1 (p. 346) as you walk to the ward.
Despite the long list, the chances are that this 63-year-old man has 
COPD, chest infection or heart failure; or, if the onset was sudden, a pul­
monary embolus.
Initial assessment
	 What does the patient look like? Is he in shock?
	 What is the severity of the problem?
•	 Tachypnoea?
•	 Is the patient using his accessory muscles?
•	 Is there any respiratory distress?
•	 Colour: is the patient cyanosed?
	 Pulse: rate, type, volume?
	 BP?
Then make a full cardiac and respiratory examination. Is there any evi­
dence of DVT?
This vague history shows the vast diagnostic possibilities, shown in the 
table but a shorter differential diagnosis can be made in context of the age 
of the patient, the past medical history and the current clinical situation. 
This man turned out to have heart failure.
• Progress.  He was treated with furosemide 40 mg daily and 3 days 
later, he was discharged with follow-up with his own doctor.
326
Respiratory Disorders
11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Case history (2)
A 29-year-old male had been at a party where he had consumed a 
lot of alcohol. He managed to get home with the help of his friend 
but he then vomited and fell to the floor. He was holding his throat 
and had great difficulty in breathing. The friend realised that he 
was in great distress and called an ambulance.
Upper airways obstruction
Diagnosis: Upper airways obstruction
THIS IS AN EMERGENCY!
	 Stridor
	 Respiratory distress
	 Cyanosis ± shock.
Fortunately, the emergency crew recognised the problem and tried to clear 
the airway. There was no improvement so the Heimlich manoeuvre was 
performed and a large bone was expelled with immediate relief of the 
man’s respiratory distress. He was taken to A&E for assessment but dis­
charged after 2 hours.
Remember
The Heimlich manoeuvre is used to expel an inhaled foreign 
body:
•	 Stand behind the patient
•	 Encircle the upper part of the abdomen, just below the patient’s 
rib cage, with your arms
•	 Give a sharp, forceful squeeze, forcing the diaphragm sharply 
into the thorax.
This should expel sufficient air from the lungs to force the foreign 
body out of the trachea. If this fails, urgent assessment by 
experienced ENT or cardiothoracic clinician is required. Fibre optic 
or rigid bronchoscopy will be required if obstruction beyond vocal 
cords.
Other causes of upper airway obstruction are shown in Table 11.1, all of 
which require emergency management, which is also shown.
COUGH
Cough is common and when persistent can cause considerable fear and 
distress. Apart from the immediate discomfort of coughing, paroxysmal 
cough can interrupt sleep, provoke retching or vomiting and, if severe, 
result in rib fractures or syncope. Always enquire about sputum and its 
colour.
327
Cough 11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Cause
Action
Anaphylaxis: laryngeal oedema
Adrenaline (epinephrine) 0.5 mg IM
Antihistamine, e.g. chlorphenamine 
10–20 mg by slow IV injection
Hydrocortisone IV 100 mg slowly
O2
Carcinoma of upper airway
Call ENT for laryngoscopy
Tracheal compression, e.g. 
bleeding post-thyroidectomy
Tracheal decompression, e.g. 
release skin sutures
Inhaled foreign body
Heimlich manoeuvre
Table 11.1  Causes of upper airways obstruction (with management 
strategies)
Case history
A 67-year-old man is admitted to hospital with a myocardial 
infarct. Following successful coronary intervention he is discharged 
on anti-platelet therapy, atorvastatin and enalapril. When seen 
again 2 weeks later, he was very well but complained of a 
persistent hacking cough. This had been keeping him awake 
at night.
In this case, as the patient has only a cough and is not 
breathless, the cause is very likely to be the ACE inhibitor 
(enalapril). This should be stopped and an ACE receptor 
antagonist, e.g. vasartan started. Unlike ACE inhibitors, 
angiotensin receptor antagonists do not affect bradykinin 
metabolism and do not produce a cough.
Cough is provoked by stimulation of mucosal and stretch receptors of 
the lung. Accordingly it has a number of causes:
Acute cough
	 Inhalation of direct irritants, e.g. smoke, chlorine gas, ozone and other 
air pollutants.
	 In the asthmatic, inhalation of specific allergen, e.g. pollen or non-
specific low-concentration irritants, e.g. perfume, tobacco fumes.
	 Upper and lower respiratory tract infections (yellow/green sputum).
Chronic cough
	 Large airway obstruction, e.g. carcinoma of bronchus or inhaled 
foreign body (Note: peanuts and other inhaled food will not be 
radio-dense).
	 Persistent bronchial inflammation, e.g. asthma, bronchiectasis, COPD, 
smoking.
	 Persistent infection, e.g. tuberculosis, lung abscess.
	 Interstitial lung disease, e.g. pulmonary fibrosis, asbestosis.
	 Raised left atrial pressure, e.g. mitral stenosis, left ventricular failure.
	 Gastro-oesophageal reflux (GORD) and bulbar dysfunction.
	 Iatrogenic, e.g. ACE inhibitors, radiation pneumonitis.
328
Respiratory Disorders
11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
BREATHLESSNESS AND WHEEZE
Asthma causes breathlessness, cough and wheeze. However, all that 
wheezes is not asthma.
Investigations
All patients with persistent cough should have a CXR
Other investigations will depend on the likely cause, e.g. serial 
peak flow in asthma, contrast studies if gastro-oesophageal reflux 
or aspiration is suspected and sputum culture, including request 
for Mycobacterium tuberculosis isolation if the cough is productive.
Information
•	 Asthma provocation tests might be required to exclude 
mild–moderate and variable bronchial irritability
•	 Bronchoscopy will be required in all chronic cases remaining 
undiagnosed
Differential diagnosis of asthma:
	 COPD:
•	 Patient usually > 40 years of age
•	 Heavy smoker > 20 pack years. (Note: patients with asthma might 
also smoke)
•	 History of variable wheeze: in patients with asthma, chest wheeze is 
usually worse at night and may only be episodic.
	 Upper airway obstruction with stridor:
•	 Occurs when there is a mechanical obstruction in the larynx or 
trachea
•	 Is heard during inspiration and expiration; but inspiratory sound 
when mouth open is most typical
•	 Might be associated with vigorous accessory muscle activity and 
obvious distress.
	 Left ventricular failure (LVF):
•	 Acute LVF can be difficult to differentiate from asthma
•	 Nocturnal symptoms common to both.
Figure 11.1 shows causes and triggers of asthma.
Enquire about associated features
	 Haemoptysis
	 Pleuritic pain
	 History of myocardial infarction (suggesting cough is due to left ven­
tricular failure)
	 Post-nasal drip.
329
Breathlessness and wheeze 11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Information
Causes of stridor:
•	 Tumour
•	 Foreign body
•	 Bilateral vocal cord palsy
•	 Laryngeal oedema
•	 Thyroid goitre
Case history
A 24-year-old female was admitted to MAU with breathlessness 
for 6 h. She has had a ‘cold’ for 2 days. Past history revealed her 
being ‘chesty’ as a child. It was noticed that she could not 
complete sentences easily. Heart rate was 126/min and respiratory 
rate was 30/min. There was expiratory wheeze over the lung fields. 
This patient has severe acute asthma.
Environmental exposure to allergen
Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus,
grass pollen, domestic pets
Occupational
sensitizers
Atmospheric
pollution
Sulphur dioxide
Ozone
Particulate matter
Drugs (oral
and/or topical)
NSAIDs
β-adrenoceptor
blocking agents
Viral infections
Rhinovirus
Parainfluenza virus
RSV
Cold air
Emotion
Genetic factors
Irritant dusts,
vapour and
fumes
Perfume
Cigarette smoke
Figure 11.1  Causes and triggers of asthma. RSV, respiratory syncytial virus; 
NSAIDs, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. 
330
Respiratory Disorders
11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
How would you manage this patient in A&E?
Immediate management should be:
	 Reassurance that treatment will be effective
	 Oxygen 40–60% (Keep SaO2 > 90%)
	 Nebulised short acting β2 agonist (SAB), e.g. salbutamol 5 mg or terbu­
taline 10 mg) with oxygen. (NB only 10% of drug reaches the lungs)
	 Systemic corticosteroids:
•	 Prednisolone 30–40 mg daily or
•	 IV hydrocortisone 200 mg 8-hourly
	 Monitor SaO2 by oximetry
	 Arterial blood gases (ABGs):
•	 Initially if SaO2 < 90%
•	 Re-check (2-hourly) if PaO2 < 8 or PaCO2 > 5 kPa until the PaCO2 is 
stable and the saturation is >90%
	 PEFR 4-hourly. Note: performing PEFR might be distressing for patient: 
do not demand unnecessary repeat testing
	 ECG
	 Chest X-ray.
30 min later there has been no significant improvement in 
her breathlessness and PEFR. What would you do next?
	 Call for senior help.
	 Continue with nebulised β2 agonist, now with added ipratropium 
(500 µg). Repeat every 30 min if necessary.
	 Intravenous aminophylline infusion can be used if patient does not 
respond to repeated nebulisation with β2 agonist and ipratropium. 
However, do not use this if oral aminophylline has been taken.
Information
Normal range
Analysis
S-I units
Non S-I units
PaO2
12–15 kPa
90–113 mmHg
PaCO2
4.5–6.0 kPa
34–45 mmHg
Hydrogen ions
37–45 nmol/L
pH 7.35–7.43
Bicarbonate
24–28 mmol/L
24–28 mEquiv/L
Remember
Severe acute asthma:
•	 Increased breathlessness/cannot complete sentences
•	 Respiratory rate > 25/min
•	 Heart rate > 100/min
•	 PEFR 30–50% of best
•	 Arterial oxygen saturation (SaO2) < 92%
331
Breathlessness and wheeze 11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Information
IV aminophylline:
•	 Ensure patient is not on oral theophylline (do not give 
aminophylline if patient is on oral aminophylline)
•	 Monitor BP and heart rate
•	 Loading dose 250–500 mg over 1 h
Infusion:
•	 1 mg/kg over 4 h
•	 0.5 mg/kg/h thereafter
•	 Check aminophylline level at 6–8 h after the start of infusion 
and adjust dose
Other therapy
	 Intravenous β2 agonist, e.g. salbutamol 3–20 µg/min is an alternative in 
most cases.
	 Magnesium sulphate 1.2–2 g IV infusion over 20 min with cardiac 
monitoring.
Indications for HDU or intensive care
Presence of life-threatening features and:
	 PaO2 < 8 on 60% oxygen
	 PaCO2 >6 kPa
	 Previous history of requiring ventilation.
Remember
Life-threatening acute asthma
•	 Silent chest, feeble respiration, cyanosis
•	 Bradycardia/hypotension, arrhythmia
•	 Exhaustion/confusion
•	 PEFR < 33% of best
•	 Arterial oxygen saturation < 92%.
Remember
•	 Beware of the SILENT CHEST!
If asthma is very severe, air entry will be minimal and breath 
sounds quiet or absent.
There is now improvement in PEFR and breathlessness 
with nebulised β2 agonist and ipratropium. What treatment 
should be offered to her now?
Continuing management should be:
	 Keeping SaO2 > 90% with oxygen supplementation
	 Corticosteroids: prednisolone 20–40 mg daily, on a reducing dose
	 2–4-hourly nebulised short acting β2 agonist (SABA) therapy.
332
Respiratory Disorders
11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
When could she be discharged?
The patient can be discharged when:
	 Symptoms, particularly nocturnal symptoms, have improved
	 Ideally, PEFR should be 75% of best and diurnal variation (i.e. ‘morning 
dips’) < 25%. If patient is improving and compliance expected to be 
good, an earlier discharge is reasonable.
24–48 h before discharge
	 Add inhaled corticosteroids, e.g. beclometasone, to oral steroids.
	 Replace nebulised bronchodilators with inhalers.
	 Introduce long-acting inhaled β2 agonists, e.g. salmeterol.
	 Check inhaler technique (? might need spacer).
	 Determine the cause of this attack (non-compliance, infection, allergen 
exposure).
Talk to asthma nurse
At discharge, patient should have:
	 Oral and inhaled corticosteroids and long acting inhaled β2 agonist 
(LABA). SABAs can be used on an ‘as required’ basis.
	 Peak flow meter and diary.
	 Management plan if condition deteriorates.
• Progress.  This patient was discharged after 7 days on treatment as 
above. She requires close follow-up because of the severe acute 
attack.
Discharge letter to GP should include:
	 Admission and discharge PEFR
	 Recommended GP follow-up in 1 week
	 Asthma clinic follow-up, preferably within 4 weeks.
Further reading
British Thoracic Society Guidelines for asthma 2009. www.brit-thoracic
.org.uk
HYPERVENTILATION
Case history
A 15-year-old schoolgirl is brought by her teacher to the A&E 
department with dizziness and feeling faint. You notice that she is 
anxious, sighing and has erratic ventilation. There are no other 
physical signs on examination. Her teacher volunteered that the 
girl was anxious about impending examinations.
What should you do?
Full examination, CXR, PEFR or spirometry, and arterial blood gases (even 
if oximetry is normal).
You have decided that her symptoms are due to hyperventilation. This 
should be confirmed by demonstration of a respiratory alkalosis with a 
low PaCO2 and [H+] in the arterial blood. Reassure the patient and ask her 
333
Haemoptysis 11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
to breathe into a closed paper bag: when settled she can be discharged with 
further reassurance. Note: mild asthma is a common provocative cause and 
might require further investigation.
Hyperventilation syndrome refers to a condition of recurrent attacks of 
anxiety, sometimes phobic in nature, and provoking such profound hyper­
ventilation to cause a reduction in arterial pCO2 that tetany occurs. Other 
features include perioral and digital paraesthesia, carpopedal spasm, 
muscle weakness, dizziness and a sense of impending loss of conscious­
ness or fear.
An attack of hyperventilation can be induced by a strong emotional 
experience in otherwise normal individuals, e.g. witnessing an accident.
In many patients, the label of hyperventilation syndrome is inappropri­
ately given when mild asthma or other conditions, such as heart failure, 
lie behind the respiratory sensation. Indeed, hypocapnia resulting from 
hyperventilation might further provoke bronchoconstriction.
Clinically obvious hyperventilation can also result from a metabolic 
acidosis and will be recognised by arterial blood gas analysis: a reduced 
pH 
and 
bicarbonate 
contrary 
to 
the 
alkalosis 
of 
respiratory 
hyperventilation.
Tetany: see p. 451; overbreathing can cause tetany (p. 451).
• Progress.  This patient settled quickly. She was reassured that 
there was nothing seriously wrong with her. She was taken home 
to her parents with a pamphlet explaining the hyperventilation 
syndrome.
HAEMOPTYSIS
Case history
A 63-year-old male smoker presents with a 4-month history of 
cough. Recently he has been coughing up blood in his sputum. He 
has also been breathless on exertion.
Coughing up blood is a dramatic symptom and can be 
frightening to patients and their families.
Colour of blood – this can differ with different causes
	 Pink frothy sputum: pulmonary oedema.
	 Rusty sputum: pneumonia.
	 Make sure it is not haematemesis, which would be suggested by:
•	 History of retching
•	 Altered blood (resembling coffee grounds)
•	 Low pH of contents.
Enquire about epistaxis, which may cause confusion. Blood-stained saliva 
suggests bleeding from gums.
Common conditions presenting with haemoptysis
	 Carcinoma of the bronchus:
•	 Smoker
•	 Age > 40 years
•	 Usually abnormal chest X-ray.
334
Respiratory Disorders
11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Pulmonary embolism:
•	 Risk factors for DVT
•	 Chest X-ray often negative
•	 History of acute breathlessness.
	 Pulmonary tuberculosis:
•	 More common in Asian people (in the UK), people drinking alcohol 
in excess, patients with HIV infection
•	 Age often < 40 years
•	 Chest X-ray usually shows patchy opacities in the upper lobes.
	 Bronchiectasis:
•	 History of purulent sputum and/or possibly recurrent haemoptysis 
over years
•	 Cystic lesions on chest X-ray at lung bases in some but not all 
patients
•	 High-resolution CT scan of the lungs is diagnostic, with bronchial 
dilation, loss of airway tapering at the periphery, bronchial wall 
thickening and thickening and cysts at the end of the bronchioles
•	 Bronchiectasis is also a feature of cystic fibrosis.
Less common causes of haemoptysis are:
	 Vasculitis (both the following are ANCA positive):
•	 Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s)
•	 Microscopic vasculitis.
	 Pulmonary haemorrhage:
•	 Goodpasture’s syndrome
•	 Idiopathic pulmonary haemosiderosis.
	 Chronic venous congestion of lungs:
•	 Mitral stenosis
•	 Left ventricular failure.
	 Aspergilloma: seen in association with cavitatory lung disease.
Management of this case
A chest X-ray was taken (Fig. 11.2 and Information box) which showed a 
pleural effusion and a hilar mass. The pleural effusion was aspirated and 
sent for cytology. A pleural biopsy was taken under ultrasound control 
and showed no evidence of malignancy on histology.
Video-assisted thoracoscopy was then performed and this allowed visu­
alisation of the pleura. A biopsy taken showed a squamous cell 
carcinoma.
The patient was referred to the multidisciplinary team for discussion of 
treatment options.
Remember
•	 Chest X-ray might be normal, e.g. pulmonary embolism
•	 Large opacity: consider malignancy or tuberculosis.
335
Haemoptysis 11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Figure 11.2  Chest X-ray 
showing a left pleural 
effusion and a hilar mass. 
Information
Chest X-rays
A standard chest X-ray (CXR) is taken posteroanteriorly (PA), with 
the patient facing the X-ray plate; the beam is directed at the 
patient’s back at a standard distance.
An emergency department film is often taken anteroposteriorly 
(AP), with the patient lying down (supine) on the X-ray plate; the 
beam is directed at the patient’s front – the distance from X-ray 
source can vary.
In an AP:
•	 Heart size and mediastinum are magnified.
•	 Pleural effusion which lies along back of chest cavity when 
patient supine might be missed.
•	 Film quality may be poor.
Don’t request an AP ‘portable’ film unless it would be unsafe for 
the patient to have a PA film.
Management of massive haemoptysis
As little as 250 mL can fill the bronchial tree and be life threatening. 
Happily, this is uncommon but nevertheless frightening for everyone 
involved:
	 Monitor: oxygen saturation with oximetry, blood pressure and pulse 
rate.
	 Perform CXR. Exclude coagulation defects.
336
Respiratory Disorders
11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Endotracheal intubation and suction might be required.
	 Urgent bronchoscopy by an experienced doctor is sometimes required.
	 A cuffed tube can be employed to protect the unaffected lung. It is 
inserted into the bronchus via a bronchoscope.
	 Bronchial artery embolisation is highly effective if the bleeding vessel 
can be identified.
Information
Massive haemoptysis can occur in the following conditions:
•	 Tuberculosis
•	 Bronchiectasis
•	 Aspergilloma
•	 Carcinoma of the bronchus
Remember
Only a minority of patients have a malignant cause of massive 
haemoptysis.
CHEST PAIN
Diagnosing the cause of a chest pain is often difficult; it can be straightfor­
ward or take days to diagnose correctly. A careful history (eliciting site, 
character and radiation of the pain) is often more useful than tests:
	 Exercise-induced central chest pain is usually cardiac in origin.
	 Rest pain might be: cardiac, pleuritic, musculoskeletal, nerve root irrita­
tion, oesophageal, mediastinal or referred pain from abdomen.
	 Lung diseases only cause pain if the pleura, mediastinum, intercostal 
nerves or bones are involved.
Is it cardiac pain?
See also p. 284.
Central chest pain: radiates to arms and neck. Dull ache, severe heavy 
‘constricting’ character. May be associated with breathlessness.
Typical angina
Occurs on exercise and is eased by rest.
Acute coronary syndrome
Pain at rest or on minimal exertion, sometimes very severe with sweating; 
pain persists.
Pericarditis
Dull or sharp, central, eased by sitting forwards, may be worse with 
breathing.
Aortic dissection
Severe sudden onset, might be described as ‘tearing’ pain in the back or 
anterior chest; patient often shocked.
337
11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Chest pain
Is it pleurisy?
Sharp pain in the sides of the chest, which ‘catches’ with breathing. This 
is often accompanied by fever, cough ± sputum or haemoptysis, indicating 
underlying lung disease.
Think of:
	 Pneumonia and pleurisy
	 Pulmonary infarction/embolism
	 Pneumothorax
	 Malignant invasion of pleura.
Is it musculoskeletal?
	 Trauma:
•	 Rib fracture: ‘point’ tenderness
•	 Crushed vertebra: pain often referred around the chest.
	 Chronic pain:
•	 Osteoarthritis (OA): long history with acute episodes. Look for spinal 
deformity
•	 Rib or spine disease: might be metastatic cancer; local tenderness and 
swelling, lumps, history of cancer.
	 Muscles: Bornholm’s disease. Follows an upper respiratory tract infec­
tion; a low-grade fever can occur. Ache in muscles. Might be tender. 
Definite cases rare.
	 Costochondral junction: Tietze’s disease; local pain on pressure over 
junctions. Responds to NSAIDs.
Is it nerve root irritation?
	 Typically in a dermatome distribution around the chest. Might be 
unilateral.
	 Vertebral OA, osteomyelitis, prolapsed disc.
	 Malignant nerve root compression.
	 Herpes zoster (shingles): is there a vesicular rash? (pain may precede 
rash).
Is it oesophageal?
Reflux causes retrosternal burning pain, usually after food. Worse lying 
flat and eased by antacid. Can be severe and mimic myocardial 
infarction.
Oesophageal rupture
Central pain with shock. Might have associated pleural effusion. Occurs 
after severe vomiting or more commonly endoscopy at which dilatation 
has been performed for a malignant lesion.
Is it referred pain from outside the chest?
Diaphragm irritation may cause shoulder tip pain. Localisation might be 
difficult for the patient. Several abdominal emergencies might have chest 
pain with or without abdominal pain.
Think of:
	 Acute cholecystitis
	 Acute duodenal ulceration
	 Subphrenic abscess
	 Perforated bowel
338
Respiratory Disorders
11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Peritonitis
	 Pancreatitis.
Is it genuine?
Yes – nearly always. Exclude organic disease in all cases.
A tiny minority might be attention seeking or have psychiatric 
disease. Even patients with Munchausen’s syndrome might have genuine 
disease.
What tests do you need to do for chest pain?
After a good history and examination do (as a minimum):
	 ECG – repeat if first ECG normal
	 CXR
	 Serum cardiac markers
	 Full blood count, including ESR and CRP.
Many diagnoses will now be obvious but remember:
	 A normal ECG does not exclude cardiac pain.
	 A normal CXR does not exclude pulmonary embolism.
If still in doubt:
	 Retake the history, re-examine the patient and consider unusual 
causes
	 Is WBC or ESR raised?
	 Is the patient pyrexial?
	 Arrange further investigations, e.g. CT, MR scan.
RESPIRATORY FAILURE
Respiratory failure (PaO2 < 8 kPa) is a common medical emergency often 
presenting with non-specific symptoms such as mild confusion or agita­
tion. Recognition requires arterial blood gas (ABG) analysis (see below). 
Oximeters that estimate arterial oxygen saturation from the finger or ear 
lobe are useful in assessment or monitoring.
Oximeters might be falsely reassuring in the patient breathing oxygen. 
Importantly, they will not detect alveolar hypoventilation, producing 
high pCO2.
Remember
All breathless patients should have oximetry checked at triage 
in A&E.
Respiratory failure commonly results from either a problem with the 
respiratory pump or because of intrinsic lung disease.
Remember
All unconscious patients should have ABG analysis at initial 
assessment.
339
Respiratory failure 11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
With respiratory pump failure the arterial pCO2 (PaCO2) is 
raised. You should think of:
	 Severe air-flow limitation, e.g. COPD
	 Neurological depression, e.g. coma, sedatives, overdose
	 Chest wall problem, e.g. flail chest, pneumothorax
	 Neuromuscular disease, e.g. Guillain–Barré, old poliomyelitis.
In intrinsic lung disease (apart from COPD) hypoxaemia is 
often combined with a reduced PaCO2
The hypoxaemia arises primarily from a mismatch of ventilation and per­
fusion in the pulmonary alveolar bed. Hypoxic stimulation of ventilation, 
coupled with abnormal respiratory sensation, then leads to a reduced arte­
rial pCO2 (alveolar hyperventilation). A raised PaCO2 indicates impending 
respiratory arrest as it suggests either a reduction in ventilatory effort or 
failure of the respiratory pump.
In hypoxaemia with reduced PaCO2 consider
	 Infection, e.g. pneumonia
	 Shock, e.g. sepsis, hypovolaemia, acute lung injury
	 Asthma
	 Cardiac disease, e.g. LVF, pulmonary hypertension
	 Pulmonary embolism.
In respiratory failure arterial blood gas sampling is 
necessary to
	 Assess severity
	 Identify type, i.e. alveolar hypo- or hyperventilation
	 Appreciate the degree of compensation (i.e. the chronicity of the 
condition)
	 A coexisting metabolic acidosis commonly causes confusion and can be 
recognised by the base excess value (see below).
Information
ABG sampling is painful. Contrary to common belief, the use of 
local anaesthetic does not make the procedure more difficult. 
Heparin has a low pH and should be expelled from the syringe. 
Heparin-bonded microsamplers are available and small-diameter 
needles make local anaesthetic unnecessary. When taking 
ABG samples it is essential to note the inspiratory O2 
concentration (FiO2).
Summary of acid–base changes (Fig. 11.3)
In a respiratory acidosis
Carbon dioxide clearance is reduced – there is alveolar hypoventilation. 
The PaCO2 and [H+] rise. The HCO3 is also increased due to renal 
compensation.
Examples: exacerbation of COPD, flail chest injury, Guillain–Barré 
syndrome.
340
Respiratory Disorders
11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
†The pH changes by approximately 0.1 per 1 kPa change in PaCO2.
*To convert to mmHg, multiply by 7.5.
6.9
7.0
7.1
7.2
7.3
7.4
7.5
7.6
120
100
80
60
40
20
Arterial [H+] (nmol/L)
12
8
6
4
2
10
0
Arterial pH
0
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90
Arterial Pco2 (mmHg)
Arterial Pco2 (kPa)
Metabolic acidos
is
Acute respiratory 
acidosis
Respiratory 
alkalosis
Chronic respiratory 
acidosis
Metabolic alkalosis
Figure 11.3  The Flenley acid–base nomogram. The bands show the 95% 
confidence limits representing the individual varieties of acid–base disturbance. 
The central white box shows the approximate limits of arterial pH and pCO2 in 
normal individuals. 
In a respiratory alkalosis
There is alveolar hyperventilation and both the PaCO2 and [H+] are 
decreased. The HCO3 is slightly decreased. Examples: acute asthma, 
anxiety attack.
In a metabolic acidosis
There is disturbance of bicarbonate regulation or excessive H+ production. 
The HCO3 is reduced and the PaCO2 falls because of respiratory 
compensation.
Example: diabetic ketoacidosis, renal failure, shock.
In a metabolic alkalosis
The HCO3 is increased and relative hypoventilation leads to a small com­
pensatory increase in the PaCO2.
Example: excessive vomiting, profound hypokalaemia.
Normal blood gas values (with FiO2 21%):
	 pH ~ 7.4
	 PaO2 > 10.0 kPa*
	 PaCO2 4.5–6.0 kPa†
	 HCO3 24–28 mmol/L.
341
Respiratory failure 11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Information
The base excess value provided by the ABG analyser is calculated 
by back titration to normal values for PaCO2 and HCO3.
Common ABG abnormalities
Life-threatening asthma
	 pH: 7.2
	 PaO2: 15.4
	 PaCO2: 6
	 HCO3: 16.2
	 BE: –7.3.
Supplemental O2 is being provided (note the high PaO2). There is a meta­
bolic acidosis (note the pH and BE) as a result of metabolic demands 
exceeding O2 delivery and producing a lactic acidosis. Airflow limitation 
limits the normal respiratory compensation to this profound acidosis.
Acute or chronic respiratory failure in a patient with COPD
	 pH: 7.3
	 PaO2: 25.8
	 PaCO2: 12.6
	 HCO3: 42.1
	 BE: +4.3.
Acute or chronic respiratory acidosis exacerbated by a high FiO2 using 
variable performance mask (40–60% O2) (note high PaO2 and PaCO2). The 
high HCO3 results from renal compensation. The patient was changed to 
28% oxygen.
Severe pneumonia (FiO2 60%)
	 pH: 7.15
	 PaO2: 4.8
	 PaCO2: 3.5
	 HCO3: 12.5
	 BE: –9.3.
Despite high FiO2 this patient is hypoxaemic because of ventilation: per­
fusion mismatch. The profound hypoxia despite oxygen and the associated 
metabolic acidosis indicate the need for urgent intubation and IPPV and 
are a reflection of circulatory failure resulting from septic shock.
Management
Respiratory failure can be difficult to assess or manage. Always review the 
CXR. Discuss with your consultant or other more senior staff. If you feel 
that the situation is unstable, do not hesitate to call an anaesthetist. Semi-
elective intubation is much preferred to a respiratory arrest. It should be 
performed in the ward before transfer of the patient to the ICU.
How do I recognise impending respiratory arrest?
	 Tachycardia > 120
	 Tachypnoea, respiratory rate > 30
	 Hypotension
342
Respiratory Disorders
11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Sympathetic activation: pale and sweaty, agitation, confusion
	 Progressive increase in PaCO2 or fall in PaO2
	 Rapid desaturation on disconnection from O2, e.g. when drinking or 
coughing.
Evaluation is often at the ‘end of the bed’: is the patient getting tired? Be 
sensitive to subtle changes or a failure to improve.
Treating the cause
	 Individual causes will require different actions: for instance, an inter­
costal drain for a tension pneumothorax or large pleural effusion (see 
p. 364).
	 In neurological coma, intubation might be necessary for airway protec­
tion or to manage raised intracranial pressure by hyperventilation.
	 Drug-induced respiratory failure can be confirmed by a therapeutic trial 
with a specific antidote, i.e. a bolus injection of naloxone for opiates and 
flumazanil for benzodiazepines. Infusions will be required if a positive 
response is obtained as antidotes have short half life.
	 Oxygen supplementation should be aimed at raising the PaO2 to beyond 
the steep part of the oxygen dissociation curve (Fig. 11.4). Very high 
PaO2 values are unnecessary but controlled O2 therapy via a fixed per­
formance mask is only necessary in chronic respiratory failure resulting 
from COPD.
LEFT SHIFT
RIGHT SHIFT
0
4
5.3(40)
8
12 13.3(100)
75
v
a
x
Venous
Arterial
2,3-DPG↑
pH↓
2,3-DPG↓
pH↑
Partial pressure of oxygen (kPa/mmHg))
HbO2 (%)
p50
p50
100
80
60
40
20
Figure 11.4  Oxygen dissociation curve. BPG, bisphosphoglycerate; a, arterial 
point; v, venous point; x, arterial venous difference; HbO2, oxygen saturation of 
haemoglobin. 
343
Respiratory failure 11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Case history
A 65-year-old man with advanced COPD was admitted with a 
1-week history of cough, breathlessness and purulent sputum. In 
the previous 24 h he had become mildly confused. He was 
agitated with a respiratory rate of 35, BP 170/90, sweaty with an 
oximeter reading on air of 72%. There was widespread wheeze 
and coarse crackles suggestive of retained secretions. ABG 
analysis revealed pH 7.32, PaO2 5.8, PaCO2 8.1, and HCO3 28.
What do these blood gases mean?
Hypoxaemia with mild acute respiratory acidosis. No evidence of chronic 
respiratory failure with chronically elevated pCO2 as HCO3 is normal, i.e. 
no compensation.
The initial treatment in A&E was:
	 Nebulised bronchodilators (salbutamol 5 mg nebulised + ipratropium 
bromide 500 µg).
	 28% O2 by controlled mask.
	 IV amoxicillin (erythromycin if patient penicillin allergic).
	 IV steroids (this is conventional treatment but there is limited evidence 
for effectiveness). Hydrocortisone 100 mg × 3 daily.
	 Encouragement to clear secretions including sitting patient up and the 
attention of the physiotherapist.
	 CXR to exclude pneumothorax or demonstrate associated pneumonia.
Information
Controlled oxygen via Venturi mask commonly leads to intermittent 
therapy as the mask is poorly tolerated by agitated, breathless 
patients. Oxygen via nasal prongs at 1 or 2 L/min is more effective 
and continuous but is not ‘controlled’.
Repeat ABGs were requested: pH 7.20, PaO2 6.5, PaCO2 12.5, HCO3 30.
These results show further CO2 retention and a deteriorating situation. 
Oxygen should not be removed – its removal will precipitate severe hypox­
aemia. Alveolar ventilation must be increased. Despite using a nasal 
airway to stimulate cough and aid suction of respiratory secretions there 
was no improvement. Furosemide was given because it was difficult to 
exclude coexistent LVF. Intubation was considered appropriate but a trial 
of non-invasive ventilation (NIV), BiPAP with tight-fitting facial mask was 
first tried with repeat gases at 1 h. On NIV the respiratory rate slowed and 
the acute respiratory acidosis resolved.
Non-invasive ventilatory support employs a nose- or face-mask to 
provide ventilatory assistance to breathing (this is termed ‘spontaneous 
pressure support’) or timed breaths (‘pressure controlled ventilation’). An 
344
Respiratory Disorders
11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Information
Contraindications/cautions to non-invasive ventilation (NIV):
•	 Unconscious or uncooperative
•	 Vomiting
•	 Large amount of respiratory secretions
•	 Cardiovascularly unstable (beware hypotension)
•	 Recent facial or upper airway surgery
•	 Recent upper GI tract surgery
•	 Inability to protect airway
Mechanical ventilation
In an unstable situation it is essential to maintain oxygenation. As intuba­
tion of an acutely unwell patient requires experience, refer to ITU outreach 
team.
Aims of intubation and mechanical ventilation
	 Immediate correction of hypoxaemia
	 Slower correction of hypercapnia
	 Allow effective suctioning of respiratory secretions.
Hypotension after intubation is very common and relates to
	 High airway pressures limiting venous return and causing a fall in 
cardiac output
	 Vasodilation directly caused by sedatives
	 A fall in sympathetic tone.
• Progress.  This patient was seen by the ITU team who felt, despite 
his confusion, that he should first be tried on non-invasive ventilatory 
support. He was put on BiPAP and his blood gases were monitored. 
These gradually improved on this regimen and antibiotics. He was 
discharged and advised to see his doctor as soon as he develops a 
chest infection.
Further reading
British Thoracic Society. Non-invasive ventilation in acute respiratory 
failure. Available online: www.thoraxjnl.com
Roberts, CM, Brown JL, Reinhardt AK et al. Non-invasive ventilation in 
COPD: management of acute type 2 respiratory failure. Clin Med 2008; 
8: 517–521.
COPD – ACUTE EXACERBATION
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is used to describe a 
number of clinical syndromes associated with destruction of the lung and 
airflow obstruction.
exhalation valve reduces re-breathing. NIV is successful in approximately 
70% of patients with respiratory failure resulting from COPD. It should 
not be employed if intubation would be more appropriate.
345
COPD – acute exacerbation 11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Case history (1)
A 63-year-old male ex-smoker has had a chronic productive 
cough for 20 years. For 10 years he has had gradually increasing 
breathlessness on exertion. His usual exercise tolerance is 200 
yards on the flat. One week previously he became breathless on 
walking between rooms and his sputum became purulent. His 
normal medication is salbutamol and beclometasone inhalers.
On examination his chest expanded poorly and he was wheezy, but 
there were no localising signs, no evidence of cor pulmonale or heart 
failure.
	 His usual FEV1/FVC was 1.9/3.2 (predicted 3.4/4.4) but on arrival was 
0.9/2.6
	 His CXR showed no acute lesion.
It was decided not to admit him to hospital because:
	 He was able to cope at home with aid of his wife
	 He was not cyanosed: oximetry showed SaO2 97%
	 His general condition was good and he had a normal level of 
consciousness.
He was discharged home with:
	 Amoxicillin 500 mg × 3 daily for 1 week
	 Prednisolone 30 mg daily for 2 weeks
	 Advice to increase his inhaled bronchodilators to salbutamol four puffs, 
4-hourly via a spacer
	 A follow-up appointment at the chest clinic for 2 weeks.
Key points
	 The patient did not need admission because:
•	 No evidence of respiratory failure
•	 No evidence of cor pulmonale
•	 Able to cope at home.
	 Antibiotic was broad spectrum and, in particular, covered the majority 
of Haemophilus influenzae and Streptococcus pneumoniae organisms (the 
most common causes of acute exacerbation). Erythromycin was unnec­
essary because Mycoplasma was unlikely.
	 Oral steroids were used as adjunct to antibiotics because the patient was 
already on inhaled steroids and possibly had a degree of steroid respon­
siveness. This is conventional treatment but there is limited evidence to 
support it.
	 Patient was given a spacer (and shown how to use it) in order to increase 
the lung deposition of aerosol.
	 Salbutamol dose was increased and given 4-hourly because the effect 
lasts only 4–6 h and is partly dependent on dose.
	 Follow-up at chest clinic because patient had moderately severe COPD 
and had never been assessed:
•	 Advise pneumococcal and influenza vaccination
•	 Consider referral for pulmonary rehabilitation.
However, the patient’s doctor, when seeing the patient 1 week later, can­
celled the outpatient appointment believing it unnecessary. He wrote to 
346
Respiratory Disorders
11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
the chest physician saying that he was able to manage the patient 
himself. He had a spirometer in the surgery and when well the patient had 
an FEV1 of > 50% predicated normal. Furthermore, the doctor said that the 
patient:
	 Had a definitive diagnosis
	 Had only moderately severe COPD
	 No cor pulmonale
	 No respiratory failure and did not need oxygen
	 Did not have bullous lung disease
	 Did not have a rapidly declining FEV1.
The patient’s doctor was arranging to perform bronchodilator tests himself 
using a spirometer and checking the response to both salbutamol and 
ipratropium inhalers. He would arrange vaccination.
Remember
Spirometry is required to assess the severity of COPD. Most 
COPD patients can be satisfactorily managed in the community.
Box 11.1.  Causes of breathlessness
•	 Sudden onset:
–	 An inhaled foreign body
–	 A pneumothorax
–	 A pulmonary embolus.
•	 Breathlessness developing over a few hours:
–	 Asthma/COPD
–	 Pneumonia
–	 Pulmonary oedema
–	 Respiratory muscle disease, e.g. Guillain–Barré.
•	 Intermittent breathlessness:
–	 Asthma
–	 Pulmonary oedema
–	 Pulmonary emboli.
•	 Breathlessness over a few days:
–	 Pleural effusion
–	 Carcinoma of the bronchus
–	 Pneumonia including pulmonary tuberculosis.
•	 Breathlessness developing over months or years:
–	 Fibrosis alveolitis
–	 COPD
–	 Sarcoid
–	 Chest wall or neuromuscular disease
–	 Occupational lung disease
–	 Non-respiratory causes: anaemia, hyperthyroidism.
Prognosis of COPD
Predictors of a poor prognosis are increasing age and worsening of airflow 
limitation, i.e. a fall in FEV1.
347
COPD – acute exacerbation 11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
A patient with a BODE index (Table 11.2) of 0–2 has a mortality rate of 
10%; one with a BODE index of 7–10, a mortality rate of 80% at 4 years.
Points on BODE index
Variable
0
1
2
3
FEV1 (percent of predicted)
≥ 65
50–64
36–49
≥ 35
Distance walked in 6 
minutes (m)
≥ 350
250–349
150–249
≤ 149
MMRC dyspnoea scale
0–1
2
3
4
Body mass index
> 21
≤ 21
Scores on the modified Medical Research Council (MMRC) dyspnoea scale 
range from 0 to 4, with a score of 4 indicating that the patient is breathless 
when dressing.
Table 11.2  BODE index (Body mass index, degree of airflow 
Obstruction, Dyspnoea and Exercise capacity)
Case history (2)
A 68-year-old female smoker with a chronic productive cough and 
5 years of gradually increasing breathlessness on exertion had a 
usual exercise tolerance of 40 yards on the flat and was breathless 
bending and washing. She was virtually housebound and lived 
alone. She developed a cough with purulent sputum and had been 
breathless at rest for 2 days. She was sent as an emergency to 
the A&E Department. She was admitted to the medical 
assessment unit immediately because she:
On examination
•	 Showed signs of respiratory failure: drowsy and cyanosed, 
CO2 flap
•	 Pulse 130/min; atrial fibrillation; BP 100/60
•	 Cor pulmonale with tricuspid regurgitation:
–	 JVP raised up to the level of the ear
–	 Midsystolic murmur at LSE
–	 Enlarged pulsatile liver
–	 Bilaterally oedematous legs to knees.
•	 Respiratory rate 30, shallow breaths using accessory muscles 
of respiration, generalised wheezing and bilateral basal crackles. 
Investigations showed:
•	 Arterial blood gases: pH 7.32, PaO2 5.6, pCO2 8.2 on air
•	 FBC Hb 178 g/L, Hct 54%, WBC 12 300
•	 Urea 9.0, K+ 3.5, creatinine 102
–	 ECG 130 (ventricular rate); atrial fibrillation and right heart 
strain.
•	 Chest X-ray: overinflated lungs with prominent pulmonary 
arteries (indicating pulmonary hypertension) and normal-sized 
heart.
348
Respiratory Disorders
11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Key points
	 Patient in respiratory failure with raised PaCO2: give oxygen via fixed 
performance mask 24, initially increasing to 28 or 35% if no rise in 
PaCO2.
	 Cor pulmonale (right heart failure secondary to lung disease) is difficult 
to improve while the patient remains hypoxic.
	 Atrial fibrillation may only be secondary to hypoxaemia and might 
revert to sinus rhythm when PaO2 improves.
Immediate treatment
	 Oxygen 28% via Venturi mask and repeat ABGs.
	 Sit patient upright to help breathing.
	 Give nebulised bronchodilators:
•	 Salbutamol 5.0 mg with ipratropium 0.5 mg 6-hourly via nebuliser
•	 Air rather than high-flow O2 is safer for nebulising bronchodilators.
	 Chest physiotherapy to help sputum expectoration.
	 Amoxicillin 500 mg × 3 daily IV until condition improves and then oral 
for 1 week in total.
	 IV hydrocortisone 100 mg × 3 daily until patient improves and then oral 
prednisolone 20 to 30 mg daily for 2 weeks. If not on oral theophyllines, 
start aminophylline infusion.
	 Monitor oximetry + mental state, respiratory rate and pulse until 
improvement. Daily weights.
There was no improvement
She was therefore given:
	 Doxapram as a respiratory stimulant (1.5–4 mg/min infusion) which 
sometimes helps.
	 Non-invasive intermittent positive pressure ventilation (NIV) (see 
p. 343). The best technique is using a tight-fitting facial mask to deliver 
bilevel positive airway pressure ventilation support (BiPAP).
Progress
	 Patient more alert
	 PaO2 8.0, PaCO2 8.4, pH 7.35 now on 2 L nasal oxygen
	 In sinus rhythm.
Key points
	 Oxygen should be prescribed on treatment sheet and given continu­
ously, not ‘as required’.
	 Management of oxygen is the most helpful and difficult component of 
treatment.
	 Although oxygen by a Venturi mask gives a known concentration it is 
uncomfortable and claustrophobic. It has to be removed to eat, talk and 
cough and for nebulised treatment.
	 Oxygen by nasal spectacles is more comfortable and can be kept on 
continuously.
	 Nasal oxygen gives variable FiO2 depending on pattern of breathing and 
flow rate between 24% and 35%. It worked on this patient but in many 
patients with COPD, a 24% oxygen via a mask is preferable when PaCO2 
> 8.0 kPa.
349
COPD – acute exacerbation 11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 It takes 30–40 min to equilibrate blood gases with any change in FiO2 
and blood gases should not be checked earlier.
	 It is unnecessary to get the PaO2 normal: aim to get it at the top of the 
steep slope of the oxygen saturation curve (see Fig. 11.3).
	 If PaO2 is > 7.5 kPa, a small fall in PaO2 has little effect on O2 saturation: 
this is safe.
	 If PaO2 is 6.5 or less, a small fall produces a dangerous fall in SaO2. Note: 
the sigmoid shape of oxygen dissociation curve (see p. 342).
	 Increasing the inspired oxygen may cause a small rise in PaCO2 (mostly 
because of relaxation of hypoxic vasoconstriction in relatively poorly 
ventilated alveoli). A pH change of < 0.1 or PaCO2 < 1 kPa is not signifi­
cant, so do not reduce or remove the oxygen.
	 If, on increasing FiO2, this patient had not clinically improved and ABGs 
showed PaO2 6.8, PaCO2 12.0:
•	 Action: patient still needs oxygen but at a more controlled concentra­
tion. Increase FiO2 to 35%
•	 Get help from senior, preferably from respiratory team and discuss 
transfer to HDU for non-invasive ventilation or to ITU for assisted 
ventilation.
• Progress.  Over the next few days the patient improved and felt well 
by 1 week. Her Hb came back as 180 g/L, Hct 55. What would you 
do now?
Action
Venesect cautiously under Haematology guidance. Three to four units 
venesected over next few weeks starting before discharge from hospital 
aiming for a Hct of 50. Continue bronchodilators as inhalers via spacing 
device, oral steroids continued for 2 weeks and diuretics, e.g. furosemide 
given.
Key points
	 Before discharge blood gases were checked on air and showed a PaO2 
7.0, PaCO2 6.3. The respiratory nurse was asked to visit to:
•	 Discuss disease/risk factors, especially to urge to stop smoking and 
refer to smoking cessation clinic
•	 Explain mechanism of action of drugs
•	 Explain use of aerosol devices and spacers
•	 Give chest clinic follow-up for 2 weeks.
A follow-up in chest clinic was arranged to:
	 Optimise bronchodilator treatment.
	 Monitor for polycythaemia and cor pulmonale.
	 Assess for long-term domiciliary oxygen (indication PaO2 < 7.3 on two 
occasions 3–4 weeks apart when patient stable).
	 Consider obstructive sleep apnoea in view of marked polycythaemia.
Further reading
British Thoracic Society. Guidelines for COPD. Available online: www.brit-
thoracic.org.uk
350
Respiratory Disorders
11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
PNEUMONIA
Pneumonia is an inflammation of the substance of the lungs. It can be 
classified by site (e.g. lobar, diffuse, bronchopneumonia) or by aetiological 
agent (e.g. bacterial, viral, fungal, aspiration, or due to radiotherapy or 
allergic mechanisms). Pneumonias can be community-acquired (CAP; 
commonest Strep. pneumoniae), hospital-acquired (often Gram-negative 
bacteria) or ventilator-associated (multiple organisms, e.g. Pseudomonas, 
Klebsiella, Acinetobacter).
Case history (1)
A 33-year-old female non-smoker was admitted to the medical 
assessment unit with a 2-day history of fever, sweating and cough, 
productive of yellow, lightly blood-stained sputum. She had 
pleuritic pain in the left axilla. Herpes labialis was present.
This is the typical history of community-acquired pneumonia.(CAP).
Signs
	 Fever 39°C.
	 Respiratory rate 28/min.
	 Dullness to percussion left lung base; consolidation.
	 Bronchial breathing left lung base; consolidation.
Likely infecting organisms
	 Streptococcus pneumoniae: the most likely cause (35–80% of cases)
	 Haemophilus influenzae: especially in smokers with COPD
	 Mycoplasma (4-yearly epidemics)
	 Legionella
	 Staphylococcus aureus
	 Viral: influenza
	 Chlamydophilia psittaci.
Investigations
•	 Chest X-ray
•	 Arterial blood gases
•	 Blood count, WBC + differential
•	 Urea and electrolytes
•	 Urinalysis for sugar (is patient diabetic?)
•	 Blood and sputum culture
•	 Blood for viral serology and Legionella/Mycoplasma
•	 Serology for pneumoccocal antigen (blood, sputum and urine)
•	 Rapid urine test available for Legionella
How ill is this patient?
The following CURB-65 criteria indicate the severity of CAP.
351
Pneumonia 11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
• Progress.  This patient was young, previously fit, not breathless or 
shocked. The chest X-ray (Fig. 11.5) showed a left lower lobe pneu­
monia and the WBC was 11 500. Normal urea. PaO2 10.5 kPa.
This pneumonia is not severe on the CURB criteria.
The patient was treated with oral antibiotics and was discharged in 24 
hours (see Antibiotic choices, p. 353).
CURB-65 Criteria for the diagnosis of severe community-acquired 
pneumonia
•	 Confusion*
•	 Urea > 7 mmol/L
•	 Respiratory rate ≥ 30/min
•	 Blood pressure (systolic < 90 or diastolic ≤ 60 mmHg
•	 Age > 65 years of age
Score 1 point for each feature present
Score 0–1 – Treat as outpatient
Score 2 – Admit to hospital
Score 3+ – Often require ICU care
Mortality rates increase with increasing score.
Other markers of severe pneumonia
•	 Chest X-ray – more than one lobe involved
•	 PaO2 < 8 kPa
•	 Low albumin (< 35 g/L)
•	 White cell count (< 4 × 109/L or high > 20 × 109/L)
•	 Blood culture – positive
*Confusion is described as a new disorientation in person, place or time.
Figure 11.5  Lobar 
pneumonia. 
352
Respiratory Disorders
11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Investigations show
	 CXR (Fig. 11.6):
•	 Diffuse opacification in both lungs
•	 Ring opacities in right lung
	 Urea 9 mmol/L
	 WBC 28 000
	 ABG: PaO2 9.0 kPa, PaCO2 5.3 kPa, on FiO2 40%.
This is a high-risk case. He has influenza and a superinfection with Staphy­
lococcus aureus causing severe community-acquired pneumonia with early 
abscess formation (ring opacities on the CXR). He needs:
Case history (2)
A 73-year-old man was brought to A&E by his very anxious wife. 
He had had winter bronchitis for the last 5 years and was a 
current smoker of 20 cigarettes/day. One week ago he had the 
‘flu’ and this morning became increasingly breathless, sweaty, 
pale and confused. He had had a diagnosis of angina made 2 
years ago.
Bedside assessment summary:
•	 Confusion
•	 RR > 30/min
•	 BP 110/40
•	 73 years old
•	 Dehydrated
•	 Pre-existing COPD
•	 Pre-existing angina
i.e. CURB-65 score of 4+ (no blood tests done yet for urea).
Figure 11.6  Diagram of chest X-ray showing bilateral diffuse opacities and ring 
opacities in the right lung. 
353
Pneumonia 11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Rehydration: intravenous fluid
	 Intravenous antibiotics: see Antibiotics, below – severe CAP
	 Pulse oximetry: give O2 to try to keep O2 sat > 90%
	 Nursing where he can be easily observed or in an HDU (hourly BP, 
pulse, RR)
	 To be watched for respiratory failure: IPPV might be needed
	 Physiotherapy if difficulty coughing up sputum.
Information
Indications for intensive care monitoring and assisted respiration:
•	 PaO2 < 8 kPa on 60% O2
•	 PaCO2 > 6.4 kPa
•	 Patient exhausted, drowsy or unconscious
•	 Shock
•	 Hypotension or circulatory failure
Antibiotic choices for CAP
Consult your Hospital Formulary or select from below:
Uncomplicated mild community-acquired pneumonia
	 Treat for 5 days with oral medication unless patient not swallowing or 
not absorbing.
	 Oral amoxicillin 500 mg × 3 daily + erythromycin 500 mg × 4 daily (or 
clarithromycin).
	 In penicillin allergic patient with underlying lung disease (H. influen­
zae suspected)
	 Clarithromycin 500 mg × 2 daily.
Severe CAP
	 IV antibiotics until significant improvement. Co-amoxiclav 1.2 g IV x 3 
daily and clarithromycin 500 mg IV × 2 daily.
	 Antibiotics for up to 10 days.
Staphylococcal pneumonia
	 Treat for 10 to 14 days.
	 Flucloxacillin 2 g × 4 daily IV + fusidic acid oral 0.5–1 g × 3 or gen­
tamicin 3.0–5.0 mg/kg IV daily as single dose (check gentamicin levels 
before second dose).
Legionnaire’s disease
	 Treat for 3 weeks.
	 Clarithromycin 500 mg × 2 daily (for severe cases IV).
Mycoplasma pneumonia N.B.
	 Treat for 2 weeks.
	 Erythromycin 500 mg × 4 IV or oral daily.
	 If allergic to erythromycin give doxycycline 200 mg orally then 100 mg 
daily or ciprofloxacin 500 mg × 2 daily.
Q fever and psittacosis
	 Tetracycline 500 mg × 3 daily for 10 days.
• Progress.  This patient made a signficant improvement on his IV 
antibiotics. He was switched to oral antibiotics and made a slow 
recovery.
354
Respiratory Disorders
11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
You should think this patient may have HIV infection with a Pneumocystis 
jiroveci pneumonia because of country of origin, 6-month history of 
illness, lymphadenopathy, low white cell count and appearance on CXR 
(Fig. 11.7).
On investigation, the CXR had:
	 Ground glass appearance of lung fields
	 Bilateral and perihilar shadowing.
Case history (3)
A 24-year-old male, recently arrived in the UK from East Africa, 
presented with breathlessness of 2 weeks’ duration, gradually 
increasing in severity with a dry cough and sweats. He had a 
diarrhoeal illness 6 months ago and has recently noticed swollen 
glands in his neck.
Bedside assessment summary:
•	 Looks worried
•	 RR 34/min
•	 Tachycardia 120 bpm
•	 Temperature 41°C
•	 No abnormal signs in chest
•	 Pre-existing illness: HIV infection
•	 ABGs: PaO2 9.0 kPa; on FiO2 60% PaCO2 3.2 kPa
•	 WBC 23 × 109/L
•	 Normal serum urea.
Figure 11.7  Chest X-ray showing bilateral perihilar shadowing. Pneumocystis. 
355
Pneumonia 11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Treatment should start in this patient for pneumocystis 
jiroveci
	 High-dose IV co-trimoxazole.
	 Add IV cefuroxime and erythromycin if in doubt as to cause of the 
pneumonia.
	 Refer to HIV specialist.
	 May need high-dose steroids IV if deteriorates.
	 Give O2 to keep O2 sat > 90%.
	 Arrange for induced sputum collection next day.
• Progress.  This patient improved on antibiotics and his care was 
taken over by the HIV team.
Remember
Other pneumonias
•	 Heavy alcohol users: inhalation pneumonia (Gram-negative 
organisms)
•	 Drug users: ‘dirty’ needles and syringes, infected emboli to 
lungs (Staphylococcus aureus)
•	 Tuberculosis: a sputum smear for AFB is quick and easy to do. 
Can coexist with other pneumonias
•	 Cytomegalovirus
•	 Fungal: Aspergillus, Candida albicans
These latter two are seen in immunocompromised patients, for 
example with:
•	 HIV infection
•	 Leukaemia and lymphoma
•	 Chemotherapy
•	 Transplant recipients
•	 Steroid therapy
•	 Chronic kidney disease.
Case history (4)
A 68-year-old female smoker was admitted by the surgical team 9 
days previously with intestinal obstruction. A laparotomy showed 
severe diverticulitis with a pelvic mass and a defunctioning 
colostomy was performed. She has been very slow to mobilise 
postoperatively and developed a troublesome cough. Two days 
ago she developed a fever and has now become breathless, 
tachycardic and has right-sided pleurisy.
Bedside assessment summary:
•	 Looks ill
•	 RR 24/min
•	 Pulse 112 bpm regular
•	 Temperature 40°C
•	 Coarse crackles right lung base, patchy bronchial breathing
•	 Pleural rub
Continued
356
Respiratory Disorders
11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
What is the diagnosis?
Severe hospital-acquired pneumonia
However, for all cases, think of:
	 DVT with pulmonary emboli might coexist.
	 Inhalation of vomiting causing aspiration pneumonia.
	 Previous 
antibiotics 
could 
have 
selected 
out 
Gram-negative 
organisms.
	 Infected intravenous cannulae.
	 Pre-existing lung disease – smoker.
Bacteriology in hospital-acquired pneumonia
Wide range of possible organisms:
	 Gram-negative bacilli (50%):
•	 Acinetobacter spp.
•	 E. coli
•	 Proteus spp.
•	 Klebsiella spp.
•	 Pseudomonas spp.
•	 Haemophilus influenzae
	 Gram-positive cocci:
•	 Staphylococcus aureus
•	 Streptococcus pneumoniae
	 Anaerobes:
•	 Bacteroides spp.
•	 Clostridia spp.
Management
	 Give O2 to raise O2 saturation to > 90%.
	 Rehydrate intravenously.
	 Give IV antibiotics to cover wide spectrum:
•	 Ceftazidime 2 g × 2 daily and gentamicin 800 mg initially with checks 
on the blood level.
Case history (4) (continued)
•	 No evidence of DVT
•	 Has vomited recently
•	 Recent surgery
•	 The surgeons gave her 5 days of IV amoxicillin post-op.
Her MEWS score (p. 162) has increased to 4.
Investigations
•	 CXR: patchy opacification right lung base
•	 ABGs: PaO2 7.3, PaCO2 4.6
•	 WBC 16 × 109/L
•	 Urea 10 mmol/L
•	 ECG sinus tachycardia
357
Lung abscess 11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 If improving after 48 h and able to swallow switch to:
•	 Co-amoxiclav (500/125) 625 mg × 3 daily + oral metronidazole 
400 mg × 3 daily.
	 Patient is at high risk of pulmonary emboli: LMW heparin, e.g. Enoxa­
parin 40 mg SC × 1 daily if not already on.
	 Watch for deterioration.
	 Physiotherapy to encourage cough.
• Progress.  She responded slowly and was discharged a week later.
LUNG ABSCESS
This is a severe localized suppuration in the lung. The CXR shows cavity 
formation, often with the presence of a fluid level (not due to 
tuberculosis).
The causes of lung abscess include aspiration, particularly amongst 
alcohol users. Lung abscesses also frequently follow the inhalation of a 
foreign body into a bronchus. They can also occur when the bronchus is 
obstructed, e.g. a bronchial carcinoma. Chronic or subacute lung abscesses 
can also follow an inadequately treated pneumonia.
Case history
A man of 74 presented with a 1-month history of a productive 
cough with offensive-tasting sputum, malaise and weight loss. His 
dentition was very poor. He had just stopped smoking.
On examination he had a temperature of 39.8°C, a few 
crackles at the right base but no other respiratory signs. A chest 
X-ray (Fig 11.8) shows a cavity.
• Thin walled cavity with fluid
  level in right lower lobe
Figure 11.8  Diagram of chest X-ray showing a cavity (lung abscess). 
Differential diagnosis
	 Lung abscess
	 Cavitating lung cancer
	 Tuberculosis.
Bronchoscopy showed thick secretions in right lower lobe. No bronchial 
obstruction. Cytology negative.
358
Respiratory Disorders
11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Diagnosis: Pyogenic abscess
• Progress.  The patient responded to antibiotics (cefuroxime and met­
ronidazole) and the abscess resolved in 6 weeks. This probably 
resulted from aspiration with mouth anaerobes contributing to the 
unpleasant smell and taste of sputum. Aspiration usually occurs on 
the right side as the right bronchus is more vertical.
Case history (1)
An 18-year-old man who came to the UK 2 years ago from the 
Indian sub-continent presented with general malaise, photophobia, 
unproductive cough, weight loss and night sweats.
On examination his temperature was 39.5°C. He looked unwell 
and appeared rather vague. There was no neck stiffness or any 
abnormal chest signs.
Investigations revealed Na 120, K 2.6 and urea 2.8, Hb 104 g/L 
and WBC 6.4; serum ALT and alkaline phosphatase were slightly 
raised. Portable AP chest film appeared normal.
He was admitted with the diagnosis of pyrexia of unknown 
origin. He had blood and urine cultures and CSF examination. 
CSF showed an increased cell count, mostly lymphocytes, raised 
protein and low glucose. No organisms were seen but cultures 
sent. A departmental PA chest X-ray was performed after 2 days, 
which showed miliary mottling.
This patient has miliary tuberculosis with meningitis (TBM). It 
carries a high morbidity if not treated early. The hyponatraemia is 
dilutional secondary to inappropriate ADH secretion.
• Treatment.  This is with anti-tuberculous drugs – rifampicin, isoni­
azid and pyrazinamide. These must commence before cultures are 
available. Continue for at least 9 months. Ethambutol should not be 
used because of its eye complications. Corticosteroids, e.g. pred­
nisolone 60 mg are given for the first 3 weeks as they reduce mortal­
ity. Relapses and complications (e.g. seizures, hydrocephalus) are 
common in TBM. The mortality remains over 60% even with early 
treatment.
• Progress.  This patient was started on anti-TB therapy as above. His 
mental state improved and temperature settled. He was discharged 
after 3 weeks with an appointment in 3 weeks in outpatients.
TUBERCULOSIS
Case history (2)
A 50-year-old man who was a heavy drinker, with no fixed abode, 
was brought to A&E ‘collapsed’. He had stopped drinking alcohol 
1 week previously because he had run out of money. He was 
confused, hallucinating and coughing, and was transferred to the 
MAU.
359
Tuberculosis 11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Investigations
•	 Hb 180 g/L; MCV 106; WBC 8500
•	 Urea: 1.3
•	 K+: 3.5
•	 Creatinine: 60, eGFR = 98 mL/min
•	 Na: 126
•	 Bilirubin: 40
•	 Alkaline phosphatase and ALT raised
•	 Chest X-ray (Fig. 11.9)
Figure 11.9  Diagram of chest X-ray – patchy opacification with cavitation in 
right upper lobe. Trachea deviated to the right. Tuberculosis. 
Case history (2) (continued)
On examination he was unkempt and emaciated, confused 
and jaundiced:
•	 Temperature: 37.9°C
•	 Pulse: 100
•	 BP: 100/60.
On further examination, right upper chest; bronchial breathing + 
coarse crackles; trachea deviated to the right.
Liver enlarged 3 cm below costal margin. Ascites.
A provisional differential diagnosis was made of:
	 Delirium tremens
	 Pulmonary tuberculosis
	 Alcoholic liver disease.
360
Respiratory Disorders
11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Urgent sputum was sent for staining with auramine-phenol fluorescent 
test and culture + sensitivities for AFB (if no organisms found send at least 
three more good sputum specimens). TB bacilli were found in the third 
sputum specimen (smear +ve).
Risk factors for developing TB reactivation
	 Heavy alcohol or other drug use
	 Diabetes mellitus
	 Malnutrition
	 Immunosuppression (any cause including steroid therapy).
Management
	 Isolate patient as smear +ve.
	 Treat delirium tremens (see p. 525). Note: always also give thiamine.
	 Start anti-TB therapy (see below) as soon as possible.
	 Notify patient to infection control and contact TB health visitor to do 
contact tracing.
• Progress.  He was started on anti-TB therapy and treatment for his 
DTS. He needs directly observed treatment (DOT) because he is 
unlikely to comply with treatment otherwise. He was also referred 
to the respiratory and gastroenterological teams.
Case history (3)
A 64-year-old white male smoker was treated by his doctor with 
antibiotics for bronchitis 3 months ago. As his cough had not 
resolved, he was admitted to hospital (MAU) 1 week ago. Initial 
assessment showed a right upper lobe pneumonia and he was 
treated with oral amoxicillin and erythromycin. Blood and sputum 
cultures were negative. He had a persistent low-grade fever and 
the chest X-ray still showed patchy right upper lobe consolidation. 
You have been called to see him because he has just had a 
haemoptysis.
Why is this pneumonia slow to resolve?
Consider:
	 Obstructing carcinoma of right upper lobe bronchus:
•	 Is there a hilar mass?
•	 Should he be bronchoscoped?
	 Unusual infecting organism.
Further history
Always worth retaking the history.
	 His mother was treated for pulmonary tuberculosis in 1941. He was 
seen in a chest clinic as a child but does not think that he had drug 
treatment. He has no recall of having BCG vaccination and does not 
have a BCG scar.
	 Pulmonary TB is a possible diagnosis.
	 Look carefully at a new PA chest X-ray (Fig. 11.10).
361
Tuberculosis 11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Action
This is TB until proved otherwise.
	 Send urgent sputum for auramine staining and TB culture.
	 Send at least three sputum specimens.
	 Check blood count, liver function, renal function.
Results
The microbiologist calls you urgently:
	 The patient has AAFB seen on sputum smear.
	 Sputum is being cultured for TB.
	 Culture results will be available in 6–8 weeks.
	 Sensitivities perhaps not for 12 weeks.
Progress and action
This patient was isolated in a side room (smear +ve).
	 Treatment for TB given (see below).
	 TB is a notifiable disease in the UK and allows contact tracing to be 
initiated.
Figure 11.10  Diagram of chest X-ray – right upper lobe consolidation with small 
apical cavity – probably obscured by the clavicle on previous chest X-ray. 
Case history (4)
A 34-year-old Ugandan refugee presented to A&E with high fever, 
diarrhoea and weight loss. She omitted to inform the staff that she 
had been found to be HIV positive 6 months previously (with a CD 
count of 250) and had declined further investigation or treatment 
at that time.
On examination she appeared unwell, cachetic and was 
coughing continuously.
Continued
362
Respiratory Disorders
11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Key points
	 Many patients do not volunteer their HIV status.
	 You must indicate that Mycobacterium TB is a possibility when request­
ing sputum examination.
	 Atypical 
radiological 
changes 
are 
common 
in 
TB 
in 
the 
immunocompromised.
	 Both Mycobacterium intracellulare avium and Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
can be isolated from stool and blood.
	 A patient from Africa with pneumonia should be admitted to a side 
room until TB has been excluded.
	 The risk of TB developing in those infected (i.e. disease reactivation) in 
HIV increases when CD count < 200.
• Progress.  This patient was started on anti-tuberculous therapy. She 
was taken over by the HIV team and had continued care from the 
respiratory team for follow-up and contact tracing.
Treatment – drug therapy in tuberculosis
	 Rifampicin: if body weight < 50 kg, 450 mg daily; if body weight ≥ 
50 kg, 600 mg daily.
	 Isoniazid: 300 mg daily.
	 Pyrazinamide: if body weight < 50 kg, 1.5 g daily; if body weight ≥ 50, 
2 g daily.
	 Ethambutol: 15 mg/kg (test visual acuity before treatment).
	 Give all drugs together once daily with breakfast.
	 All four drugs for 2 months followed by rifampicin and isoniazid for 4 
months (having checked the sensitivities).
	 Tuberculous meningitis: recommended duration 12 months:
•	 Four drugs for 3 months: rifampicin + isoniazid for 9 months.
•	 Corticosteroids are indicated in tuberculous meningitis, pericarditis 
and spinal tuberculosis with neurological compression.
NB: This patient may have multi-resistant TB (MRTB).
Monitor therapy
	 Liver biochemistry
	 Patient compliance with medication.
Case history (4) (continued)
•	 CXR: right lower lobe shadowing and possible right hilar 
lymphadenopathy
•	 Hb 75 g/L; WBC 4.2; lymphocytes 0.8; platelets 156
•	 Na+ 128; K+ 2.5; urea 11.8; albumin 18.
Blood, stool, sputum and urine cultures were taken and she was 
admitted to the medical assessment unit and commenced on 
amoxicillin and erythromycin. She failed to improve and after 3 
days the antibiotics were changed to ciprofloxacin, although 
sputum culture was unhelpful. On day 5 the microbiologist was 
consulted: examination of sputum for AFB was positive and 
subsequently Mycobacterium TB was isolated from blood and 
stool.
363
Pleural effusion 11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Further reading
Maartens G, Wilkinson RJ. Tuberculosis. Lancet 2007; 2030–2243.
WHO Global tuberculosis control 2011. http://www.int/tb/publicationc/
global_report/en/index./html
PLEURAL EFFUSION
This is an excessive accumulation of fluid in the pleural space. It can be 
detected on X-ray when 300 mL or more of fluid is present and clinically 
when 500 mL or more is present. The chest X-ray appearances range from 
the obliteration of the costophrenic angle to dense homogeneous shadows 
occupying part or all of the hemithorax. Fluid below the lung (a subpul­
monary effusion) can simulate a raised hemidiaphragm. Fluid in the fis­
sures may resemble an intrapulmonary mass.
Case history (1)
A 63-year-old man presented with a 2-month history of increasing 
breathlessness and could only walk at a slow pace on the level. 
On examination he showed:
•	 Reduced chest movement on the right
•	 Reduced tactile vocal fremitus
•	 Stony dullness to percussion
•	 Reduced breath sounds
•	 Apex beat in anterior axillary line (see CXR in Fig. 11.2 on 
p. 335).
Extra signs to look for
	 Clubbing: suggests malignancy
	 Glands in neck
	 Wasting
	 Enlarged liver.
What do you do next?
Admit him to MAU. A diagnostic aspiration was performed after proce­
dure was explained to the patient and consent obtained:
A syringe with a 21 G needle was used to obtain 20 mL of fluid. This 
was sent to the laboratory for:
	 Protein/LDH
	 Cell count
	 Culture including TB
	 Cytology for malignant cells.
Result
	 Fluid is blood stained.
	 Fluid protein is > 30 g/L, which indicates an exudate.
	 Few white cells and mesothelial cells.
	 Cultures sterile.
	 Malignant cells: probably squamous origin.
• Diagnosis.  Malignant pleural effusion. Underlying squamous cell 
carcinoma of bronchus.
364
Respiratory Disorders
11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
If the diagnosis had not been obtained on the aspirate, a pleural biopsy 
and a larger volume of pleural fluid with cytological examination of the 
spun cellular debris could have been performed.
If still no diagnosis, refer to respiratory physician.
What next?
	 The patient has inoperable lung cancer (malignant cells in fluid).
	 Treatment should be discussed at an MDT meeting concentrating on 
relieving symptoms and discussion of possible chemotherapy.
Drain the effusion (following explanation and consent) with an intercostal 
drain placed ideally over the top of the diaphragm.
An ultrasound to guide placement is useful. A small-bore (10–14 F) 
intercostal drain should be the initial choice. Clamp intermittently and 
limit flow to 1 L in the first hour to reduce the risk of re-expansion pulmo­
nary oedema or discomfort from mediastinal shift. Re-expansion pulmo­
nary oedema occurs much more commonly following re-expansion of the 
collapsed lung associated with a pneumothorax. It relates to endothelial 
dysfunction and is not therefore hydrostatic. Diuretics are not helpful and 
may exacerbate any tendency to hypovolaemic hypotension.
• Progress.  This man’s breathlessness improved after drainage of the 
effusion and he was discharged with an appointment with the Pallia­
tive Care team.
Case history (2)
A 43-year-old woman developed increasing breathlessness and 
malaise after being treated for pneumonia with oral cefalexin 2 
weeks previously. She was febrile with a temperature of 39°C, 
flushed and anorexic with signs of a left pleural effusion. A 
pleural tap produced cloudy, infected fluid (an empyema). A 
diagram of the CXR appearances is shown in Figure 11.11.
What should you do?
	 Drain the fluid by placing an intercostal drain.
	 Start antibiotics (after taking blood and fluid cultures). This should 
cover both aerobic and anaerobic organisms: cefuroxime 1 g 6-hourly 
IV, metronidazole 500 mg IV 8-hourly for 5 days, followed by oral 
cefaclor and metronidazole for 2–4 weeks.
	 Consult chest physician/surgeon early if drainage is incomplete. Decor­
tication of the lung or a rib resection and wide-bore drain might be 
needed.
	 Bronchoscopy should be performed to exclude bronchial obstruction. 
CT scanning is helpful to assess presence of underlying lung 
abscess.
Causes
	 Malignancy
	 Mesothelioma
	 Metastatic cancer: breast, bowel
	 Lymphoma
365
Pleural effusion 11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Pneumonia
	 Tuberculosis
	 Heart failure
	 Nephrotic syndrome
	 In association with intra-abdominal sepsis or pancreatitis.
PA aspect –
Homogeneous shadow
rising into the axilla
Fluid level indicates
air/fluid interface = gas
forming organisms in
the pleural space
Left lateral view –
This is an empyema –
pus in the pleural space.
You cannot aspirate this
with a ‘fine’ needle!
Figure 11.11  Diagram of chest X-ray (PA and left lateral) of an empyema. 
Remember
If in doubt:
•	 Consult a more senior colleague
•	 Learn under supervision.
• Progress.  This patient had an empyema. She was in hospital for 10 
days as her recovery was slow. She required two further drainages 
of her empyema but surgery was not required. When seen 4 weeks 
later she was well.
366
Respiratory Disorders
11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Further reading
Davies CW, Gleeson FV, Davie RJ. Pleural Disease Group British Thoracic 
Society guidelines for the management of pleural infection. Thorax 2003; 
58 (Suppl II): 18–28.
PULMONARY EMBOLISM (AND DEEP VEIN THROMBOSIS)
Pulmonary embolism is due to thrombus formed in the systemic veins 
(rarely the right side of the heart) which breaks off and embolises in the 
pulmonary artery. The clinical scenarios depend on whether the emboli 
block small/medium arteries or the pulmonary artery itself, causing right 
ventricular obstruction.
The diagnosis of pulmonary embolism can be difficult for a number of 
reasons:
	 It is often not present when thought of
	 It is present when not thought of
	 Presumptive treatment is not without risk
	 Proving the diagnosis may be difficult.
Case history (1)
A 24-year-old woman had been getting breathless for 3 months 
when referred. Asthma seemed unlikely (peak flow from referring 
doctor was 460 L/min) and the CXR was normal. A short 
pulmonary early diastolic murmur was noted and a cardiology 
opinion sought. Spirometry was normal but CO gas transfer was 
reduced (TLCO 60% predicted). The echocardiographic 
appearances were normal.
About 2 weeks later she was admitted in shock. The ECG 
showed acute right heart strain (S1, Q3, T3 with dominant R 
waves in V1–3) and the pulmonary artery diastolic pressure with 
the right atrial pressure was calculated to be 25 cmH2O (by 
Doppler echocardiography of the tricuspid regurgitant wave), 
which is very high.
• Diagnosis.  This is a massive pulmonary embolism.
She was managed on the CCU with intravenous alteplase 10 mg IV over 
1–2 min followed by IV infusion of 90 mg over 2 h and the Doppler 
echocardiogram used to monitor response.
She responded well to treatment and was returned to the ward.
• Progress.  A subsequent 

V/Q scan revealed the typical multiple 
patchy perfusion abnormalities of recurrent minor pulmonary embo­
lism, which explains her 3-month history of breathlessness. The scan 
has remained abnormal and she has continued to be breathless. 
Leiden factor V deficiency was discovered and the oral contraceptive 
stopped. She has been advised to remain on life-long warfarin.
Other common clinical scenarios caused by pulmonary 
embolisms you will meet are:
	 Acute minor pulmonary infarction producing pleuritic chest pain and 
possibly haemoptysis.
367
Pulmonary embolism (and deep vein thrombosis) 11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Episodic non-specific symptoms in the postoperative patient (such as 
palpitations and anxiety attacks) possibly followed by a cardiac arrest 
when at toilet.
	 Chronic minor thrombo-embolism leading to established pulmonary 
hypertension.
Information
90% of patients with a pulmonary embolus have chest pain and/or 
breathlessness as the major complaint.
The source of dislodged thrombus is most commonly the pelvic or 
femoral veins, with the classical triad of stasis, hypercoagulopathy or 
trauma being present in most patients. In some circumstances air, amniotic 
fluid, infected clot and even sheared off intravenous catheter material may 
be causal.
Venous thrombosis occurs in 10% of hospitalised patients and was 
much more common on surgical wards before routine prophylaxis was 
introduced. Patients with malignancy, advanced cardiorespiratory disease 
or a past history of venous thrombosis are most at risk.
All medical patients expected to be in bed for more than 3 days should 
be given DVT prophylaxis. Risk calculation should now guide prophy­
laxis, which should include pressure stockings as well as heparin (low 
molecular weight).
• Simple investigations.  These are usually only helpful when the 
diagnosis is clinically obvious.
	 Plasma D-dimers are very useful and if negative rule out pulmonary 
embolism.
	 The ECG or CXR might, however, reveal evidence of alternative causes 
such as myocardial infarction, pneumothorax or aortic dissection.
Information
An undetectable plasma D-dimer level (reflecting fibrin activation) 
essentially excludes significant thromboembolism but a raised 
value is non-specific.
Invasive investigations
	 CT. Contrast-enhanced, multi-detector CT angiograms (CTAs) have a 
sensitivity of 83% and specificity of 96%, with a positive predictive value 
of 92% (higher with 64-multislice scanners).
	 Radionuclide ventilation/perfusion scanning ( 

V/Q scan). This is a 
good test after measurement of D-dimers. It demonstrates ventilation/
perfusion defects, i.e. areas of ventilated lung with perfusion defects. 
Pulmonary 
99mtechnetium scintigraphy demonstrates the under-
perfused areas, while a scintigram, performed after inhalation of radio­
active xenon, shows no ventilatory defect. A matched defect may, 
however, arise with a PE that causes an infarct, or with emphysematous 
368
Respiratory Disorders
11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
bullae. This test is therefore conventionally reported as a probability 
(low, medium or high) of PE and should be interpreted in the context 
of the history, examination and other investigations.
	 MRI. This gives similar results to CT and is used if CTA is 
contraindicated.
The echocardiogram can be very useful in the diagnosis of 
massive PEs but is of limited value otherwise:
	 It might show RV dilation with paradoxical septal wall movement; 
pulmonary artery pressure may also be estimated.
	 It might exclude or confirm an alternative diagnosis, e.g. cardiac tam­
ponade, LVF.
	 RV clot is occasionally imaged and is an adverse prognostic sign with 
10% mortality risk.
• Look for DVT.  Doppler ultrasound or B-mode venous compression 
ultrasonography of the legs has largely replaced contrast venogra­
phy, having sensitivities of 90% and 70%, respectively, for proximal 
thrombus. This can detect clots in the pelvic or ilio-femoral 
veins.
Treatment
Supportive therapy with oxygen and analgesia should be given.
In the original trials of IV heparin in patients with obvious clinical 
venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism, treatment with heparin 
reduced mortality from 40% to 7%:
	 Low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) is licensed for use in DVT 
and patients with minor PE, e.g. pulmonary infarction can be treated 
without admission if the necessary organisation is available in the com­
munity. Use unfractionated heparin if rapid reversal is required.
	 These treatments only prevent further clot formation.
	 Warfarin is started and heparin discontinued once INR is therapeutic 
(INR 2–3).
	 6 months’ warfarin is adequate therapy and 6 weeks might be sufficient 
in patients with surgery as the provoking factor and no underlying 
coagulopathy. Anti-thrombin agents, e.g. dabigatram, are being used in 
place of heparin and warfarin.
	 Thrombolytic therapy is used for clot lysis in major pulmonary 
embolism. There is increasing experience of thrombolytic therapy. 
Although good evidence of reduced mortality is lacking, there is faster 
and more complete resolution of echocardiographic abnormalities or 


V/Q defects:
Information
Thrombolysis should be used in all patients with cardiogenic 
shock due to massive PE. You should discuss with your 
consultant before treating.
	 Emergency embolectomy is rarely a possibility – it can be performed 
only in cardiothoracic centres.
369
Pneumothorax 11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Transvenous placement of venocaval filters is used for recurrent PE even 
though the patient is adequately anticoagulated.
Further reading
Agnelli G. Current concepts. Acute pulmonary embolism. N Engl J Med 
2010; 363: 266–284.
British Thoracic Society.  Guidelines for the management of suspected 
acute pulmonary embolism. Thorax 2003; 58: 470–484. Available online: 
www.throaxjnl.com
PNEUMOTHORAX
Case history (1)
A 23-year-old man presented to the A&E Department with sudden 
onset of right-sided chest pain worse on deep inspiration 
associated with acute breathlessness. This started at rest and was 
not associated with cough. There were no pre-existing medical 
problems and no other symptoms.
On examination he was a healthy young man:
•	 Afebrile, not cyanosed, no signs of DVT
•	 Pulse rate 100/min; respiratory rate 30/min
•	 Trachea central
•	 Chest movement reduced right side
•	 Percussion note hyper-resonant right side
•	 Breath sounds reduced right side
•	 Key investigation: chest X-ray (Fig. 11.12): CXR findings 
pneumothorax = 1/2 hemithorax.
Key points
Common causes of pleuritic chest pain and dyspnoea are: pneumothorax, 
pulmonary embolism, pneumonia with pleurisy.
Diagnosis
Right-sided spontaneous pneumothorax.
Management of pneumothorax
	 If < 2 cm: discharge and review next day
	 If SOB ± > 2 cm rim on CXR: aspirate
	 If still unsuccessful: insert intercostal drain.
This man was symptomatic and had a moderate-sized pneumothorax. 
Aspiration is the first choice. Explain and obtain consent:
	 Technique for simple aspiration:
•	 Infiltrate with local anaesthetic down to pleura in second intercostal 
space in mid-clavicular line using FG16 cannula (or less) at least 3 cm 
long.
•	 Once in pleural space, remove needle.
•	 Connect cannula via three-way tap to chest, 50 mL syringe.
370
Respiratory Disorders
11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
•	 Stop aspirating when resistance felt, or patient coughs or complains 
of discomfort, or when 2.5 L aspirated.
	 Patient re-X-rayed: the lung had partially re-expanded.
Further management
	 Patient was discharged home after observation and some resolution on 
CXR, taking his discharge X-ray.
	 Instructed not to fly for 6 weeks or go deep-sea diving.
	 Given follow-up appointment in chest clinic for 1 week.
	 Instructed to re-attend (bringing X-ray) if he became breathless.
• Progress.  This man’s follow-up X-ray was normal and he has had 
no further problems.
Collapsed underlying lung
Figure 11.12  Diagram of chest X-ray showing collapsed right lung 
(pneumothorax). 
Case history (2)
A 69-year-old man with long-standing COPD and an exercise 
tolerance of 100 yards on the flat became acutely breathless at 
rest. On examination he was distressed and cyanosed:
•	 Using accessory muscles of respiration
•	 Respiratory rate 40 per minute
•	 Pulse 120; BP 100/60
•	 Barrel-shaped chest with poor expansion
•	 Hyper-resonant chest with almost inaudible breath sounds.
Main differential diagnoses
	 Acute exacerbation of COPD but no obvious infection and symptoms 
very acute
371
Pneumothorax 11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Pulmonary embolism
	 Pneumothorax
	 Acute myocardial infarction with LVF.
Action
Urgent chest X-ray, arterial blood gas.
Diagnosis
Life-threatening tension pneumothorax: emphysematous lungs with 
mediastinal shift to the right and complete left pneumothorax.
Management
	 Controlled oxygen as per blood gases
	 Urgent insertion of cannula followed by insertion of intercostal tube.
Information
Management of intercostal tube
Insertion of tube:
•	 Explain and reassure patient throughout. Obtain consent
•	 Premedicate with opiate and atropine to prevent reflex 
bradycardia, particularly if patient anxious, in patients with 
pre-existing lung disease
•	 Double-check the site of pneumothorax
•	 Site: 4–6th intercostal space in anterior axillary line – mark with 
pen + position patient supine with head at 30° and arm 
abducted to 90°
•	 Wear sterile gloves
•	 Drain 10–14 FG (adult). Check assembly and tight connection 
and that underwater seal is ready
•	 Local anaesthetic:
–	 Intradermal bleb in appropriate intercostal space
–	 Infiltrate deeper with blue, then green needle to parietal 
pleura at upper surface of rib: NB neuro-vascular bundle runs 
along lower surface
–	 Use 5 to 10 mL 1% lidocaine
–	 Check intermittently if in pleural space (air aspirated into 
syringe).
Insertion of drain:
•	 1 to 2 cm incision in skin and subcutaneous fat
•	 Insert two horizontal sutures across incision (leave loose for 
subsequent sealing of wound on drain site)
•	 Wide tract made through intercostal muscles down to and 
through pleura by blunt dissection with forceps (not sharp 
trocar)
•	 Insert tube using Seldinger technique and drain assembly 
without force
•	 Withdraw metal needle 5 cm and advance tube in apical 
direction
•	 Remove metal needle and connect tube to underwater seal
Continued
372
Respiratory Disorders
11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Information (continued)
•	 Secure tube firmly with one or two sutures (1 loop through skin 
and 4 times round tube). Purse string suturing is no longer 
advised as it leaves unsightly scarring
•	 Loop tube and secure to skin with plaster (Note: no kinks)
•	 Prescribe adequate oral/IM analgesia.
Removal of tube:
•	 Leave tube draining until no further bubbling + then re-X-ray 
(X-ray earlier if in doubt about site or efficacy of tube). Note: if 
level not swinging tube blocked. Clear or replace if lung not 
re-expanded
•	 Some patients need premedication for tube removal
•	 Remove holding suture and withdraw while patient breath-holds 
in expiration
•	 Seal wound with one of original sutures
•	 Observe overnight and if no recurrence of pneumothorax 
(clinical and X-ray) discharge with Chest Clinic appointment in 7 
to 10 days. Patient keeps last X-ray to bring to appointment or 
to A&E in emergency.
• Progress.  A chest X-ray at the Chest Clinic at 10 days showed full 
expansion of the lungs. He was asymptomatic but apprehensive 
about having a recurrence. He was reassured that this was unlikely.
Further reading
Henry M, Arnold T, Harvey J. Pleural Diseases Group. British Thoracic 
Society guidelines for the management of spontaneous pneumothorax. 
Thorax 2003; 58 (Suppl II): ii39–ii52.
CARCINOMA OF THE BRONCHUS
Case history
A 53-year-old male presents with a history of having coughed up 
blood a few hours ago. He has been smoking 20 cigarettes a day 
for the past 30 years. On examination there are diminished breath 
sounds at the right upper chest anteriorly.
What is the most likely diagnosis and why?
Carcinoma of the bronchus:
	 Cigarette smoking is the most common risk factor
	 It is a common cause of haemoptysis in smokers > 40 years of age
	 Physical sign of diminished breath sounds suggests bronchial 
obstruction.
373
Carcinoma of the bronchus 11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Information
Carcinoma of the bronchus:
•	 Most common form of cancer in both sexes
•	 Non-small cell:
•	 Squamous cell carcinoma (39%)
•	 Large cell carcinoma (25%)
•	 Adenocarcinoma (10%)
•	 Alveolar cell carcinoma (2%)
•	 Small cell (20–30%)
What are the diagnostic investigations?
	 Chest X-ray
	 Sputum cytology
	 Bronchoscopy for histological diagnosis
	 CT.
If histological diagnosis is not made on bronchoscopy, CT-guided percu­
taneous needle biopsy should be performed.
Radiological manifestations of lung cancer
Screening for lung cancer has been shown to be ineffective in reducing the 
mortality rate. Chest X-ray is the first diagnostic investigation for lung 
cancer. Evidence on chest X-ray depends on:
	 Location of tumour
	 Its effect on neighbouring tissues:
•	 Central lung shadow: about 70% of cancers, mostly small cell and 
squamous cell, arise centrally and present as a shadow in the hilar 
region and/or in the mediastinum due to involvement of lymph 
nodes (Fig. 11.13).
•	 Peripheral lung shadow: some tumours, especially adenocarcinoma, 
appear as a rounded shadow in the periphery.
•	 Collapse of lung parenchyma: centrally located tumours often result 
in collapse of a lobe by obstruction of the bronchus (Figs 11.14 and 
11.15).
•	 Collapsed whole left lung (Fig 11.16). NB: Collapse of whole lung is 
also seen postoperatively due to retained sputum.
•	 Pleural effusion: a large pleural effusion is almost always due to 
invasion of pleura by malignant cells and its presence is a contrain­
dication for surgical resection. A small pleural effusion might occur 
without invasion of malignant cells and hence surgical resection may 
still be considered.
•	 Rib erosion: the classic presentation is erosion of the first rib seen 
with an apical neoplasm (Pancoast tumour) often associated with 
Horner’s syndrome. Rib erosion itself is not a contraindication for 
surgical resection.
Other presentations are:
	 Cachexia or metastatic disease
	 Raised hemi-diaphragm due to phrenic nerve palsy.
374
Respiratory Disorders
11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Figure 11.13  Chest X-ray 
showing a shadow in the 
right mid-zone (note the 
area of consolidation with 
irregular margins). 
Differential diagnosis
Pneumonia
The possibility of lung cancer should be considered in a smoker with 
shadow on chest X-ray diagnosed as due to pneumonia:
	 Presence of lobar collapse on chest X-ray
	 Irregular margins of the lung shadow representing consolidation
	 Absence of constitutional symptoms associated with pneumonia
	 Symptoms such as haemoptysis and weight loss prior to the develop­
ment of pneumonia, especially in middle-aged or elderly smoker.
Patient should be investigated for lung cancer if:
Figure 11.14  Chest X-ray 
showing a left lower lobe 
collapse. 
375
Carcinoma of the bronchus 11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Figure 11.15  X-ray 
showing right upper lobe 
collapse. 
• Homogeneous opacification
  of left hemithorax
• Trachea deviated to the left
•  Mediastinal shift
•  Left heart border obscured
•  Left diaphragm raised
a
b
Figure 11.16  Diagram (a) and chest X-ray (b) showing a complete collapse of 
the left lung. Note that the mediastinum has been shifted to the left. 
376
Respiratory Disorders
11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Patient does not respond to treatment, especially if there are risk factors 
such as smoking and the susceptible age group.
	 Satisfactory radiological resolution has not occurred 6 weeks following 
treatment for pneumonia resulting in clinical response.
Tuberculosis
	 Tuberculosis is more often seen in young age group.
	 Constitutional symptoms such as low-grade pyrexia and night sweats 
are often present in tuberculosis.
	 Cavitation is uncommon in lung cancer but may occur in squamous cell 
type. The wall of the cavity is thick and irregular in lung cancer.
Management
For practical purposes carcinoma of the bronchus can be divided into:
	 Small-cell lung cancer (SCLC): this is rarely operable.
	 Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
Information
SCLC
•	 Limited disease: tumour confined to one hemithorax and 
ipsilateral supraclavicular node
•	 Extensive disease: involvement of any site outside the hemithorax
What treatments can be offered to a patient?
All patients should be referred to a multidisciplinary team (MDT) for 
discussion of management, which is then discussed fully with the patient 
before decisions are made.
Small-cell lung cancer
•	 Prognostic factors  The staging of small-cell lung cancer is divided into 
limited and extensive disease (see above). Systemic therapy is the 
primary therapeutic modality because of the usually disseminated 
nature of the disease.
•	 Treatment  Limited disease is present in approximately 30% of patients 
and is best treated with concurrent chemo- and radiotherapy using a 
combination of cisplatin and etoposide or irinotecan, which increases 
the survival at 5 years from 15% to 25% compared with radiotherapy 
alone. A similar degree of improvement can also be achieved with 
hyperfractionated radiotherapy. Prophylactic whole-brain radiation to 
prevent cerebral metastases can reduce symptomatic CNS disease and 
improve overall survival by 5%.
Extensive disease can be palliated with the combination of carboplatin 
and etoposide or irinotecan, which when compared with best supportive 
care can increase median survival from 6 months to 9–13 months and 
2-year survival to 20%.
	 Severe pain: potent analgesics, e.g. opiates, including fentanyl.
	 Bone pain:
•	 NSAIDs
•	 Local radiotherapy.
377
Carcinoma of the bronchus 11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Nerve root pain:
•	 Amitriptyline
•	 Carbamazepine.
Management of major complications
Hypercalcaemia (see p. 447)
	 Intravenous fluids: 3–4 L
	 Diuretic: furosemide 40 mg IV (ensure adequately rehydrated)
	 Intravenous pamidronate: treatment of choice.
Weakness of legs
This suggests spinal cord compression and is a medical emergency espe­
cially with bladder or bowel dysfunction:
	 Start dexamethasone 4 mg × 3 daily
	 MRI scan of the spine and referral for radiotherapy/surgery.
Stridor
This is due to obstruction above the level of carina (demonstrated in a flow 
volume loop):
	 Start dexamethasone 4 mg × 3 daily
	 Urgent bronchoscopy followed by CT scan of the chest/neck
	 Intraluminal growth: referral for laser therapy/stenting
	 Extrinsic compression: referral for radiotherapy/stenting.
Superior venacaval obstruction
	 Start on dexamethasone 4 mg × 3 daily.
	 Refer for radiotherapy.
	 Consider heparin or thombolysis.
Management of patients with neutropenia following 
chemotherapy
Indications for antibiotic therapy
	 Absolute neutrophil count < 1.0/total white cell count < 2.5
	 Pyrexia.
Recommended antibiotic regimes
	 IV gentamicin 3–5 mg/kg IV once a day (monitor trough levels) and a 
ureidopenicillin (Piperacillin with Tazobactam 4.5 g every 6 hours).
	 In presence of severe renal insufficiency, replace gentamicin with IV 
ceftazidime 1–2 g × 3 daily or ciprofloxacin 400 mg × 2 daily.
	 Continue antibiotics for 5 days or until white cell counts are in normal 
range and symptoms have remitted.
Investigations
•	 Blood (preferably two samples from two different sites) and 
urine cultures
•	 Chest X-ray
•	 Culture from any suspected site of infection, e.g. cannula exit 
site, sputum
378
Respiratory Disorders
11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
If no improvement after 48 to 72 h of antibiotic therapy
	 Repeat blood and urine cultures and chest X-ray
	 Consider the following infections:
•	 Fungus: blood and urine cultures
•	 Start fluconazole and/or amphotericin
	 Protozoa: broncho-alveolar lavage
	 Virus: viral serology
	 Resistant staphylococcus:
•	 More common with central venous catheter
•	 Treat with vancomycin.
Indications for Filgrastim (G-CSF) – specialist use only
	 Absolute neutrophil count: 0.2
	 Persistent neutropenia (< 1.0 for more than 48 h)
	 Stop therapy when absolute neutrophil count is 1.5 or more.
• Progress.  This man was found to have non-small cell carcinoma of 
the bronchus-squamous cell type. The MDT consensus was that 
surgery was not an option. He was given radiotherapy followed by 
chemotherapy. Follow-up at 6 months showed deterioration of his 
condition and he was referred to the palliative care team.
Further reading
Goldstraw P, Ball D, Jett JR et al. Non-small-cell lung cancer. Lancet 2011; 
378: 1727–1740.
Van Meerbeeck JP, Fennell DA, De Ruysscher DK. Small-cell lung cancer. 
Lancet 2011; 378: 1741–1755.
Websites for guidelines on lung cancer
British Thoracic Society Guidelines: www.brit-thoracic.org.uk
Royal College of Radiologists: Guidelines on the Non-Surgical Manage­
ment of Lung Cancer: www.rcr.ac.uk/oncologytemplate
SARCOIDOSIS
Sarcoidosis is a multi-system granulomatous disorder of unknown aetiol­
ogy. It commonly presents with bilateral lymphadenopathy, pulmonary 
infiltration and skin and eye lesions.
Case history (1)
You are phoned up by a primary care physician who has a 
28-year-old woman with tender, bluish lumps on the front of her 
legs in the clinic. She also complains of stiffness of the ankles and 
a temperature. The doctor thinks that this is erythema nodosum 
but would like another opinion.
Is this erythema nodosum (EN)?
From the description this sounds very likely and you ask the doctor to 
send the patient up to outpatients when you will arrange for a CXR to be 
performed (Fig. 11.17).
379
Sarcoidosis 11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
EN with lymphadenopathy on CXR is a characteristic presentation of 
sarcoidosis. Along with her arthritis and fever, the syndrome is called 
Löfgren’s syndrome. In outpatients, the patient poses several questions for 
you on hearing her diagnosis.
What is sarcoidosis?
You explain that this is a well-recognised disorder for which no cause is 
known. You emphasise, however, that in her case the skin rash (EN) will 
subside within 2 months but the CXR might take up to a year to revert to 
normal. No treatment is required other than pain relief.
The chances of further trouble are negligible.
You discuss this later with your consultant, who reminds you of the 
extrapulmonary manifestations that can be troublesome (skin and ocular 
lesions are most common):
	 Skin lesions: 10% of cases. Apart from EN, a chilblain-like lesion (lupus 
pernio) and nodules are seen.
	 Eye involvement: 5% of cases. Anterior uveitis (misting of vision, pain, 
red eye) is common. Posterior uveitis may present with a progressive 
loss of vision. Conjunctivitis and retinal lesions are seen. Asymptomatic 
uveitis may be found in 25% of patients.
	 Metabolic hypercalcaemia: found in 10% but it is rarely severe.
	 CNS involvement: is rare (2%) but can lead to severe neurological 
disease.
	 Bone and joint involvement: arthralgia without EN is seen in 5% of 
cases.
	 Cardiac involvement: is rare (3%) clinically, although seen in 20% of 
post-mortems. Ventricular arrhythmias, conduction defects and cardio­
myopathy with CCF are seen. The serum ACE is insensitive in cardiac 
sarcoid and echocardiography should be performed in chronic 
sarcoidosis.
Your consultant does say that the above list is comprehensive but fortu­
nately the conditions are rare.
Figure 11.17  Bilateral 
hilar lymph node 
enlargement – sarcoidosis. 
380
Respiratory Disorders
11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
• Progress.  The patient made a good recovery and her EN settled after 
2 weeks. A follow-up chest X-ray at 6 months was normal.
Case history (2)
You are contacted by the ENT registrar because he has seen a 
48-year-old patient with nasal stuffiness and a blocked nose. He 
had also noted some blood-stained nasal discharge. An X-ray of 
the patient’s sinuses shows destruction of the nasal bones. He 
wants you to see the patient because he found out that this man 
has had long-standing pulmonary sarcoidosis. As you walk to 
the ENT ward you go over your knowledge of sarcoidosis, 
remembering that patients with upper respiratory tract involvement 
usually have pulmonary disease.
On arrival on the wards you retake the history – he has been 
breathless for years and tells you that all his numerous CXRs show 
that his lungs are ‘full of sarcoid’. He has not been on steroids 
because of their lack of efficacy and side effects, which have 
made him non-compliant.
On examination he is noticeably breathless and cyanosed. 
Chest examination shows widespread crackles.
You arrange to give the patient oxygen by ordinary face-mask 
4 L/min.
Investigations
•	 CXR
•	 FBC shows:
–	 A mild normochromic normocytic anaemia
–	 Low lymphocyte count ± low neutrophils
–	 Thrombocytopenia
•	 Blood gases PO2 6.8 kPa, pCO2 4.3 kPa
The next morning you return with your consultant, having obtained the 
patient’s old notes.
You note multiple CXRs showing widespread pulmonary infiltration 
with no hilar lymphadenopathy. The latest CXR also shows a rounded 
opacity in the right apex – thought to be an aspergilloma.
Fibre optic bronchoscopy with transbronchial biopsies was performed 
10 years ago. This showed epithelial and giant cell granulomas (this test 
has a 90% sensitivity with pulmonary infiltration).
Lung function tests showed:
	 Reduced total lung capacity (restrictive ventilatory capacity)
	 Impaired gas transfer (TLCO)
	 Low compliance
	 Serum ACE level: this had been done a few years back and was found 
to be raised.
381
Sarcoidosis 11
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Review of his past treatment shows that he has been given steroids on 
many occasions and azathioprine and methotrexate as steroid-sparing 
agents.
Your consultant congratulates you on your review of the notes, which 
is crucial for the future management of this case. In a patient with such 
severe disease, he suggests you start high-dose steroids and then a trial of 
azathioprine and infliximab for which there is some evidence of 
efficiency.
Progressive respiratory failure is well recognised in sarcoidosis. Unfor­
tunately, recurrence in the transplanted lung (as well as limited availability 
of organs) has led many centres to not consider transplantation for end-
stage pulmonary fibrosis. Lung transplantation may be indicated if this 
patient fails to improve.
Remember
•	 Persistently raised levels are a poor guide to clinical activity.
• Progress.  This man’s chest condition remained static, despite a 
further trial of steroids and azathioprine. He continues to be breath­
less but is, for the moment, coping. He has been referred to the 
transplant team for assessment in view of his young age.
This page intentionally left blank
383
383
ITU 12 
SHOCK
Case history (1)
A 60-year-old bank manager presents with crushing central chest 
pain. This started 45 minutes ago and has remained constant ever 
since.
On examination he is pale and clammy. His pulse is 100/min, 
poor volume and BP 90/60.
Case history (2)
A 50-year-old man who works in a bar has been brought to 
hospital vomiting a large amount of blood. He gave no history of 
upper abdominal pain but did admit to drinking a bottle of whiskey 
a day and occasional beers as well.
He also admits to a previous hospital admission with abdominal 
swelling which was due to alcoholic liver disease. He was told that 
his liver disease was bad and that he must stop drinking and take 
propranolol regularly as he had varices on endoscopy. He had not 
stopped drinking, nor was he taking his propranolol.
On examination he is sweating profusely with visible shaking of 
his extremeties. His pulse rate is 120/min with a blood pressure of 
90/60.
Remember
•	 Shock is a life-threatening condition in which the patient is 
suffering global hypoxic injury
•	 Establish clear airway
•	 Oxygen must be given immediately to all haemodynamically 
unstable patients.
• Diagnosis.  Shock – cardiogenic; ECG shows evidence of anterior 
myocardial infarction.
• Diagnosis.  Shock – hypovolaemia due to blood loss, probably from 
oesophageal varices.
384
ITU
12 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Figure 12.1  The sympatho-adrenal response to shock showing the effect of 
increased catecholamines on the left of the diagram and the release of 
angiotensin and aldosterone on the right. Both mechanisms result in 
maintaining the blood pressure and cardiac output in shock. 
Adrenal
medulla
Adrenal cortex
Angiotensinogen
Angiotensin I
Renin
Angiotensin II
Aldosterone
Circulating
volume
Systemic
resistance
Heart rate
Myocardial
contractility
Blood
pressure
Maintains
venous return
Vasomotor centre
Baroreceptors
Chemoreceptors
Venous
capacitance
Salt and
water
retention
Pulse
pressure
Blood
flow
Blood volume
(? +    blood pressure)
(? + acidosis)
Maintains cardiac output
Maintains blood pressure
Sympathetic + 
 Noradrenaline
nervous 
 (norepinephrine)
activity 
 Adrenaline
 
 (epinephrine)
Physiology (Fig. 12.1)
Shock is ‘inadequate tissue oxygenation’ where there is failure of the cir­
culatory system due to:
	 Failure of the heart to maintain an adequate cardiac output, e.g. myo­
cardial infarction
	 Reduction in the volume of blood within the circulation, e.g. 
haemorrhage
	 Loss of vascular tone within the circulatory system, e.g. septicaemia
	 Obstruction to the circulation, e.g. pulmonary embolism.
Causes of shock
	 Cardiogenic: myocardial infarction, tamponade, aortic dissection, pul­
monary embolism
385
Shock 12 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Sepsis: infective causes, e.g. pneumonia, urinary tract infection or 
meningococcal septicaemia or ‘systemic inflammation’, resulting from 
trauma, post-surgery or anaphylaxis
	 Hypovolaemia: profound dehydration, haemorrhage.
Remember
A patient might have more than one cause of shock, e.g. Case 2 
may have an alcoholic cardiomyopathy (pump failure) as well as 
his haematemesis (decreased blood volume).
Is the shock state in Case 1 due to myocardial infarction, 
an obstructed circulation or other shock-inducing factors?
A history in a shocked patient of chest pain associated with ECG evidence 
of a myocardial infarction makes the diagnosis in this case. However, be 
careful because ECG changes with tachyarrhythmias and some ST segment 
changes which look characteristic of myocardial ischaemia can also occur 
in other types of shock.
Is the shock state in Case 2 due to fluid loss? If so, what 
fluid and from where?
In this case the blood loss is obvious, i.e. haematemesis. Try and estimate 
from the patient how much was lost. In other cases blood loss might be 
concealed, e.g. pancreatitis.
Clinical examination
In assessing the shocked patient the following indices should be 
monitored:
	 Pulse rate and respiratory rate
	 Peripheral venous filling/capillary filling
	 Limb temperature
	 Arterial blood pressure
	 Urinary output
	 Mental status.
Investigations
•	 Haemoglobin and haematocrit, U&Es, LFTs, troponin estimation
•	 ECG and monitor
•	 Central venous pressure (see p. 225)
•	 If the CVP is low (< 5 mmHg) fluid replacement is necessary
•	 If 10 mmHg or more, fluid replacement is probably not 
required immediately
Case 1 – has a problem with the circulatory pump and probably needs 
no extra intravascular fluid administration.
Case 2 – the haematemesis patient – has lost circulating volume with a 
low central venous pressure. His problems are with the plumbing circuit 
386
ITU
12 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Figure 12.2  Management of shock. Patients require intensive nursing care. 
Ensure adequate oxygenation
and ventilation
Maintain
patient
airway.
May need:
Support
respiratory
function early.
May need:
Oropharyngeal
airway
Endotracheal
tube
Tracheostomy
Continuous positive
airways pressure
(CPAP)
Mechanical
ventilation
± positive end
expiratory pressure
(PEEP)
Give oxygen
Expand
circulating
volume
using
Support
cardiovascular
function
May need:
Monitor:
 • Skin colour
 • Mental status
 • Capillary refill time
 • Peripheral temperature
 • Urine flow
 • Blood pressure (usually intra-arterial)
 • ECG
 • CVP in most cases
 • Oesophageal Doppler in selected cases
 • Pulmonary artery catheter in selected cases
 • Central venous or mixed venous oxygen
      saturation 
Monitor:
 • Respiratory
  rate
 • Blood gases
 • Chest
  radiograph
Investigations
All cases
 • Hb, PCV
 • WCC
 • Blood glucose
 • Platelets,
  coagulation
 • Urea,
  creatinine,
  electrolytes
 • Liver
  biochemistry
 • Blood gases
 • Acid–base
  state
 • 12-lead ECG
Selected cases
 • Blood cultures
 • Culture of
  sputum, urine,
  pus, CSF
 • Blood lactate
 • Plasma
  D-dimer
 • Troponin
Administer
analgesia
Small divided
doses of opiates
intravenously
Treat underlying
causes
For example
 • Control
  haemorrhage
 • Treat infection
  (antibiotics,
  remove indwelling
  catheters, surgical
  exploration
  and drainage,
  open abdomen)
Identify source
of infection
 • Clinical
  examination
 • Chest and
  abdominal
  radiography
 • Ultrasonography
 • CT scan
 • MRI
Treat
complications
For example
 • Coagulopathy
   (FFP and platelets
   as indicated)
 • Acute kidney
   injury
 • Correct acidosis
Blood
Rapidly via
one or
more
large-bore
intravenous
cannulae
Colloids
Crystalloids
Inotropic support
and/or vasopressors
Vasodilators
Intra-aortic balloon
counterpulsation
Restore cardiac output
and blood pressure
Restore delivery of oxygen to the tissues
rapidly and completely to prevent organ damage
Consider
adjunctive therapy,
e.g. stress-dose 
steroid therapy
administration in
patients with
severe sepsis
387
Shock 12 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
not the heart pump but his condition might be compounded by coagula­
tion 
and 
biochemical 
disturbances 
consequent 
upon 
hepatic 
insufficiency.
Other investigations (see Fig 12.2)
	 Arterial blood gas analysis: in hypovolaemic shock (as in all shock 
states) there is a metabolic acidosis with a high hydrogen ion concentra­
tion and low bicarbonate concentration. In cases with respiratory com­
plications the pO2 and pCO2 values will help indicate the need for 
ventilatory support.
	 Lactate levels: blood lactate levels rise approximately in proportion to 
the severity of the shock.
	 X-rays: these are usually of little value in the acute stages of shock 
management. A CXR will exclude any treatable pathology, such as a 
pneumothorax or haemothorax often complicating insertion of monitor­
ing lines. A CT scan may be helpful in, for example, a case of trauma.
How would you treat?
Both patients should be admitted to high-dependency nursing units in the 
first instance as their MEWS scores were > 5.
Case 1
In cardiogenic hypotension key issues are pain relief, arrhythmia manage­
ment and treatment of pulmonary oedema. Pain relief by incremental 
doses of intravenous opiates will aid reduction in myocardial oxygen 
consumption. Correcting electrolyte disturbances, hypoxia and controlling 
angina pain might assist in arrhythmia management. Temporary trans­
venous pacing might be required for significant bradycardia. Continuous 
infusion of vasodilators (e.g. glyceryl trinitrate 10–200 µg/min) plus diu­
retics (e.g. furosemide 40 mg) is needed for pulmonary oedema. Acute 
revascularisation (thrombolysis, angioplasty) might also be indicated. In 
the context of persistent hypotension, infusion of inotropic agents such as 
dobutamine (e.g. 2.5–10 µg/kg/min) might be necessary whilst correctable 
abnormalities are sought (e.g. acute mitral regurgitation following papil­
lary muscle rupture or the development of an ischaemic ventricular septal 
defect). Percutaneous insertion of an intra-aortic balloon counterpulsation 
pump may be necessary for refractory cardiogenic hypotension following 
transfer to a specialist centre as a prelude to surgical intervention.
• Progress.  This man initially improved on ionotropes, diuretics and 
vasodilatory therapy. However, he remained hypotensive, BP < 90 
with poor output. He was transferred to the Cardiac Centre for inser­
tion of an intra-aortic balloon pump. He did not respond and died 3 
days later (mortality is 79% for cardiogenic shock).
Information
Patients at risk of further deterioration will have one or more of the 
following vital signs, which would indicate transfer to an intensive 
therapy unit (ITU):
•	 Heart rate > 120 bpm
•	 Heart rate < 40 bpm
Continued
388
ITU
12 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Case 2
In hypovolaemic hypotension the principal issues are the reduction in 
further fluid loss and simultaneously restoring fluid volumes via wide-
bore intravenous cannulae. Infusion of red cells provides sufficient oxygen 
transport capacity (a target of 7–9 g/dL is broadly accepted). Fresh frozen 
plasma (e.g. to obtain a target INR of < 1.5) might be necessary. At the 
earliest opportunity the patient with haematemesis will require endoscopy 
to find the bleeding lesion and treat (see p. 67).
• Progress.  This man was successfully resuscitated and variceal 
banding was performed at endoscopy. He left hospital after 7 days 
and was referred to the local Liver Unit for consideration of liver 
transplantation (Child’s Grade C alcoholic liver disease). He did not 
attend the clinic and was readmitted 6 weeks later in hepatic coma 
and died.
Case history (3)
A 68-year-old man is brought to A&E by ambulance. His wife says 
that he developed abdominal pain 4 days ago which has got 
progressively worse. He has always suffered from indigestion and 
pain in the stomach area after food, for which he has taken 
antacids with some relief.
Information (continued)
•	 Systolic blood pressure > 200 mmHg
•	 Systolic blood pressure < 80 mmHg
•	 Respiratory rate > 30 breaths per minute
•	 Respiratory rate < 8 breaths per minute
•	 Oxygen saturation < 90%
•	 Glasgow coma scale < 8
•	 Core temperature > 39°C
•	 Core temperature < 35°C
•	 Urine output less than 0.5 mL/kg/h for 2 consecutive hours.
On this occasion the pains got worse and she said her husband had 
refused to get out of bed and appeared to be confused and disorientated. 
She had called an ambulance, which brought him to hospital.
On examination he was pyrexial at 39°C. He was pale and unsure of 
his surroundings and moaning about his abdominal pain. His pulse was 
120 beats/min with a blood pressure of 90/40 and he had a cold nose. He 
was breathless and his O2 sats were 90%.
Abdominal examination revealed a distended abdomen, tender to 
touch, with absent bowel sounds.
What is the cause of shock in this patient?
The patient has septic shock, probably secondary to intra-abdominal 
sepsis. He will need fluid resuscitation and urgent investigations and prob­
ably a laparotomy.
389
Shock 12 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
How would you manage this case? (see Fig. 12.2)
Immediate action
	 A B C D E.
	 Correct hypoxaemia: high-flow O2 via a face mask.
	 Determine cause: examination, chest and abdominal X-ray, ECG, ABGs, 
FBC, U&Es, amylase, blood cultures.
	 IV access.
	 Initiate treatment: IV fluid resuscitation with 0.9% saline, inotropes if 
no response to fluid resuscitation.
	 Insert a urinary catheter and monitor urinary output.
Shock is a medical emergency. The longer it persists, the lower the chance 
of recovery because secondary injury, from coexistent hypoxaemia and 
delayed reperfusion, is now recognised to cause further cytokine activation 
and the development of multiple organ failure (MOF).
Information
The medical records of many patients admitted to the ICU from 
the ward show progressive evidence of impending collapse 
– increasing heart rate, oliguria, tachypnoea or confusion.
Act before shock has become established!
Pathophysiology of septic shock
In sepsis, hypotension primarily results from impaired vascular tone. Sym­
pathetic activation often leads to a high cardiac output with a low systemic 
vascular resistance. Hypovolaemia can occur from interstitial fluid losses 
due to widespread endothelial dysfunction and reduced venous tone. In 
more profound sepsis, myocardial depression also occurs due to circulat­
ing cytokines such as tumour necrosis factor (TNF).
Further management
	 Early antibiotic therapy, e.g. Piperacillin with Tazobactam, as it was felt 
to be an upper GI perforation.
	 Attempted early control of the source of infection: seek surgical opinion 
for treatment of abdominal condition.
	 Central line for CVP measurement.
	 Titrate fluid resuscitation to provide adequate cardiac output with good 
urine output.
	 Inotropic support: give dopexamine, a dopamine analogue which is 
useful in patients with septic shock, as in this man with a low cardiac 
output and peripheral vasoconstriction.
	 CPAP or intubation and IPPV.
	 Early recourse to stress-dose steroid therapy if requiring vasoconstrictor 
therapy.
	 Control blood sugar with insulin.
Summary
Timely intervention in patients with sepsis might prevent the progression 
of shock. Fluid resuscitation and treatment aimed at the primary cause 
390
ITU
12 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
should be instituted rapidly and high-flow oxygen given to limit regional 
hypoxaemia. Prognosis is dependent on cause and response to treatment. 
For instance, mortality from urinary sepsis has a better prognosis than a 
similar clinical situation resulting from peritonitis.
• Progress.  This man had peritonitis secondary to a perforated ulcer. 
He was resuscitated and admitted to the ITU. He later had a laparot­
omy (a laparoscopic surgeon was unavailable) with washout of the 
peritoneum and oversewing of the ulcer, with an omental patch. He 
remained in ITU, needing inotropic support and ventilation for 4 
days and was then transferred to the ward. He eventually made a 
good recovery. Helicobacter pylori eradication was given.
ACUTE LUNG INJURY/ACUTE RESPIRATORY 
DISTRESS SYNDROME (ARDS)
Case history
You are called urgently to the emergency department when on 
take. A 35-year-old known drug user has been sent urgently to the 
hospital having been found unconscious. The Glasgow Coma 
Score (GCS) is 5, BP 100/60 with a respiratory rate of 20 and 
SaO2 on high-flow O2 therapy is 85%.
What are the possible causes of depressed consciousness 
and what are your immediate actions?
	 You need to consider intoxication, hypoglycaemia, respiratory failure, 
head injury or a post-ictal state.
On examination, look for evidence of focal neurological signs, pinpoint 
pupils, trauma to the head or evidence of seizures such as tongue lacera­
tion, incontinence.
	 Ensure airway not obstructed, establish IV access, take blood gases, 
blood glucose and blood and urine for toxicology.
	 ABG analysis reveals pH 7.2, PaO2 6.4, PaCO2 2.5, lactate 4.1 mmol/L.
What do these results indicate?
	 Acute type 1 respiratory failure with a metabolic (lactic) acidosis.
	 There is vomitus around the mouth and on his clothing. The chest X-ray 
shows patchy shadowing at the right base.
	 Following naloxone administration he becomes agitated, moving all 
limbs, but does not respond purposely to command.
What is the immediate management?
Respiratory failure is probably related to aspiration of vomitus. Intubation 
and IPPV are indicated. CPAP or non-invasive ventilation are contraindi­
cated because of danger of further vomiting and lack of cooperation.
He was transferred to the ICU. On the post-take ward round next 
morning, ventilatory pressures are high for standard tidal volumes and he 
remains hypoxic on FiO2 100%. Your consultant suggests you make a short 
391
Acute lung injury/Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS) 12 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
presentation on acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) to the stu­
dents at the lunch-time meeting.
Key features of acute lung injury/ARDS
See Figure 12.3:
	 Pulmonary infiltrates: due to an increase in lung interstitial fluid not 
related to heart failure; by definition pulmonary artery occlusion pres­
sure < 18 mmHg.
	 A reduction in pulmonary compliance: i.e. stiff lungs, resulting in high 
inflation pressures.
	 Profound gas exchange abnormalities defined as PaO2 : FiO2 ratio 
< 300 mmHg for acute lung injury (ALI) or < 200 mmHg for ARDS.
Causes
	 Severe sepsis, e.g. peritonitis, septicaemia
	 Pulmonary aspiration (as in this case)
	 Multiple trauma and massive transfusion
	 Post-cardiac bypass syndrome
	 Pancreatitis
	 Toxic fume exposure including smoke inhalation
	 Cerebral injury, e.g. subarachnoid haemorrhage.
Pathophysiology
Profound hypoxaemia results from venous admixture or shunting of 
deoxy­genated blood through poorly or unventilated lung units. This arises 
because:
Figure 12.3  Chest radiograph appearances in adult respiratory distress 
syndrome (ARDS). Bilateral diffuse alveolar shadowing with air bronchograms 
and no cardiac enlargement. From Kumar and Clark Clinical Medicine 8th edn, 
2012.
392
ITU
12 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Endothelial dysfunction leads to widespread interstitial oedema and 
impaired alveolar capillary perfusion.
	 The stiff (low-compliance) lungs result in reduced tidal volume and 
reduced end expiratory lung volume – this then causes small airway 
collapse. Once collapsed, Laplace’s law explains why it is difficult to 
re-expand the airway (consider the difficulty in initially blowing up a 
balloon).
	 Additional small airway pathology, particularly with direct lung injury, 
e.g. smoke inhalation.
	 The lung can be likened to a wet sponge – the dependent sponge is 
waterlogged and the air spaces collapsed. Only the non-dependent 
areas of the lung might be contributing to gas exchange. The additional 
component of airway inflammation in some causes of ARDS explains 
the high mortality associated with direct lung injury (> 60%).
Management
The high mortality of ARDS is critically dependent on resolution of the 
primary cause. Treatment of the lung is essentially supportive. Avoidance 
of further injury by tolerating relative hypoxaemia (aiming to limit oxygen 
toxicity by FiO2 < 70%) and allowing permissive hypercapnia (limiting tidal 
volume to avoid barotrauma – overdistension of functioning lung and risk 
of pneumothorax). Ventilatory techniques include:
	 Deep sedation and neuromuscular paralysis to increase chest wall com­
pliance. A semi-recumbent bed position unless contraindicated.
	 Small tidal volumes (6 mL/kg of predicted body weight) and prolonged 
inspiratory time to limit airway pressure.
	 Use of a minimum amount of PEEP (positive end-expiratory pressure) 
to recruit lung units.
	 Prone positioning to improve {Vdot}/{Qdot} matching and clearance of 
lung secretions.
Experimental methods include:
	 Inhaled nitric oxide to overcome hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction 
and improve {Vdot}/{Qdot} matching and reduce pulmonary 
hypertension.
	 Rescue therapy with steroids to limit the proliferative fibrotic process 
of lung repair.
	 High-frequency ventilation.
	 Extra corporeal membrane oxygenation.
Outlook
Mortality from ALI/ARDS remains high (overall 30–40%). Lung remodel­
ling might, however, result in considerable eventual recovery. Progress of 
the underlying disease, hospital-acquired infection or the development of 
cardiogenic shock secondary to right ventricular failure are critical in 
determining survival.
• Progress.  The patient developed multi-organ failure with impaired 
hepatic synthesis including coagulopathy, cholestatic jaundice and 
acute tubular necrosis requiring haemofiltration. Antibiotic therapy 
initially was IV cefuroxime infusion 1.5 g 6-hourly and metronida­
zole 500 mg IV 8-hourly, but subsequently Pseudomonas was cultured 
from respiratory secretions and IV piperacillin was started. A week 
later a tracheostomy was performed and ventilatory support was 
393
Acute lung injury/Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS) 12 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
progressively weaned over the next 3 weeks. He was discharged 
from hospital 6 weeks after admission.
Further reading
Herridge MS, Tansey CM, Matte A et al. Functional disability 5 years 
after acute respiratory distress syndrome. N Engl J Med 2011; 364: 
1293–1304.
Patekh D, Dancer RC, Thickett DR. Acute lung injury. Clin Med 2011; 11: 
615–618.
Wheeler AP, Bernard GR. Acute lung injury and the acute respiratory 
distress syndrome. Lancet 2007; 369: 1556–1565.
This page intentionally left blank
395
395
Poisoning 13 
SELF-POISONING
This is a common problem, leading to over 100 000 hospital admissions in 
England and Wales per annum. It is also a problem in developing coun­
tries: in cities, drugs, e.g. diazepam, are used, while in rural areas sub­
stances such as copper sulphate and yellow oleander are often taken.
General points
	 80% of patients seen in A&E will be conscious.
	 There is poor correlation between history of amount, type and timing 
of poisons consumed and blood toxicology.
	 Frequently, more than one drug will have been consumed.
	 Alcohol is the most commonly consumed second agent.
	 Carefully assess suicide risk, be sympathetic and admit to MAU.
What particular points do you need to assess on physical 
examination?
	 Assess and record conscious level using the Glasgow Coma Scale 
(p. 492).
	 Document respiratory rate and cyanosis (use pulse oximetry).
	 Measure blood pressure and pulse.
	 Record pupillary size (small with opiates) and reactivity to light.
	 Measure temperature: rectally if unconscious.
	 If depressed consciousness, check for coexistent head injury.
	 Look for needle tracks or signs of drug use.
Case history (1)
A 25-year-old woman is admitted semi-conscious, smelling of 
alcohol, having taken an indeterminate amount of an unknown 
drug at some point earlier that evening.
On examination she has depressed consciousness (GCS = 11), 
respiratory rate of 12 per minute, blood pressure of 95/70 mmHg 
and small reactive pupils.
What should you do?
	 Baseline: full blood count, urea and electrolytes, liver function.
	 Paracetamol and salicylate levels at 4 h or thereafter post-overdose.
	 Blood and urine samples for toxicology: particularly useful in seriously 
ill with altered consciousness.
	 O2 saturation, arterial blood gases if depressed respiration.
	 Admit patient to MAU.
396
Poisoning
13 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Information
Self-poisoning
Take advice from the 24-h National Poisons Information Service 
(see end of chapter) in all serious overdoses: there might have 
been recent advances in management of the specific poisoning 
under your care.
Some common drugs used for overdose exhibit delayed action, 
e.g. aspirin, paracetamol, tricyclic anti-depressants, iron (more 
common in children), co-phenotrope, paraquat and all modified-
release preparations.
General management
	 Nurse in left lateral position.
	 Clear mouth of vomitus, debris, obstructing objects.
	 Catheterisation of bladder is usually unnecessary as gentle suprapubic 
pressure can empty bladder.
	 IV cannula.
	 Nursing care of mouth and pressure areas.
Respiratory support
	 Protect airway because vomiting is a risk: vomiting is particularly 
associated with opiates, benzodiazepines, alcohol and tricyclic 
anti-depressants.
	 Respiratory depression might occur with opiates, benzodiazepines, 
alcohol, tricyclic anti-depressants.
	 Monitor with pulse oximetry.
	 Give oxygen: start with 60% humidified O2.
	 Loss of gag or cough reflex is the prime indication for intubation.
Cardiovascular support
	 Watch for hypotension (systolic BP below 80 mmHg):
•	 Mild: raise end of bed
•	 Severe: use IV volume expanders, e.g. dextran
•	 Very severe: insert CVP line to monitor fluid replacement
•	 Measure urine output: aim for 0.5 mL/kg/h. Urine output is a 
useful guide to the adequacy of the circulation.
	 Monitor ECG for arrhythmias.
What other problems might occur?
Blood pressure
	 Watch for hypotension (see above).
	 Avoid vasopressant drugs because these might interact adversely with 
the poison.
	 Less commonly, transient hypertension might be seen with amfetamine 
and cocaine.
Arrhythmias
	 Might arise from hypoxia or metabolic acidosis.
	 Bradycardia might occur with beta blockers, digoxin and organophos­
phorus compounds.
397
Self-poisoning 13 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Ventricular and supraventricular tachycardias occur due to theophyl­
lines, tricyclic anti-depressants/phenothiazines (due to prolonged QT 
interval) cocaine, Ecstasy and amfetamine.
Hypothermia
	 Can occur due to unconsciousness, especially with phenothiazines and 
barbiturates.
	 Measure temperature rectally.
	 Nurse under space blanket with warming, if needed, using water 
bottles.
Hyperthermia
	 Can occur with amfetamines, Ecstasy and cocaine, selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), salicylates and tricyclic anti-depressants.
What specific management procedures are there for 
overdoses?
Reducing absorption
	 Gastric lavage: should only be used for life-threatening overdoses and 
only within the first hour for significant recovery of poison. Avoid 
lavage if corrosives, paraffin or petrol have been taken because of risk 
of inhalation. Always intubate if the patient is unconscious.
	 Induced emesis: should not be used because it is ineffective at removal 
of poison and delays the use of activated charcoal.
	 Activated charcoal: binds drugs in the intestine and is valuable for 
adsorbing most poisons but is most effective for aspirin, tricyclic anti-
depressants and theophyllines. For most drugs do not use more than 
1 h post-ingestion of poison or with an oral antidote (see also Active 
elimination, below).
Active elimination
	 Repeated doses of charcoal might enhance elimination for selected 
drugs even after the drug has been absorbed. This works for aspirin, 
barbiturates, quinine, theophylline and carbamazepine.
	 Whole bowel irrigation using non-absorbable polyethylene glycol solu­
tion (not to be confused with ethylene glycol or anti-freeze) causes loose 
stool and forces bowel contents through, rapidly reducing absorption. 
This is not routinely used.
	 Forced diuresis for salicyclate poisoning is dangerous and should not 
be used.
	 Urine alkalinisation is mainly used for salicylate overdose (see 
p. 403).
	 Haemodialysis helps in severe salicylate poisoning, barbiturates, ethyl­
ene glycol, alcohol and lithium poisoning.
	 Haemoperfusion involves passing heparinised blood across absorbents 
such as charcoal. Works for barbiturates and theophylline.
Antagonising the influences of poisons
	 Acetylcysteine or methionine replenishes cellular glutathione stores in 
paracetamol poisoning.
	 Ethanol is a competitive inhibitor of alcohol dehydrogenase and is given 
in ethylene glycol (anti-freeze) poisoning. Fomepizole is also useful 
when ethanol is contraindicated, e.g. previous excess alcohol user or 
liver disease.
	 Naloxone and opiates compete at the same receptor.
398
Poisoning
13 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
• Progress.  The partner of this 25-year-old patient came to the MAU 
shortly after admission. He had found two empty boxes of diazepam 
which she had been taking for acute anxiety over the last few months. 
He said that her drug misuse might be related to her being made 
redundant a week ago. She did not require ventilation and woke up 
gradually. She was very tearful and apologetic and did not require 
psychiatric referral after counselling.
Remember
•	 Paracetamol is consumed in 45% of overdoses in the UK
•	 As little as 7.5–15 g (15–30) tablets can cause severe hepatic 
necrosis.
Case history (2)
A young woman, aged 18, was brought into A&E by her boyfriend, 
who had found her drowsy. A tablet packet – possibly containing 
paracetamol tablets – and half a bottle of wine was found near 
her. They had argued the previous night and she had threatened 
suicide. He thought that she had taken the tablets 6 h ago. A past 
history of an eating disorder was elicited.
On examination she was very thin and had a GCS of 10. There 
were no other physical signs.
Benzodiazepine overdose
Benzodiazepines account for 40% of all overdoses.
Clinical features
•	 Drowsiness, ataxia, slurred speech, coma
•	 Respiratory depression and hypotension might occur.
Management – the problems
Respiratory depression or in combination with alcohol – vomiting 
and aspiration.
Treatment – supportive
•	 Protect airway and neurological observations.
•	 Gastric lavage is not required.
•	 Flumazenil is a benzodiazepine antagonist that can be used in 
severe overdose with marked respiratory depression only.
•	 Beware: seizures have followed flumazenil administration.
•	 Patients are usually fit to be discharged at 24 h.
PARACETAMOL (ACETAMINOPHEN) POISONING
399
Paracetamol (acetaminophen) poisoning 13 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
This patient’s paracetamol level was 140 mg/L and her salicylate level 
was < 10 mg at 6 h post-overdose. She was admitted to MAU.
Points to remember
	 Nausea and vomiting are extremely common in first 24 h.
	 Abdominal pain 24 h plus.
	 Persistent nausea with subcostal pain usually indicates significant 
hepatic necrosis.
	 Chronic alcohol excess or other enzyme-inducing drugs increase metab­
olism of drugs.
	 Hypoglycaemia may occur.
Investigations
•	 Baseline urea and electrolytes
•	 Liver function (including INR) and biochemistry
•	 Paracetamol and salicylate levels
Remember
Paracetamol is a constituent of co-proxamol or co-dydramol with 
an opiate.
Physical examination (Fig. 13.1)
	 Check respiratory rate in case compound preparation consumed.
	 Haematuria, proteinuria and loin pain after the first 24 h might indicate 
acute kidney injury (AKI).
	 Later: liver flap and altered consciousness might develop 3 days plus.
Management – the problems
Paracetamol can cause hepatic necrosis, with maximum damage sustained 
72–96 h after ingestion. Renal damage occurs even without major liver 
damage.
Information
Important points:
•	 Severe liver or renal damage: seek specialist advice
•	 Contact liver unit if INR > 3.0 or alanine aminotransferase > 
1000 U/L, evidence of acidosis, encephalopathy or hypotensive 
with systolic less than 60 mmHg
•	 Hypoglycaemia might develop in first 48 h
•	 Alert renal physicians if serum creatinine rises
•	 There is evidence that administration of acetylcysteine, even in 
patients with established hepatic encephalopathy, might 
improve the prognosis
How should you manage this patient?
For general management, see p. 396.
400
Poisoning
13 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
The treatment nomogram (Fig. 13.2)
	 There are two lines on the nomogram: the normal and the high-risk 
treatment lines.
	 The high-risk treatment line should be used for patients who are likely 
to be glutathione deplete, e.g. malnourished or HIV-positive patients.
	 Alcohol dependent patients or those on enzyme inducers, e.g. pheny­
toin, rifampicin, carbamazepine, are also at high risk from lower levels 
of paracetamol.
	 This patient’s prior eating disorder and low body weight indicate that 
the high-risk treatment line should be used to interpret the paracetamol 
levels.
Figure 13.1  Physical signs of poisoning. 
Cherry red colour
Carbon monoxide
Constricted pupils
Opiates
Organophosphate
Trichloroethanol
Dilated pupils
Belladonna alkaloids
Phenothiazines
Amphetamines
Cocaine
Tricyclic
 antidepressants
Cardiac arrhythmias
Tricyclic antidepressants
Blisters
(mainly due to pressure)
Barbiturates
Other CNS depressants
Alcohol on breath
Corrosive burns
around mouth
Caustics
Corrosives
Needle tracks
Opiate misuse
Rectal temperature
Hypothermia
Chlorpromazine
Barbiturates
Information
Paracetamol overdose
•	 The National Poisons Information Service has received reports 
that the nomogram has not predicted paracetamol toxicity for 
some patients.
•	 Investigation indicates this relates to inaccurate history of 
timings, quantities and frequency of paracetamol overdose.
401
Paracetamol (acetaminophen) poisoning 13 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
The antidotes – regime for treatment
Acetylcysteine by infusion
	 Acetylcysteine 150 mg/kg in 200 mL 5% glucose over 15 min
	 Then 50 mg/kg in 500 mL 5% glucose over 4 hours followed by 100 mg/
kg in 1 L over 16 h. Total dose 300 mg/kg over 20–25 h.
What are the adverse reactions to acetylcysteine?
	 Local itching and rashes at infusion sites.
	 Systemic effects include nausea, flushing, angioedema, bronchospasm 
and hypotension. Treatment is with discontinuation of the infusion and 
an anti-histamine.
Once these effects have been resolved then the acetylcysteine infusion can 
be resumed at 100 mg/kg in 1 L over 16 h.
With a Glasgow Coma Score of 10, opiates were suspected in this patient 
and naloxone 0.8–2 mg IV was also given. As she responded to this, a 
naloxone infusion was started at a dose of 2 mg diluted in 500 mL with 
Figure 13.2  The treatment nomogram. From British National Formulary, with 
permission.
Plasma paracetamol concentration (mg/L)
200
190
180
170
160
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1.3
1.2
1.1
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Plasma paracetamol concentration (mmol/L)
0 
2 
4 
6 
8
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24
Time (hours)
Normal treatment line
Risk of severe liver disease
No specific treatment
required
Acetylcysteine therapy
required
High-risk treatment line
402
Poisoning
13 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
the rate adjusted to clinical response as a single IV naxolone dose only lasts 
30 min, as well as the acetylcysteine.
Intubation and ventilation were not required; pulse oximetry showed 
no impaired oxygenation.
Summary: how would you treat a paracetamol overdose?
If presentation within 8 h (as in this case)
	 Gastric lavage or emesis up to 4 h post-ingestion.
	 Use treatment nomogram at 4 h or later to guide use of acetylcysteine 
(see Fig. 13.2).
	 If there is doubt about the timing, or if more than 12 g ingested, then 
treat with acetylcysteine immediately.
	 If the 4-h paracetamol level is below the treatment line, discontinue 
acetylcysteine except in patients who are at high risk (see Fig. 13.2).
	 If methionine or acetylcysteine is started within 8 h, the prognosis is 
good and patients can be considered for discharge at the end of the 
infusion if blood tests are normal.
	 Prior to discharge check that INR and plasma creatinine are normal.
	 Advise patient to return if vomiting ensues.
	 Ensure that liaison with psychiatric services occurs.
If a patient presents at 8–24 h post-ingestion
	 Patients presenting more than 8 h post-ingestion are at greater risk of 
hepatotoxicity: the efficacy of treatment with acetylcysteine declines but 
still give it.
	 Individual response to paracetamol overdose can be variable and the 
validity of the treatment line beyond 15 h post-ingestion is not clear.
	 If there is doubt about the timing of overdose, or if more than 12 g have 
been consumed, then treat with acetylcysteine immediately.
	 At the end of the infusion, check that the INR and plasma creatinine are 
normal. If so, risk of damage is negligible and discharge can be planned.
	 If INR or creatinine is abnormal, or the patient develops symptoms, 
continue to monitor these blood tests till normal.
If a patient presents 24 h plus post-ingestion
	 The treatment remains controversial but there is evidence of benefits of 
acetylcysteine in those who develop hepatic encephalopathy.
	 All should have INR, creatinine, BM Stix glucose and arterial pH 
monitored.
• Progress.  This woman was given acetylcysteine and her INR moni­
tored within the normal range. She was discharged after being seen 
by the duty psychiatrist with an urgent referral to Mental Health 
Services.
SALICYLATE OVERDOSE
Case history
A 16-year-old girl was brought to A&E by her parents following an 
episode of nausea, followed by severe vomiting. Her parents then 
found packs of Sol Aspirin tablets in her bedroom, which she said 
she had taken because of difficulties with friends at school. She 
403
Salicylate overdose 13 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Case history (continued)
also complained of tinnitus and deafness. The parents 
think the aspirin ingestion occurred about 4 hours ago.
On examination she is hyperventilating with peripheral 
vasodilation, profuse sweating and tachycardia, suggesting a 
moderate/severe salicylate overdose. She was transferred 
to MAU.
	 Aspirin is rapidly absorbed: usually peaks at 4 h.
•	 <150 mg/kg bodyweight causes mild toxicity
•	 150–130 mg/kg bodyweight causes moderate toxicity
•	 300–500 mg/kg bodyweight causes severe toxicity.
	 Beware modified-release formulations: these can prolong absorption.
	 Aspirin itself might delay gastric emptying.
Clinical features
	 Early features include nausea, vomiting, tinnitus or deafness (severe 
overdose), sweating and hyperventilation.
	 Later features include Kussmaul’s respiration, confusion, coma, fits and 
renal impairment.
Investigations
	 Blood gases reveal a respiratory alkalosis.
	 Plasma salicylate measured after 4 hours.
Management – the problems
	 Aspirin delays gastric emptying.
	 People who appear well might have very high levels.
	 Early hypokalaemia and respiratory alkalosis may be replaced after 
4–6 h by metabolic acidosis due to salicylate.
	 Hypo-prothrombinaemia might occur (increased prothrombin time/
INR).
Treatment
	 Gastric lavage was not attempted as tablets taken 4 hours previously.
	 Repeated doses of charcoal enhance elimination.
	 Intravenous fluids with potassium supplements to correct dehydration, 
hypokalaemia and improve urine flow were given.
	 Forced alkaline diuresis should not be used.
	 Urine alkalinisation was used when plasma salicylate levels were found 
to be 620 mg/L. 8.4% bicarbonate (approx. 225 mL) in 1 h with careful 
monitoring.
	 Haemodialysis should only be used when salicylate level is > 700 mg/L.
• Progress.  This young girl was kept in hospital for 3 days, during 
which time she fully recovered and her blood gases and electrolytes 
returned to normal. She was seen with her parents by the Psychiatric 
Department but further counselling was not thought to be 
necessary.
404
Poisoning
13 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Tricyclic anti-depressant overdose
These have become less common since the selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors became available (much safer). Features of overdose are mainly 
due to anti-muscarinic and alpha blocking adverse effects. Arrhythmias 
occur due to prolongation of the QT interval.
Clinical features
	 Drowsiness, confusion but rarely unconsciousness
	 Blurred vision due to fixed dilated pupils
	 Sinus tachycardia with long QT interval
	 Ventricular arrhythmias
	 Hypotension
	 Hypothermia
	 Hyper-reflexia and extensor plantars occur
	 Agitation, visual and auditory hallucinations are common during 
recovery
	 Seizures occur in less than 5%.
Treatment – supportive
	 Gastric lavage up to 4 h post-ingestion for life-threatening amount of 
drug.
	 Activated charcoal reduces absorption of tricylics; anti-cholinergic 
action delays gastric emptying.
	 Cardiac monitor and watch for hypotension.
	 Neurological observations.
	 Seizures might require IV diazepam 10 mg.
	 Ventricular arrhythmias due to prolonged QT interval should not be 
treated with anti-arrhythmics but with under-drive or over-drive tem­
porary pacing.
	 Rarely, heart block and electrical mechanical dissociation have occurred.
	 Occasionally, metabolic acidosis ensues – this should be corrected if pH 
of 7.0 or less develops using 1.4% sodium bicarbonate.
COCAINE
Cocaine (Fig. 13.3) can be inhaled (snorted), injected or swallowed or sepa­
rated from its hydrochloride base and melted as crack. Binges with cocaine 
can last 24–96 h.
Information
Risk factors for death from salicylates:
•	 Age over 70 years
•	 CNS features
•	 Metabolic acidosis
•	 Hyperpyrexia
•	 Late presentation
•	 Pulmonary oedema
•	 Salicylate concentrations > 700 mg/L (5.07 mmol/L)
405
Cocaine 13 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Figure 13.3  Features of cocaine and Ecstasy abuse. 
Ecstasy
Cocaine
Euphoria/seizures
Slurred speech
Temperature
Hallucinations
Stroke
Chest pain
Myocardial
 infarction
Hypertension
Arrhythmias
Acute kidney
 injury
DIC
Agitation
Low sodium
Hyperthermia
Coma seizures
Stroke
Adult respiratory
  distress syndrome
  (late)
Arrhythmias
 (late)
Sudden death
 (early)
Acute kidney injury
DIC
Case History
A 32-year-old man is brought to A&E by his friends who were all 
at a party together. A large amount of alcohol was drunk and 
some drugs had been used, mainly cannabis and Ecstasy. The 
patient had been found semi-conscious and when his friends tried 
to move him he seemed to have no movement in the left side 
of his body.
On examination he has a Glasgow Coma Score of 9. He has 
signs of a left hemiparesis.
Remember
If a young person presents with a stroke or myocardial infarction, 
cocaine overdose should always be looked for.
406
Poisoning
13 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Clinical features of cocaine toxicity
	 Euphoria, slurred speech, dilated pupils
	 Pyrexia, sinus tachycardia and hallucinations (auditory, tactile and 
olfactory)
	 Hypertension (may be severe) rarely causing haemorrhagic stroke, 
hyperventilation
	 Myocardial infarction may occur in 6% of those with chest pain
	 Ventricular arrhythmias, seizures
	 Later kidney injury, disseminated intravascular coagulation.
Immediate plan
	 ABCDE
	 Admit to HDU
	 Blood tests (Hb, WCC, U&Es glucose, INR)
	 Arrange urgent CT scan. This shows evidence of cerebral haemorrhage 
so any further active treatment is not required. He was transferred to 
the Stroke Unit (see p. 476).
Ecstasy (see Fig. 13.3)
Ecstasy is an amfetamine derivative known as MDMA, which stimulates 
the sympathetic nervous system, and prevents neuronal reuptake of cat­
echolamines, dopamine and serotonin (5HT).
Clinical features
	 Agitation, profound dehydration, low sodium due to excess water con­
sumption or anti-diuretic hormone.
	 Early arrhythmias (supraventricular or ventricular) occur and can cause 
sudden death.
	 Nausea, vomiting, muscle pain, sinus tachycardia and visual 
hallucinations.
	 Hypertension (might be severe) rarely causing haemorrhagic stroke, 
chest pain, hyperventilation.
	 Hyperthermia, coma, seizures, rhabdomyolysis, rarely fulminant 
hepatic failure.
	 Later: acute kidney injury, disseminated intravascular coagulation, 
acute respiratory distress syndrome.
Investigations
•	 Baseline: full blood count, urea and electrolytes, glucose, liver 
function
•	 12-lead ECG
•	 Paracetamol and salicylate levels at 4 h or thereafter if 
coexistent overdose suspected
•	 Urine screen for drugs of abuse
•	 Imaging, e.g. brain CT
Treatment – supportive
	 Activated charcoal reduces absorption within 1 h.
	 Early hyponatraemia due to excessive water consumption by Ecstasy 
users should be looked for before rehydration.
	 Cardiac monitor and watch for hypertension.
	 Treat agitation or seizures with IV diazepam 10 mg.
407
Gammahydroxybutyric acid (GHB) 13 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Hyperthermia > 39°C can be reduced by 1 litre of cold saline. If tem­
perature does not respond, IV dantrolene might help.
	 Ventricular arrhythmias should be treated with anti-arrhythmics.
GAMMAHYDROXYBUTYRIC ACID (GHB)
GHB has been used by bodybuilders and for weight reduction. It was sold 
as a salt, which forms a colourless liquid in water. It is no longer available 
legally. The seaweed-like taste can be impossible to detect when added to 
an alcoholic drink. GHB has been used to facilitate ‘date rape’. Street names 
includes ‘scoop’, ‘easylay’ and ‘liquid X’.
Clinical features
	 History might indicate no intent or knowledge of consumption of 
any drug.
	 Initial euphoria, disinhibition, agitation, confusion, nausea and diar­
rhoea progressing within 1 h to drowsiness and unconciousness (poten­
tiated by alcohol).
	 Nausea, vomiting, muscle pain, sinus tachycardia, and rarely seizures.
	 Bradycardia, respiratory depression and even Cheyne–Stokes respira­
tion might rarely occur.
	 Be alert to the possibility that such patients might have suffered sexual 
assault.
Investigations
For GHB consumption
•	 Baseline full blood count, urea and electrolytes (may reveal 
hypernatraemia and hypokalaemia), blood glucose and liver 
function
•	 Blood gases if patient is unconscious or respiratory depression 
occurs (metabolic acidosis may occur)
Treatment of GHB consumption – supportive
	 Activated charcoal reduces absorption within 1 h: observe for a 
minimum of 2 h even if apparently clinically much improved.
	 Monitor blood pressure, heart rate and pulse oximetry.
	 Treat seizures with IV diazepam 10 mg.
	 Bradycardia associated with hypotension should be treated with IV 
atropine.
Significant websites
www.toxbase.co.uk
Toxbase – Database of UK National Poisons Information Service
www.toxinz.com
Database of the New Zealand Poisons Centre
www.toxnet.nlm.nih.gov
National Library of Medicine’s Toxnet
www.who.int/ipcs/poisons/centre/directory/en
Contact details of all poisons centres worldwide
www.wikitox.org
Home of the Clinical Toxicology Teaching Resource Project
408
Poisoning
13 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
• Progress.  This young man continued to deteriorate and died 33 
hours after admission. It was later found that he tried smoking 
cocaine for the first time.
INSECT STINGS AND BITES
Case history
A 24-year-old had been cleaning a pond in the summer when she 
was stung by a wasp. A few minutes later she felt unwell and had 
to lie down as she felt faint. She then noticed some difficulty in 
breathing and felt a ‘tightening’ of her face. After 45 minutes her 
symptoms improved.
Anaphylactic reactions can be fatal
Reactions to penicillin: 1 death in every 7.5 million injections
Bee and wasp stings 1 : 200 stings severe reactions
(USA 60–80 deaths per year)
(UK 5–10 deaths per year)
• Diagnosis.  Mild anaphylactic reaction to wasp sting. She made a 
complete recovery.
ANAPHYLACTIC SHOCK
Typically follows second or third challenge.
History
	 Exposure to insect bite, bee or wasp sting, seafood, nuts, drugs (e.g. 
penicillin, NSAIDs) or contrast media
	 Dizziness, wheeze and facial swelling
	 Past history of allergy.
Examination
	 Facial oedema
	 Tachycardia, hypotensive
	 Stridor due to laryngeal oedema
	 Bronchospasm.
Immediate management
	 Ensure clear airway and establish large-bore venous access.
	 Oxygen 35% unless hypoxic.
	 If there is serious hypoxia and stridor, tracheostomy might be required.
	 Lie flat and elevate legs.
	 Cardiovascular observations.
	 Administer 0.5 mg adrenaline (epinephrine) intramuscularly (not IV) to 
create depot support for the circulation.
409
Anaphylactic shock 13 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Repeat after 5 min if still hypotensive.
	 Follow with anti-histamine: chlorphenamine 10 mg IV.
	 Then hydrocortisone 100 mg IV.
Further management
	 If persistent hypotension, infuse plasma expander e.g. 1 litre of 
Haemaccel.
	 Salbutamol 2.5–5 mg nebulised or IV for bronchospasm or continued 
shock.
	 An aminophylline infusion for continuing bronchospasm.
	 Always identify precipitant.
	 Advise on medic-alert bracelet.
	 Provide the patient with adrenaline (epinephrine) Minijet 0.3 mg and 
tuition to inject in thigh in the event of exposure to allergen. This should 
be carried with the patient at all times.
Prevention
	 This is the best.
	 Avoid triggering factor, e.g. food, stings.
	 Patient education is vital.
	 Self-administered adrenal (epinephrine). Patients should always carry 
pre-loaded syringes.
This page intentionally left blank
411
411
Endocrinology and Diabetes 14 
DIABETES MELLITUS
Diabetes mellitus is a syndrome of chronic hyperglycaemia due to relative 
insulin deficiency or resistance or both.
Case history (1)
You are telephoned by a GP who has seen a 50-year-old man in 
his surgery complaining of thirst and polyuria. His venous blood 
glucose is 24 mmol/L. He is tired but otherwise well.
What are the key decisions in this case?
•	 Does this patient need admission?
•	 Does he need insulin?
•	 What is the immediate management?
The likelihood is that this patient has type 2 diabetes (Table 14.1). The 
risk of ketoacidosis is small and he will not need admission unless he is 
either ketotic (ketonuria 3+) or is very dehydrated.
This patient should be advised to avoid sweet drinks (especially sweet­
ened canned drinks) and an appointment arranged for him to attend a 
diabetic outpatient clinic. Contact the diabetic liaison nurse in your hospi­
tal and arrange for the patient to be seen urgently.
Indications for admission
	 Severe dehydration (may have hyperosmolality).
	 Intercurrent illness such as pneumonia or UTI.
	 3+ ketonuria.
	 Tachycardia or tachypnoea.
Information
Diagnostic criteria for diabetes mellitus:
•	 Fasting venous plasma glucose > 7.0 mmol/L (126 mg/dL) after 
8-h fast*
•	 Random venous plasma glucose > 11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL)*
•	 An HbA1c of > 6.5% (48 mmol/mol) has recently been approved 
for diagnosis (Table 14.2)
•	 Impaired fasting glucose: 5.6–6.9 mmol/L
•	 Impaired glucose tolerance: > 7.8 and < 11.1 mmol/L; 2 h after 
75 g oral GTT.
An oral glucose tolerance test is only required for borderline cases.
*Two readings are required for asymptomatic individuals. Note also:
412
Endocrinology and Diabetes
14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Type 1
Type 2
Epidemiology
Younger (usually < 30 
years of age)
Older (usually > 30 
years of age)
Usually lean
Often overweight
Increased in those of 
Northern European 
ancestry
All racial groups. 
Increased in peoples 
of Asian, African, 
Polynesian and 
American-Indian 
ancestry
Seasonal incidence
Heredity
HLA-DR3 or DR4 in 
> 90%
No HLA links
30–50% concordance 
in identical twins
~ 50% concordance in 
identical twins
Pathogenesis
Autoimmune disease
No immune disturbance
Islet cell 
autoantibodies
Insulin resistance
Insulitis
Association with other 
autoimmune 
diseases
Immunosuppression 
after diagnosis 
delays beta-cell 
destruction
Clinical
Insulin deficiency
Partial insulin deficiency 
initially
May develop 
ketoacidosis
May develop 
hyperosmolar state
Always need insulin
Many come to need 
insulin when 
beta-cells fail over 
time
Biochemical
Eventual 
disappearance of 
C-peptide
C-peptide persists
Note: there is a significant rise in the incidence of young patients with type 2 
diabetes mellitus, especially in the obese and in Asian populations.
Table 14.1  The spectrum of diabetes: a comparison of type 1 and 
type 2 diabetes mellitus
• Progress.  At the Diabetic Clinic the diabetic nurse explained life­
style changes that are an essential part of treatment, i.e. stopping 
smoking, losing weight with a diet and exercise. The nurse arranges 
for an appointment for this patient to be checked by the doctor and 
for eye testing. He was also started on Metformin 500 mg daily, 
increasing to 1.5 g daily.
413
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) 14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
DCCT HbA1c %
IFCC HbA1c mmol/mol
4.0
20
5.0
31
6.0
42
6.5
48
7.0
53
7.5
59
8.0
64
9.0
75
10.0
96
DCCT, Diabetes control and complication trial.
IFCC, International Federation of Clinical Chemistry.
Table 14.2  HBA1c – conversion of percentage values to mmol/mol
Case history (2)
You are telephoned by a GP who has seen a 17-year-old man in 
his surgery complaining of thirst and polyuria. He has recently lost 
8 kg in weight. His blood glucose is 31 mmol/L.
The key decisions are again:
•	 Does this patient need admission?
•	 Does he need insulin?
•	 What is the immediate management?
This patient is much more likely to be presenting with early type 1 diabe­
tes and might not be ketotic yet because he could still have a degree of 
residual beta cell function (the ‘honeymoon’ phase). Again, assessment of 
ketosis, acidosis and dehydration must be made to determine whether he 
needs admission. He should be seen within 24 h either by the diabetic 
liaison nurse or in hospital to commence insulin. If there is any doubt, the 
patient should be seen in A&E immediately.
• Progress.  At the Diabetic Clinic the patient was dehydrated with 
mild ketosis. He was admitted to MAU to commence insulin therapy.
DIABETIC KETOACIDOSIS (DKA)
Case history (3)
A 21-year-old woman presents to A&E having been generally 
unwell for 2 weeks and having been treated for a urinary tract 
infection by her doctor.
Continued
414
Endocrinology and Diabetes
14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
• Diagnosis.  Diabetic ketoacidosis.
How do patients present with ketoacidosis?
	 Unwell ± intercurrent illness (e.g. bacterial or viral infection)
	 Polyuria and polydipsia
	 Hyperventilation or dyspnoea
	 Vomiting ± abdominal pain
	 Impaired conscious level.
Patients known to have type 1 diabetes mellitus most commonly develop 
ketoacidosis when insulin is omitted because of missed meals during an 
intercurrent illness (e.g. gastroenteritis). Patients become rapidly dehy­
drated (Fig. 14.1) and acidotic (over hours). Tachypnoea or Kussmaul 
respiration (a deep sighing respiration) is prominent, with the smell of 
ketones on the breath. It is the fall in pH that causes coma.
The blood glucose might not be particularly high and severe acidosis 
be present, with glucose values as low as 10 mmol/L. This might be due 
to recent self-administration of insulin, which is insufficient alone to 
correct the acidosis in the presence of dehydration.
Assessment of severity
Poor prognostic features include:
	 Impaired conscious level (indication for urgent intubation)
	 pH < 7.0
	 Oliguria
	 Low serum potassium at presentation.
Case history (3) (continued)
Examination reveals severe dehydration, a tachycardia of 
120 bpm and a blood pressure of 90/50 mmHg. The nurses have 
checked her finger-prick blood glucose (BM Stix) and found it to 
be 30 mmol/L.
Investigations
•	 Blood glucose
•	 Arterial blood gases and pH
•	 Urea and electrolytes – bicarbonate in venous blood < 
12 mmol/L – severe acidosis
•	 Urinalysis (ketones strongly positive + + +)
•	 Plasma ketones – test with ketostix
•	 Full blood count
•	 Blood ± urine cultures
•	 CXR
•	 ECG and cardiac enzymes
415
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) 14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Glucose
Hyperglycaemia
Glycosuria
Impaired excretion of ketones
and hydrogen ions
Acidosis
Osmotic diuresis
Fluid and electrolyte depletion
Renal hypoperfusion
Vomiting
Ketones
Figure 14.1  Dehydration occurs during ketoacidosis as a consequence of two 
parallel processes. Hyperglycaemia results in osmotic diuresis, and 
hyperketonaemia results in acidosis and vomiting. Renal hypoperfusion then 
occurs and a vicious circle is established as the kidney becomes less able to 
compensate for the acidosis. 
Management: general measures
	 Admit to HDU.
	 Insert a central line in patients with a history of cardiac disease/renal 
impairment/autonomic neuropathy or the elderly.
	 An arterial line to monitor ABGs and plasma potassium.
	 Nil by mouth for at least 6 h.
	 Nasogastric tube: if there is impaired conscious level, to prevent vomit­
ing and aspiration.
	 Urinary catheter: if no urine for 2 hours or serum creatinine is high.
	 Low molecular weight heparin: enoxaparin 40 mg SC daily.
Remember
Management of DKA requires fluid, insulin, potassium and care.
Management: fluid replacement 
Severely shocked patients may require colloid to restore circulating plasma 
volume. Table 14.3 shows examples of blood values in severe ketoacidosis 
416
Endocrinology and Diabetes
14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
and compares these with those seen in the hyperosmolar, hyperglycaemic 
state described on page 418.
The guidelines for fluid replacement are shown in Table 14.4. These are 
applicable for young patients.
	 When blood glucose falls to less than 12 mmol/L convert to a 5% 
glucose infusion. This will enable the insulin infusion to be continued. 
Continued insulin is required to inhibit ketone production.
	 Continue with IV fluids 1 L every 4–6 h until rehydrated and ketosis 
resolves (~24 h).
Severe 
ketoacidosis
Hyperosmolar, 
hyperglycaemic 
state
Na+ (mmol/L)
140
155
K+ (mmol/L)
5
5
Cl− (mmol/L)
100
110
HCO3
− (mmol/L)
5
25
Urea (mmol/L)
8
15
Glucose (mmol/L)
30
50
Arterial pH
7.0
7.35
The normal range of osmolality is 285 to 300 mOsmol/kg. It can be 
measured directly, or can be calculated approximately from the 
formula:
Osmolality = 2 (Na+ + K+) + glucose + urea
For example, in the example of severe ketoacidosis given above:
Osmolality = 2(140 + 5) + 30 + 8 = 328 mOsmol/kg, and in the example 
of non-ketotic hyperosmolar coma:
Osmolality = 2(155 + 5) + 50 + 15 = 385 mOsmol/kg
The normal anion gap is less than 17. It is calculated as (Na+ + K+) 
– (Cl− + HCO3
−). In the example of ketoacidosis, the anion gap is 40, 
and in the example of non-ketotic hypersomolar coma the anion gap is 
20. Mild hyperchloraemic acidosis may develop in the course of 
therapy. This will be shown by a rising plasma chloride and 
persistence of a low bicarbonate even though the anion gap has 
returned to normal.
Table 14.3  Examples of blood values
Volume
Duration/timing
1 L 0.9% saline + 20 mmol/KCl
Over the first 30 min
1 L 0.9% saline + 20 mmol/KCl
Over next 1 h
1 L 0.9% saline + 20 mmol/KCl
Over next 2 h
1 L 0.9% saline + 20 mmol/KCl
Over next 4–6 h
Table 14.4  Guidelines for average fluid replacement in 
young patients
417
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) 14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Management: insulin regimen
	 Add 50 units of soluble insulin to 50 mL 0.9% saline and administer by 
intravenous infusion; this equates to 1 U/mL.
	 Commence at 6 U/h and continue at 3 U/h after venous glucose falls 
to < 11.5 mmol/L.
	 Glucose must then be administered to prevent hypoglycaemia (see 
above).
	 Continue IV insulin infusion until ketosis resolves, the patient is eating 
and for 2–4 h after the first SC dose of soluble insulin.
Management: potassium replacement (Table 14.5)
Total body potassium can be depleted by approximately 1000 mmol and 
the plasma potassium falls rapidly as potassium shifts into the cells under 
the action of insulin. Use less potassium in patients with renal impairment 
or oliguria.
	 Monitor serum [K+] every 2 h initially then every 4 h until stable.
	 Use premixed potassium-containing infusions wherever possible.
Management: acidosis
	 If the pH < 7.0: isotonic (1.26%) sodium bicarbonate given at a rate of 
500 mL over 4 h is safe. If the pH > 7.0, bicarbonate need not be given.
Assessment during treatment
	 Remember the role of insulin is primarily to suppress ketogenesis rather 
than to lower blood glucose.
	 Blood glucose (BM Stix every hour, laboratory blood glucose 4-hourly).
	 Plasma potassium every 4 h: the main risk is hypokalaemia.
	 Repeat ABGs after 2 h. A calculated anion gap (needs chloride estima­
tion) may be adequate for monitoring.
Serum potassium (mmol/L)
Amount of KCl (mmol/hour)
<3
40
3–1
30
4–5
20
5–6
10
> 6
Stop KCl
Table 14.5  Potassium replacement in patients with 
diabetic ketoacidosis
Remember
Causes of death in DKA:
•	 Hyperkalaemia
•	 Aspiration due to gastric stasis
•	 Cerebral oedema due to acidosis ± overhydration
•	 Hypokalaemic respiratory arrest
418
Endocrinology and Diabetes
14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
• Progress.  This patient started eating and treatment with SC insulin 
after 48 hours. She was shown a video on diabetes and its self 
management. She was helped with her insulin injections and dis­
charged on the 6th day with support from the Community Diabetic 
Nurse.
HYPEROSMOLAR HYPERGLYCAEMIC STATE
How should this patient be managed?
Hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic state occurs in older patients with type 2 
diabetes. It is characterised by a very high glucose, a relatively normal 
acid–base balance and high plasma osmolality. These patients are also at 
increased risk of venous and arterial thromboses. The mortality is higher 
than for DKA. This patient’s biochemistry has been slowly getting worse 
over many weeks, so normalisation must be equally slow.
Remember
Ketones can be found in the urine in any starved person.
Information
Calculation of osmolality:
2 × (Na+ + K+) + glucose (normal range 285–300 mOsmol/kg)
Case history (4)
A 60-year-old woman is referred to A&E following a collapse. She 
has been generally unwell for the last year. Her husband confirms 
that she has had polyuria and polydipsia with nocturia of three to 
four times every night. Over the last month, she has started using 
sugar drinks to build herself up because she has been losing 
weight.
Examination reveals an extremely dehydrated woman with 
increased tissue turgor. Pulse 100 regular, BP 100/60. JVP not 
visible. Glasgow coma scale 12.
Investigations revealed:
Na+ 165; K+ 5.9; U 24.7; Cr 170; Bicarb 20; Glucose 64 mmol/L; 
pH 7.31; pCO2 4.7 kPa; pO2 11.2 kPa; plasma osmolality 2 × (165 
+ 5.9) + 64 + 24.7 = 429.7 mOsmol/kg.
These findings are typical of hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic 
state (see Table 14.3).
How do patients present?
	 The patient is middle aged or elderly
	 Insidious onset of polyuria and polydipsia
419
Hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic state 14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Severe dehydration
	 Altered conscious level
	 Most middle-aged or elderly patients have not previously been diag­
nosed with diabetes
	 Respiration is usually normal
	 Presentation is usually precipitated by infection, stroke or myocardial 
infarction.
Diagnosis and investigations
	 Plasma glucose: usually > 40 mmol/L.
	 U&Es: significant hypernatraemia occurs but this is masked by the high 
glucose. The [Na+] usually increases as the venous glucose and therefore 
the extracellular colloid osmotic pressure falls and water moves into the 
intracellular space.
	 Arterial blood gases: relatively normal.
	 Plasma osmolality: typically > 350 mOsmol/kg.
	 Estimate corrected sodium to evaluate water loss as a result of hyperg­
lycaemia (see Information box).
	 FBC: may show polycythaemia, dehydration or a leucocytosis from 
infection.
	 CK: cardiac ischaemia or rhabdomyolysis.
	 Troponins.
	 ECG: for myocardial infarction or ischaemia.
	 CXR: for signs of infection.
	 Urine for urinalysis, microscopy and culture.
Information
Calculation of corrected sodium concentration: Add 2.0 mmol/L to 
the measured serum sodium for every 5 mmol/L increase in 
glucose concentration. Thus a fall in glucose from 50 to 
25 mmol/L will be accompanied by a rise in [Na+] of 10 mmol/L.
Remember
The principal cause of death and morbidity in hyperosmolar 
hyperglycaemic state is arterial and venous thrombosis due to the 
hyperosmolar state.
Assessment of severity
	 The degree of consciousness correlates most closely with plasma osmo­
lality. Coma is usually associated with an osmolality of greater than 
400 mOsmol/kg.
	 A coexistent lactic acidosis considerably worsens the prognosis.
How would you manage this patient?
General treatment measures
	 Aim to correct the high osmolality with fluid and insulin over 48–72 h. 
Avoid fluid overload and insert a central venous line if cardiac 
problems.
420
Endocrinology and Diabetes
14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Manage as for DKA except:
•	 0.9% saline is the standard fluid for replacement given slowly
•	 If [Na+] is > 150 mmol/L then use 5% glucose
•	 Ensure slow correction of serum sodium (see p. 229)
•	 Start insulin at 3 U/h as patients are often sensitive to insulin
•	 Anti-coagulate with SC enoxaparin 40 mg daily unless contraindi­
cated
•	 Urinary catheter if oliguria is present, or serum creatinine is high.
	 When blood glucose is less than 10 mmol/L, commence a 5% glucose 
infusion.
	 Once stable, stop insulin therapy and commence oral hypoglycaemic 
agents or diet alone.
• Progress.  This patient was discharged on metformin 1 g daily and 
instructed on lifestyle changes, e.g. controlling weight and an urgent 
appointment with the Community Diabetic Nurse.
HYPOGLYCAEMIC COMA
Case history (1)
A 25-year-old man is brought to A&E by the police, having been 
found behaving abnormally. He is aggressive and irrational and 
attempts to punch the staff. He is restrained and a MedicAlert 
bracelet is found under his shirt indicating that he has diabetes. A 
finger-prick glucose reads ‘low’.
• Diagnosis.  Hypoglycaemia.
Always consider hypoglycaemia in confused patients and check a blood 
glucose using a glucostix (or BM Stix), confirming with a laboratory deter­
mination wherever possible. The most common cause of coma in a patient 
with diabetes is hypoglycaemia due to drugs. The long-acting sulphony­
lureas, such as glibenclamide, or long-acting insulins, such as Isophane, 
are prone to do this. Patients who are not known to have diabetes but who 
are hypoglycaemic should have a laboratory-determined blood glucose 
and blood saved (serum) for insulin and C-peptide determination (to diag­
nose insulinoma or factitious drug administration).
How do patients present? (Table 14.6)
Patients with tightly controlled diabetes can have frequent episodes of 
hypoglycaemia and can become desensitised to sympathetic activation. 
These patients can develop neuroglycopenia before sympathetic activation 
and complain of ‘loss of warning’. Use of beta blockers can also minimise 
the warning signs of hypoglycaemia by blocking the features of an acti­
vated sympathetic nervous system.
Conversely, patients with poorly controlled diabetes develop sympa­
thetic signs early and avoid these by running a high blood glucose. They 
complain of ‘being hypo’ when their blood sugar is normal or high. They 
do not require glucose.
421
Hypoglycaemic coma 14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Information
Patients with type 2 diabetes who are on diet alone or metformin 
(but no insulin or sulphonylureas) cannot become hypoglycaemic.
Assessment of severity
	 Hypoglycaemia in a patient with diabetes is defined as < 3.5 mmol/L.
	 A ‘mild’ episode requires intervention by the patient.
	 A ‘severe’ episode might lead to coma and requires treatment by a third 
party.
Investigations
Patients with diabetes with frequent hypoglycaemic attacks:
•	 Urea and electrolytes: hypoglycaemia is more common in 
diabetic nephropathy because the kidney is one of the sites of 
insulin metabolism
•	 Thyroid function tests: hypothyroidism is associated with type 1 
diabetes mellitus and impairs counter-regulation
•	 09:00 cortisol ± short ACTH (tetracosactide) stimulation test: 
hypoadrenalism reduces hepatic glycogen stores (see p. 443)
•	 Take an alcohol history
•	 Consider deliberate self-harm
How would you manage hypoglycaemia?
Conscious patient
Treat with 15–20 g carbohydrate, i.e. four glucose tablets, or glucose drink.
Unconscious patient
	 Take blood sample.
	 Give:
•	 75 mL 20% glucose IV or
•	 1 mg glucagon intramuscularly.
Sympathetic overactivity 
(glucose < 3.5 mmol/L)
Neuroglycopenia (glucose 
< 2.6 mmol/L)
Tachycardia
Confusion
Palpitations
Slurred speech
Sweating
Localised neurological impairment
Anxiety
Coma
Pallor
Tremor
Cold extremities
Table 14.6  Presentation of patients with hypoglycaemic coma
422
Endocrinology and Diabetes
14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Do not use 50% glucose in peripheral veins.
	 Once recovered, give 1–2 slices of bread or 2–4 biscuits.
	 Admit the patient if the cause is a long-acting sulphonylurea or a long-
acting insulin and give a continuous infusion of 10% glucose (e.g. 1 litre 
8-hourly) and check glucose hourly or 2-hourly.
	 Patients should regain consciousness or become coherent within 10 min, 
although complete cognitive recovery might lag by 30–45 min. Do not 
give further boluses of IV glucose without repeating the blood glucose. 
If the patient does not wake up after 10 min or more, repeat the blood 
glucose and consider another cause of coma – stroke or a head injury 
during their confused state.
Hypoglycaemia in the non-diabetic patient
Hypoglycaemia in patients without diabetes is rare and always needs 
investigation – usually as an inpatient. Always:
	 Confirm the hypoglycaemia with a laboratory sample before 
treatment.
	 Take a simultaneous serum sample for insulin and C-peptide (the frag­
ment of proinsulin that is found in endogenous insulin), sent urgently 
to the laboratory for centrifugation and separation.
Causes of hypoglycaemia
	 Drugs:
•	 Surreptitious insulin or sulphonylurea ingestion
•	 Ethanol
•	 Quinine
•	 Pentamidine
•	 Disopyramide
•	 Prescription errors, e.g. chlorpropamide for chlorpromazine (ask for 
all drugs to be brought in).
	 Tumours:
•	 Insulinoma
•	 Retroperitoneal sarcomas and other malignancies.
	 Liver failure.
	 Hypopituitarism, causing ACTH, GH and TSH deficiency.
• Progress.  This patient responded to IV glucose and quickly returned 
to normal. He explained that he was out with friends last night and 
forgot to eat but continued to drink alcohol. He thinks he may have 
given himself the wrong amount of insulin as he overslept and was 
late for work.
SICK DIABETIC PATIENT
Case history
A 40-year-old man with a 15-year history of type 1 diabetes 
mellitus and previously documented proteinuria is referred from 
A&E with vomiting and feeling generally unwell. Glucose was 
20 mmol/L, electrolytes were normal and blood gases did not 
support diabetic ketoacidosis (pH 7.4; bicarbonate 20 mmol/L). An 
423
Sick diabetic patient 14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Treatment/progress
This patient has a diagnosis of STEMI and requires immediate therapy 
with aspirin 300 mg chewed and clopidogrel 300 mg oral gel. He was 
immediately transferred to the Coronary Care Unit for further assessment 
and possible percutaneous coronary intervention, which is instantly avail­
able (p. 285). His diabetes was initially controlled on insulin infusion 
because he was nil by mouth for the cardiac procedures (Table 14.7). The 
infusion was continued until the patient was eating and drinking. Insulin 
treatment has been proven to improve outcome in patients with diabetes 
in the immediate period after myocardial infarction.
Once eating and drinking, the patient can be converted back to his or 
her usual insulin regimen or, if tight glycaemic control is essential, on to 
× 4 daily insulin (see below), which gives greater ease of adjustment.
Case history (continued)
ECG shows evidence of evolving anterior myocardial infarction. 
This is the typical presentation of a ‘silent MI’. Chest pain is 
frequently atypical or absent in diabetes due to small fibre 
neuropathy. The other major cause of this type of non-specific 
presentation is occult infection and often further investigations are 
required:
Investigations
•	 FBC
•	 Urea and electrolytes
•	 ABG
•	 CXR
•	 MSU
•	 ECG
•	 Blood cultures
Other investigations to consider later if occult infection is 
suspected:
•	 Abdominal US or abdominal CT scan
•	 Tc bone scanning
•	 Labelled white cell scan
Remember
Always carefully inspect the feet in unwell diabetic patients – 
infected ulcers are common and may be painless.
424
Endocrinology and Diabetes
14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Protocol for converting diabetics from intravenous 
to subcutaneous insulin
	 Calculate total dose over last 24 h.
	 Give 25% of total as soluble insulin 30 min before each meal (i.e. × 3 
daily).
	 Give 25% of total dose as intermediate-acting isophane insulin at 22:00.
	 Monitor blood glucose fasting and 2 h after meals (post-prandial) – each 
finger-prick glucose measures the adequacy of the previous dose.
	 Aim for glucose < 10 mmol/L post-prandial and < 8 mmol/L fasting.
	 Do not discontinue IV insulin until 1–2 h after the first subcutaneous 
insulin dose is administered, because IV insulin has a half-life of only 
3 min.
MANAGEMENT OF NEW TYPE 2 DIABETIC PRESENTING 
FOR SURGERY
Case History
You are asked to see a 50-year-old man with no previous history 
of diabetes who is admitted for coronary artery bypass surgery 
and found to have a blood glucose of 13 mmol/L. This patient has 
suffered from angina for 5 years but he still has symptoms on 
maximal medical therapy. He has had coronary angiography which 
shows triple vessel disease and his cardiologist has recommended 
surgery rather than percutaneous coronary intervention.
Level of blood glucose (measured hourly)
Insulin infusion 
(units per hour)
< 4.0 mmol/L
0.5
4.0–7.0 mmol/L
1
7.1–9.0 mmol/L
2
9.1–11.0 mmol/L
3
11.1–14.0 mmol/L
4
14.1–17.0 mmol/L
5
17.1–28 mmol/L
6
> 28 mmol/L
8
Note: the above is only a guide and insulin doses should be adjusted 
upwards if the patient is known to have a high insulin requirement, and 
always reviewed regularly to see if the doses are appropriate. The aim is to 
keep blood glucose in the 7–9 region.
Table 14.7  Intravenous infusion insulin management of type 1 
diabetes mellitus in hospital
425
Management of new type 2 diabetic presenting for surgery 14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
How would you manage this patient?
	 Ask about symptoms of diabetes, e.g. thirst, polyuria, lack of energy.
	 Check that a laboratory glucose has been sent to confirm the diagnosis 
of diabetes (random glucose 13.4 mmol/L).
	 Discuss patient’s angina symptoms and discuss with cardiologist the 
urgency of CABG surgery.
	 It is agreed by all, including the patient, that his diabetes should be 
treated and blood sugar controlled before surgery is performed.
	 The patient is referred to the Diabetic Liaison Nurse for assessment and 
discussion of treatment as an outpatient.
Remember
Always get diabetes under control before patients undergo surgery 
unless this is an emergency.
Information
Assessment of new patients with diabetes
•	 Biochemical assessment of long-term glycaemic control (e.g. 
HbA1c)
•	 Measure body weight
•	 Measure blood pressure
•	 Measure plasma lipids
•	 Measure visual acuity
•	 Examine the retina through dilated fundi (ophthalmoscope 
initially followed by retinal photo)
•	 Test urine for protein
•	 Test blood for renal function (creatinine and eGFR)
•	 Check general condition of the feet, peripheral pulses and 
sensation
•	 Review cardiovascular risk factors
•	 Introduce self-monitoring and injection techniques if insulin is 
required
•	 Review dietary knowledge
• Progress.  This patient was managed with lifestyle changes and Met­
formin, initially 500 mg daily. He will undertake surgery when his 
HbA1c is <7% (53 mmol/mol).
Management for surgery
Non-insulin-treated patients should stop medication 2 days before the 
procedure. Patients with mild hyperglycaemia (fasting blood glucose < 
8 mmol/L) can be treated as non-diabetic. Those with higher levels are 
treated with soluble insulin prior to the procedure/surgery, and with 
glucose, insulin and potassium infusion during and after the procedure 
(p. 426). Be careful of hypoglycaemia due to the additive effect of medica­
tions taken previously. Postoperatively, patients should return to their 
normal management regimen when they begin eating and drinking.
426
Endocrinology and Diabetes
14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Who needs insulin perioperatively?
	 All patients who usually use insulin
	 All acute surgical emergencies (type 1 and type 2 diabetes)
	 All patients undergoing major surgery (type 1 and type 2 diabetes).
In other words, all diabetic patients should receive insulin except type 2 
diabetic subjects undergoing minor surgery. For patients on insulin, give 
the usual evening and/or night-time insulin and commence glucose and 
insulin as above at 06:00.
URGENT SURGERY IN PATIENTS WITH DIABETES
Surgery requires patients to fast for several hours. In addition, a general 
anaesthetic and surgery themselves produce significant stresses on an 
individual. The hormonal response to stress involves a significant rise in 
counter-regulatory hormones to insulin, in particular cortisol and adrena­
line. For this reason, patients with diabetes undergoing surgery will 
require an increased dose of insulin despite their fasting state. Long-acting 
hypoglycaemic agents must be stopped the night before surgery because 
hypoglycaemia might otherwise occur. In case of an emergency operation 
where the patient has taken a long-acting insulin, an infusion of 10% 
glucose can be used (usually with potassium), together with a controlled 
infusion of insulin.
The procedure for insulin-treated patients is simple:
Patients whose diabetic control is poor and when surgery is not an 
emergency should have their diabetic control reassessed and therapy 
adjusted with HbA1c < 8.5% (70 mmol/mol), if possible preoperatively.
Preoperative glucose levels should be in the range of 7–11 mmol/L.
The patient’s usual insulin is given the night before the operation and, 
whenever possible, diabetic patients should be first on the morning 
procedure/operating list.
An infusion of glucose, insulin and potassium is given during the 
procedure/surgery. The insulin can be mixed into the glucose solution or 
administered separately by syringe pump. A standard combination is 16 U 
of soluble insulin with 10 mmol of KCl in 1 L of 5–10% glucose, infused at 
125 mL/hour. The insulin dose is adjusted:
	 Blood glucose < 4 mmol/L – 8 U/L
	 Blood glucose 4–15 mmol/L – 16 U/L
	 Blood glucose 15–20 mmol/L – 32 U/L.
Postoperatively, the infusion is maintained until the patient is able to eat. 
Other fluids needed in the perioperative period must be given through a 
separate IV line and must not interrupt the glucose/insulin/potassium 
infusion. Glucose levels are checked every 2–4 hours and potassium levels 
are monitored. The amount of insulin and potassium in each infusion bag 
is adjusted either upwards or downwards according to the results of 
regular monitoring of the blood glucose and serum potassium 
concentrations.
The same approach is used in the emergency situation, with the excep­
tion that a separate variable-rate insulin infusion may be needed to bring 
blood glucose under control before surgery.
427
Diabetic foot 14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
DIABETIC FOOT
Remember
•	 Many foot problems are avoidable. Older diabetic patients must 
be taught good foot care and should not cut their own toe-nails
•	 Diabetic foot problems can occur in patients with type 1 and 
type 2 diabetes.
Case history
The chiropodist in the diabetic clinic asks you to review an 
84-year-old woman who is complaining of severe pain in her big 
toe. She had attempted to cut a toe-nail a week ago and the toe 
had become painful and infected. She is known to have type 2 
diabetes for which she takes glibenclamide 10 mg daily. She does 
not have regular supervision of her diabetes.
On examination she has a 2-cm ulcer on the medial side of her 
big toe with swelling and erythema.
What further points would be helpful in the history?
	 Is there a previous history of foot problems?
	 Does she regularly inspect and wash her feet? Is she careful about 
buying shoes of the correct size?
	 How good is her sight?
	 Does she live alone? Does she have any help?
	 Is there any suggestion of peripheral vascular disease, e.g. intermittent 
claudication?
	 Is there any suggestion of peripheral sensory problems? Does she com­
plain of numbness or burning in her feet?
Remember
50% of patients have no previous history of neuropathy or 
peripheral vascular disease.
What particular points do you look for on examination?
	 Inspect the lesion. Take a swab for culture.
	 Look for signs of neuropathy:
•	 Dry skin
•	 Evidence of sensory loss to pin-prick/light touch/vibration
•	 Check ankle jerks – absent knee and ankle jerks and sensory loss 
indicate a neuropathy.
428
Endocrinology and Diabetes
14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Look for signs of vascular insufficiency:
•	 Check peripheral pulses
•	 Are the toes cold?
Pathogenesis of foot ulcers
	 Most ulcers occur as a result of trauma
	 Neuropathy causes:
•	 Reduced sensitivity
•	 Altered proprioception with ‘high pressure’ on parts of foot
•	 Autonomic dysfunction leading to dry skin with cracks and 
fissures.
	 Peripheral vascular disease:
•	 Very common
•	 Leads to ischaemic ulcers (pure ischaemic ulcers in 10%). 90% of 
ulcers are due to neuropathy alone or a combination of neuropathy 
and ischaemia.
Information
Meggitt–Wagner classification of diabetic foot ulcers
Grade 0: high-risk foot with no ulcers
Grade 1: superficial ulcer
Grade 2: deeper ulcer infection/cellulitis. No bone involvement
Grade 3: osteomyelitis and foot ulceration
Grade 4: localised gangrene (toes, forefoot or heel)
Grade 5: gangrene of entire foot.
Information
Diabetes in India
•	 50 million people with diabetes mellitus
•	 Foot problems are very common: these are due to neuropathic 
and infective causes rather than vascular
Management
	 Admit the patient to a medical assessment unit.
	 Take swabs for microbiology.
	 Arrange an urgent X-ray to look for foreign bodies, gas and 
osteomyelitis.
	 Early effective antibiotic treatment is essential:
•	 Use broad-spectrum antibiotic cover until cultures are available, e.g. 
flucloxacillin, amoxicillin and metronidazole
•	 Discuss with microbiologist.
	 Control the diabetes with insulin until foot healed, when oral treatment 
can be restarted.
	 Establish the presence of other diabetic complications (see above).
	 Ask diabetic team to fully assess her and arrange for future follow-up 
care.
429
Diabetes in pregnancy 14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
• Progress.  This woman was admitted to MAU and seen by the Tissue 
Viability Nurse for daily dressings of her foot ulcer. The inflamma­
tion settled and she was discharged after 6 days with full nursing 
care at her own home. She was continued on glibenclamide and 
metformin.
Further reading
Jude EB, Eleftheriadou I, Tentolouris N. Peripheral arterial disease in dia­
betes – a review. Diabet Med 2010; 27: 4–14.
DIABETES IN PREGNANCY
Case history (1)
You are asked to see a 28-year-old woman who is 18 weeks 
pregnant and has been found to have a blood glucose of 
10 mmol/L. She is asymptomatic and gives no history of diabetes.
• Diagnosis.  Gestational diabetes.
How should this patient be managed?
Meticulous glycaemic control is of paramount importance in pregnancy. 
The patient should initially be taught to monitor her blood glucose levels 
and be advised on lifestyle changes, including diet. Blood glucose levels 
should be measured 1 h after each meal. If blood glucoses are below 
7 mmol/L, then insulin is not required. Oral hypoglycaemic agents are 
avoided in pregnancy because they cross the placental barrier (although 
there is evidence that glibenclamide is safe), so that if glucose levels are 
above 7 mmol/L, insulin therapy is required. High levels of glucose are 
associated with risk of neonatal macrosomia, fetal death and postnatal 
hypoglycaemia. Thus the patient should be commenced on soluble insulin 
with each meal and a long-acting insulin at night if glucose is not control­
led to < 7 mmol/L.
Information
•	 Normal subjects have lower blood glucose during pregnancy
•	 Thresholds vary between diabetic units but a fasting glucose > 
6 mmol/L or a random/post-prandial glucose > 7.8 mmol/L is an 
indication for home blood glucose monitoring
•	 Diet should be healthy but not restricted
•	 Have a low threshold to start insulin
• Progress.  This patient required insulin therapy, which was contin­
ued until she delivered at normal term.
430
Endocrinology and Diabetes
14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Immediate management of this patient?
An infusion of 5% glucose containing 10 mmol of KCl and 16 units of 
insulin in 1 litre is commenced at an initial rate of 125 mL/hour.
The dose of insulin is adjusted with hourly glucose assessment (see 
p. 426), with a target blood glucose of 4–9 mmol/L. The infusion is main­
tained until the patient is able to eat and drink.
It is essential to determine whether the patient had type 1 diabetes 
before pregnancy (in which case insulin should never be stopped) or 
whether she has gestational diabetes, when insulin therapy can be stopped 
after delivery. The placental hormones cause insulin resistance and, after 
the third stage of labour, gestational diabetes can disappear.
• Progress.  This mother has type 1 diabetes, so she was commenced 
on her pre-pregnancy dose of insulin when she started eating. Intra­
venous insulin must be continued until 4 h after the first dose of 
subcutaneous insulin. She is followed up at her doctor’s diabetic 
clinic.
CUSHING’S SYNDROME
Cortisol is the principal endogenous glucocorticoid secreted from the 
adrenal glands; the amount controlled by the level of plasma ACTH.
Cushing’s syndrome is due to excess glucocorticoids due to the causes 
shown in the Information box, of which exogenous corticosteroid admin­
istration is the commonest.
Patients have undiagnosed Cushing’s syndrome for some time, and 
present due to metabolic decompensation either due to hypokalaemia 
(which can be severe) or hyperglycaemia and resultant dehydration.
Other complications follow, including secondary infection, bruising 
and bleeding, uncontrollable hypertension and osteoporotic fractures 
(Fig. 14.2).
Case history (2)
You are called to the labour ward to see a patient who is on 
insulin and in labour. She has been on soluble insulin 12 units 
three times daily and Isophane insulin 18 units last thing at night, 
with very good control of her blood sugar. She is now in labour 
and is nil by mouth.
Information
Causes (percentages in brackets refer to incidence of primary 
cause)
•	 Excess corticosteroid administration
•	 Pituitary-dependent Cushing’s disease (85%)
•	 Adrenal adenoma (10%)
•	 Ectopic ACTH protection (5%)
431
Cushing’s syndrome 14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Symptoms
Weight gain (central)
Change of appearance
Depression
Psychosis
Insomnia
Amenorrhoea/
   oligomenorrhoea
Poor libido
Thin skin/ easy bruising
Hair growth/acne
Muscular weakness
Growth arrest in children
Back pain
Polyuria/polydipsia
Old photographs
   may be useful
Symptoms of
   hypopituitarism
   are rare
Signs
Moon face
Plethora
Depression/psychosis
Acne
Hirsutism
Frontal balding (female)
Thin skin
Bruising
Poor wound healing
Pigmentation
Skin infections
Hypertension
Osteoporosis
Pathological fractures
  (especially vertebrae
  and ribs)
Kyphosis
‘Buffalo hump’
   (dorsal fat pad)
Central obesity
Striae (purple or red)
Rib fractures
Oedema
Proximal myopathy
Proximal muscle wasting
Glycosuria
Figure 14.2  Symptoms and signs of Cushing’s syndrome. The bold type 
indicates the signs of most value in discriminating Cushing’s syndrome from 
simple obesity and hirsutism. 
Case history
A 55-year-old woman presents with a 2-year history of atypical 
depression and 3 weeks of confusion, altered behaviour and an 
inability to climb stairs due to muscular weakness. Her weight has 
increased marginally but she has lost muscle bulk from the arms 
and legs.
On examination she was obese, plethoric with a moon face 
and buffalo hump. Her skin was thin with multiple striae over 
breasts, abdomen and thighs.
• Diagnosis.  Cushing’s syndrome.
She was dehydrated and was found to have glycosuria with a blood 
glucose of 30 mmol/L.
Arterial blood gases reveal:
	 pH 7.60
	 pO2 12.0 kPa
	 pCO2 5.4 kPa.
432
Endocrinology and Diabetes
14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
This patient has a metabolic alkalosis due to chronic hypokalaemia found 
in Cushing’s. Electrolytes came back from the laboratory, confirming your 
suspicions:
	 Na+ 145 mmol/L
	 K+ 2.5 mmol/L
	 Urea 15.0 mmol/L
	 Creatinine 120 µmol/L
	 Bicarb 37 mmol/L
	 Glucose 27 mmol/L.
How would you manage this patient?
The hypokalaemia and hyperglycaemia need prompt treatment. Total 
body potassium is likely to be extremely low, and as potassium is replaced, 
the initial effect will be to reduce the bicarbonate rather than to increase 
the extracellular (serum) potassium.
	 Start potassium replacement both orally and intravenously (not more 
than 20 mmol in any 3 h) to provide at least 200 mmol per day.
	 Rehydrate the patient with 0.9% saline + potassium chloride (40 mmol/L) 
added to each bag (see p. 426) with 2-hourly K+ monitoring.
	 Start an intravenous infusion of insulin at 4 units per hour. This might 
exacerbate the fall in serum potassium.
	 After 48 hours the lady was rehydrated with a serum K+ of 4.5 mmol/L.
	 Confirm the diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome.
•	 Collect 24-h urine for urinary free cortisol (normal < 700 nmoles in 
24 hours)
•	 Measure midnight cortisol (normal < 50 nmol/L).
•	 8-h low-dose dexamethasone suppression (0.5 mg 6-hourly for 48 h 
at 09:00, 15:00, 21:00, 03:00 followed by 09:00 cortisol).
• Progress.  Cushing’s is confirmed and the patient is referred for 
specialist investigation. These investigations will include determina­
tion of ACTH dependence, pituitary and adrenal CT scanning and 
localisation procedures.
HYPERTHYROIDISM
Case history (1)
A 65-year-old woman is brought to A&E with acute breathlessness 
and cough with frothy blood tinged sputum.
On examination she had profuse sweating with rapid severe 
breathlessness. She has atrial fibrillation and auscultation reveals 
wheezes and crackles throughout the chest. Your diagnosis of 
pulmonary oedema is confirmed by the chest X-ray showing 
bilateral perihilar shadowing and Kerley B lines of interstitial 
oedema.
ECG shows fast AF 160/min but no evidence of cardiac 
ischaemia or other abnormality.
433
Hyperthyroidism 14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
What should you do?
	 Admit the patient to HDU and start treatment of acute heart failure, 
oxygen, IV furosemide 50 mg and vasodilation therapy glyceryl trini­
trate infusion 100–200 µg min.
	 She responds well but still has fast AF.
	 Urgent. Thyroid function tests reveal a free T4 of 45 pmol/L (NR 9.0–23) 
with a suppressed TSH.
• Diagnosis.  Hyperthyroidism
Treatment
	 Control the heart rate using beta blockers (propranolol 40 mg every 8 h) 
and digoxin if required.
	 Avoid amiodarone as this will potentially interfere with investigation 
and management.
	 Anti-coagulate the patient (heparin and warfarin).
	 Start anti-thyroid medication, e.g. carbimazole 40 mg daily.
	 Determine the cause of the hyperthyroidism (see below).
Beta adrenoreceptors are sensitised to normal circulating catecholamines 
by high levels of thyroxine and beta blockade is useful in achieving 
symptom control in hyperthyroidism, and is also helpful in treating high-
output heart failure and achieving rate control. Propranolol is used in high 
doses (40 mg every 8 h) because, being lipid soluble, it crosses the blood–
brain barrier.
Remember
•	 TSH is invariably suppressed in hyperthyroidism (except for the 
exceptionally rare TSH-secreting pituitary adenoma)
•	 Hyperthyroidism often presents in the elderly with atrial 
fibrillation and few other features.
Investigations
•	 Thyroid anti-microsomal autoantibodies and anti-thyroglobulin 
antibodies (in the serum): positive in up to 90% of patients with 
Graves’ disease
•	 Thyroid technetium scan to distinguish a ‘hot nodule’ (focal 
uptake) from Graves’ disease (uniform uptake) and from viral 
thyroiditis (zero uptake)
• Progress.  This lady was confirmed as having Graves’ disease. She 
was followed up for her hyperthyroidism with reduction of her car­
bimazole dosage. A cardiologist advised her to stay on digoxin and 
warfarin and she remained in AF at 6 months.
Further reading
Brent GA. Graves’ disease. NEJM 2008; 358: 2594–2605.
434
Endocrinology and Diabetes
14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Case history (2)
A 75-year-old woman is referred with weight loss, general malaise 
and apathy.
Clinical examination is unremarkable except for a mild 
tachycardia of 100 bpm.
Routine investigations (remembering to include thyroid 
function tests) (Table 14.8), have now been telephoned by the 
biochemist with the following results:
•	 fT4: 56 pmol/L (NR: 9–23 pmol/L)
•	 TSH < 0.1 mU/L (NR: 0.3–5.5 mU/L)
TSH
(0.3–3.5 mU/L)
Free T4
(10–25 
pmol/L)
Free T3
(3.5–7.5 
pmol/L)
Thyrotoxicosis
Suppressed 
(<0.05 mU/L)
Increased
Increased
Primary 
hypothyroidism
Increased 
(>10 mU/L)
Low/low-
normal
Normal or 
low
TSH deficiency
Low-normal or 
subnormal
Low/low-
normal
Normal or 
low
T3 toxicosis
Suppressed 
(<0.05 mU/L)
Normal
Increased
Compensated 
euthyroidism
Slightly 
increased
(5–10 mU/L)
Normal
Normal
Table 14.8  Characteristics of thyroid function tests in common 
thyroid disorders (the clinically most informative tests in each 
situation are shown in bold)
Elderly patients can have atypical presenting features of hyperthyroidism, 
which may be dominated by weight loss, apathy and fatigue.
Remember
Weight loss without obvious cause always requires a TSH 
measurement.
Information
Hyperthyroidism in the elderly
•	 Weight loss
•	 Atrial fibrillation
•	 Lethargy
•	 Proximal myopathy
435
Hyperthyroidism 14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Causes of hyperthyroidism
Common causes
	 Graves’ disease
	 Multinodular goitre
	 Toxic solitary nodule
	 Viral thyroiditis
	 Amiodarone induced.
Rare causes
	 TSH-secreting pituitary adenoma
	 Choriocarcinoma
	 Factitious (self-medication).
Tests in patients with goitres
	 Thyroid function tests – TSH plus free T4 or T3.
	 Thyroid antibodies – to exclude auto-immune aetiology.
	 Ultrasound. Ultrasound with high resolution is a sensitive method for 
delineating nodules and can demonstrate whether they are cystic or 
solid. In addition, a multinodular goitre may be demonstrated when 
only a single nodule is palpable. Unfortunately, even cystic lesions can 
be malignant and thyroid tumours may arise within a multinodular 
goitre; therefore fine-needle aspiration (see below) is often required and 
performed under ultrasound control at the same time as the scan.
	 Fine-needle aspiration (FNA). In patients with a solitary nodule or a 
dominant nodule in a multinodular goitre, there is a 5% chance of 
malignancy; in view of this, FNA should be performed. This can be done 
in the outpatient clinic. Cytology in expert hands can usually differenti­
ate the suspicious or definitely malignant nodule.
	 FNA reduces the necessity for surgery, but there is a 5% false-negative 
rate which must be borne in mind (and the patient appropriately coun­
selled). Continued observation is required when an isolated thyroid 
nodule is assumed to be benign without excision.
	 Thyroid scan (99m technetium) can be useful to distinguish between 
functioning (hot) or non-functioning (cold) nodules. A hot nodule is 
only rarely malignant; however, a cold nodule is malignant in only 10% 
of cases and FNA has largely replaced 99m technetium scans in the 
diagnosis of thyroid nodules.
Drug treatment in hyperthyroidism
	 Rapid symptomatic treatment (if necessary): propranolol 40–80 mg 
8-hourly
	 Control thyroid overactivity:
•	 Carbimazole 40 mg once daily or
•	 Propylthiouracil (PTU) 200 mg × 3 daily.
The latter two drugs inhibit the formation of thyroid hormones (Fig. 14.3). 
Carbimazole and PTU will induce hypothyroidism after 4–8 weeks at these 
doses and treatment should either be titrated down to a maintenance level 
(e.g. carbimazole 10 mg daily) or thyroxine added back at a dose of 100–
150 µg in a ‘block and replace’ regimen. Patients are typically treated for 
6–18 months with anti-thyroid drugs. All patients commencing anti-
thyroid drugs should be warned about possible rashes, which are common 
and usually self-limiting without discontinuation, and severe sore throats 
or mouth ulcers, which may indicate a dangerous fall in neutrophils.
436
Endocrinology and Diabetes
14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Treatment with radioiodine is frequently employed if patients relapse 
after medical treatment but may also be used as primary treatment, par­
ticularly in multinodular goitres or toxic adenoma. Surgery is reserved for 
large goitres or for patient preference after relapse.
TRH
TSH
Thyroid
Triiodothyronine
Thyroxine
Hypothalamus
T3
T4
Peripheral
tissues
Pituitary
Tissue
actions
Peripheral
conversion
Negative 
feedback loop
Figure 14.3  The hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis. Pituitary TSH is 
secreted in response to hypothalamic TRH and stimulates secretion of T4 and T3 
from the thyroid. T4 and T3 have actions in peripheral tissues and exert negative 
feedback on pituitary and hypothalamus. 
Remember
Agranulocytosis occurs in 1 : 1000 patients on anti-thyroid drugs. 
All patients prescribed anti-thyroid drugs should be warned to 
report severe mouth ulcers or sore throats immediately, and 
should have an urgent full blood count if symptoms are 
experienced.
437
Hyperthyroidism 14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Information
Investigation of a solitary nodule
•	 All solitary nodules > 1 cm should be evaluated, as should 
‘dominant’ nodules in nodular goitres
•	 Fine-needle aspiration cytology is the first-line investigation to 
identify a papillary carcinoma or follicular neoplasm
•	 Ultrasound is used to diagnose multinodular goitre
•	 Isotope scanning might identify a toxic ‘hot’ solitary nodule; 
these are almost always benign
• Progress.  This patient was treated with carbimazole and at 3 months 
was euthyroid.
This patient is now biochemically hypothyroid, although the initial 
biochemistry demonstrated hyperthyroidism.
This presentation is strongly suggestive of viral thyroiditis (de Quer­
vain’s). Thyroid hormones are released in the early stage (when the patient 
is thyrotoxic) and patients typically become biochemically, and later clini­
cally, hypothyroid. The tissue effects of high levels of thyroxine last longer 
than their serum levels and sypmtoms often lag behind the biochemical 
changes.
• Progress.  Viral thyroiditis does not usually require treatment; 
hypothyroidism is often transient, although a short course of thyrox­
ine (3–6 months) should be used if high TSH persists. Autoantibodies 
might be positive because of the viral damage and do not necessarily 
predict long-term thyroid dysfunction. Thyroid function tests at 6–12 
months were normal in this patient.
Features of viral (de Quervain’s) thyroiditis
	 Neck discomfort or pain on swallowing and a short course of pred­
nisolone is used if pain is severe
	 History of viral illness
Case history (3)
You have been telephoned by a doctor who has received the 
results of some thyroid function tests (TFTs) on one of his patients. 
The blood test report showed a high free T4: 45 pmol/L (10–25 
normal range) with a suppressed TSH (< 0.1 mU/L). On further 
questioning it transpires that the test was performed in a patient 
who was unwell with a painful neck. You recommend a thyroid 
technetium uptake scan which shows minimal uptake, and arrange 
for the patient to come to outpatients in 2 weeks.
When you see the patient he is better but still clinically 
hyperthyroid and repeat TFTs are as follows: free T4 7 pmol/L; 
TSH 25 mU/L.
438
Endocrinology and Diabetes
14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Case history (4)
A 42-year-old female was brought to A&E as an emergency with a 
24-hour history of vomiting, diarrhoea and two seizures. She had 
become confused and was now very drowsy.
She was accompanied by her partner who explains that she has 
been unwell for 6 months with a thyroid problem, for which she 
takes tablets. Following a severe cold 7 days ago he thinks that 
she has stopped her therapy.
On examination she has a GCS of 8 with the following 
findings.
•	 Tachycardia > 145 beats per minute, ? atrial fibrillation
•	 Hyperpyrexia > 41°C
•	 Heart failure
•	 Jaundice
•	 Psychosis.
	 Hyperthyroidism (usually 1–3 weeks followed by hypothyroidism), fol­
lowed by resolution
	 Disparity between clinical features and biochemistry
	 High ESR
	 Reduced uptake on technetium uptake scan
	 Weakly positive anti-thyroid antibodies.
Patients who have two or more of the above have a high mortality. Symp­
toms can also include vomiting, diarrhoea, seizures and coma.
Thyroid storm
This is defined as being present in a patient with hyperthyroidism bio­
chemically and any two of the above features. It is a rare medical emer­
gency because thyrotoxicosis is now easy to diagnose biochemically and 
can be treated earlier than formerly.
It can be precipitated by thyroid surgery, the administration of radioio­
dine, the withdrawal of or non-compliance with anti-thyroid medication 
and by acute illness.
Treatment
	 Cool the patient with tepid sponging and a fan. Do not use aspirin, 
which is contraindicated in thyroid storm (it displaces thyroxine from 
its binding globulin and increases the free T4).
	 Beta blockers (propranolol 5 mg IV then 40–80 mg 8-hourly orally) 
unless contraindicated by asthma (Note: heart failure is not a contrain­
dication to beta blockers).
	 Fluid replacement: this needs careful assessment with central venous 
monitoring. Heart failure will rapidly come under control once the 
patient’s heart rate is lowered.
	 Hydrocortisone 100 mg IV 6-hourly. This blocks T4 to T3 conversion.
	 Propylthiouracil 250 mg 4-hourly.
	 Potassium iodide 60 mg 8-hourly as iodine blocks thyroxine synthesis 
and release. This should be given at least 1 h after the propylthiouracil, 
which blocks iodine incorporation, but not uptake.
439
Amiodarone and thyroid function 14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
• Progress.  This woman responded to her emergency treatment and 
was referred back to the Endocrine team who have now recom­
mended radioactive thyroid treatment.
AMIODARONE AND THYROID FUNCTION
Case history
A 45-year-old patient presents in A&E with increased 
breathlessness over the last few days. On direct questioning she 
says that she has been losing weight (8 kg) for 4 months. She 
gave a past history of heart problems, for which she is under the 
care of a cardiologist. She is unsure of the exact problem but says 
that she does take tablets for an irregular pulse that she has 
brought with her. She is on amiodarone and also takes warfarin 
and a diuretic.
On examination she has an irregular pulse 120/min, a raised 
JVP with crackles at both bases.
You diagnose mild heart failure with atrial fibrillation which is 
confirmed by ECG.
Treatment
You increase her diuretic to furosemide 80 mg daily and start her on 
enalapril at a small initial dose of 2.5 mg daily.
• On post-take ward round:  Your consultant is pleased with your 
summary of the woman’s condition and your initial management. He 
asks you about the weight loss, which you have noted but so far have 
no explanation for.
Fortunately you have done many blood tests, including thyroid function 
tests, the results of which are now available. These show a free T4 
30.7 pmol/L and a TSH < 0.1 mU/L. How should you proceed?
	 Confirm how long the patient has been on amiodarone and check the 
clinical record to establish whether there are any previous TFT results, 
particularly those before amiodarone therapy was commenced.
	 Amiodarone can cause hypo- or hyperthyroidism. In patients who have 
nodular thyroid disease the synthesis of thyroxine may be autonomous 
and is limited only by iodine availability: thyrotoxicosis may be precipi­
tated. In others, the Wolff–Chaikoff effect may result in hypothyroidism. 
Amiodarone also blocks T4 to T3 conversion, causing a high T4 and 
normal T3.
	 Examine the patient for clinical evidence of hyperthyroidism.
	 The patient is clinically, as well as biochemically thyrotoxic, so start 
carbimazole 40 mg daily and ask the patient’s cardiologist to discon­
tinue amiodarone and use other therapy for her atrial fibrillation. 
Amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis can require high doses of carbima­
zole and sometimes prednisolone is helpful in controlling the condition. 
Because amiodarone contains large amounts of iodine, radioiodine 
cannot be used.
440
Endocrinology and Diabetes
14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Information
Wolff and Chaikoff first noted that excessive iodine suppresses 
thyroid function and causes short-term atrophy of the thyroid 
gland. Surgeons use this effect by administration of potassium 
iodide for 10 days before surgery. This is also why potassium 
iodide is used in thyroid storm.
• Progress.  Cardiologists agreed that this patient should stop amio­
darone and start verapamil. They said that two attempts at DC con­
version had failed in the past and DC was unlikely to be successful 
now. The patient became euthyroid after 3 months carbimazole 
therapy.
HYPOTHYROIDISM
Information
Amiodarone contains a substantial amount of iodine and has a 
half-life of about a month. Thus amiodarone behaves like 
slow-release iodine.
TFTs on amiodarone:
•	 Normal
•	 High fT4 normal TSH due to reduced conversion: monitor
•	 Subclinical thyrotoxicosis, i.e. suppressed TSH: change therapy
•	 Clinical thyrotoxicosis: change treatment and control 
overactivity
•	 Hypothyroidism: titrate thyroxine very gradually starting at 25 µg 
daily
Case history
A 42-year-old woman is seen in the Well Women’s Clinic because 
she is having irregular periods which are sometimes very heavy. 
She thinks she has become menopausal and wonders about HRT. 
A more detailed history reveals that she has general malaise, 
weight gain (5 kg in 6 months), constipation and a hoarse voice.
On examination she is overweight at 68 kg (BMI 30). There is 
no palpable goitre but she does have swollen, non-pitting oedema 
of her legs and slow relaxation of her ankle jerks.
Diagnosis: Hypothyroidism.
Investigations show a raised TSH (30 µg/L) and free T4 of 
4.2 pmol/L, confirming hypothyroidism. Interpretation of thyroid 
function tests is shown in Figure 14.4.
441
Hypothyroidism 14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Hypothyroidism is now diagnosed by a multitude of practitioners:
	 Lipid clinic: cause of hypercholesterolaemia
	 Psychiatrists: organic psychosis or depression
	 Neurologists: ataxia
	 ENT surgeons: dysphonia or deafness
	 Cardiologists: during follow-up on amiodarone treatment
	 Dermatologists: dry skin or hair
	 Gynaecologists: menorrhagia, oligo- or amenorrhoea, infertility
	 Geriatricians: screening test
	 Diabetologists: screening test in diabetes.
In primary hypothyroidism, the TSH will always be elevated and often very 
high.
Adult-onset primary hypothyroidism is usually due to autoimmune 
disease, unless:
	 Amiodarone treatment
	 Previous thyroid surgery
	 Previous radioiodine treatment
	 Viral or post-partum thyroiditis.
Treatment
The patient, who is otherwise fit and not at risk of ischaemic heart disease, 
is started on 100 µg levothyroxine daily.
Low free T4, Low/normal TSH
Patient in hospital/chronic illness
Yes
Sick euthyroid likely
No
Yes
No
Radiological and
biochemical pituitary
assessment
Recheck in
3 months
Patient clinically hypothyroid?
(Repeat measurement
in 6 weeks)
Abnormal
Normal
Discharge
Figure 14.4  Interpretation of thyroid function tests. 
442
Endocrinology and Diabetes
14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
And then …?
It takes about 6 weeks for a steady state to be reached. Aim to increase the 
levothyroxine dose in 25 µg increments every 6 weeks until the TSH is 
within or just below the normal range (3–3.5 mU/L). Occasionally, patients 
require only 50–75 µg daily although usually 100–150 µg daily is required. 
Think about associated autoimmune diseases:
	 Vitamin B12 deficiency
	 Myasthenia gravis
	 Addison’s disease
	 Coeliac disease
	 Other organ specific autoimmune diseases.
If the patient had angina, be very careful indeed. Many clinicians start at 
25 µg per day (or even alternate days) and increase every 4–6 weeks. With 
hypothyroidism or when attempting thyroxine replacement with unstable 
angina, treat the heart disease first.
What is compensated hypothyroidism?
Early in the course of hypothyroidism the TSH is elevated (4–20 mU/L) 
but T4 and T3 are normal. Opinion differs as to the need for treatment. 
Most endocrinologists replace with levothyroxine:
	 If autoantibodies are present in high titre
	 If the patient has typical symptoms of hypothyroidism
	 In the presence of a high cholesterol
	 TSH > 10 mU/L.
• Progress.  The patient made a complete recovery on levothyroxine 
therapy and did not require HRT.
ADDISON’S DISEASE
Case history
A 35-year-old teacher has been under the care of a gynaecologist 
whom she consulted for amenorrhoea and menopausal symptoms. 
She has been increasingly tired and has lost weight over a 
6-month period. She presents acutely to A&E with a 2-day history 
of vomiting and postural hypotension.
On examination she has a dull, slightly grey/brown 
pigmentation easily seen on her palmar creases. Her blood 
pressure is 80/60 with a postural drop.
Electrolytes:
	 Sodium: 127 mmol/L
	 Potassium: 5.2 mmol/L
	 Urea: 16 mmol/L
	 Creatinine: 140 µmol/L.
The clinical presentation and electrolytes indicate adrenal insufficiency. 
Treatment with glucocorticoids (e.g. hydrocortisone) and IV 0.9% saline is 
life-saving in this situation and should be started immediately after a blood 
sample is taken for plasma cortisol/ACTH measurements.
443
Addison’s disease 14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Adrenal insufficiency presents gradually – over months – but also, as 
in this case, with acute haemodynamic collapse, often precipitated by 
infection, trauma or surgery. Crises can also occur in patients with known 
Addison’s disease during relatively trivial episodes such as a viral infec­
tion; for this reason patients are advised to increase (typically double) the 
dose of hydrocortisone during illness.
Patients who are on long-term steroids for inflammatory conditions 
such as asthma also have pituitary adrenal suppression but do not develop 
the same pattern of electrolyte disturbance and rarely become so unwell 
because they have preserved mineralocorticoid (i.e. aldosterone) 
secretion.
Clinical findings in Addison’s disease
Acute
	 Hypotension (may be severe or postural)
	 Nausea and vomiting
	 Diarrhoea
	 Hyponatraemia and hyperkalaemia
	 Metabolic acidosis
	 Hypercalcaemia
	 Mild elevation of TSH.
Chronic
	 Weight loss and anorexia
	 Fatigue
	 Generalised weakness
	 Hyperpigmentation
	 Arthralgia and myalgia
	 Depression and apathy and confusion.
Information
Common causes of adrenal failure
•	 Primary:
–	 Autoimmune: often associated with other autoimmune 
disease (e.g. type 1 diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism, 
premature ovarian failure)
–	 Tuberculous adrenalitis: consider in immigrant populations/
developing countries
–	 Drugs (e.g. ketoconazole, metyrapone)
•	 Secondary (i.e. due to ACTH deficiency):
–	 Long-term glucocorticoid therapy (oral, inhaled, topical or 
intranasal steroids)
–	 Hypopituitarism
Immediate management of this patient
General
	 IV 0.9% saline
	 Correct hypoglycaemia with 5% glucose
	 Identify and treat a precipitating cause.
444
Endocrinology and Diabetes
14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
The initial cortisol in this woman was < 100 nmol/L so that Addison’s 
disease is confirmed. In a less clear cut case, use a tetracosactide test.
• Progress.  Once the patient had recovered and is eating and drink­
ing, hydrocortisone replacement was rapidly tapered to 20 mg daily, 
given as 10 mg (06:00) + 5 mg (12:00) + 5 mg (18:00) to try and mimic 
the physiological circadian rhythm. Fludrocortisone was commenced 
at 100 µg daily.
Further investigations
•	 FBC (anaemia, normochromic normocytic)
•	 Glucose (hypoglycaemia)
•	 Serum calcium (might be high)
•	 ABGs (acidosis)
•	 CXR (TB, carcinoma)
•	 Short tetracosactide test (see Information box) if necessary to 
confirm diagnosis
•	 Pituitary MRI if hypopituitarism suspected
Information
Short ACTH (Tetracosactide) test
•	 Omit morning and previous evening dose of hydrocortisone
•	 Take baseline blood sample for cortisol and ACTH
•	 Administer tetracosactrin 250 µg IM or IV
•	 Take further blood samples for cortisol at 30 and 60 min
•	 30 minute cortisol < 500 nmol/L is abnormal (500–600 nmol/L is 
borderline)
Further reading
Arit W, Allolio B. Adrenal insufficiency. Lancet 2003; 362: 1881–1894.
PATIENTS ON STEROIDS FOR SURGERY
Case history
A 50-year-old woman who is known to have chronic asthma and 
who has been on oral prednisolone between 10 mg and 40 mg for 
at least the last 10 years is admitted for a right hemicolectomy for 
a caecal carcinoma. Her asthma has been difficult to control on 
inhalers alone and she finds that her asthma worsens whenever 
her dose of oral prednisolone is reduced to 10 mg, which she is 
on at present.
Specific
	 Take samples for cortisol and ACTH.
	 Hydrocortisone (100 mg IM); the intramuscular route gives sustained 
plasma levels.
	 Continue hydrocortisone 50–100 mg IV/IM × 4 daily.
445
Patients on steroids for surgery 14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Figure 14.5  Control of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. Pituitary 
ACTH is secreted in response to hypothalamic CRH (corticotrophin-releasing 
hormone) triggered by circadian rhythm, stress and other factors, and stimulates 
secretion of cortisol from the adrenal. Cortisol has multiple actions in peripheral 
tissues and exerts negative feedback on pituitary and hypothalamus. 
Tissue
actions
Stress
Circadian
rhythm
Hypothalamus
Adrenals
Pituitary
Cortisol
ACTH
CRH
How should the patient’s steroids be continued 
following surgery?
Patients who have been on prednisolone for more than 3 months are likely 
to have a suppressed pituitary–adrenal axis (Fig. 14.5). Adrenal mineralo­
corticoid production will be normal, so that the risks of a typical Addison­
ian crisis are small, but nevertheless this patient will not be able to mount 
the normal cortisol response to surgery. Glucocorticoid replacement 
should be given as follows:
	 At induction: hydrocortisone 100 mg IM; then
	 50–100 mg IM or IV for 3 days.
An intravenous infusion of hydrocortisone (25–100 mg over 24 h, i.e. 
1–4 mg per hour) should be given to all patients who will have a prolonged 
period NBM or who are on ITU. The pharmacokinetics of hydrocortisone 
are such that such a continuous infusion of 4 mg will achieve a steady-state 
plasma cortisol level of > 500 nmol/L, similar to patients on ITU with 
normal adrenals. A serum cortisol sample after 12 h of infusion can be used 
to titrate the hydrocortisone infusion down to achieve a cortisol level of 
500–750 nmol/L. Hydrocortisone 100 mg every 6 h when given IM will 
also achieve a similar concentration of cortisol.
Note: Oral hydrocortisone has a greater bioavailability than intravenous 
hydrocortisone.
446
Endocrinology and Diabetes
14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Information
Once-daily steroids are used in pharmacological doses to treat 
inflammatory conditions. Such treatment is not appropriate for 
hydrocortisone replacement in patients with Addison’s disease, 
patients who have congenital adrenal hyperplasia (who might not 
be able to synthesise any adrenal steroids) or following 
adrenalectomy, when patients are at risk of true Addisonian crises. 
These patients need twice-daily treatment.
Case history (1)
A 56-year-old female patient who has been found to have fibroids 
has been admitted for a hysterectomy. She has treated 
hypertension but no other known illness, and no symptoms other 
than menorrhagia. A routine biochemical screen has revealed a 
corrected calcium of 2.75 mmol/l (NR 2.20–2.60 mmol/L).
Information
An incidental finding of a raised serum calcium is a common 
presentation of hypercalcaemia and should be evaluated.
• Progress.  This patient’s postoperative period was prolonged due to 
her asthma and she spent 48 hours in ITU. She eventually made a 
good recovery but is continuing to need oral steroids.
HYPERCALCAEMIA
What is the appropriate management of this case with mild 
hypercalcaemia?
Mild to moderate hypercalcaemia: corrected calcium < 3.00 mmol/L.
	 Ensure breast examination and CXR are reviewed
	 Ensure adequate hydration preoperatively
	 Continue IV 0.9% saline (1 L 8-hourly) postoperatively until patient is 
drinking freely
	 U&Es and calcium postoperatively
	 Follow-up with full investigation.
Investigations
•	 Urea, electrolytes and eGFR
•	 Serum PTH
•	 ESR
•	 Serum electrophoresis and immunofixation for paraprotein
447
Hypercalcaemia 14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Clinical features of moderate/severe hypercalcaemia
	 Malaise, tiredness, fatigue
	 Anorexia and weight loss
	 Thirst and polyuria
	 Non-specific musculoskeletal symptoms
	 Renal calculus (stones)
	 Osteoporosis (‘bones’)
	 Abdominal pain (‘groans’)
	 Confusion (‘psychic moans’).
Causes
Investigations (continued)
•	 Serum free light chain assay
•	 24-h urine collection for calcium estimation
•	 CXR
•	 TFTs
•	 Serum angiotensin converting enzyme levels (for sarcoidosis)
Information
•	 Primary hyperparathyroidism is the most common cause of 
mild–moderate hypercalcaemia
•	 Malignancy accounts for 50% of severe hypercalcaemia and is 
usually apparent with physical examination + CXR and breast 
examination
PTH dependent
	 Primary hyperparathyroidism (the most common cause of mild 
hypercalcaemia)
	 Tertiary hyperparathyroidism (in the context of chronic kidney disease)
	 Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcaemia (slightly raised PTH).
PTH independent
	 Myeloma
	 Solid tumours: breast, bronchus, kidney, lymphoma
	 Vitamin D excess (especially the 1 alpha analogues of vitamin D)
	 Sarcoidosis
	 Thyrotoxicosis
	 Glucocorticoid insufficiency.
Biochemical features of primary hyperparathyroidism
	 Elevated PTH in the presence of hypercalcaemia. High normal PTH 
with hypercalcaemia also suggests hyperparathyroidism because any 
other cause of hypercalcaemia should suppress the PTH.
	 Elevated or high/normal 24-h urinary calcium excretion (normal: 
2–8 mmol/24 h).
448
Endocrinology and Diabetes
14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Low bicarbonate 15–20 mmol/L (PTH excess causes a mild renal 
tubular acidosis).
	 Moderately elevated ESR.
	 Normochromic anaemia.
Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcaemia (FHH) is a benign, familial, auto­
somal dominant condition caused by a mutation of the calcium-sensing 
receptor in the kidney and parathyroid gland. It is not associated with 
renal calculi and is asymptomatic. It can be difficult to distinguish from 
asymptomatic primary hyperparathyroidism. A low urinary calcium sug­
gests the diagnosis, which is confirmed by examining family members.
Treatment of primary hyperparathyroidism
Patients who are symptomatic or who have complications should all be 
referred for parathyroid surgery, whatever the serum calcium level.
Most authorities suggest that the majority of asymptomatic patients 
should also be treated surgically because they are at risk of developing 
complications, and should certainly be referred for specialist opinion.
• Progress.  This patient had an uneventful postoperative recovery 
following her hysterectomy but did not want to consider any further 
surgery unless it becomes absolutely necessary. She is being followed 
with regular serum calcium levels.
SEVERE HYPERCALCAEMIA
Case history
A 72-year-old woman is referred with a diagnosis of ‘recurrent 
hyperparathyroidism’. She had a past history of primary 
hyperparathyroidism treated surgically 10 years previously and had 
been maintained on a low dose of oral calcium.
Three months prior to admission she had become generally 
unwell, weak and lethargic. She reported weight loss of 5 kg. The 
GP had performed blood tests: corrected calcium 3.5 mmol/L; 
urea 16 mmol/L; creatinine 150 µmol/L. Renal function was 
previously normal. The patient arrived dehydrated and vomiting. 
She was found to have a fungating breast carcinoma, which she 
had kept secret.
•	 Recurrence of hyperparathyroidism after surgical cure is 
unusual and suggests a familial cause of hyperparathyroidism 
(e.g. multiple endocrine neoplasia) or an alternative cause, e.g. 
breast cancer.
•	 Hypercalcaemia causes dehydration by creating a secondary 
type of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. As calcium clearance is 
itself dependent on GFR, hypercalcaemia can rapidly 
decompensate in the presence of fluid depletion.
449
Hypocalcaemia 14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Case history
Three days after a total thyroidectomy, a 32-year-old patient 
develops tingling and numbness around the mouth and in the 
extremities. She has become emotionally labile.
On examination tapping the facial nerve (Chvostek’s sign) her 
upper lip twitches. A serum calcium is 1.82 mmol/L corrected. 
How do you proceed?
Information
Severe hypercalcaemia is defined as: corrected calcium > 
3.5 mmol/L or > 3.0 with evidence of dehydration.
Management of this patient’s severe hypercalcaemia
	 Aggressive rehydration with 0.9% saline 4–6 L over 24 h.
	 Central venous pressure monitoring is usually necessary.
This is usually sufficient to bring calcium down to 3.0 mmol/L.
	 Bisphosphonate: treatment of choice for hypercalcaemia of malignan­
cies or of undiagnosed cause. 60–90 mg infusion of disodium pamidro­
nate via a cannula in a large vein causes normalisation of serum calcium 
in 80% of patients after 48 to 72 h.
Other treatments:
	 Glucocorticoids (e.g. prednisolone 60 mg daily is used in sarcoidosis or 
vitamin D toxicity).
	 In life-threatening hypercalcaemia, haemodialysis may be necessary.
• Progress.  This patient’s calcium level remained within the normal 
range for 2 weeks. She was referred to the Oncology Department for 
treatment of the breast cancer and was started on an oral bisphos­
phonate as skeletal secondaries were demonstrated.
HYPOCALCAEMIA
Management
	 The patient’s parathyroid glands might have been inadvertently 
removed. Before the plasma calcium result is available, an urgent assess­
ment of the patient must be made to determine the severity.
Clinical features of hypocalcaemia
	 Abnormal neurological sensations and neuromuscular excitability
	 Numbness around the mouth and paraesthesia of the distal limbs
	 Hyper-reflexia
	 Carpal and pedal spasms
	 Tetany contractions (may include laryngospasm)
	 Generalised seizures
450
Endocrinology and Diabetes
14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Chvostek’s sign is elicited by tapping the facial nerve just anterior to 
the ear, causing ipsilateral contraction of the facial muscles (positive in 
10% of normals).
	 Trousseau’s sign is elicited by inflating a blood pressure cuff for 3 min 
at the level of systolic blood pressure. This causes mild ischaemia, 
unmasks latent neuromuscular hyperexcitability and carpal spasm is 
observed.
	 ECG: prolonged QT interval.
Information
Causes of tetany
In the presence of alkalosis:
•	 Hyperventilation
•	 Excess antacid therapy
•	 Persistent vomiting
•	 Hypochloraemic alkalosis, e.g. primary hyperaldosteronism
In the presence of hypocalcaemia: see below
How do you assess severity?
The symptoms and signs described above are a much better guide to 
prognosis than the absolute value of the plasma calcium. In the presence 
of a low calcium (corrected calcium less than 2.0 mmol/L), any of the 
above features should be taken as evidence that urgent treatment is 
required.
Treatment of this patient (Table 14.9)
	 Administer 10 mL calcium gluconate (10 mL of 10% calcium gluconate 
(2.20 mmol)) before the plasma calcium result is back.
	 Hypocalcaemia is usually transient.
Investigations
•	 Plasma calcium (and albumin) and phosphate
•	 Plasma magnesium
•	 U&Es
•	 Plasma PTH level (low in hypoparathyroidism, high in vitamin D 
deficiency
•	 Vitamin D level
•	 Skull XR (intracranial calcification of chronic hypocalcaemia)
Causes of hypocalcaemia
	 Hypoparathyroidism 
(primary, 
secondary 
or 
most 
commonly 
post-surgical)
	 Renal failure (associated hyperphosphataemia)
	 Vitamin D deficiency (giving rickets and osteomalacia)
	 Pseudo-hypoparathyroidism (resistance to PTH)
451
Hypocalcaemia 14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Severity of hypocalcaemia
Recommended action
Emergency
Spontaneous tetany, 
laryngospasm, seizures
Give 10 mL calcium gluconate 10% 
over 5 min IV, then proceed as 
below
Acute severe hypocalcaemia
Frequent spasms/distressing 
symptoms and corrected 
calcium < 2.00 mmol/L or
Calcium infusion: calcium gluconate 
at 15 mg/kg IV over 4 h in 1 L 
0.9% saline. This is equivalent to 
[(weight in kg) × 1.7] mL of 10% 
calcium gluconate
Mild symptoms and 
corrected calcium of < 
1.90 mmol/L
ECG monitoring is essential for 
patients with arrhythmias
Check magnesium level and correct 
if low
Acute mild hypocalcaemia
Mild symptoms with calcium 
1.90–2.20 mmol/L
Oral calcium supplements
Calcium carbonate (600 mg Ca2+ 
daily) 1–2 tablets twice or three 
times daily. Preferably between 
meals to increase availablility of 
calcium for intestinal absorption.
If hypocalcaemia asociated with 
insufficient vitamin D give calcium 
carbonate with colecalciferol 1 
tablet twice or three times daily 
(Ca2+ 600 mg)
Chronic hypocalcaemia
Symptoms frequently mild 
unless accompanied by 
osteomalacia
Oral calcium supplements (as above)
If due to dietary vitamin D deficiency 
use oral calcium as above
With hypoparathyroidism: either 
primary, secondary or persisting 
following thyroid/parathyroid 
surgery: add alfacalcidol 1 µg 
daily. This medication requires 
careful monitoring and usually 
endocrine follow-up
Table 14.9  Management of symptomatic hypocalcaemia
	 Severe magnesium deficiency (causes both reduced PTH secretion and 
resistance to PTH action)
	 Acute pancreatitis
	 Rhabdomyolysis.
How do you manage symptomatic hypocalcaemia?
The aim of acute management is not to return the calcium to normal but 
to ameliorate the acute manifestations of hypocalcaemia (Table 14.9).
• Progress.  This patient’s serum calcium was normal on the 4th post­
operative day and she made an uneventful recovery.
452
Endocrinology and Diabetes
14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
PHAEOCHROMOCYTOMA (CATECHOLAMINE CRISIS)
Phaeochromocytomas are rare catecholamine-producing tumours derived 
from neuroendocrine cells, usually involving the adrenal glands (90%) or 
elsewhere in the sympathetic chain (paragangliomas).
Information
Administration of alfacalcidol (0.5–1.0 µg), together with oral 
calcium gluconate, is used for chronic hypoparathyroidism with 
regular calcium monitoring.
Case history
Three hours after a surgical procedure for colonic malignancy, a 
62-year-old woman becomes hypertensive with tachycardia, 
inappropriate lactic acidosis and hyperglycaemia. When you 
review the notes you discover that she has a 3-cm adrenal mass 
seen on a CT scan preoperatively, which was felt to be an 
incidental finding by the surgical team. On further questioning, you 
determine that she has had a history of paroxysmal palpitations, 
flushing, sweating attacks and headaches for years.
This history and CT findings would be compatible with a 
phaeochromocytoma.
Phaeochromocytoma is known as the 10% tumour (see 
Information box). It can be diagnosed during routine screening of 
hypertensive patients (found in only 0.1% of hypertensive 
subjects), the investigation of unusual episodes or cardiac events 
of uncertain aetiology. Phaechromocytomas are usually associated 
with hypertension, ‘attacks’ and/or headache. They secrete 
adrenaline or noradrenaline (Fig. 14.6).
Information
Phaeochromocytoma – the 10% tumour
•	 10% are bilateral
•	 10% are extra-adrenal, usually around the sympathetic chain, 
when they are known as paragangliomas
•	 10% are malignant
How do these tumours present?
Symptoms and signs of catecholamine excess include:
	 Hypertension (sustained or paroxysmal)
	 Anxiety attacks
	 Palpitations and tachycardia
	 Cold extremities
453
Phaeochromocytoma (catecholamine crisis) 14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Tyrosine
DOPA
Dopamine
Noradrenaline
(norepinephrine)
Adrenaline
(epinephrine)
Dopamine  β-hydroxylase
Dopa decarboxylase
Tyrosine hydroxylase
COMT
MAO
COMT
MAO
MAO
COMT
Metnoradrenaline
Metadrenaline
Dihydroxymandelic
acid
N-methyl
transferase
Vanillylmandelic
acid (VMA)
Figure 14.6  The synthesis and metabolism of catecholamines. DOPA, 
dihydroxyphenylalanine; COMT, catechol-O-methyl transferase; MAO, 
monoamine oxidase. 
	 Cold sweats, tremor, pallor
	 Cardiac arrhythmias including atrial and ventricular fibrillation
	 Hypertensive crises may be precipitated by intercurrent illness, surgery, 
or drugs (e.g. beta blockers, tricyclic anti-depressants, metoclopramide 
and naloxone)
	 Pulmonary oedema with normal LV function
	 Unexplained lactic acidosis
	 Apparent type 2 diabetes.
Associations
A family history is vital, particularly in young patients, and might reveal 
the following autosomal dominant conditions:
	 Neurofibromatosis type I (neurofibromata, café au lait spots, Lisch 
nodules (iris hamartomas) and axillary freckling)
	 von Hippel–Lindau disease (cerebellar haemangioblastomas, retinal 
haemangiomas and renal cell carcinoma)
	 Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (medullary thyroid carcinoma and 
hyperparathyroidism)
	 Hereditary paraganglioma syndromes (phaeochromocytoma, carotid 
body tumour).
454
Endocrinology and Diabetes
14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Diagnostic tests include
	 U&Es: potassium often low, urea may be high if dehydrated
	 Glucose: hyperglycaemia.
	 Urinary catecholamines (adrenaline, noradrenaline and dopamine) are 
measured by most laboratories. Two sets of normal 24-h urinary cate­
cholamines make a phaechromocytoma very unlikely.
	 Plasma (heparinised) catecholamines (adrenaline, noradenaline and 
dopamine) are specific but not sensitive tests. The blood must be taken 
directly to the lab for centrifugation.
	 MRI/CT scan of the adrenals should be delayed until biochemical diag­
nosis but are useful in localising the lesion.
	 MIBG scan: MIBG (131I-metaiodobenzylguanidine) is taken up selec­
tively by adrenal tissue and is useful for localisation of tumour, particu­
larly in extra-adrenal sites.
How would you manage this case?
	 Adequate fluid replacement with 1 L 0.9% saline intially over 1 hour, 
then 1 L 8-hourly, usually with CVP monitoring.
	 Initiate oral alpha blockade: phenoxybenzamine 10 mg × 3 daily increas­
ing gradually to 40 mg × 3 daily.
	 When the blood pressure is controlled with phenoxybenzamine and a 
reflex tachycardia occurs, add propranolol 10–40 mg × 3 daily. Do not 
use Labetalol.
	 Surgery: hypotension commonly occurs intra-operatively when the 
tumour is removed, and this should be managed with blood, plasma 
expanders and inotropes as required. Inotropes should be used only 
when the patient is appropriately fluid replete. Expansion of intravas­
cular volume 12 h before surgery significantly reduces the frequency 
and severity of postoperative hypotension.
	 In emergency (hypertensive crisis) intravenous phentolamine (1–5 mg) 
should be used, but great care should be taken to adequately rehydrate 
the patient in order to prevent severe hypotension.
• Progess.  This patient improved with α and β blockade and her 
blood pressure stabilised. She was referred to the Endocrine Depart­
ment who, after further investigations, recommended surgical 
removal of the tumour.
HYPOPITUITARISM
Pathophysiology
Deficiency of hypothalamic releasing hormones or of pituitary trophic 
hormones can be selective or multiple. Thus isolated deficiencies of GH, 
LH/FSH, ACTH, TSH and vasopressin are all seen, some cases of which 
are genetic and congenital and others sporadic and autoimmune or idio­
pathic in nature.
Multiple deficiencies usually result from tumour growth or other 
destructive lesions. There is generally a progressive loss of anterior pitui­
tary function. GH and gonadotrophins are usually first affected. Hyper­
prolactinaemia, rather than prolactin deficiency, occurs relatively early 
because of loss of tonic inhibitory control by dopamine. TSH and ACTH 
are usually last to be affected.
455
Hypopituitarism 14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
• Diagnosis.  Hypopituitary coma and apoplexy.
Pituitary apoplexy occurs with infarction or haemorrhage into an undiag­
nosed pituitary tumour. It produces severe headache with sudden visual 
field defects or ocular palsy. Axial CT scan can miss pituitary apoplexy but 
MRI usually shows the tumour.
Features of pituitary apoplexy
Pituitary infarction can be silent. Apoplexy implies the presence of 
symptoms:
	 Headache occurs in 75% of cases (may be sudden onset, very severe, or 
mild)
	 Visual disturbance (compression of optic tract, usually causing bitem­
poral hemianopia)
	 Ocular palsy present in 40% of cases: unilateral or bilateral
	 Nausea/vomiting
	 Meningism
	 Hemiparesis.
Clinically, pituitary apoplexy can be very difficult to distinguish from 
subarachnoid haemorrhage, bacterial meningitis, mid-brain infarction 
(basilar artery occlusion) and cavernous sinus thrombosis.
Initial investigation
An MRI of the pituitary reveals a tumour mass. Note: MRI will often reveal 
a pituitary tumour although it cannot distinguish between recent and old 
haemorrhage (CT might help).
A single clotted blood sample should be taken to measure cortisol, 
thyroid function, prolactin, growth hormone, testosterone (in men) and the 
gonadotrophin hormones.
Assessment of severity
The course of pituitary apoplexy is variable. Headache and mild visual 
disturbance can develop slowly and persist for several weeks. In the acute 
form, apoplexy might cause optic nerve compression, haemodynamic 
instability, coma and is potentially fatal. Neurosurgical advice should 
always be sought. Residual endocrine disturbance invariably occurs. Pan­
hypopituitarism is the usual result. Table 14.10 shows the replacement 
therapy that is required.
Case history
A 60-year-old man is admitted with a sudden onset of explosive 
headache and a left third nerve palsy. CT scan showed no 
evidence of an intracranial haemorrhage. An LP showed a mild 
lymphocytosis.
Viral meningitis is suspected but his recovery is slow. He is 
noted to have small testes and a hypogonadal appearance. Six 
weeks later he is readmitted with weight loss and a chest 
infection. Endocrine screening shows a low 09:00 serum cortisol 
and undetectable serum testosterone.
456
Endocrinology and Diabetes
14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Axis
Usual replacement therapies
Adrenal
Hydrocortisone 15–40 mg daily (starting dose 
10 mg on rising/5 mg lunchtime/5 mg evening)
(Normally no need for mineralocorticoid 
replacement)
Thyroid
Levothyroxine 100–150 mcg daily
Gonadal
  Male
Testosterone IM, orally, transdermally or implant
  Female
Cyclical oestrogen/progestogen orally or as patch
Fertility
HCG plus FSH (purified or recombinant) or 
pulsatile GnRH to produce testicular 
development, spermatogenesis or ovulation
Growth
Recombinant human growth hormone used 
routinely to achieve normal growth in children
Also advocated for replacement therapy in adults 
where growth hormone has effects on muscle 
mass and well-being
Thirst
Desmopressin 10–20 mcg 1–3 times daily by 
nasal spray or orally 100–200 mcg 3 times 
daily
Carbamazepine, thiazides and chlorpropamide 
are very occasionally used in mild diabetes 
insipidus
Breast (prolactin 
inhibition)
Dopamine agonist (e.g. cabergoline 500 mcg 
weekly)
FSH, follicle-stimulating hormone; GnRH, gonadotrophin-releasing hormone; 
HCG, human chorionic gonadotrophin.
Table 14.10  Replacement therapy for hypopituitarism
Information
•	 Neurosurgical decompression via a trans-sphenoidal route is 
the definitive treatment for pituitary apoplexy
•	 Obtundation and visual deterioration are absolute indications for 
neurosurgery
•	 Patients without confusion or visual disturbance generally do 
well without surgery
Management of this patient’s acute hypopituitarism
	 Diagnostic samples for cortisol, TFTs, prolactin (single plain venous 
sample).
	 Hydrocortisone 100 mg (preferably IM) should be administered when 
the diagnosis is suspected.
	 Administer glucose if the patient is hypoglycaemic.
	 Investigate and treat his chest infection.
457
Diabetes insipidus 14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
How do patients with hypopituitarism present?
	 Patients present at times of stress (e.g. following a general anaesthetic) 
with hypoglycaemia due to the combination of a lack of GH, cortisol 
and thyroxine, all of which have a counter-regulatory effect on 
insulin.
	 Post-partum infarction of the gland occurs following post-partum 
haemorrhage and vascular collapse during a difficult delivery (Shee­
han’s syndrome). This diagnosis should be suspected with failure to 
lactate, amenorrhoea and general ill-health post-partum.
	 Other features of hypopituitarism are non-specific and include tired­
ness, weakness, loss of body hair and loss of libido (sexual interest) and 
features of hypothyroidism.
	 Note that patients with ACTH deficiency have no postural blood pres­
sure drop and normal electrolytes, as adrenal mineralocorticoids (aldos­
terone) are unaffected.
Assessment of severity
The degree of hypopituitarism bears little relationship to the clinical state 
of the patient. In the absence of stress, patients with severe hypopituitarism 
might have few complaints. Examination of the testes in males might 
reveal small testes and women can demonstrate either amenorrhoea or 
inappropriately low post-menopausal gonadotrophins. Patients with mild 
hypopituitarism might become profoundly unwell at times of stress, such 
as during an intercurrent infection.
Causes
	 Destruction of the pituitary gland by primary or metastatic tumour
	 Ischaemic necrosis after post-partum haemorrhage
	 Pituitary apoplexy
	 Post-pituitary surgery or radiotherapy
	 Primary empty sella syndrome.
Investigations of anterior pituitary function
	 Baseline blood samples must be taken for cortisol, free thyroid 
hormone levels, testosterone LH, FSH, prolactin and growth hormone 
levels.
	 Dynamic investigation of pituitary function can be deferred and the 
patient should be treated expectantly with hydrocortisone (e.g. 10 mg 
× 2 daily once stable).
	 Imaging using CT with fine cuts through the pituitary or MRI is indi­
cated to find any space-occupying lesion.
• Progress.  This patient’s hypopituitarism improved without surgery 
and at 3 months his serum hormone levels were normal. He was 
evaluated further for possible treatment of his pituitary adenoma.
DIABETES INSIPIDUS
Transient diabetes insipidus (DI) often occurs following pituitary 
surgery because of vasopressin deficiency, and can also occur acutely fol­
lowing head injury. Consider DI if asked to see a patient with polyuria 
and polydipsia who has normal blood glucose. DI is also a cause of 
hypernatraemia.
458
Endocrinology and Diabetes
14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
This patient probably has transient diabetes insipidus.
How would you manage this patient?
	 Ensure adequate access to water or commence IV glucose 5% and 0.18% 
saline to match urine output if the patient cannot drink enough.
	 Make sure an accurate fluid balance chart is being maintained.
	 If urine output > 200 mL/hour for 2 consecutive hours, check plasma 
and urine osmolality.
	 DI is confirmed by the presence of a high plasma osmolality (> 290) in 
the presence of an inappropriately low urine osmolality (< 500 mOsmol/
kg).
	 Start desmopressin: adult dose 0.5–1.0 µg SC stat followed by 10–40 µg 
× 3 daily as an intranasal spray.
	 If the plasma osmolality is low the patient might be over-drinking due 
to a dry mouth, and a low urine osmolality is appropriate. In this cir­
cumstance, administration of desmopressin will cause a further fall in 
plasma osmolality and can be dangerous.
Other causes of diabetes insipidus
Diabetes insipidus is either cranial (CDI) or nephrogenic (NDI) due to the 
inability of ADH to act on the kidney (Table 14.11).
• Progress.  This patient’s DI was transient and he improved with IV 
fluids.
Case history
You are called to see a patient who had a trans-sphenoidal 
hypophysectomy the day before for a non-functioning pituitary 
adenoma. He has made a good recovery from surgery but now 
complains of severe thirst and is passing large volumes of dilute 
urine. Results of his investigations:
•	 Na+: 146
•	 K+: 4.0
•	 Urea: 4.7
•	 Creatinine: 90
•	 Urine SG (dipstick): 1.001.
Cranial DI
Nephrogenic DI
Hypothalamic tumour
Drugs:
Basal skull fracture
  diuretics
Neurosarcoidosis
  lithium
(other hypothalamic disease)
Hypercalcaemia
Idiopathic
Hypokalaemia
Infection
Inflammatory
Kidney disease e.g. renal tubular 
acidosis
Idiopathic
Table 14.11  Cranial and nephrogenic causes of diabetes insipidus
459
Syndrome of inappropriate anti-diuretic hormone (SIADH) 14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
SYNDROME OF INAPPROPRIATE ANTI-DIURETIC 
HORMONE (SIADH)
Inappropriate secretion of ADH results in retention of water and subse­
quent hyponatraemia. Mild symptoms of confusion, irritability and nausea 
occur as sodium levels fall below 125 mmol/L (125 meq/L); fitting and 
coma occur as the sodium falls below 115 mmol/L. A diagnosis of SIADH 
can only be made in a patient who is clinically normovolaemic with normal 
thyroid and adrenal function.
Case history
A 65-year-old smoker complained of a chronic cough and 
haemoptysis. A chest X-ray revealed a hilar mass. He was referred 
to the chest clinic for further investigation. Electrolytes: Na 118; K 
4.4; U 3.3; Cr 100; glucose 4.9; measured plasma osmolality 255.
In view of the low plasma osmolality, a spot urine was also sent 
to the biochemistry department:
Urinary sodium 30 mmol/L; urinary osmolality 350 mOsm/kg.
This patient’s urinary osmolality is high for his current plasma 
osmolality. Normally, the kidney can make urine as dilute as 
100 mOsmol/kg (urine SG = 1.0001) or as concentrated as 
1300 mOsmol/kg in a patient who is dehydrated (urine SG = 
1.4000). The current urinary osmolality has to be interpreted with 
the knowledge of the current plasma osmolality.
This patient does indeed have inappropriate ADH. He was put on a 
1-litre fluid restriction daily and commenced on demeclocycline.
Mild hypovolaemia is a potent stimulus for vasopressin (anti-diuretic 
hormone; ADH) release, and volume-depleted patients given hypotonic 
fluid will frequently become hyponatraemic. Assessment of volume status 
and recent fluid charts is essential in assessing hyponatraemia.
Information
Syndrome of inappropriate anti-diuretic hormone (SIADH)
•	 Dilutional hyponatraemia due to excessive water retention
•	 Low plasma osmolality with higher ‘inappropriate’ urine 
osmolality
•	 Continued urinary sodium excretion > 30 mmol/L
•	 Absence of hypokalaemia (or hypotension)
•	 Normal renal, adrenal and thyroid function
How would it present?
Most commonly, patients with true SIADH present with incidentally dis­
covered hyponatraemia. Alternatively, patients might present with a fit or 
episodes of confusion.
460
Endocrinology and Diabetes
14 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Causes
	 Small-cell lung carcinoma (commonest)
	 Drugs (e.g. carbamazepine, SSRIs)
	 Pneumonia
	 Tuberculosis
	 Intracranial pathology
	 Other neuroendocrine tumours.
What other causes of hyponatraemia should you think of?
It is essential that other causes of hyponatraemia (in particular diuretics) 
are excluded. The diagnosis of SIADH cannot be made in a patient who is 
on diuretics, although a patient might have SIADH and also be on diuret­
ics. The differential diagnosis of hyponatraemia includes hypothyroidism, 
adrenal and renal insufficiency, and chronic states such as cirrhosis and 
CCF.
Investigation of hyponatraemia
	 Take a drug history, e.g. diuretics, SSRIs or carbamazipine.
	 U&Es and plasma osmolality: hyponatraemia will be seen.
	 Urinary electrolytes and osmolality.
	 The patient will have a low plasma osmolality (< 280) and an inappro­
priately concentrated urine (> 300).
	 Free T4 and TSH to exclude hypothyroidism.
	 Cortisol and short ACTH test (p. 445) to exclude Addison’s disease.
	 CXR and chest CT (TB, carcinoma).
	 CT/MRI brain (exclude intracranial pathology).
Treatment
	 Fluid restriction
	 Demeclocycline.
• Progress.  On fluid restriction and demeclocycline, this patient’s 
serum Na+ returned to normal levels. He was referred to the oncolo­
gists for management of his bronchial carcinoma.
461
461
Neurology 15 
DIPLOPIA
Diplopia (double vision) occurs when there is an acquired defect of move­
ment of an eye (paralytic squint). It is maximal in the direction of action 
of the weak muscle.
Case history (1)
A 70-year-old man with type 2 diabetes presents with a 12-hour 
history of double vision. He is taking metformin and glibenclamide 
for his diabetes.
On examination there is ptosis in the left eye and the eye is 
deviated downwards and laterally (down and out) and fails to 
elevate or move medially (Fig. 15.1). The pupils both react 
normally. He is otherwise well. Random blood glucose is 
11.5 mmol/L. HbA1c is 8% (64 mmol/mol).
The diagnosis is a mononeuritis (usually a pupil-sparing third 
nerve palsy), a complication of diabetes mellitus.
What immediate action would you take?
	 Achieve better diabetic control.
	 Put a patch over the eye.
	 Reassure that recovery is likely (but not definite) over weeks.
If no recovery, refer to a neurologist for MRI scan and investigation of 
causes of mononeuritis multiplex (see p. 471).
Information
•	 A painless third nerve palsy with preserved pupil reactions 
commonly occurs in the setting of diabetes due to nerve 
infarction.
•	 If there is headache, especially of sudden onset, a posterior 
communicating artery aneurysm compressing the third nerve 
in front of the midbrain is a likely cause. Such a lesion also 
commonly involves the parasympathetic pupillary constricting 
fibres so that the pupil is fixed and dilated. MR angiography is 
indicated in this situation (Fig. 15.2).
462
Neurology
15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Figure 15.1  Partial left 3rd nerve palsy with mild ptosis in a man without 
diabetes. a) Large left pupil, b) normal left gaze, c) no adduction of left eye on 
right gaze, d) poor elevation, e) poor depression. 
a
b
c
d
e
463
Diplopia 15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Figure 15.2  a) MRI showing left cavernous carotid aneurysm (arrow) b) MR 
angiogram showing an aneurysm (from Albert and Jakobiec’s Principles and 
Practice of Ophthalmology. Saunders 2008 with permission).
b
a
• Progress.  This woman’s diplopia improved over the next 2 months.
Case history (2)
A 35-year-old woman presents with 3 months of intermittent 
double vision.
On examination there is mild restriction of upgaze and lateral 
gaze of the left eye, and mild restriction of upgaze of the right eye. 
There is mild bilateral ptosis. Further examination reveals 
fatiguability of the ptosis and of the eye movements.
A clinical diagnosis of myasthenia gravis was made.
What action would you take?
Confirm diagnosis of myasthenia by:
	 Serum acetylcholine receptor antibodies (present in 40% of cases with 
eye involvement only with 100% specificity).
	 Perform EMG studies, including the extra-ocular muscles.
	 MRI of mediastinum to exclude thymoma.
This patient was diagnosed as having myasthenia gravis and was referred 
urgently to a neurologist. Myasthenia gravis is sometimes restricted to the 
ocular system and can present as a variable gaze palsy that is difficult to 
interpret in terms of individual muscles or cranial nerves. There is not 
always a history of fatiguability. Some of the many causes of diplopia are 
listed in Table 15.1.
Treatment
Treatment of myasthenia gravis includes oral anticholinesterases, e.g. 
neostigmine or pyridostigmine (dosage gradually increased), steroids, 
immunosuppression, and plasmapheresis. Restricted ocular myasthenia 
464
Neurology
15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Case history (3)
A 30-year-old, 27-weeks pregnant woman complains of 4 weeks 
of headache, nausea, brief one-second episodes of visual loss and 
horizontal double vision that is worse on distance gaze.
On examination she is found to have bilateral papilloedema 
(Fig. 15.3) and bilateral restriction of lateral gaze consistent with 
sixth nerve palsies.
Muscle/obstructive
Thyroid eye disease
Orbital masses
Orbital pseudotumour (ocular myositis)
Myasthenia
Latent squint (visible when tired)
Cranial nerves
Mass lesion in path of III, IV or VI nerves
Mononeuritis multiplex
False localising due to raised intracranial 
pressure
Central
Brainstem inflammation, demyelination, 
brainstem mass lesion, infarction, haemorrhage
Table 15.1  Causes of diplopia
carries a better prognosis, as swallowing and the respiratory muscles may 
be permanently spared.
Thymectomy may be necessary, even in patients without a thymoma.
This woman remains well on pyridostigmine at regular intervals 
through the day but in view of the high doses required (>360 mg) she was 
put on immunosuppressive therapy (azathioprine and steroids). She got 
side effects of abdominal colic from the pyridostigmine and this was 
helped by oral propantheline.
Further reading
Chaudhuri A, Behan PO. Myasthenic crisis. QJM 2009; 102: 97–107.
What action would you take?
	 MR or CT scan of head.
In this case the ventricles were normal and therefore it was safe to proceed 
to a lumbar puncture. The opening pressure was recorded at 30 cm 
(normal pressure < 25 cm). A volume of CSF (usually around 20 mL) 
should be removed, so as to approximately halve the opening pressure.
• Diagnosis.  This woman has idiopathic intracranial hypertension 
(IIH). This is most common in overweight females and rare in 
males.
465
Diplopia 15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Figure 15.3  Papilloedema. 
Precipitating factors
	 Pregnancy
	 Weight gain
	 Polycystic ovaries
	 Tetracyclines
	 Vitamin A excess (including retinoids)
	 Steroids.
Management
Repeated lumbar puncture and removal of CSF, e.g. every 1–2 weeks, 
has been widely used but is probably not helpful. Drugs such as aceta­
zolamide can be helpful. Treatment is directed primarily at preventing 
visual loss due to uncorrected papilloedema and secondly for relief of 
headache/diplopia. The visual fields must be checked formally at inter­
vals by screen perimetry to monitor any enlargement of the blind spots. 
If repeat puncture is unsuccessful in this usually self-limiting condition, 
optic nerve fenestration or even ventriculoperitoneal shunting may be 
necessary.
Remember
•	 There are a number of secondary causes of raised intracranial 
pressure without dilated ventricles or other space-occupying 
lesion, e.g. venous sinus thrombosis and meningeal disease
•	 MRI/MR venography and examination of CSF constituents is 
therefore mandatory.
• Progress.  This patient’s condition improved post-partum.
466
Neurology
15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Case history (1)
A 64-year-old man presents in the A&E with visual loss in the right 
eye for 3 hours. He had a previous episode several months earlier. 
He describes the loss as a horizontal screen descending over his 
vision. You are called by the A&E officer to give an opinion. When 
you arrive the visual loss has recovered.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
Temporary monocular visual loss with a horizontal defect in this age 
group is very likely to be amaurosis fugax. This is often caused by throm­
boembolism in the ophthalmic artery and is a symptom of carotid 
stenosis.
Investigation and management
See pp. 175 and 176.
What is the differential diagnosis?
Transient ischaemic attacks (TIAs) are usually diagnosed clinically. Other 
causes of visual loss are shown in Table 15.2.
Remember giant cell arteritis, which causes acute visual loss. It responds 
to steroids (see p. 182).
Abrupt and progressive visual loss over days is also seen in elderly 
hypertensives. There is often disc swelling and later disc pallor. This is due 
to an arteriopathy of the posterior ciliary artery resulting in ischaemia of 
the optic disc causing an anterior ischaemic optic neuropathy. Urgent 
management by a specialist is with heparin infusion and mannitol.
Ophthalmological
Neurological
Glaucoma
Optic neuritis/demyelination
Amaurosis fugax
Compressive lesion of the optic 
nerve, chiasm, tract
Giant cell (temporal) arteritis
TIA/stroke of posterior cerebral 
circulation
Anterior ischaemic optic 
neuropathy
Migraine
Central retinal vessel 
occlusion
Occipital, temporal, parietal 
haemorrhage
Vitreous haemorrhage
Occipital, temporal, parietal 
space-occupying lesion
Retinal detachment
Temporal lobe epilepsy
Uveitis, keratitis
Raised intracranial pressure
Table 15.2  Causes of acute or transient visual disturbance
LOSS OF VISION
467
Loss of vision 15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Case history (2)
A 24-year-old woman complains of several attacks of loss of 
vision, lasting up to 1 hour, in the right eye, accompanied by a 
left-sided pounding headache. Closer questioning reveals that the 
defect is in fact in the right visual field of both eyes.
Visual hemifield disturbance, sometimes with shimmering or jagged 
line scotomata, is a relatively common aura experienced by patients with 
migraine. Occasionally there is no headache.
If the symptoms are dramatic or atypical, or especially if there are any 
fixed symptoms or signs, an MRI scan should be performed to check for 
an underlying vascular lesion such as an arteriovenous malformation or 
underlying epileptogenic lesion, including occipital tumour.
Treatment
	 Paracetamol 1 g, aspirin 900 mg (dispersible formulation) or an NSAID, 
e.g. ibuprofen 400–600 mg or naproxen 500 mg is given, as early as 
possible during an attack. Gastric emptying is reduced during the attack 
so dispersible formulations are preferred.
	 Antiemetics (e.g. metoclopramide 10 mg or domperidone 10 mg).
	 If these measures are ineffective, use a 5-hydroxytryptamine (5HT)1B/1D 
serotonin receptor agonist (triptan). These drugs relieve both the pain 
and the nausea. Triptans should be avoided in patients with vascular 
disease or uncontrolled/severe hypertension. Triptans should be given 
at the onset of the headache (e.g. during the aura phase). There are 
several triptans available with a spectrum of efficacy, e.g.:
•	 Sumatriptan 25–100 mg at onset of headache, repeat if necessary after 
at least 2 hours, max. 300 mg in 24 hours; SC 6 mg sumatriptan 
produces highest efficacy and most rapid response.
•	 Zolmitriptan 2.5 mg at onset, repeat if only partial response after 2 
hours; 5 mg also available.
•	 Rizatriptan 10 mg at onset, repeat after 2 hours if only partial 
response.
•	 Oro-dispersible formulations exist for some triptans but absorption 
is slower.
	 If there is no response to an initial dose, do not persist with subsequent 
doses during the same attack. However, the drug may be effective in 
subsequent attacks.
• Progress.  This patient’s headache improved with paracetamol and 
sumatriptan. On subsequent episodes of migraine she was able to 
self-administer sumatriptan, an anti-emetic and paracetamol at the 
onset of her headaches. With this regimen her migraine has been 
manageable.
Further reading
Loder E. Triptan Therapy in Migraine. N Engl J Med 2010; 363: 63–70. 
2010.
• Progress.  This patient’s carotid doppler showed a 70% stenosis in 
the carotid artery and an internal carotid endarterectomy was per­
formed. He has had no further episodes.
468
Neurology
15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
BELL’S PALSY
Figure 15.4  Bell’s palsy. 
Case History
You are called to see a 45-year-old man who woke up this 
morning with a ‘numb’ left face, a droopy left eyelid and drooling 
from the left side of his mouth.
On examination, it is apparent that his ‘numbness’ represents 
left facial weakness in the upper and lower distributions. There is 
no sensory loss and no lesions of the skin around or inside the ear 
(Ramsey Hunt Syndrome).
An acute VII nerve lesion, Bell’s palsy (Fig. 15.4) is usually due to a viral 
infection (often herpes simplex). It involves the VII facial nerve (motor 
only) with occasionally a loss of taste on the tongue and hyperacusis. There 
should be no sensory loss or other cranial nerve involvement.
Treatment is with steroids (60 mg prednisolone for a week) and tailing 
down over the subsequent 1–2 weeks, with an anti-viral, e.g. aciclovir 
given if diagnosed early. The patient should be reassured and the cornea 
protected if exposed. Sometimes recovery is incomplete and faulty rein­
nervation of the facial muscles or of the lacrimal gland may occur. Relapses 
are seen.
Bilateral or recurrent Bell’s palsy, or one that shows no recovery after 
several weeks, should be investigated with an MRI scan, possibly CSF 
analysis, and investigations for causes of mononeuritis multiplex.
469
Vertigo 15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Investigations
Mononeuritis multiplex
•	 FBC
•	 U&Es
•	 Blood glucose
•	 Serum autoantibodies
•	 Serum anti-cardiolipin antibodies
•	 Serum ANCA
•	 Treponemal serology
•	 Borrelia serology
•	 Serum and CSF angiotensin-converting enzyme
•	 Serum electrophoresis and Bence–Jones protein
•	 CXR
Note:
	 Sarcoidosis should be suspected in cases of bilateral Bell’s palsy.
	 A rare condition causing bilateral Bell’s palsy and tongue swelling with 
other features is Melkersson–Rosenthal syndrome.
	 Progressive multiple cranial nerve palsies should lead to suspicion of 
malignant meningitis, or lymphomatous or carcinomatous infiltration.
• Progress.  This patient was treated with steroids and aciclovir 
and the palsy resolved over a few weeks. He has had no further 
recurrences.
Further reading
De Almeida JR, Al Khabori M, Guyatt GH et al. Combined corticosteroid 
and antiviral treatment for Bell palsy: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. JAMA 2009; 302: 985–993.
VERTIGO
Vertigo, the definite illusion of movement of the subject or surroundings, 
typically rotatory, indicates a disturbance of the vestibular nerve, brain­
stem or, very rarely cortical function. Deafness and tinnitus accompanying 
vertigo indicate involvement of the ear or cochlear nerve.
Case history (1)
An 85-year-old woman presented to A&E with a history of severe 
nausea, vomiting and dizziness, which started on waking one 
morning 2 weeks previously. She was confused and dehydrated. 
On rehydration she was able to give a clear history of true vertigo 
(the sensation of the environment spinning or rotating about her). 
The symptoms were precipitated by head movement, especially 
when she turned her head in bed.
On examination she has a normal eye movement. The 
rotational nystagmus in both eyes was brought on by sudden head 
movements (Hallpike’s manoeuvre).
470
Neurology
15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
What is the likely diagnosis?
This history is typical of vestibular neuronitis, the aetiology of which is 
uncertain. It occurs at any age. Recovery generally takes place to a large 
extent over 2–3 weeks, although complete recovery might take several 
months. Cinnarizine and other vestibular suppressants give symptomatic 
relief but are best avoided in the long term.
Peripheral vestibular lesions are characterised by positional vertigo, 
i.e. influenced – often in a stereotyped way – by head movement. This 
is manifest in the Hallpike’s test (Information box; Fig. 15.5), which char­
acteristically reveals a rotational nystagmus.
Figure 15.5  Hallpike manoeuvre for diagnosis of Benign paroxysmal positional 
vertigo. 
a
b
Information
Hallpike’s test
The patient is sat on a couch with her eyes open and facing the 
side of the lesion. The examiner swings the patient backwards so 
that she is supine and her head is below horizontal. Nystagmus 
following a latent interval of a few seconds is commonly noted if 
the test is positive.
A central vestibular lesion is sometimes also positional but generally 
fails to habituate (i.e. on Hallpike’s testing, continued repetition of the 
same movement results in no reduction in the unpleasantness or in the 
nystagmus).
The definitive investigation to differentiate the two sites and to lateralise 
the lesion is by caloric tests.
471
Vertigo 15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Remember
•	 If there is a suspicion of a central lesion, an MRI scan should 
be performed
•	 Always check for associated deafness, tinnitus, cranial nerve 
lesions or cerebellar disturbance for early identification of a 
cerebellopontine angle lesion, most commonly an VIII nerve 
Schwannoma (‘acoustic neuroma’).
Main causes of vertigo
	 Peripheral:
•	 Vestibular neuronitis
•	 Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo
•	 Meniere’s syndrome
•	 Lesion of the VIII nerve, e.g. schwannoma
•	 Inner ear infections, infiltrations.
	 Central:
•	 Brainstem infarction, inflammation or demyelination
•	 Brainstem space-occupying lesion
•	 Posterior circulation TIA
•	 Migraine
•	 Complex partial seizures.
• Progress.  This patient’s vertigo settled after 5 days and has not 
recurred.
Case history (2)
A rather anxious woman presents to A&E with occasional, very 
brief blackouts and a long history of dizziness in crowds or when 
walking past fast-moving traffic. She prefers to avoid any sudden 
head movements, especially in certain directions and when turning 
in bed. Hallpike’s test is positive.
What is the likely diagnosis?
Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV). This is a relatively common 
disorder presenting with true vertigo, particularly on head movement. 
There are often vague ‘vestibular hypersensitivity’ symptoms, especially 
precipitated when there are conflicting visual inputs such as being station­
ary in a fast-moving visual field. Occasionally, the vertigo may be so 
sudden and dramatic as to present as a blackout.
Diagnosis
Largely clinical, although caloric testing may reveal mild dysfunction and 
MRI helps to exclude other conditions.
Management
Vestibular physiotherapy in the form of Cawthorne–Cooksey exercises 
(repetitive eye and head movements) and vestibular suppressants (e.g. 
472
Neurology
15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
β-histine). In some cases the cause is said to relate to fragments of calcifica­
tion in the semicircular canals; some specialists perform the Epley manoeu­
vre; a gentle manipulation and rotation of the head, in an attempt to 
dislodge these fragments away from the receptors. Some severe cases may 
be successfully treated by surgical section of the nerve to the ampulla of 
the posterior semicircular canal.
• Progress.  The patient has vestibular physiotherapy and was taught 
to continue the exercises at home. She continues to have dizziness in 
crowds but is better.
Case history (3)
A 70-year-old man presents with sudden onset of vertigo, 
vomiting, gait unsteadiness and left facial numbness.
On examination there is coarse unidirectional nystagmus, 
reduced left corneal reflex, left Horner’s syndrome, mild dysphagia 
and palatal deviation to the right, left-sided ataxia and impaired 
pin-prick on the right arm and leg.
This is a partial left lateral medullary syndrome due to a stroke in the 
territory of branches of the posterior or anterior inferior cerebellar arteries. 
The vertigo is usually not positional. Nystagmus of brainstem origin is 
often coarse, may be in any direction, often unidirectional and sometimes 
monocular.
Management
As for a stroke; see below.
STROKE
This is the sudden onset of focal neurological symptoms caused by inter­
ruption of the vascular supply to a region of the brain (ischaemic stroke) 
or intracerebral haemorrhage (haemorrhagic stroke). It is a common cause 
of mortality and physical disability.
Pathophysiology
Ischaemic stroke (infarction of central nervous tissue) results from 
cerebral infarction secondary to either arterial thromboembolism or 
emboli arising from the heart (e.g. in atrial fibrillation, mural thrombus 
after acute myocardial infarction, or rarely from vegetations in infective 
endocarditis).
Cerebral haemorrhage is often caused by microaneurysm rupture in 
small penetrating arteries in hypertensive patients. It can also occur by 
rupture of an aneurysm or arteriovenous malformation or by amyloid 
angiopathy in older patients. It accounts for ~15% of strokes.
Other causes of stroke in younger patients include arterial dissection, 
venous sinus thrombosis, thrombophilia, vasculitis and paradoxical 
embolisation through a patent foramen ovale.
473
Stroke 15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Case history (1)
A 70-year-old man presents with a two and a half hour history of 
right-sided arm, leg and face weakness and loss of speech. He 
has no headache and is mildly confused. He has a history of 
ischaemic heart disease.
On examination he has a global dysphasia, full visual fields, 
upper motor neurone distribution right facial weakness and dense 
weakness (UMN distribution) of the right side with absent reflexes 
and an upgoing plantar response on that side. His pulse was 
regular.
A clinical diagnosis of left middle cerebral artery ischaemic 
stroke is made.
What immediate action would you take in this case 
(i.e. cerebral infarct)?
	 Is thrombolysis to be considered? Yes. This stroke occurred less than 
180 min ago, therefore immediate diffuse weighted MRI (more sensi­
tive than CT) if available should be performed (Fig. 15.6). Unfortunately 
it was not available for this patient.
	 CT will distinguish haemorrhage immediately but infarction cannot be 
seen early on (Fig. 15.6a).
An early CT scan is also useful in stroke to check for subarachnoid or 
intracerebral haemorrhage and to help exclude other conditions that may 
masquerade as stroke, such as tumour, cerebral abscess and cerebral 
venous sinus thrombosis.
In this patient the CT showed no evidence of haemorrhage, therefore 
cerebral infarction was likely.
Figure 15.6   a) CT of a Middle cerebral infarct performed in the early stages 
showing subtle changes in right MCA territory. b) MRI of same region done at 
the same time as the CT showing the full extent of the damage. (Courtesy of Dr 
Paul Jarmon).
a
b
474
Neurology
15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Other immediate action
	 Give O2 by mask.
	 Do blood tests (Hb, WCC, U&Es, glucose, ESR).
	 Admit to multidisciplinary hospital stroke unit.
	 Check:
•	 Blood pressure: do not over-correct systemic hypertension in acute 
phase
•	 Swallowing: nil by mouth and IV fluids in any major stroke; assess 
properly by speech therapist
•	 Asymptomatic aspiration is common, therefore early referral to 
physiotherapy and other support services
•	 Treat for any concurrent infection, other illness or electrolyte 
disturbance.
	 If there is evidence of cerebral oedema and risk of coning, give IV 
mannitol.
Further management
	 Start aspirin 75 mg daily (24 hours after if tPA has been given).
	 Dipyridamole slow release.
	 Anti-coagulants if in atrial fibrillation.
	 Serum cholesterol: if fasting > 3.5 mmol/L (not in acute situation), give 
atorvastatin 10 mg daily.
• Progress.  This patient did not make an early clinical improvement 
as can occur after thrombolytic therapy (37%) but by 3 months he 
was ambulant, with a minor neurological deficit, and had improved 
speech.
Further reading
Wechsler LR. Intravenous thrombolytic therapy for acute ischemic stroke. 
N Engl J Med 2011; 364: 2138–2146.
He was given IV tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) after ruling out 
contraindications and consenting the patient as soon as possible (MINUTES 
COUNT). Total dose 0.9 mg/kg; maximum 90 mg. Give 10% of total dose 
over 1 min and the remainder over 60 min by infusion (thrombolytic 
therapy is recommended by Cochrane reviews).
(If there had been a contraindication to the therapy or if thrombolysis 
is not available, he would have been given 300 mg aspirin.)
Remember
•	 If cerebral haemorrhage is shown on CT: do NOT give any 
therapy that might interfere with clotting, e.g. aspirin or heparin
•	 If posterior fossa haemorrhage: refer to neurosurgeons for 
possible emergency clot evacuation.
475
Stroke 15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Transient ischaemic attack (TIA)
This is a transient episode of neurological dysfunction caused by focal 
brain, spinal cord or retinal ischaemia without acute infarction. The previ­
ous definition with its arbitrary 24-hour time scale is no longer used as the 
end point is now tissue injury.
Examples include:
	 anterior circulation – sudden transient loss of vision in one eye (amau­
rosis fugax), aphasia, hemiparesis; or
	 posterior circulation – diplopia, ataxia, hemisensory loss, dysarthria, 
transient global amnesia.
TIAs may herald the onset of stroke (one-quarter of patients developing 
stroke have had a TIA, usually within the previous week).
The ABCD2 score can help to stratify stroke risk in the first 2 days.
• 	Age > 60 years
1 point
• 	BP > 140 mmHg systolic and/or > 90 mmHg diastolic
1 point
• 	Clinical features:
  Unilateral weakness
2 points
  Isolated speech disturbance
1 point
  Other
0 points
• 	Duration of symptoms (min)
  > 60
2 points
  10–59
1 point
  < 10
0 points
• 	Diabetes
  Present
1 point
  Absent
0 points
A score of < 4 is associated with a minimal risk, whereas > 6 is high risk 
for a stroke within 7 days of a TIA.
	 If patients are at a high risk of a TIA, i.e. ABCD2 score > 4, or have had 
two recent TIAs, especially within the same vascular territory, they 
should be admitted for investigation and treatment (see below).
	 All patients should be referred to a TIA clinic and ideally seen within 
24 hours. Investigation and treatment should be regarded as urgent and 
should be completed within 10 days.
Investigations
	 Look for the source of the embolus – carotids (Doppler) and cardiac 
(echo).
	 ECG.
	 CT brain. Further investigation with MRI imaging of the brain and 
vascular system is often required.
Case history (2)
A 56-year-old man presents with weakness of the left hand and 
face lasting 3 hours and resolving gradually. He had a similar 
episode 3 months earlier with complete recovery. He is a type 2 
diabetic and a smoker. A Doppler ultrasound reveals that he has a 
90% stenosis at the origin of the right internal carotid artery. This 
is a transient ischaemic attack (TIA).
476
Neurology
15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Treatment
	 Antiplatelet therapy as for stroke (p. 477).
	 Modification of vascular risk factors – smoking, hypertension, statins as 
above.
	 Early endarterectomy for symptomatic 70–99% carotid artery stenosis 
(within 1 week if possible).
	 Anticoagulation for atrial fibrillation (p. 274) (aspirin 300 mg daily for 
2 weeks, then anticoagulate with heparin and warfarin or dabigatran) 
(see p. 276).
• Progress.  In this patient an endarterectomy was performed. He has 
made lifestyle changes and has been well over the last 2 years.
Further reading
Brott G, Hobson RW 2nd, Howard G et al. Stenting versus endarterectomy 
for treatment of carotid artery stenosis. N Engl J Med 2010; 363: 11–23.
Rothwell PM, Algra A, Amarenco P. Medical treatment in acute and long-
term secondary prevention after transient ischaemic attack and ischae­
mic stroke. Lancet 2011; 377: 1681–1692.
Case history (3)
A 40-year-old man presents with a 1-week history of headache 
followed by loss of speech and a right hemiparesis. His weakness 
worsens over the next 24 h and he becomes confused. A CT scan 
is normal at this time. A subsequent MRI scan reveals an infarct in 
the left frontal lobe with small haemorrhages elsewhere in the 
hemispheres. His ESR and autoantibodies are normal. CSF 
analysis reveals 35 lymphocytes/mm3 but is otherwise normal. A 
right frontal brain biopsy reveals primary cerebral granulomatous 
angiitis (a rare necrotising inflammation with granulomatous 
vasculitis of the brain and meningeal vessels). He is treated with 
high-dose steroids and cyclophosphamide.
What are the causes of strokes in this young age group?
In the younger age group, other causes of stroke, such as vasculitis or 
structural cardiac lesions, occur. In many of these conditions, specific treat­
ment is indicated. Cerebral vasculitis is difficult to diagnose because sys­
temic inflammatory markers may be normal. The CSF and intra-arterial 
angiography are sometimes also normal. Even a cerebral/meningeal 
biopsy may miss involved vessels because the condition is often patchy.
Investigations
Additional investigations in the younger age group:
•	 MRI head
•	 Autoantibodies, including anti-cardiolipin, ANCA
•	 Lupus anti-coagulant
•	 Serum electrophoresis
477
Subdural haemorrhage 15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
• Progress.  This patient was initially treated with high dose steroids 
and cyclophosphamide. The steroids were reduced gradually and 
oral cyclophosphamide continued for 6 months.
Further reading
Cramer SC. Brain Repair after Stroke. N Engl J Med 2010; 362: 1827–1829.
SUBDURAL HAEMORRHAGE
This is caused by venous bleeding in the subdural space from rupture of 
a vein. It usually follows a head injury, often trivial.
Investigations (continued)
•	 Serum lactate/pyruvate
•	 Urine for protein and casts
•	 Urine homocysteine
•	 Echocardiogram
•	 24-h ECG
•	 Consider CSF analysis
Case history
A 77-year-old woman was admitted 2 weeks previously with failure 
to manage at home alone. There had been a 2-year history of 
cognitive decline that seemed to have accelerated to precipitate 
the admission.
On examination, she was confused, unable to repeat a five-digit 
number, disorientated and had an upgoing left plantar. Her Glasgow 
Coma Score (GCS, p. 492) was 12.
• Diagnosis.  A CT scan revealed bilateral subdural haematomas 
(Fig. 15.7).
Subdural haemorrhage can present rather acutely following a fall with 
sudden onset of headache and diminished consciousness. The diagnostic 
challenge lies in identifying other cases that present vaguely without focal 
signs and with no history of trauma. A number of factors are associated 
with increased risk of apparently spontaneous subdural haemorrhage:
	 old age
	 cerebral atrophy, dementia
	 alcohol excess, general debility
	 bleeding diathesis/anticoagulant therapy
	 intracranial lesion such as tumour
	 brain surgery, especially ventricular shunt insertion for normal pressure 
hydrocephalus.
Management
The management of subdural haematomas depends on their size and the 
severity of symptoms. Small ones may simply be managed conservatively 
478
Neurology
15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Case history
A 75-year-old man with Parkinson’s disease presented with 
uncontrollable gyrating movements of his arms and legs. On 
obtaining a detailed history it transpired that he was on levodopa 
therapy. This had recently been increased to co-careldopa 50/200 
(a mixture of carbidopa and levodopa) three tablets × 4 daily.
with follow-up CT scanning. Larger or more acutely symptomatic subdur­
als should be surgically evacuated.
• Progress.  This patient had an acute subdural haemorrhage which 
precipitated her deterioration. This was managed surgically with 
overall treatment in her cognitive state.
PARKINSON’S DISEASE
Parkinson’s disease is a neurodegenerative disorder affecting nigrostriatal 
dopaminergic cells, as well as other brain cells.
It causes a combination of tremor, rigidity and akinesia, developing 
slowly over many months or years.
Figure 15.7  Bilateral subdural haematomas. a) CT scan b) MR (T1). 
a
b
What is the problem?
This patient has dyskinesia – a common, late side effect of levodopa (LD) 
therapy for parkinsonism. About 10% of patients per year of therapy will 
develop such dyskinesias, involving uncontrollable choreoathetoid move­
ments and dystonic posturing. At this stage in the illness, the severity of 
dyskinesia is dose dependent and so a balance has to be struck between 
‘off’ symptoms of bradykinesia and rigidity and ‘on’ dyskinetic symptoms. 
In this case, the co-careldopa was prescribed at too high a dose.
479
Parkinson’s disease 15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
When commencing levodopa therapy, patients are generally started on 
co-careldopa 25/100 or co-beneldopa (100 mg/25 mg tablets: a mixture of 
benserazide hydrochloride and levodopa in proportions of 1 : 4) × 3 daily. 
These drugs consist of a combination of levodopa and a peripheral DOPA 
decarboxylase inhibitor (DDI) to prevent inappropriate peripheral activa­
tion to dopamine. The dose of these drugs can be gradually increased in 
amount and frequency as the underlying disease worsens.
Alternatively, patients may receive a controlled-release preparation; 
co-careldopa 50/200 has nearly twice the bioavailable strength of straight 
careldopa but the co-beneldopa (25/1000) preparation is a more equivalent 
dose. The controlled release preparations may be given once at night to 
help with nocturnal or early morning ‘off’ symptoms, or may be given two 
to three times a day alone or in combination with straight levodopa in an 
effort to smoothen fluctuating symptoms.
Information
Some physicians start off with controlled release preparations. 
This is to minimise dose fluctuations that may result in dyskinesias 
later in the course of the disease, but there is no clear evidence 
for this protective effect.
Occasionally, dyskinesias occur in relation to dramatic fluctuations in 
levodopa levels rather than to high peak levels; the solution in this situa­
tion is to place the patient on a higher dose of longer-acting medication.
Other treatment available
	 Exercise and physiotherapy are useful.
	 Initiate pharmacological treatment when there is impairment/disability 
resulting from symptoms.
	 Early treatment with monoamine oxidase B (MAOB) inhibitors (sele­
giline or rasagiline) may delay the need for more definitive dopamine 
replacement therapy by several months.
	 Dopamine agonists (DAs) are used in patients below 70 years. Although 
they are less effective and less well tolerated than LD, they are also 
associated with fewer long-term motor complications. 
	 In older patients (i.e. more severely affected at diagnosis) start LD + DDI 
(co-beneldopa or co-careldopa) because of fewer side effects.
	 Non-ergot DAs (pramipexole and ropinirole oral 3 times daily, or once 
daily with slow-release formulations, rotigotine via transdermal patch) 
are used in preference to ergot-derived drugs.
	 All patients with PD will eventually require treatment with LD, often 
in combination with a DA. A typical starting dose is 50 mg of LD (e.g. 
co-careldopa 62.5 mg) 3 times daily, increasing after 1 week to 100 mg 
3 times daily.
• Progress.  This patient was put on a lower dose of co-careldopa and 
the dyskinesia settled.
Further reading
Lees AJ, Hardy J, Revesz T. Parkinson’s disease. Lancet 2009; 373: 
2055–2066.
480
Neurology
15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS (MS)
MS is an autoimmune disease of unknown aetiology. It causes plaques of 
demyelination throughout the brain and spinal cord. Acute relapses are 
caused by focal inflammatory demyelination which causes a conduction 
block. These plaques can be demonstrated using an MRI scan (Fig. 15.8).
Case history (1)
A 28-year-old man presents with several days of pain and 
progressive loss of vision in one eye.
Examination showed diminished visual acuity 6/36 and disc 
swelling (papilloedema). He had previously had an episode of 
difficulty in walking and urinary incontinence which had recovered 
fully after several weeks.
What is the problem with his eyes?
The swelling of the disc, along with diminished visual acuity, suggests 
optic neuritis as other causes of papilloedema do not usually give visual 
disturbance. Optic neuritis is a common early presentation of multiple 
sclerosis (MS). The previous history suggesting an episode of transverse 
myelitis (inflammation of the cord) indicates dissociation in space and 
time, providing strong clinical support for the diagnosis of multiple 
sclerosis.
What action would you take?
	 An MRI should be performed to look for demyelinating lesions of MS.
	 CSF analysis for oligoclonal bands is usually unnecessary to further 
corroborate the diagnosis.
	 Visual evoked potentials are likely to be delayed in the affected eye 
but may also reveal subclinical involvement of the other eye, providing 
evidence for dissociation in space.
Figure 15.8  Multiple sclerosis – showing plaques in the posterior column and 
lateral corticospinal tracts. (Courtesy of the late Ian MacDonald).
481
Multiple sclerosis (MS) 15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Case history (2)
A previously well 25-year-old woman develops double vision, 
vertigo, unsteadiness, as well as speech and swallowing problems 
over 2 days. She is admitted to hospital where she rapidly 
deteriorates, becoming confused and hypoxic. She requires 
ventilatory support. An MRI scan reveals a number of small 
bilateral periventricular white matter lesions and lesions in the 
brainstem and cerebellar peduncles. She is given intravenous 
methylprednisolone and recovers well over the next 2 weeks apart 
from residual mild vertigo and intermittent diplopia.
	 Medication. Recovery after an episode of optic neuritis is aided by 
intravenous methylprednisolone, e.g. 1 g/day for 3 days.
• Progress.  This patient’s vision improved following his steroid 
therapy. However, the MRI showed demyelinating lesions of MS and 
he is being followed up in the Neurology Clinic.
Remember
Multiple sclerosis may sometimes present dramatically as a 
brainstem syndrome with central respiratory problems and rapid 
severe bulbar failure. Early supportive management and steroids is 
essential in such cases. There may be excellent recovery following 
the relapse. Patients with known MS who suffer a relapse involving 
bulbar function or dysarthria should similarly be carefully observed.
Case history (3)
A patient with known multiple sclerosis with frequent severe 
relapses, bladder instability and incontinence and painful leg 
spasms wonders if anything can be done for her incurable 
condition.
What would you suggest?
Many forms of treatment have been marketed, but none has been shown 
to improve outcome.
	 Acute relapses. Short courses of steroids, such as IV methylprednisolone 
1g/day for 3 days or high-dose oral steroids, are used widely in relapses 
and do sometimes reduce severity. They do not influence long-term 
outcome.
	 Preventing relapse and disability. Beta-interferon (both INF β-1b and β-1a) 
by self-administered injection is used in relapsing and remitting disease. 
This is defined as at least two attacks of neurological dysfunction over 
the previous 2 or 3 years followed by a reasonable recovery. IFN β1b is 
also used for secondary progressive MS. Interferon certainly reduces 
relapse rate in some patients and prevents an increase in lesions seen 
482
Neurology
15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
on MRI. Unwanted effects are flu-like symptoms and irritation at injec­
tion sites. Beta-interferons are expensive.
	 Glatiramer acetate, an immunomodulator, has been shown to reduce 
relapse frequency in ambulatory patients with relapsing remitting MS 
– similar to beta-interferon.
	 Natalizumab is a monoclonal antibody which inhibits migration of leu­
cocytes into the central nervous system by inhibitory α-4 integrins 
found on the surface of lymphocytes and monocytes. It is useful in 
severe, relapsing remitting MS that is unresponsive to other treatments. 
It is associated with a risk of progressive multifocal leucoencephalopa­
thy (PML) and all patients need close surveillance for this and hyper­
sensitivity reactions.
	 Alemtuzumab, an anti-CD52 monoclonal antibody that destroys T- and 
B-cells, reduces disease activity.
	 Mitoxantrone is used in primary progressive MS in specialist centres. It 
is potentially cardiotoxic and myelosuppressive.
	 New oral disease modifying drugs, e.g. fingolimod, a sphingosine-1-phos­
phate receptor modulator, and cladribine (both given orally), an immu­
nomodulator of lymphocytes, have shown benefit in ongoing trials.
• Progress.  This patient was admitted for reassessment. She was 
treated with baclofen for her spasms and spasticity and gabapentin 
for neuropathic pain. An anti-muscarinic (oxybutin) was tried for her 
urinary problems but eventually she was taught to self-catheterise 
herself intermittently. The physiotherapists, occupational therapists 
and a social worker were asked to review her. Disease modifying 
therapy was thought to be inappropriate for her advanced 
condition.
Further reading
Chataway J, Miller DH. Multiple sclerosis – quenching the flames of 
inflammation. Lancet 2011; 378: 1759–1760.
Frohman EM, Wingerchuk DM. Transverse Myelitis. N Engl J Med 2010; 
363: 564–572.
Pelletier D, Hafler DA. Fingolimod for multiple sclerosis. New Engl J Med 
2012; 366: 339–347.
ENCEPHALITIS
This is an inflammation of the brain parenchyma which is often due to a 
virus.
Case history (1)
A 45-year-old man presents with a one week history of malaise, 
followed by increasing confusion, headache, meningism and a 
seizure.
On examination he was confused, with a Glasgow Coma Score 
of 10. He had fever, neck stiffness and hyper-reflexia of the left 
arm and leg.
• Diagnosis.  A tentative diagnosis of an encephalitis was made.
483
Encephalitis 15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
What action would you take?
	 Supportive care: including respiratory support if necessary.
	 Treatment of any seizures: ictal and post-ictal states are a reversible 
element of changes in conscious level.
	 CT scan showed no space-occupying lesion.
	 Lumbar puncture: there was a lymphocytosis.
	 Serology and PCR: for likely aetiological agents (see below).
	 If there is even a remote possibility that the cause is HSV1, start 
aciclovir immediately, intravenous 10 mg/kg × 3 daily. HSV is treata­
ble; most other causes are not (Box 15.1). Patients have been known to 
relapse and respond to further treatment.
Box 15.1  Causes of encephalitis/meningoencephalitis
•	 Viral include:
–	 Herpes simplex (HSV 1 and 2)
–	 Measles
–	 Rubella
–	 EBV
–	 VZV
–	 Echo
–	 Coxsackie
–	 CMV
–	 HIV
–	 Japanese B (most common worldwide)
–	 Tick-borne encephalitis
–	 Post-viral: acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM).
•	 Bacterial include:
–	 Legionnaire’s
–	 Mycoplasma
–	 Listeria
–	 Tuberculosis.
In immunocompromised people think of unusual organisms, 
e.g. fungal.
Remember
•	 Most cases of viral encephalitis present in the same way, the 
symptoms being milder than those for a bacterial meningitis. 
In many cases the viral cause can be worked out from the 
epidemiological pattern, e.g. from the geographical area where 
the disease was contracted and the season of the year.
•	 The term ‘encephalitis’ encompasses any acute febrile illness, 
perhaps with some meningeal involvement, that is accompanied 
by acute generalised or focal cerebral disturbance. Thus there 
is considerable overlap with meningitis.
484
Neurology
15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
• Progress.  The MRI was highly suggestive of an HSV1 encephalitis 
and this was confirmed by serology and PCR. The patient was treated 
with IV aciclovir. Although he survived he was left with a significant 
residual deficit. He was sent for rehabilitation. He had problems with 
his memory, particularly common following HSV1 encephalitis.
Further investigations
•	 An MRI scan showed temporal oedema
•	 An EEG excluded generalised or complex partial status 
epilepticus
•	 If there is a possibility of immunosuppression (as a result of 
AIDS, lymphoproliferative disorders or iatrogenic) this should be 
investigated
Remember
•	 All cases of encephalitis in developed countries should be given 
aciclovir
•	 HSV is treatable; most other causes are not.
Case history (2)
A 25-year-old woman has an upper respiratory tract infection. 
Following recovery she becomes drowsy over a period of 48 h.
On examination she is apyrexial with a GCS of 9. She has 
abnormal eye movements and gaze-evoked nystagmus. There is 
marked spasticity in the limbs.
Investigations. CT shows effacement of cerebral sulci but it 
is safe to do a lumbar puncture. Lumbar puncture reveals 40 
lymphocytes/mm3. She requires intubation to protect the airway.
A provisional diagnosis of HSV1 encephalitis is made.
Follow-on. A subsequent MRI scan reveals diffuse and 
confluent T2 hyperintensities in the periventricular white matter, in 
the brainstem and also within cerebral grey matter.
What is the diagnosis?
Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM). This is considered to be a 
post-viral (sometimes post-mycoplasma), mainly white matter inflamma­
tory condition, although the distinction from a direct viral encephalitis 
may be blurred. At the other end of the scale, the distinction from a severe 
initial attack of multiple sclerosis might also be unclear, although the latter 
attack is usually milder, more likely to be associated with CSF oligoclonal 
bands, and is characterised in retrospect with repeated attacks. However, 
treatment of both ADEM and multiple sclerosis attacks is similar, namely 
485
Falls 15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
with high doses of steroids. Because of the nature of presentation of 
ADEM, anti-virals are usually also given.
• Progress.  She is treated with intravenous methylprednisolone fol­
lowed by a course of oral steroids and made a good recovery after 
several weeks, with some residual pyramidal gait difficulty.
FALLS
Information
Steele–Richardson syndrome
•	 Parkinsonism
•	 Axial rigidity
•	 Dementia
•	 Defective upward-and-lateral gaze
Case history
A 70-year-old man presents with recurrent falls. On examination 
he has a rigid increase in tone, worse in the trunk than the limbs, 
marked bradykinesia and extreme mental slowness. He is unable 
to move his eyes vertical or laterally. He walks with a rather 
upright gait. He is thought to have Parkinson’s disease but has 
had a poor response to levodopa.
What is the diagnosis?
This man has progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP; also known as Steele–
Richardson syndrome). Parkinson’s disease usually results in falls late on 
in the disease. Early falls should lead to suspicion of PSP or multisystem 
atrophy (which does not cause early cognitive problems).
Some common causes of falls are listed below. Some simply relate to 
stance or gait difficulties.
Causes of falls
Preserved consciousness:
Loss of consciousness:
•	 Leg weakness
•	 Spasticity
•	 Extrapyramidal syndromes
•	 Ataxia, periodic ataxia
•	 Vertigo
•	 Drop attacks
•	 Cataplexy
•	 Epilepsy, myoclonus
•	 Epilepsy
•	 Faint
•	 Syncope (cardiac or vascular 
insufficiency)
•	 Vertebrobasilar TIA
•	 Intermittent hydrocephalus
•	 Metabolic e.g. hypoglycaemia
•	 Toxic encephalopathy
•	 Other encephalopathies.
486
Neurology
15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
• Progress.  This patient continued to deteriorate and died of pneu­
monia 6 months later.
Case history
A 65-year-old woman is worried she has epilepsy. She suffers 
repeated falls when walking outside. There is no warning before 
falling, she tends to graze her knees and hands and recovers 
immediately in a state of embarrassment. If she loses 
consciousness at all, it could only be for a split second because 
she is certainly aware when she hits the ground.
There is no abnormality on examination.
What is the diagnosis?
The diagnosis is drop attacks. These are benign episodes that commonly 
occur in middle-aged to elderly women. There is no loss of consciousness 
and they are not considered epileptic (see p. 503). They are due to sudden 
changes in lower limb tone, presumably brainstem in origin.
• Progress.  This patient was reassured that she did not have epilepsy 
and was helped by using a walking stick.
Further reading
Dykes PC, Carroll DL, Hurley A et al. Fall prevention in acute care hospi­
tals. JAMA 2010; 304(17): 1912–1918.
TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY
Case history (1)
A 25-year-old man is knocked unconscious by a blow from a 
sledgehammer. He regains consciousness after a few minutes and 
attends A&E. He is nauseated and in pain but reasonably alert, 
with a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS; Table 15.3) of 14. A skull X-ray 
shows a linear skull vault fracture. After being reasonably well for 
many hours his conscious level rapidly deteriorates to a GCS of 5. 
A subsequent CT scan reveals a large extradural blood collection 
that requires emergency drainage by craniotomy.
Extradural haemorrhage is a serious secondary effect of head injury. 
These bleeds occur into a tight space, resulting in a rather long lucid inter­
val as the blood slowly accumulates. CT reveals a convex hyperdense 
collection in the acute phase. By contrast, subdural haemorrhages bleed 
more freely into a more easily opened space so the shape is concave on CT 
and there is little lucid interval.
487
General management of traumatic injuries 15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Score
Eye opening (E)
Spontaneous
4
To speech
3
To pain
2
No response
1
Motor response (M)
Obeys
6
Localises
5
Withdraws
4
Flexion
3
Extension
2
No response
1
Verbal response (V)
Orientated
5
Confused conversation
4
Inappropriate words
3
Incomprehensible sounds
2
No response
1
Glasgow Coma Scale = E + M + V (GCS minimum = 3; maximum = 15)
Table 15.3  The Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS)
• Progress.  Following his craniotomy and drainage, he gradually 
recovered over the next few days. However, 2–3 weeks later he was 
still amnesic and needed constant attention. He is being followed up 
by the neurologists.
GENERAL MANAGEMENT OF TRAUMATIC INJURIES
Remember
•	 Always carefully monitor head injuries and record changes in 
GCS rather than simply considering one value in isolation
•	 The result of secondary swelling by haemorrhage or oedema 
(the latter is common in children) is raised intracranial pressure 
(ICP) leading to reduced perfusion pressure and coning.
Effects and complications of traumatic brain injury
	 Primary effects:
•	 Diffuse axonal injury
•	 Contusion
488
Neurology
15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
•	 Laceration
•	 Vascular lesions.
	 Secondary effects:
•	 Extradural haemorrhage
•	 Subdural haemorrhage
•	 CSF leak, infection
•	 Hydrocephalus
•	 Compromised airway, respiration
•	 Hypotension.
	 Late sequelae:
•	 Chronic daily headache
•	 Post-traumatic stress disorder: rare
•	 Vertigo
•	 Cognitive impairment.
Information
Post-traumatic amnesia of over 24 h indicates severe brain injury.
What action would you take in a patient with a head injury?
	 Attend first to any secondary or concomitant general problems, i.e. 
resuscitation, correct hypovolaemic shock, hypotension or compro­
mised airway.
	 Assess severity, using circumstances of injury and period of amnesia as 
a guide.
	 Establish whether there is anterograde amnesia: the inability to form 
memories from the time of injury to the time of continuous normal 
memory, is the most accurate guide.
	 Brainstem damage in head injury can affect central respiratory drive, 
bulbar function and pressor responses.
	 Regular GCS measurements; below 5 at 24 h implies severe injury and 
50% of such patients die.
	 Do CT scan (see Box 15.2).
How would you manage the following problems?
	 If the patient is deteriorating, or has evidence of raised ICP: consider 
insertion of a bolt, which is simply a tube into the ventricle through 
which ICP can be recorded.
	 If ICP > 20 mmHg: need to treat; give enough mannitol IV to raise the 
plasma osmolality to 300 to decrease the intracranial pressure. However, 
the benefits of mannitol are still controversial. Mannitol also has poorly 
understood neuroprotective effects. Hyperventilation with IPPV will 
also lower the ICP.
	 If the patient has haemorrhages: a craniotomy may be indicated.
Follow-up
Check for continued improvement in the weeks subsequent to the head 
injury. At 2–3 weeks post-injury, the development of hydrocephalus is a 
major complication.
489
Severe brain injury 15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Case history (1)
Your patient has had a severe hypoxic cerebral episode following 
a cardiac arrest. He is currently stable from a cardiac point of view 
but comatose (GCS 5) and requiring ventilatory support on ITU. He 
has been given 24 hours of induced hypothermia 32–34°. The ITU 
staff and the patient’s relatives want an indication as to the 
likelihood of useful recovery.
Case history (2)
A 30-year-old man falls from a second-storey building and is 
immediately unconscious. He is admitted comatose, GCS 5, 
although he is breathing spontaneously. There are no external 
injuries and CT scan of the head is normal. He does not regain 
consciousness.
Box 15.2  NICE Guidelines for head injuries
Criteria for immediate request for CT scan of the head (adults)
•	 GCS less than 13 on initial assessment in the emergency 
department
•	 GCS less than 15 at 2 hours after injury on assessment in the 
emergency department
•	 Suspected open or depressed skull fracture
•	 Any sign of basal skull fracture (haemotympanium, ‘panda’ eyes, 
cerebrospinal fluid leakage from the ear or nose, Battle’s sign)
•	 Post-traumatic seizure
•	 Focal neurological deficit
•	 More than one episode of vomiting
•	 Amnesia for events more than 30 minutes before impact.
Diffuse axonal injury is the primary effect of traumatic brain injury and 
a common cause of vegetative state. There is usually immediate loss of 
consciousness followed by prolonged coma.
Milder axonal injury is reversible, e.g. in concussion. This damage 
occurs with brain accelerations or decelerations such as hitting the floor 
or wall, rather than by a direct blow to the head. The mechanism of 
damage is due to stretching of axons causing Ca2+ entry and neurofilament 
damage, interrupting axonal transport over the next 12 h. Certain areas are 
particularly vulnerable, such as the parasagittal white matter, internal 
capsule, cerebellar peduncles, posterior corpus callosum and dorsolateral 
midbrain.
• Progress.  This patient was in a coma for a week and never 
recovered. Consent was obtained for his organs to be used for 
transplantation.
SEVERE BRAIN INJURY
490
Neurology
15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
What action would you take?
First, check for a remediable cause of coma or any confounding factors 
worsening the patient’s responsiveness (see Investigations box). For 
example:
	 Brain imaging may reveal a potentially treatable but unsuspected condi­
tion, possibly additional to the primary pathology, such as subdural or 
intracerebral haemorrhage or a hydrocephalus.
	 An EEG may show abnormalities indicative of an unsuspected meta­
bolic encephalopathy or subclinical seizure activity.
	 The patient may still be under the influence of long-acting anaesthetic 
agents or other sedative drugs.
Investigations
•	 Brain imaging
•	 EEG
•	 Recent drug history
•	 Electrolyte imbalance
•	 Sepsis
•	 Ongoing low cardiac output
Aspects of examination to assess routinely
	 Glasgow Coma Scale, Table 15.3, p. 487.
	 Eye movements:
•	 Following, roving, conjugate
•	 Optokinetic nystagmus (following a moving grid pattern)
•	 Vertical and horizontal doll’s head movement
	 Pupils
	 Corneal reflexes
	 Bulbar function: is he tolerating the ET tube?
	 Respiratory function: level of ventilator support
	 Tone and reflexes
	 General examination, e.g. chest, infected pressure sores, abdominal 
guarding.
What are your prognostic indicators?
There are some prognostic values, depending on the time after the initial 
cerebral insult. The following criteria indicate poor outcome:
	 Absent or extensor plantar response 72 hours after cerebral insult.
	 Absent pupillary or corneal reflexes 72 hours after cerebral insult.
In general, every case must be assessed on its merits, especially with regard 
to the nature of the original insult and whether it was a discrete event or 
likely to be resulting in ongoing brain injury.
Note: relatives should not be given conflicting or inaccurate 
information.
Beware
Determination of brain death is made only by the appropriate consultant 
specialists who assess – on separate occasions – the various brainstem 
491
Meningitis 15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
reflexes and responses listed under ‘Aspects of examination’, above. 
The nature of the insult must be clear and remediable causes must 
be excluded. Because the criteria for brain death are heavily weighted 
towards brainstem function and, in the UK, EEG corroboration is not 
required, the locked-in syndrome (Table 15.4) should be excluded. In this 
state, a severe pontine lesion prevents access to or from the outside world. 
The only signs of relatively spared higher-level function may be preserved 
vertical optokinetic nystagmus or eye following, and preserved vertical 
doll’s eye reflexes.
MENINGITIS
Case history (1)
A 55-year-old, a heavy alcohol user is brought to A&E with 
headache, confusion and a high fever.
On examination he is found to be photophobic and have neck 
stiffness. He is thought by the A&E staff to have meningitis and is 
immediately given IV benzylpenicillin because they were unclear 
about the most likely organism. You are called urgently to A&E.
Remember
Give immediate penicillin if meningococcal meningitis suspected.
What would you do?
You quickly check the neurological signs and agree this is meningitis. You 
also note that there is no purpuric rash of meningococcal septicaemia. You 
try and see his fundi but are unsure whether papilloedema is present. 
You are worried about doing a lumbar puncture because he is semi-
conscious and you are concerned about the possibility of ‘coning’. You 
arrange an immediate CT scan, which is normal. You proceed with a 
lumbar puncture and the CSF, which is turbid, is sent urgently to the 
microbiologists.
What do you do next?
Investigations
•	 Blood culture
•	 CXR
This man has meningitis, presumably bacterial. You recheck for purpu­
ric spots of meningococcal meningitis.
492
Neurology
15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Condition
Vegetative
Minimally conscious
Locked-in syndrome
Coma
Brain death
Awareness
Absent
Present
Present
Absent
Absent
Sleep–wake 
cycle
Present
Present
Present
Absent
Absent
Response to 
noxious stimuli
±
Present
Present (in eyes only)
±
Absent
Glasgow Coma 
Scale score
E4, M1–4, V1–2
E4, M1–5, V1–4
E4, M1, V1
E1–2, M1–4, V1–2
E1, M1–3, V1
Motor function
No purposeful 
movement
Some consistent or 
inconsistent verbal or 
purposeful motor behaviour
Volitional vertical eye 
movements or 
eyeblink preserved
No purposeful 
movement
None or only reflex 
spinal movement
Respiratory 
function EEG 
activity
Typically preserved
Typically preserved
Typically preserved
Variable 
Typically slow wave 
activity
Absent
Typically slow wave 
activity
Insufficient data
Typically normal
Typically absent
Cerebral 
metabolism 
(PET)
Severely reduced
Insufficient data
Mildly reduced
Moderately to 
severely reduced
Severely reduced 
or absent
Prognosis
Varies: usually 
continued vegetative 
state or death
Varies
Depends on cause but 
full recovery unlikely
Recovery, vegetative 
state, or death within 
weeks
Already dead
NB: EEG and measures of cerebral metabolism are not required to make these clinical diagnoses. EEG, electroencephalography; PET, positron 
emission tomography; E, eye opening; M, motor response; V, verbal response.
From: The vegetative state: guidance on diagnosis and management. Clinical Medicine 2003; 3: 251.
Table 15.4  Differentiation diagnosis of the vegetative state
493
Meningitis 15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Information
Lumbar puncture
This should be performed with sterile measures. Check no 
papilloedema:
•	 Obtain patient consent
•	 Place patient in lateral decubitus position
•	 Identify L4–5 interspace (intersection of imaginary line between 
iliac crests and spine)
•	 Clean area with antiseptic, e.g. chlorhexidine
•	 Local anaesthetic (2% lidocaine) into skin and subcutaneous 
tissue
•	 Insert lumbar puncture spinal needle (bevel upwards) into skin 
over L4–5 interspace horizontally and slightly towards the head
•	 When needle penetrates the dura mater (slight decrease in 
resistance is felt), withdraw stylet and allow a few drops of CSF 
to escape
•	 Measure CSF pressure by connecting manometer to needle 
(normal CSF pressure is 60–150 mmH2O); it rises and falls with 
respiration and heart beat
•	 Collect CSF in three sterile tubes (2 mL per tube)
•	 Send to laboratory. Note if clear, cloudy, yellow (xanthochromic) 
or red
•	 Remove needle and apply sterile dressing
•	 Patient should lie horizontal for 4 h to avoid headache. 
Analgesics might be required.
Indications and contraindications are shown in Table 15.5.
The CSF results sent through are:
	 Protein: 1.5 g/L (normal range 0.2–0.4 g/L)
	 Glucose: 1.5 mmol/L
	 Leucocytes: 500/mm3
	 Pneumococcus is seen on Gram stain.
Diagnosis
Pneumococcal meningitis. You immediately start treatment with IV cefo­
taxime 8 g daily in four divided doses because there is a high incidence of 
penicillin-resistant pneumococcus (Table 15.6).
Further reading
Thigpen MC, Whitney CG, Messonnier NE et al. Bacterial meningitis in 
the United States, 1998–2007. N Engl J Med 2011; 364: 2016–2025.
Causes of meningitis
	 Bacterial:
•	 Meningococcus
•	 Pneumococcus
•	 Listeria spp.
•	 Staphylococcus aureus
•	 E. coli
•	 Pseudomonas spp.
494
Neurology
15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Indications
Contraindications
Diagnosis of meningitis, 
encephalitis and subarachnoid 
haemorrhage (sometimes)
Raised intracranial pressure
Measurement of CSF pressure, 
e.g. for idiopathic, intracranial 
hypertension (IIH)
Local infections at site of 
puncture area
Removal of CSF therapeutically 
(IIH)
Platelet count < 40 × 109/L
Diagnosis of conditions, e.g. 
neoplastic involvement
Mass lesion in brain or spinal cord
Table 15.5  Indications and contraindications for lumbar puncture
Organism
First choice
Alternative
Unknown
Cefotaxime
Benzylpenicillin and 
cefotaxime
Meningococcus
Benzylpenicillin
Cefotaxime
Pneumococcus
Cefotaxime
Penicillin if organism 
sensitive
Haemophilus
Cefotaxime
Chloramphenicol
Listeria
Amoxicillin + gentamicin
This table shows the value of cefotaxime in clinical practice.
Table 15.6  Treatment regimens: antibiotics and acute 
bacterial meningitis
	 Viral:
•	 Enteroviruses
•	 Mumps (meningoencephalitides).
	 Atypical:
•	 Tuberculosis
•	 Cryptococcus
•	 Leptospirosis.
	 Non-infective:
•	 Subarachnoid haemorrhage
•	 Chemical meningitis.
	 Recurrent:
•	 Nasal sinus fistula
•	 Traumatic CSF leak
•	 Epstein–Barr virus
•	 Sarcoidosis, Behçet’s
•	 Mollaret’s meningitis (HSV type 2).
	 Pneumococcal meningitis most commonly occurs in the debilitated or 
in those with a chest or sinus infection, valvular disease, splenectomy 
or a fistula from the paranasal air sinuses to the brain.
	 Meningococcal meningitis (see also p. 7) occurs in epidemics and is 
sometimes associated with a petechial or purpuric rash and has a very 
495
Meningitis 15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
rapid evolution. It is seen in young adults. Nasopharyngeal swab culture 
is useful for typing meningococcus and haemophilus (see below).
	 Staphylococcus aureus meningitis generally occurs in the context of 
systemic infection, abscesses or neurosurgical procedures.
	 Pseudomonas and other Gram-negative enterobacillae are usually a 
consequence of surgical access to the CSF.
	 Listeria meningitis is quite common. It should be treated with amoxicil­
lin and gentamicin. It is also associated with an encephalitis.
	 Haemophilus influenzae type B used to be extremely common but has 
been substantially reduced in many countries by immunisation (Hib 
vaccine) in children.
• Progress.  This man made an excellent recovery from his pneumo­
coccal meningitis.
What action would you take?
	 Routine blood tests.
	 CXR: may show evidence of TB.
	 CT scan: an immediate scan is done because with his confusion and 
possible raised intracranial pressure coning is a possibility following 
lumbar puncture. CT scan normal.
	 Lumbar puncture.
The CSF results (Table 15.7) sent back to your house officer are:
Case history (2)
A 22-year-old Asian man is admitted from A&E with an insidious 
2-week history of malaise, headaches and marked confusion. On 
examination he is pyrexial, drowsy, has neck stiffness and has 
upgoing plantar responses. A presumptive diagnosis of 
tuberculous meningitis is made.
Normal
Viral
Pyogenic
Tuberculosis
Appearance
Crystal 
clear
Clear/turbid
Turbid/
purulent
Turbid/
viscous
Mononuclear 
cells
< 5 mm3
10–100 mm3
< 50 mm3
100–300 mm3
Polymorph 
cells
Nil
Nil*
200–300/
mm3
0–200/mm3
Protein
0.2–0.4 g/L
0.4–0.8 g/L
0.5–2.0 g/L
0.5–3.0 g/L
Glucose
2/3 to 1/2 
blood 
glucose
> 1/2 blood 
glucose
< 1/2 blood 
glucose
< 1/3 blood 
glucose
*Some polymorph cells may be seen in the early stages of viral meningitis 
and encephalitis.
Reprinted from Kumar and Clark Clinical Medicine 8th edn, 2012, by 
permission of the publisher Elsevier.
Table 15.7  Typical changes in the CSF in meningitis
496
Neurology
15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
•	 Glucose 1.8 mmol/L (blood level 6.5, i.e. low glucose)
•	 Protein 2.3 g/L (very high protein)
•	 250 white cells (70% lymphocytes).
Note: the CSF protein can be so high as to cause the formation of a fine clot 
(‘spider web’).
Note: tubercle bacilli are only occasionally seen in the CSF and the CSF 
must be sent for culture, which takes 6 weeks.
How would you manage this case?
Start anti-TB chemotherapy on the basis of the clinical picture and high 
protein in the CSF, which strongly suggest tuberculous meningitis. Don’t 
wait for the culture! Start therapy (rifampicin, isoniazid and pyrazinamide, 
for 6 weeks until the culture and sensitivities come back. Three drugs 
should be given for 3 months, followed by rifampicin and isoniazid for 9 
months, depending on sensitivities. Specialist advice should be sought for 
treatment, notification and contact tracing.
• Progress.  This patient made a good recovery. Prednisolone was also 
given for the first 3 weeks
Further reading
van de Beek D, de Gans J, Tunkel AR et al. Community-acquired bacterial 
meningitis in adults. New England Journal of Medicine 2006; 354: 44–53s.
FITS AND FAINTS
Case history (1)
A 16-year-old young woman is referred with a suspected seizure. 
Earlier that day in her office she had felt unwell for about an hour. 
On getting up from her chair she suddenly lost consciousness 
without warning. She was incontinent of urine. She woke some 
minutes later, but had nausea and malaise for the rest of the day. 
Witnesses said that, when unconscious, she was flaccid, that her 
mouth, hands and feet were twitching and she was pale.
Is this a fit or a faint?
The patient has probably suffered a faint. Some factors are good at distin­
guishing a fit from faint (Table 15.8) whereas others are unreliable. In the 
above case, it is noted that faints, other than cardiac syncope, only occur 
on standing; the preceding symptoms are prolonged or ill defined. Twitch­
ing is not usually as violent as in a clonic seizure and the underlying 
muscle tone is not increased.
Investigations
In suspected cardiac syncope include:
•	 ECG
•	 24-h ambulatory monitoring
•	 Echocardiogram
497
Fits and faints 15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Fit
Faint
Prodrome
None or 
characteristic 
brief aura
Short or prolonged. Blood 
draining, visual darkening, 
rushing noise. Cardiac syncope 
may have no prodrome
Posture at onset
Any
Standing unless cardiac
Injury
Common
Rarer. Protective reflexes may 
act
Incontinence
Sometimes
Sometimes 
Skin colour
Normal, flushed 
or pale
Pale
Recovery
Slow return of 
consciousness
Rapid, more physical 
weakness with clear sensorium
Frequency
Rare to many a 
day
Not repeated attacks each day
EEG
May be abnormal
Normal
Table 15.8  Features of fits and faints
Vasovagal faints are generally idiopathic but there are often precipitat­
ing or predisposing factors.
Associations with faints
	 Adolescent, young adult female
	 Low blood pressure
	 Postural hypotension
	 Heavy periods
	 Micturition with prostatic problems
	 Hot, stuffy surroundings
	 Fasting, hypoglycaemia
	 Dehydration
	 Vagal stimuli such as distress or nausea.
Vasovagal attacks must be distinguished from cardiac syncope (see p. 
265). In the latter there is often no warning, there may be breathlessness 
and engorged jugular veins and the heart rate may be faster than 140 or 
slower than 40.
• Progress.  This girl and her parents were reassured that she had had 
a simple faint.
Case history (2)
A 16-year-old boy presents with repeated brief falls. He does not 
seem to lose consciousness but has been seen in A&E several 
times with severe head and facial injuries resulting from these 
episodes. Recovery, apart from associated injury, is immediate.
498
Neurology
15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
What is the diagnosis?
This history is suggestive of atonic seizures. This seizure disorder usually 
presents in childhood, often as one aspect of a complex epileptic syndrome. 
Not all seizures resulting in falls are generalised tonic–clonic in nature.
The loss of tone is immediate and absolute so that no protective reflexes 
occur and injury can be severe. Some sufferers need to wear crash helmets.
• Progress.  He was referred to the neurologists for management of 
his epilepsy.
Epilepsy
An epileptic seizure is a convulsion or transient abnormal event experi­
enced by the subject as a result of a paroxysmal discharge of cerebral 
neurones. Epilepsy, by definition, is the continuing tendency to have such 
seizures. Recurrent seizures can be prevented in most cases by anti-
convulsant drugs.
Case history (3)
A 28-year-old man is brought to A&E because he was found to be 
unconscious and shaking in the high street. You are called to see 
him urgently because he has had a further tonic/clonic generalised 
seizure.
How would you manage this situation?
Remember
Status epilepticus exists when seizures follow each other without 
recovery of consciousness.
General measures
	 Secure the airway; remove any false teeth and insert oropharyngeal 
tube.
	 Administer 60% oxygen.
	 Secure venous access: many anti-convulsants cause phlebitis, so choose 
a large vein.
	 Glucose, 50 mL of 20% IV if hypoglycaemia is a possibility (see p. 221).
	 Thiamine, 250 mg by slow IV injection if patient is a chronic alcohol 
user.
Control seizures
Remember
Full ventilatory support must be available when treating status 
epilepticus.
499
Difficulty walking 15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Lorazepam 0.1 mg/kg by slow (2 mg/min) intravenous injection. Give 
rectal diazepam (10–20 mg) or intramuscular midazolam (0.2 mg/kg) if 
intravenous access difficult.
	 If seizures continue give IV phenytoin:
•	 Phenytoin: loading dose of 15 mg/kg at a rate not exceeding 
50 mg/min. Give a further bolus up to total loading dose of 30 mg/
kg if seizures persist. Continue with a maintenance dose of 100 mg 
IV at intervals of 6–8 h.
If seizures continue (despite phenytoin) use:
	 Phenobarbital: 15 mg/kg at a rate not exceeding 100 mg/min and 
repeated at intervals of 6–8 h if necessary; IV clonazepam can also be 
used.
	 If seizures continue despite these measures the patient is given a general 
anaesthetic, using thiopentone or propofol, and management is contin­
ued with full anaesthetic support.
• Progress.  This patient had no further fits after being given pheny­
toin. He was known to have epilepsy and was referred back urgently 
to his normal consultant for management of his drug therapy.
DIFFICULTY WALKING
Case history (1)
A 75-year-old man is referred with a 1-year history of progressive 
difficulty with his walking. He has hypertension which is well 
controlled with ramipril 5 mg daily. His wife says that his memory 
has been progressively getting worse.
On examination he has a mini mental score of 22, indicating 
a cognitive impairment. His grasp and snout (pursing of lips on 
lightly tapping the closed lips) reflexes are present, indicating 
frontal lobe disease. His legs are stiff and his walking is 
disorganised. This is an apraxic gait.
An apraxic gait is typical of frontal lobe pathology and can be 
regarded as a problem with high-level programming and execution 
of gait. This man has vascular dementia (multi-infarct dementia). 
Patients with cerebrovascular disease should always be imaged to 
exclude a frontal meningioma or other lesion.
• Progress.  This patient was referred to the psychogeriatric depart­
ment for full assessment. He was started on donepezil 5 mg daily (a 
reversal inhibitor of acetyl cholinesterase).
Case history (2)
A 70-year-old woman has a 3-week history of progressive difficulty 
in walking and loss of bladder function. For the last 6 months she 
has had problems with a stiff gait, numbness in the feet and pains 
down the left arm.
Continued
500
Neurology
15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
What is the diagnosis?
Cervical myelopathy, which at this age is most commonly due to spond­
ylitis. She requires an urgent MRI scan of her cervical spine with a view 
to early decompression because relatively acute deficits are more poten­
tially reversible. The MRI showed cord compression at the level of C5–6 
(Fig. 15.9).
Walking difficulties with upper motor signs in the legs should always 
be investigated by cervical imaging. Thoracic compression is relatively 
much less common in the elderly age group.
Other common causes of difficulty in walking are:
	 Neurological:
•	 Myopathy: proximal, Trendelenburg positive (pelvis drops on the 
side of the stance leg suggesting weakness on abductor muscles of 
the hip), worse on stairs
•	 Peripheral neuropathy: foot drop
•	 Extrapyramidal, e.g. shuffling, stooped
•	 Spasticity: stiff, circumducting hip
•	 Apraxic: upright, high stepping
•	 Ataxic: wide based.
	 Rheumatological/orthopaedic conditions:
•	 Polymyalgia
•	 Hip joint disease.
Figure 15.9  MRI showing spinal cord compression. a) Multiple vertebral 
metastases (arrows); b) cervical compression caused by meningioma (arrow). 
a
b
Case history (2) (continued)
On examination she has wasting and weakness of the hands 
and brisk triceps reflexes. In the legs there are signs of an upper 
motor neurone lesion with brisk reflexes and an extensor plantar 
response. There is also a patchy sensory loss in both arms 
and feet.
501
Headaches 15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
• Progress.  In view of this woman’s serious disability and bladder 
problems, decompressive surgery was performed. This stabilised her 
condition but without improvement in her bladder function.
HEADACHES
Remember
If a close family member has also had a subarachnoid 
haemorrhage then the rest of the family should be screened by 
MR angiography.
Case history (1)
A 35-year-old woman is admitted to the Medical Admission Unit 
(MAU) with very severe headache of explosive onset. She is 
slightly drowsy with a Glasgow Coma Scale of 13 and she has 
photophobia and meningism.
A CT scan shows blood in the subarachnoid space (this has a 
95% sensitivity in the first 24 hours).
• Diagnosis.  Subarachnoid haemorrhage.
	 Arrange for cerebral MR angiography to identify the source of 
bleeding.
	 If aneurysm found, refer to neurosurgeon for surgical treatment.
	 Nimodipine (e.g. 60 mg orally 4-hourly for 2–3 weeks, or 1 mg/hour 
IV) can reduce arterial spasm and reduce further cerebral infarction.
	 Avoid hypotension (it may worsen the ischaemic deficit). Treat hyper­
tension if diastolic pressure is persistently > 130 mmHg. Aim for a very 
gradual decrease in BP with careful monitoring and frequent repeat 
neurological examination.
	 Supportive measures include bed rest, analgesia and laxatives (avoid 
sudden rises in ICP or BP).
	 Watch for complications, including hyponatraemia (SIADH), hydro­
cephalus (obstruction of cerebral aqueduct by blood) and vasospasm 
causing ischaemic deficits.
NB. If the scan is negative and the history highly suggestive of a subarach­
noid haemorrhage, a lumbar puncture is necessary.
	 A lumbar puncture is performed to look for blood-stained CSF and 
xanthochromia (bilirubin discoloration of CSF due to cell lysis). Xan­
thochromia may be detected from ~12 hours to 3 weeks after SAH. 
Visible inspection of a centrifuged sample is often sufficient to detect 
xanthochromia, but laboratory spectrophotometry is more sensitive.
Conditions that can mimic subarachnoid haemorrhage include sudden 
onset of meningitis or viral meningism, migraine, spontaneous subdural 
haemorrhage and post-coital headache. The last of these is a headache of 
502
Neurology
15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
very sudden onset but is a benign self-limiting condition, perhaps a variant 
of migraine. With the availability of MR angiography, patients are now 
often scanned to exclude aneurysms. Finally, low-pressure headache may 
be of sudden onset. This is a poorly understood condition where headache 
may occur suddenly on standing and generally settles when lying down. 
There is meningeal enhancement on MRI and a low CSF pressure. The 
condition is again self-limiting. At least some cases relate to CSF leaks, 
sometimes from lumbar puncture (post-lumbar puncture headache), occa­
sionally from Valsalva manoeuvres.
• Progress.  In this patient, a posterior communicating aneurysm was 
found and she was treated with an intravascular coil insertion. She 
made a good recovery.
Further reading
van Gijn J, Kerr RS, Rinkel GJ. Subarachnoid haemorrhage. Lancet 2007; 
369: 306–318.
Case history (2)
A 35-year-old man complains of continuous headache day and 
night. He used to have a different headache, which was episodic. 
This previous headache was unilateral, throbbing and would last 
a few hours; it was also associated with photophobia, visual 
scotomata and nausea. The new headache has no such features. 
He has to take about eight paracetamol tablets a day to control 
the pain.
What is this new headache due to?
Migraine headache, which was also the cause of this man’s original head­
ache. The headache sometimes becomes transformed into a more chronic 
headache punctuated by migraine-like exacerbations. Often the patient is 
given regular analgesia, which has a well-known effect of actually perpetu­
ating headache.
What action should you take?
A brain scan is not often necessary in a clearly chronic headache with no 
signs, although the patient often expects one. It is more necessary to take 
a proper history and institute the correct management.
Management
Broadly similar for episodic migraine, i.e. sumatriptan prophylaxis is given 
if the sufferer has more than about two migraines a month or finds them 
very debilitating. A migraine prophylactic agent should be given (see 
p. 470).
• Progress.  This patient was reassured that he did not have malignant 
or serious disease.
Chronic analgesia abuse should be stopped and he was advised to reduce 
this gradually over a month. He was told to expect that his headaches 
would be worse over this period.
503
Headaches 15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Case history (4)
A 30-year-old woman has a long history of short but severe 
headaches on one side of the face, lasting only a few minutes but 
occurring several times a day. There is considerable flushing and 
rhinorrhoea on the same side during each attack. There is no 
trigger to the attacks.
Case history (3)
A 40-year-old man comes to A&E with severe headache, which 
then settles on arrival. This has happened before and he has 
always been discharged immediately. On taking a history, it 
transpires that he gets an excruciating headache that comes 
on gradually at about the same time every day. The headache 
is unilateral, pounding, involves the side of the face and is 
associated with a watering eye and nose. He jumps up and down 
in agitation with the pain. The symptoms generally only last about 
an hour.
What is the cause of this headache?
This description is typical for cluster headache. Each cluster may last a 
few weeks, with several months of relief in between.
Cluster headache
Cluster headache is distinct from migraine and consists of recurrent bouts 
of excruciating unilateral pain that typically wake the patient. Attacks 
cluster around one eye. Cluster headache affects adults, mainly males aged 
30–40 years. Alcohol and glyceryl trinitrate can provoke attacks. Severe 
pain can last for several hours and is associated with vomiting. One cheek 
and nostril become congested. Transient ispilateral Horner’s syndrome is 
common. One bout of cluster attacks, with pain every few nights, usually 
lasts 1 to 2 months. Despite excruciating pain there are no sequelae. Bouts 
recur at intervals over several years but tend to disappear after the age of 
55.
• Progress.  In this patient, treatment with analgesics and prophylactic 
migraine drugs did not help. However, his attacks were attenuated 
with subcutaneous sumatriptan. Oxygen inhalation also helped on 
occasions. A short course of oral prednisolone reduced the frequency 
of attacks.
What is the cause of this headache?
The patient has paroxysmal hemicrania; the attacks are longer in duration 
than in trigeminal neuralgia but shorter than in cluster headaches or 
migraine. There is generally some associated autonomic disturbance, as 
seen here. There is a specific and often extremely rewarding response to 
indometacin, as occurred in this woman.
Some causes of acute, episodic and chronic headache are given in 
Box 15.3.
504
Neurology
15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
MOVEMENT DISORDERS
	 Akinetic-rigid syndromes, i.e. slowed movement with increased tone.
	 Dyskinesias – added, uncontrollable movements.
Both may co-exist.
Box 15.3  Causes of headache
•	 Very sudden headaches:
–	 Subarachnoid haemorrhage
–	 First migraine attack
–	 Subdural haemorrhage
–	 Meningitis, encephalitis
–	 Inflammatory meningoencephalitis, e.g. SLE
–	 Cerebral abscess
–	 Raised intracranial pressure
–	 Low-pressure headache
•	 Episodic:
–	 Tension headache
–	 Migraine
–	 Paroxysmal hemicrania
–	 Cluster headache
–	 Trigeminal/occipital neuralgia
–	 Giant cell arteritis (temporal or cranial arteritis)
–	 Post-coital headache
•	 Chronic:
–	 Tension headache
–	 Analgesia abuse
–	 Chronic hemicrania
–	 Chronic cluster headache
–	 Cervicogenic headache
–	 Space-occupying lesions
–	 Raised intracranial pressure
–	 Ongoing after many acute headaches
–	 Associated with depression/anxiety
Case history (1)
A 22-year-old woman develops an acute gastrointestinal illness 
with abdominal pain, vomiting and diarrhoea. After 2 days she 
becomes generally stiff and has prolonged episodes of painful 
spasm of the axial muscles with opisthotonic posturing. Her eyes 
periodically roll upwards involuntarily (oculogyric crises). She had 
been given metoclopramide for her vomiting.
• Diagnosis.  Oculogyric crises from metoclopramide.
Acute dystonic reactions can occur in sensitive individuals after relatively 
modest doses of drugs with central anti-dopaminergic action, such as 
505
Movement disorders 15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
neuroleptics or certain anti-emetics, e.g. metoclopramide. Neuroleptic 
malignant syndrome can also occur.
Treatment of oculogyric crisis involves the identification and stoppage 
of the responsible agent. These acute dystonias respond generally to intra­
venous centrally acting anti-muscarinics, e.g. procyclidine 5–10 mg.
Anti-emetics, e.g. domperidone, ondansetron or granesetron do not 
produce dystonia.
Hypokinetic movement disorders
	 Parkinson’s disease
	 Multisystem atrophy
	 Progressive supranuclear palsy
	 Dementia with Lewy bodies
	 Corticobasal degeneration
	 Some frontal dementias, mass lesions
	 Tardive dyskinesia (+ hyperkinetic)
	 Psychomotor retardation.
Hyperkinetic movement disorder
	 Choreoathetosis
	 Ballismus
	 Dystonia
	 Myoclonus
	 Tics
	 Tremor
	 Psychogenic.
• Progress.  This woman was given IV procyclidine 5 mg IV. Her dys­
tonia settled within 24 hours.
Case history (2)
A 40-year-old man has a 1-year history of involuntary facial 
movements and a shuffling gait. There is a past history of 
schizophrenia, for which he was given haloperidol. On examination 
he has intermittent involuntary protrusion of his tongue, grimacing 
and blepharospasm. He has some writhing movements of his left 
arm and repetitive rubbing of the soles of his feet on the floor 
when sitting. Voluntary arm movements are slow. He walks slowly 
with a shuffling gait and stooped posture.
• Diagnosis.  Tardive dyskinesia. This develops in patients previ­
ously, as well as currently, on anti-psychotic medication. The move­
ment disorder may be a complex mixture of hyperkinetic restlessness 
(akathisia), dystonia and choreoathetosis, and hypokinetic bradyki­
nesia. They are late and difficult to reverse. The effects of anti-
dopaminergics are thought to be due to long-term dysregulation of 
dopaminergic pathways. Sometimes, in the short term, increases in 
anti-psychotic drug doses actually temporarily improve the hyperki­
netic aspects (direct anti-dopaminergic action), but this is likely to 
lead to worsened long-term problems. The drugs that are good for 
506
Neurology
15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
avoiding acute extrapyramidal side effects are also good for minimis­
ing long-term side effects.
• Progress.  In this patient the haloperidol was gradually reduced and 
stopped. His symptoms improved. He has been told of the risk of 
recurrence on further anti-psychotic therapy.
GUILLAIN–BARRÉ SYNDROME
This is an acute sensori-motor polyneuropathy which often follows 
a gastrointestinal, e.g. Campylobacter, cytomegalovirus, or a respiratory 
infection.
Case history
A 34-year-old woman is brought to A&E by her relatives; she 
has a 1-week history of difficulty walking. She had had mild 
gastroenteritis due to Campylobacer jejuni about 5 weeks before 
but had recovered from this. Her relatives thought she was 
‘putting it on’ but became a bit concerned when they found that 
she was unable to climb the stairs to her flat.
On examination she looked well and was orientated; but she 
was extremely anxious because she thought she was becoming 
paralysed. She had a symmetrical weakness in her limbs, which 
was worse proximally. Reflexes were absent and she had normal 
plantar responses. There was a mild sensory deficit of a glove and 
stocking distribution
What is the diagnosis?
This could be the Guillain–Barré syndrome. Do not leave this patient unat­
tended because the progression can be fast and her respiratory muscles 
can be affected within a few hours.
Investigations
Blood tests:
•	 FBC
•	 U&Es
•	 CRP
•	 ABGs
What should you do?
Admit her. Once on the ward, perform a lumbar puncture. In this patient, 
the CSF protein is raised. She gets progressively weaker and is having 
difficulty breathing,
How would you manage this patient?
	 Admit her to the HDU.
	 Regularly monitor her respiratory function with vital capacity. Intuba­
tion and ventilation might be required. Call for expert help.
507
Spinal cord compression 15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Nursing care: to avoid pressure ulcers.
	 Prophylaxis: 
to 
prevent 
venous 
thrombosis 
(LMW 
heparin, 
enoxaparin).
	 Steroid therapy is ineffective.
	 IV immunoglobin given in the first 2 weeks reduces duration and sever­
ity of weakness. NB. Check IgA levels; severe allergic reactions occur 
(due to IgG antibodies) with IgA deficiency.
• Progress.  This patient was given IV immunoglobulins and gradu­
ally improved over the next few months.
Prognosis
80% of patients make a full recovery, as occurred in this patient.
SPINAL CORD COMPRESSION
This produces radicular pain at the level of the cord lesion, with a spastic 
tetraparesis or paraparesis below the level; sensory loss below the cord 
level is also present.
Case history
A 56-year-old man is admitted with a 2-week history of weakness 
in his legs. He has no other complaints but admits that he is a 
heavy smoker.
On examination there is weakness of both legs, which is more 
marked distally; the left leg is more severely affected. Knee and 
ankle jerks are slightly brisk and he has a bilateral extensor plantar 
response. There are no sensory signs. He has no neurological 
deficit in his arms.
NB. This is a medical emergency.
This patient has a mild paraparesis and a cord lesion must be exluded.
Investigations
	 Routine bloods show a Hb of 100 g/L with an ESR of 100 mm/h.
	 CXR was normal, making carcinoma with secondaries unlikely despite 
him being a heavy smoker.
	 Thoracic and lumbar spinal X-rays showed an osteolytic lesion at T10.
The preliminary tests have taken 3 days and the patient is now incontinent 
of urine and his leg weakness is worse. Urgent neurological referral is 
required.
MRI scan shows a lesion at T10. Urgent decompression is performed by 
a neurosurgeon but the patient still requires a urinary catheter.
Further blood tests
	 Serum protein electrophoresis and immunofixation shows a monoclonal 
band.
	 Bence Jones protein is present in the urine.
	 Bone marrow shows infiltration with plasma cells.
• Diagnosis.  Multiple myeloma.
• Progress.  This patient needed radiotherapy and chemotherapy. He 
still requires a catheter and is mobilising only slowly with a frame.
508
Neurology
15 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Remember
Diagnosis is urgent with cord compression. Prompt diagnosis 
enables decompression to be performed before severe symptoms 
develop and potentially before urinary problems, which if present 
are frequently permanent, even with decompression.
509
509
Psychiatry 16 
DELIRIUM (see also p. 153)
Delirium is the most commonly misdiagnosed psychiatric disorder in the 
general hospital and many cases go undetected. Yet it is the most common 
psychosis met in the hospital setting; 10–20% of surgical and medical 
inpatients have delirium during their admission. It is the best indication 
that the higher centres of the brain are failing.
Information
Delirium: central features
• Impaired consciousness/attention
• Global disturbance of cognition
• Psychomotor disturbance
• Disturbed sleep/wake cycle
• Emotional disturbance
How would you diagnose delirium?
An acute onset and fluctuating course is valuable diagnostically. Delirium 
represents an acute generalised impairment of cognitive function (see 
Information box). The primary feature is disorientation in time and place 
(more rarely person). A well patient should know the day of the week, 
month and year (people who are well can occasionally get the date and 
time wrong). They should know that they are in hospital, its name and 
location, and the name of the ward. Other psychoses do not affect 
orientation.
	 ‘Clouding of consciousness’: refers to the variable level of attention 
seen in delirium, so that the patient cannot learn information and there­
fore cannot recall it.
	 Visual hallucinations or illusions: are commonly present, so the 
patient may mistake a curtain movement in a dimly lit ward as a threat­
ening person, resulting in extreme fear and agitation, especially at night.
Case history
You are asked to see a 68-year-old man who had surgery for a 
fractured hip sustained after a fall at home 3 days previously. He 
was awake all night, occasionally shouting out, disturbing the rest 
of the ward, and he keeps pulling at his intravenous line.
510
Psychiatry
16 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Remember
• Behaviour may be agitated and disturbed or ‘quiet’, ‘hypoactive’ 
and less easily identified
• Fluctuating presentation and disturbed sleep/wake cycle may 
conceal abnormalities during the day
• Emotional disturbance (fear, perplexity, apathy, depression) is 
common in delirium.
	 Persecutory delusions: are the most common and may make patients 
refuse food, drink and medicines because they believe that they are 
being poisoned. Alternatively, these delusions can cause aggression as 
patients defend themselves against a perceived threat.
What were the predisposing factors in this patient?
Delirium occurs most commonly in a person with a developing or deterio­
rating brain, with risk factors such as:
	 Extremes of age (the young and old)
	 Brain damage or insult:
•	 Any dementia (most common)
•	 Previous head injury or episode of delirium
•	 Previous cerebrovascular accident
•	 Alcoholic brain damage
	 Newly prescribed or multiple medications
	 Prolonged operative procedure and anaesthesia
	 Immobilisation and social isolation
	 Dislocation to an unfamiliar environment (such as admission to 
hospital)
	 Sleep deprivation
	 Sensory deficits (e.g. visual or hearing) and extremes (overload or 
deprivation).
Specific causes of delirium include:
	 Brain trauma
	 Epilepsy (ictal, interictal, postictal)
	 Neoplasm (intracranial or extracranial
	 Other brain-space-occupying lesions (e.g. abscess)
	 Metabolic 
encephalopathies 
(e.g. 
hypoglycaemia, 
hypoxia, 
hyponatraemia)
	 Infections (intracranial and systemic)
	 Drugs and poisons (see p. 519)
	 Withdrawal from drugs (e.g. alcohol and sedatives; see p. 521)
	 Vascular (cerebral or myocardial)
	 Haematological (severe anaemia)
	 Extracranial insult (e.g. hypothermia).
How would you investigate this patient?
Corroborative history from family/partner (duration of history, drug 
history, past medical and psychiatric history, alcohol/drug use).
511
16 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Delirium
An EEG shows excess slow waves in 90% (with the exception of drug 
withdrawal states) and may show sharp waves and spikes in status epi­
lepticus. It is used occasionally as a confirmatory test, if there is doubt 
about the clinical diagnosis.
Investigations
• Look for infections (MSU, CXR, blood and sputum cultures, 
lumbar puncture if indicated)
• U&Es (hyponatraemia)
• Calcium
• Blood sugar
• Liver and cardiac enzymes
• ECG (silent myocardial infarct)
• CT brain scan (‘silent’ parietal infarct; predisposing brain 
disease/damage)
Second-line investigations:
• Therapeutic drug levels (anti-convulsant, lithium)
• Endocrine (TFTs)
• Vitamin deficiency (thiamin, nicotinic acid, B12)
• Illicit drug screen
Nursing care
A carefully controlled consistent and balanced environment is essential:
	 Single room, if available
	 Windows that do not allow exits
	 Minimal stimulation by noise
	 Persistent orientation by nurses and notices (a very disturbed patient 
may require one-to-one nursing temporarily)
	 Minimal visitors: only those the patient knows well
	 Some lighting at night
	 Reverse dehydration and do not neglect nutrition
	 Treat constipation, sleep disturbance
	 Perceptive aids, e.g. glasses, hearing aid.
Management
	 Delirium requires urgent management because complications (e.g. falls, 
pressure ulcers and infections) can exacerbate the condition and con­
tribute to significant mortality, particularly in the elderly.
	 Find the cause and reverse it.
	 A psychiatric opinion can be useful regarding differential diagnosis (see 
below) and management.
	 Reduce all drug treatments to a minimum (see p. 521). Avoid anti-
psychotic drugs unless the patient is a danger to him- or herself (or 
others), is distressed or if the patient’s general health is suffering.
	 Symptomatic treatments include anti-psychotic drugs, initially in small 
doses, avoiding strong anti-muscarinics.
	 Evaluate progress regularly.
512
Psychiatry
16 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Differential diagnosis
	 Other organic brain disorders:
•	 Lewy body dementia: fluctuating conscious level and extreme sensi­
tivity to psychotropic drugs
•	 Advancing dementia, acute on chronic disturbance.
	 Functional psychoses/mood disorders:
•	 Severe depression (agitation, psychomotor retardation, persecutory 
ideas)
•	 Mania/hypomania (fluctuating mood, nocturnal disturbance, abnor­
mally heightened perceptions).
	 Drugs: delirium tremens (see p. 525).
Drug therapy
Doses of tranquillising drugs should start low and be titrated depending 
on age (this patient is 68 years old), pre-existing brain damage and 
response to initial treatment. Patients with delirium are often sensitive to 
medication and the dose needs to be balanced carefully.
	 Haloperidol by mouth: 1.5 mg then 1.5–5 mg up to three times a day 
depending on level of disturbance, sensitivity to drug and response. 
Note: liquid or tablet form; lowest effective dose; beware extrapyramidal 
side effects.
	 Phenothiazines are best avoided because of their anti-muscarinic and 
alpha-blocking actions.
If intramuscular medication is required
	 Haloperidol 0.5 to 1.5 mg IM, together with lorazepam 0.5–1 mg.
	 Repeat 8-hourly as necessary.
These drugs should not be given intravenously. If the patient is sensitive 
to medication and extrapyramidal side effects (EPSEs) are likely or present, 
use an ‘atypical’ anti-psychotic drug, such as risperidone (starting at 0.5 to 
1 mg orally). Check doses carefully. Reversal of acute EPSEs can be 
achieved with a low dose of an anti-muscarinic drug (e.g. procyclidine 
5 mg oral/IM).
• Progress.  Delirium resolved in this patient after 48 h following oral 
haloperidol. This anti-psychotic medication was tailed off gradually 
over 1 week.
Remember
Extrapyramidal side effects of anti-psychotic medication:
• Acute dystonic reactions: involuntary muscle contractions 
involving extra-ocular muscles, face, neck, mouth and tongue
• Pseudoparkinsonism: rigidity and tremor in larger muscles.
What is the prognosis?
There is often a delay of a few days when the underlying condition has 
improved but the brain is still dysfunctioning. Otherwise the prognosis 
depends on the successful treatment of the main aetiological condition (up 
to 20% undetermined in the elderly) and the state of the pre-existing brain 
(25% of the elderly with delirium will have an underlying dementia). Good 
513
Drugs causing delirium 16 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
communication with the patient’s primary care doctor is essential because 
treated as well as unrecognised delirium can cause problems after 
discharge.
Further reading
Inovye SK. Delirium in older persons. New England Journal of Medicine 2006; 
354: 1157–1165.
DRUGS AND POISONS AS CAUSES OF DELIRIUM
Delirium can occur in response to excessive or normal doses of many 
drugs, particularly in the elderly. Some drugs are more likely to cause 
delirium than others.
Case history
An 83-year-old woman is discharged from hospital following an 
admission for severe breathlessness due to acute on chronic heart 
failure. She was discharged on furosemide, lisonopril, carvediol 
and spironolactone.
Three weeks later she is brought to A&E by her carer because 
she is confused, very aggressive towards her carer and unaware 
of where she is.
On examination she is conscious but completely disorientated 
in time and place. She is unaware that she is in hospital. 
Cardiovascular examination shows a pulse of 60 per minute, 
irregularly irregular, normal venous pressure and no basal crackles 
or ankle oedema.
You check on her medication with the carer who confirms that 
she takes the drugs given to her when she left the hospital on a 
regular basis. The carer also says she now takes an additional 
drug which has been given to her by her doctor because of an 
irregular pulse.
Unfortunately, the carer has not brought all the drugs with her. 
You contact the patient’s doctor who says that she prescribed 
digoxin because of the irregular pulse, which she thought was 
atrial fibrillation.
You think this might be the problem, so you check her digoxin 
levels as well as her urea and electrolytes.
DRUGS CAUSING DELIRIUM
Cardiac drugs
	 Digoxin: check serum level
	 Calcium channel blockers
	 Anti-arrhythmics, e.g. lidocaine
	 Beta blockers: especially propranolol (lipid soluble); use water-soluble 
beta blocker, e.g. atenolol.
514
Psychiatry
16 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Therapeutic drugs affecting the brain
	 Benzodiazepines: although withdrawal is a more common cause; see 
below
	 Barbiturates: withdrawal again more commonly
	 Other hypnotics: nitrazepam
	 Lithium: usually a sign of toxicity
	 High-potency anti-psychotics: neuroleptic malignant syndrome (see 
Information box, below)
	 Anti-convulsants: usually a sign of toxicity
	 Dopamine and its agonists: levodopa and bromocriptine.
Drugs with anti-muscarinic properties 
(common cause of delerium)
	 Atropine and scopolamine: remember eye drops and pre-meds in 
anaesthesia
	 Other topical cycloplegics and mydriatics
	 Anti-parkinsonian agents: in patients with both Parkinson’s disease and 
pseudoparkinson’s, caused by dopamine antagonists
	 Anti-depressants: especially tricyclics; amitriptyline most frequently
	 Anti-psychotics: 
commonly 
the 
phenothiazines, 
especially 
chlorpromazine
	 Anti-emetics
	 Anti-histamines
	 Anti-spasmodics: uncommon.
What are the physical signs of the anti-muscarinic state?
	 Dilated and poorly reactive pupils (blurred vision)
	 Flushed face
	 Dry mouth and skin
	 Fever
	 Tachypnoea
	 Tachycardia
	 Hypertension
	 Urinary retention and diminished bowel sounds.
How would you treat anti-muscarinic-induced delirium?
	 General supportive nursing measures (see p. 517)
	 Management usually conservative with observation of vital signs
	 IV line and ECG Monitor if symptoms marked
	 Oral or IM benzodiazepine (e.g. diazepam 10 mg adult dose) for agita­
tion or seizures
	 Cholinergic therapy with an anticholinesterase (physostigmine) is 
potentially hazardous (heart block, bronchospasm, respiratory failure) 
and used, if at all, for life threatening cases (uncontrolled seizures, coma, 
respiratory depression). Discuss with senior and/or poisons unit.
• Contraindications:  ischaemic heart disease, prolonged PR, QRS 
intervals, asthma, diabetes, inflammatory bowel disease, bowel or 
bladder obstruction, glaucoma, pregnancy, hypothyroidism.
Anti-infective agents
	 Anti-malarials, e.g. chloroquine and mefloquine
	 Antibiotics: uncommon, but associated diarrhoea may lead to 
dehydration.
515
Drugs causing delirium 16 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Gastrointestinal drugs
	 H2 antagonists: cimetidine most commonly reported
	 Bismuth chelate.
Anti-inflammatory
	 Non-steroidal anti-inflammatories (NSAIDs)
	 Corticosteroids: differential diagnosis of affective and paranoid 
psychoses
	 Interferons.
Chemotherapeutic agents
	 Crisantaspase (asparaginase)
	 Methotrexate
	 Vinca alkaloids.
Anaesthetic agents
	 Ketamine.
‘Recreational’ drugs
	 Alcohol (toxic levels)
	 Amphetamine
	 Ecstasy (methylene dioxymethamphetamine, MDMA): an amphetamine-
like drug
	 Lysergic acid (LSD) and other hallucinogens (magic mushrooms)
	 Cannabis (toxic doses)
	 Cocaine
	 Phencyclidine (‘angel dust’): chemically related to ketamine
	 Gamma-butyric acid.
Poisons
Exposure can be occupational, environmental or by deliberate self-
ingestion, e.g.:
	 Methanol
	 Solvents: adolescents
	 Carbon monoxide
	 Plant alkaloids
	 Many industrial chemicals: always find out the patient’s occupation.
How do you treat drug-/poison-induced delirium?
	 Stop the delivery of the drug or poison. If in doubt, stop all non-essential 
medication, and/or reduce the dose.
	 Treat specific causes (e.g. hyperbaric or mask-delivered oxygen for CO 
poisoning).
	 General measures are covered in the section on delirium (see p. 517).
Drug withdrawal
	 Alcohol (see p. 527).
	 Sedatives:
•	 Benzodiazepines
•	 Barbiturates.
516
Psychiatry
16 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Clinical presentation of sedative withdrawal (beyond delirium)
	 Mental: anxiety, irritability, agitation, insomnia, nightmares.
	 Arousal: tremor, sweating, tachycardia, sensitivity to light, noise and 
touch, muscle tension, uncommonly convulsions (with the exception of 
barbiturate withdrawal).
	 Physical: nausea, anorexia, ‘flu-like’ symptoms, metallic taste.
Treatment of sedative withdrawal
	 Replace the original class of drug in adequate doses to control the 
withdrawal symptoms, reducing to the minimum amount to prevent 
their re-emergence.
	 Try to use a long-acting drug (e.g. diazepam), although sometimes the 
original drug itself is required.
	 Therapeutic drug cessation can be achieved gradually later but the 
patient should be monitored closely and supported. Even patients with 
long-term dependence can manage some reduction and stabilisation on 
a reduced dose in the short term.
Remember
Check doses with a senior colleague and with the national 
formulary.
• Progress.  This woman’s digoxin level was 2 µg/L (toxic range > 
1.5 µg) so that her digoxin was stopped but her other medication 
continued. Her serum urea and electrolytes were normal, the serum 
potassium was 4.3 mmol/L.
Her delirium required a small dose of oral haloperidol 0.5 mg × 2 daily for 
the first 4 days. She progressively improved and was discharged after 9 
days, back to her normal self. In view of her age she was started on aspirin 
150 g daily (not warfarin) and digoxin 62.5 µg daily for her atrial 
fibrillation.
DEMENTIA
See also p. 156.
Dementia is the most common organic brain syndrome seen in elderly 
inpatients; 7% of people over the age of 65 and up to 33% over the age of 
85 have a dementing illness. Treatable causes can be found in 10% of 
patients with definite dementia, but that figure is considerably higher if 
the ‘pseudodementia’ of depressive illness is included.
Dementia is a global, acquired, progressive deterioration of intellect, 
memory and personality. Altered (‘clouded’) consciousness is not usually 
involved, in contrast to delirium, although dementia is often an underlying 
predisposition for delirium (see p. 515).
517
Dementia 16 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
How does dementia present?
	 Loss of memory, especially short term
	 Episodes of increasing ‘confusion’
	 Falls, with or without head injury
	 Wandering and getting lost (getting into the wrong bed), especially at 
night
	 Insomnia
	 Weight loss
	 Slow recovery and mobilisation after injury (e.g. hip fracture) or illness 
(e.g. myocardial infarct, pneumonia)
	 Incontinence
	 Difficulty dressing: parietal lesion of dressing dyspraxia
	 Behavioural disinhibition: frontal lobe sign
	 Severe extra-pyramidal reaction to dopamine antagonists: Lewy body 
dementia.
What are the causes?
Case history
A 74-year-old woman is brought into A&E having been found 
wandering in the street at night. She is poorly nourished, 
dishevelled and has several bruises on her arms and legs. You 
find out from her daughter that her husband died 6 months 
previously.
Information
Causes of dementia (see Table 7.2 for treatable causes)
Common causes:
• Over 65:
– Alzheimer’s disease
– Multi-infarct dementia
– Lewy body disease
– Parkinson’s disease
• Under 65:
– Alzheimer’s disease
– AIDS
– Alcoholic dementia
– Head injuries
Less common causes:
• Prion disease (Creutzfeldt–Jakob)
• Huntington’s
• Fronto-temporal dementia (Pick’s)
• Multiple sclerosis
• Wilson’s disease
518
Psychiatry
16 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Differential diagnosis
	 Delirium
	 Amnestic syndrome: relatively specific memory loss, e.g. Wernicke–
Korsakoff syndrome (see p. 527).
	 Depressive ‘pseudodementia’
	 Learning disability (‘amentia’).
Investigations
• A corroborative history: duration, presentation, mood, alcohol, 
past history
• A Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE): a brief, structured 
bed-side screening test of memory
• Intelligence quotient (IQ) (performed by a psychologist) to 
confirm cognitive decline
• Blood tests:
– Gamma glutamyl transpeptidase and mean corpuscular 
volume: raised levels are evidence of excess alcohol
– Urea, creatinine, eGFR
– Liver enzymes
– Free T4 and TSH
– VDRL
– Haemoglobin
– ESR or CRP
– Autoimmune screen to include ANA
– Serum electrophoresis
– Glucose levels
– Vitamin B12 and red cell folate
– Calcium
• HIV testing after counselling in at-risk group
• MSU
• CXR
• CT/MRI brain scan: tumour, subdural haematoma, normal 
pressure hydrocephalus and infarcts might confirm generalised 
cerebral atrophy
• ECG: arrhythmias
• EEG: diffuse slow waves are rare before 75 in normal health. A 
normal EEG would suggest an alternative diagnosis
• Consider lumbar puncture, if diagnosis is unclear
Examination
	 Cardiovascular, neurological and endocrine system: to exclude second­
ary causes.
	 Mental state examination.
	 Simple cognitive screening bedside tests: dementia may be suggested 
by the quality of the responses, e.g. ‘perseveration’ (repeating a response 
beyond the relevant question), ‘confabulation’ (inventing recollections 
to compensate for memory loss).
	 Look for depressed affect.
519
Delirium tremens (DT) 16 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
How would you manage a case of dementia?
	 Treat any reversible cause.
	 Stop anti-muscarinic drugs, if possible.
	 Involve a psychiatrist early regarding diagnosis and management.
	 Acetyl cholinesterase inhibitors may be indicated in early Alzheimer’s 
disease (e.g. donepezil, galantamine or rivastigmine) and memantine 
(affects glutamate transmission) in conjunction with specialist advice 
from old-age psychiatry team (see p. 155).
	 Low-dose haloperidol (e.g. 0.5 mg) can help control agitation and any 
accompanying delusions.
	 Short-acting hypnotics, such as temazepam, can help insomnia.
	 While on the ward, ensure adequate fluids, nutrition and treatment of 
constipation and any other reversible causes of incontinence.
	 If possible, discharge home as soon as possible to avoid disorientating 
experience of admission.
	 Involve the nearest relatives only.
	 Referral to old-age psychiatry specialist dementia services.
• Progress.  This patient improved considerably after a few days in 
hospital with care from a multidisciplinary team. Her daughter lived 
fairly near so she was able with the therapist to arrange for aids at 
home to allow independent living. This patient was assessed by the 
psychogeriatrician who thought her dementia symptoms might well 
be related to her depression (pseudodementia) following the death 
of her husband. She was started on citalopram (an SSRI) 8 mg daily, 
with some improvement. She returned home, but requires continual 
supervision.
DELIRIUM TREMENS (DT)
Delirium tremens is the most severe form of alcohol withdrawal syndrome 
and is a medical emergency because of major complications that can arise. 
Information
Simple cognitive screening
• Orientation in time, place and person: ask day, month, year; 
ward, hospital, town/city, country; identity of relatives or key 
ward staff
• Attention and concentration: ask patient to recite the days of 
the week, or the months of the year, backwards (should be 
100% accurate)
• Verbal short-term memory: teach patient to immediately recite a 
name and address accurately (a test of registration: they should 
be able to do this in two attempts). Then ask the patient to 
recall the name and address 5 min later (test of memory recall; 
should recall 95% of the individual items)
• Long-term memory: tests of general information, e.g. recent 
news, world events or on a subject of their interest
• Premorbid intelligence (necessary to judge whether there has 
been a deterioration in intellect): establish level of education 
achieved and occupation
520
Psychiatry
16 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
It often occurs on the second or third day after admission, due to suddenly 
stopping drinking, although it can occur after a significant reduction in 
drinking in those who are highly alcohol dependent.
Remember
Heavy drinkers under-report and conceal alcohol consumption. 
The problem is suggested by:
• Regular medical presentations
• Injuries/falls
• Anxiety/depression/self-harm
• Marital/family/financial/legal difficulties.
Case history
A 49-year-old man was admitted via A&E to the orthopaedic ward 
having had a fall and fracturing his pelvis. On the third day after 
admission he became disorientated and restless with visual 
hallucinations. The orthopaedic SHO wants your advice.
A full history elicits that he had been a heavy drinker for 10 or 
more years and obviously has had no alcohol since the fall. You 
think he has DTs – particularly as he has had a similar episode in 
the past.
What are the clinical features of DTs?
	 Coarse tremor (which may affect the whole body)
	 Disorientation in place and time
	 Anxiety (often severe)
	 Motor restlessness
	 Nausea and/or diarrhoea
	 Insomnia
	 Nightmares
	 Excessive sympathetic drive:
•	 Sweating
•	 Tachycardia
•	 Hypertension
•	 Low-grade fever
	 Reduced attention
	 Illusions: visual
	 Hallucinations: classically visual and frightening, but may be tactile or 
auditory; small animals (insects, spiders, rats) advance menacingly 
towards and over the patient
	 Persecutory delusions
	 Convulsions in severe cases.
521
Delirium tremens (DT) 16 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
How would you treat DTs?
	 Admit the patient to an acute medical bed.
	 General measures (see Delirium, p. 517).
	 Particularly treat electrolyte and fluid imbalances.
	 Treat any co-morbid disorder.
	 Oral thiamine 200 mg daily even in the absence of Wernicke–Korsakoff 
encephalopathy, the specific signs of which can be missed in the pres­
ence of severe withdrawal symptoms. Treatment must be given early if 
long-term dementia is to be prevented.
	 Parenteral high-dose thiamine is necessary in the presence of a thiamine-
related encephalopathy.
Remember
Complications of DTs
• Co-morbid illness or trauma (infection, dehydration, head injury)
• Hypoglycaemia
• Electrolyte disturbances (sodium, potassium, magnesium)
• Convulsions
• Coma
• Death.
Investigations
• Serum urea and electrolytes (especially hypokalaemia)
• Calcium and magnesium
• Gamma glutamyl transpeptidase (raised)
• Aspartate transferase
• Bilirubin
• Glucose
• Haemoglobin
• Mean corpuscular volume (raised)
• Mid-stream urine
• If necessary, appropriate X-rays to exclude infection (CXR) and 
trauma (CT brain scan if indicated: ?subdural)
Information
Wernicke–Korsakoff syndrome
Acute confusion, ocular palsies and nystagmus, and ataxic gait 
leading to chronic short-term memory loss and confabulation.
522
Psychiatry
16 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Specific drug therapy
	 Follow a protocol if your hospital has one.
	 Oral treatment is preferred unless the patient is severely distressed and 
disturbed. Doses suggested below may not be adequate to control the 
initial condition, and more may be required:
•	 Diazepam 10 mg × 4 daily orally or
•	 Chlordiazepoxide 20 mg × 4 daily orally.
	 Chlormethiazole capsules should be avoided because of problems with 
dependence and adverse effects.
	 Doses of chlordiazepoxide up to 200 mg spread over the first 24 hours 
may be required initially in uncontrolled, severe, life endangering with­
drawal with fits. The patient must be monitored constantly with resus­
citation facilities available.
	 Prophylactic anti-convulsants (e.g. carbamazepine 200 mg × 2 daily) 
should be given when there is a previous history of withdrawal convul­
sions or if the current presentation has been complicated by fits.
• Progress.  This patient improved after 3 days of diazepam treatment 
and the dose of the medication was tapered to nothing over the next 
7 days. More gradual tapering is required in a patient with a history 
of convulsions, with a longer period (e.g. 3 months) on anti-
convulsants. He was discharged from hospital with provision of 
long-term care arranged.
Long-term care
This primarily involves maintaining abstinence from alcohol. Referral 
to alcohol support agencies requires individual motivation. Acamprosate 
has been shown to be helpful in reducing craving in conjunction 
with support from addiction services or group therapy. Those with con­
current psychological problems (e.g. depression, psychosis) require psy­
chiatric referral. This patient remains abstinent and still attends group 
therapy.
DEPRESSION
See also p. 159.
Depressive illness is common but often undetected or inadequately 
treated (see Information box, below). The central symptom is usually low 
mood. Associated symptoms reflecting effects on an individual’s behav­
iour, thoughts, perceptions and cognition become more marked as the 
severity of the condition increases.
Whereas much depressive illness has an insidious onset and never 
reaches the attention of acute medical or specialist services, up to one-third 
of physically ill patients attending hospital have depressive symptoms.
In patients presenting acutely, depression can be 
associated with:
Information
Depressive illness can be missed in medical patients for the 
following reasons:
523
Depression 16 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Suicide attempt or deliberate self-harm (see p. 533)
	 Concurrent physical illness (particularly chronic, painful, life-
threatening or disfiguring)
	 Unpleasant and demanding treatment for physical illness
	 Destabilisation of a chronic condition, exacerbation of physical symp­
toms or excessive functional impairment
	 Medical treatment refusal or poor compliance
	 Weight loss, poor nutrition, self-neglect or unusual behaviour (e.g. 
heavy drinking)
	 Increased somatic concern and unexplained physical symptoms.
Case history
A 66-year-old woman is admitted to a medical assessment ward 
for investigation of anaemia which had made her breathless and 
tired so that she was unable to cope on her own. Her husband 
died 6 months previously. The ward nurses have noted that she 
has been despondent, reluctant to care for herself and her 
nutritional intake has been poor. You suspect she may be 
depressed.
Information (continued)
• Depression considered ‘understandable’ in physically unwell
• Symptoms of depression attributed entirely to underlying 
medical condition
• Negative attitude to diagnosis of depression and reluctance to 
report symptoms
• Limited opportunity to discuss emotional issues in a medical 
setting
Information
Depression can be broadly categorised:
• Mild: low mood often associated with anxiety symptoms
• Moderate: increasingly low mood, depressive thinking (e.g. 
suicidal) with biological symptoms (sleep disturbance with early 
morning waking, mood worse in the morning, reduced appetite, 
weight and libido)
• Severe: more intense low mood, suicidal thoughts with 
development of psychotic symptoms, including delusions and 
hallucinations (most often associated with suicide)
524
Psychiatry
16 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
How would you assess this case?
Information
Assessment of mental state
Summary of the key areas of observation and enquiry:
• Appearance/behaviour: general state of health, self-care, facial 
expression, eye contact, rapport, cooperation, posture and 
movement
• Speech: rate, tone, quantity, volume, spontaneity and form
• Mood:
– Sustained disturbance: depressed, elated, anxious, irritable
– Reactivity: reduced ‘blunted’, increased ‘labile’
– Congruity: appropriateness to circumstances or theme of 
discussion
• Thoughts:
– Preoccupations, predominant concerns
– Mood-congruent ideas (e.g. suicidal)
– Delusions: abnormal unshakeable beliefs inconsistent with 
sociocultural context
• Perceptions: auditory or visual hallucinations (a perception in 
the absence of a stimulus), presence of which may be 
suggested by abnormalities of general behaviour
• Cognitive assessment (see Information box, p. 525)
• Insight: recognition and attribution of illness/awareness of 
merits of treatment
Investigations
• Full blood screen, including FBC, U&Es, creatinine (eGFR), 
thyroid function tests, liver function tests, serum calcium
• A CXR may also be helpful
	 Accurate diagnosis requires a detailed history, with a reliable corrobora­
tive account if possible, and mental state examination.
	 Factors that increase vulnerability to develop depression:
•	 Previous history of depression
•	 Family history of depression or suicide
•	 Stress/life events particularly with separation or loss
•	 Social isolation or adversity
•	 Physical illness and its treatment
•	 Medication that can cause depression
•	 Alcohol/substance misuse.
Differential diagnosis
	 Dementia
	 Delirium
525
Depression 16 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Alcohol or substance misuse
	 Chronic dysthymia
	 Grief (normal or pathological).
How do you identify a severe case?
In moderate to severe depression, mental state examination may reveal:
	 Depressed facial appearance, tearfulness, reduced expression, poor eye 
contact, retardation of movement or agitation.
	 Speech: may be slow and impoverished.
	 Persistent, pervasive low mood worse in the morning, anhedonia (loss 
of interest in pleasure), abulia (inability to make decisions), reduced 
motivation or energy. Note: these complaints are not usually attributable 
to physical illness alone – psychologically healthy people often cope 
resiliently with physical illness.
	 Suicidal thoughts may be present and should always be enquired for 
and explored carefully:
•	 Have you had any desperate thoughts?
•	 Do you feel that life is not worth living?
Biological symptoms are often present. You should ask about feelings of 
hopelessness (often associated with suicidal contemplation). Other mood-
congruent thoughts that might be present include pessimism, feelings 
of guilt, worthlessness, self-reproach, persecution, impoverishment. In 
severe depression thoughts can reach delusional intensity and may be 
associated with perceptual abnormalities, e.g. condemnatory auditory hal­
lucinations. Tests of cognitive function may be poorly performed due to 
impaired memory and concentration. In the elderly with fragile but intact 
cognitive function severe depression may suggest a dementia (‘depressive 
pseudodementia’).
• Diagnosis.  Moderate depression.
How would you manage this case?
	 Exclude organic cause: this patient has an anaemia. Investigations 
show an Hb of 76 g/L, MCV 101, ESR 31 mm/hour, white cell count 
4200.
•	 Diagnosis: A macrocytic anaemia which is probably due to her poor 
nutritional state and likely to be due to folate deficiency. You do not 
want to treat her with folate until you have excluded B12 deficiency.
•	 The laboratory say that the serum levels will be available tomorrow, 
and when they arrive they show a serum B12 of 150 pmol/L, a serum 
folate of 6 nmol/L and a red cell folate of 70 µg/L, indicating folate 
deficiency. You start her on folic acid 5 mg daily with regular blood 
monitoring.
	 Consider other possible organic causes of depressive symptoms (see 
Information box, below).
	 Specific management depends on the severity:
•	 Mild depression may respond to counselling and attempts to resolve 
problems leading to depression.
•	 Mild to moderate depression can respond well to cognitive behav­
ioural therapy, which requires time and available resources.
•	 Moderate to severe depression is more likely to present and be 
detected acutely and often responds well to medication.
	 Establish if the patient is at risk (see p. 525).
	 Refer to psychiatric team but explain this to the patient first.
526
Psychiatry
16 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Assess capacity if patient is refusing treatment.
	 Psychiatric treatment can usually be managed by the liaison team on 
the medical ward: this is preferable if medical problems require treat­
ment. A psychiatric nurse is required to observe the patient.
	 The patient will require regular review.
	 Psychiatric treatment or admission using the Mental Health Act is con­
sidered on the basis of severity and risk.
	 Identify aftercare support from family or professionals having dis­
cussed this with the patient.
	 Inform her primary care physician.
Information
Organic causes of depressive symptoms
• Endocrine:
– Hypothyroidism
– Cushing’s syndrome
– Hyperparathyroidism
– Addison’s disease
– Hypercalcaemia
• Infections:
– Viral illness
– Hepatitis
– HIV
• Metabolic:
– Anaemia (particularly vitamin B12 and iron deficient)
– Renal disease
– Cancer
• Neurological:
– MS
– Brain tumour
– Parkinson’s disease
– Post-stroke
– Dementias
• Drugs (many drugs have the potential to cause depressive 
symptoms: check data sheet). Examples include:
– Steroids
– Anti-hypertensives, beta blockers, digoxin
– L-dopa, methyldopa
– Cimetidine, metoclopramide
– Aminophylline, theophylline
– Regular use of stimulants
What medication would you consider and how would you 
begin treatment?
When prescribing anti-depressants:
	 A psychiatric opinion is usually obtained.
	 Medication is most effective in moderate and severe depression.
527
Suicide and deliberate self-harm (DSH) 16 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Compliance is essential and enhanced by good communication. Good 
prescribing practice includes explanation of:
•	 The diagnosis
•	 The likelihood of response to treatment (around two-thirds respond 
well)
•	 Common side effects, which often precede benefits
•	 Delay of 2–3 weeks before therapeutic effect
•	 Anti-depressants are not addictive (a common misconception).
	 Older tricyclic anti-depressants (TCAs) have proven efficacy but signifi­
cant side effects (e.g. anti-muscarinic, postural hypotension, cardiotoxic 
in overdose) and have largely been superseded by newer drugs. TCAs 
are still useful if newer agents aren’t tolerated, sedation is desirable or 
if the patient has had a previous effective response. Avoid prescribing 
large quantities for outpatients and on discharge.
	 Most commonly prescribed of newer anti-depressants are selective sero­
tonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), which can cause nausea but in general 
are better tolerated, cause fewer problematic interactions with other 
drugs and are less toxic in overdose.
	 Difficult to predict which anti-depressant will be best tolerated in view 
of range of side effects and significant individual variation.
	 Elderly patients often require lower starting dose and more gradual 
dose increase.
	 As a general rule, treatment should continue for at least 6 months after 
recovery from acute episode.
• Progress.  This patient’s depression responded to a mixture of 
bereavement counselling and drug therapy with an SSRI (escitalo­
pram 10 mg daily). Her anaemia was due to dietary folate deficiency 
and responded well to treatment with oral folic acid, which was 
continued at home. She is being regularly seen by her GP and Hb 
levels checked. She is still on escitalopram.
Remember
• Severe depression can be life endangering (e.g. acutely suicidal, 
not eating or drinking)
• Refer to the psychiatric team, who may consider the use of 
emergency ECT treatment.
SUICIDE AND DELIBERATE SELF-HARM (DSH)
Patients presenting to hospital having attempted self-harm comprise 
around 10% of acute medical admissions. The most common method is 
drug overdose, which is associated with recent alcohol consumption in up 
to 50% of cases.
The majority of deliberate self-harm (DSH) does not represent a serious 
suicide attempt. Motivations include:
	 Escape from overwhelming stress
	 To effect a change in personal circumstances (‘cry for help’)
	 Wish to die: serious suicidal intent is evident in up to one-fifth of DSH 
presentations.
Many of the components of the assessment of deliberate self-harm can be 
applied to patients who describe having ‘suicidal thoughts’.
528
Psychiatry
16 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
How would you manage this case of deliberate self-harm?
	 Examine the patient, check conscious level (GCS – 15), respiratory rate 
(15/min), blood pressure (104/72).
	 Attend to immediate medical requirements (overdose, see p. 396). Most 
patients will be admitted to hospital after overdose for specific treat­
ment or observation. Patients may underestimate or understate the 
number of tablets taken.
	 When medical condition is stable, interview if possible with collateral 
history from reliable informants aiming to:
1.  Identify mental illness
	 Most completed suicides are associated with a psychiatric diagnosis, 
most often a depressive illness (see p. 528). Many suicide victims have 
seen their doctor in the preceding weeks.
	 Conversely, clear psychiatric illness is evident in less than one-third of 
DSH presentations. Most occur after a ‘life event’, with up to half fol­
lowing a relationship problem.
	 Most common diagnoses include depression, alcohol dependence, per­
sonality disorders (borderline, anti-social).
2.  Detect patients at risk of completed suicide
	 Serious suicide attempts form a minority of DSH presentations but 
individuals who harm themselves have a greatly increased risk of 
suicide compared to the general population.
	 A high proportion of suicide victims have a previous history of DSH.
	 An indication of risk should be documented in the notes with an appro­
priate plan of action.
Remember
• Dependants might be at risk (e.g. young children at home): 
inform social worker if necessary
• Some hospitals have dedicated staff who assess all patients. In 
these situations your task is to identify those who are in need of 
immediate attention or treatment.
Case history
You are called to see a 24-year-old woman, accompanied by a 
friend who called an ambulance to bring the patient to A&E. The 
woman is tearful, smells of alcohol and says that she took a 
handful of paracetamol 4 h previously after a violent argument with 
her boyfriend. She tells you that her mother died 3 months ago 
and that she wants to join her. She has seen her doctor recently 
complaining of poor sleep.
529
Suicide and deliberate self-harm (DSH) 16 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
3.  Explore suicidal thoughts
	 Never avoid detailed but tactful questions concerning suicidal ideas and 
intentions.
	 Responses need to be assessed in the context of the overall presentation, 
especially if the patient is unforthcoming.
	 Establish the patient’s thoughts about the episode of self-harm.
	 Find out if the patient wishes to die: ask questions to assess underlying 
mental state, e.g.:
•	 How does the patient see the future?
•	 Does the patient see life as completely hopeless?
•	 Does the patient feel he/she would be better off dead?
	 Assess plans for further attempts: method, circumstances.
	 Identify protective factors: reasons for not wishing to die, e.g. change 
in circumstances, family, dependants.
4.  Identify means of preventing recurrence
The most significant factor predictive of repetition is the number of previ­
ous episodes. Assess:
	 Current and previous coping resources
	 Level of support: identify important relationships
	 Possible precipitants (current problems, recent events) and means of 
addressing them.
	 Alternative methods of dealing with distress.
Information
Features associated with increased suicide risk:
• Demographic: socially isolated (divorced, widowed, never 
married); male (rates in young men increasing steeply); older 
age, minority groups (e.g. young Asian women); unemployed; 
low socioeconomic class; certain professions (doctors, dentists, 
vets, farmers); individuals with access to means (drug users, 
gun owners)
• The attempt:
– Planning: taking care of affairs (cancelled appointments, 
final acts, e.g. suicide note – the content of which can be 
helpful)
– Circumstances: performed in isolation, steps to avoid 
detection
– Method: violent, severe OD or believed likely to be lethal
• The history: present or previous psychiatric diagnosis 
(particularly depression, schizophrenia), recent hospital 
discharge, previous DSH, recent life event (e.g. bereavement, 
retirement, divorce), physical illness (chronic painful illness, CNS 
disorders (MS, epilepsy), cancer, HIV), family history of 
psychiatric illness/suicide, alcohol/drug misuse, impulsive 
personality
• The mental state: agitation, depressed mood, suicidal thoughts, 
hopelessness, delusions, hallucinations, insight in early 
schizophrenia
530
Psychiatry
16 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Further management: psychiatric liaison referral
	 Many hospitals have dedicated staff to assess all deliberate self-harm 
presentations in liaison with the psychiatric team. Learn to recognise 
individuals in need of immediate attention or treatment.
	 Most patients do not require further psychiatric intervention.
	 If a significant psychiatric disorder is identified, management can be 
initiated as an inpatient or outpatient in communication with the 
patient’s doctor.
	 High-risk cases or those with severe symptoms will require psychiatric 
admission – if necessary using compulsory detention. Level of risk and 
nursing 
observation 
required 
should 
be 
communicated 
and 
documented.
Difficult management problems
1.  Repeated presenters (e.g. self-laceration, overdose, actual 
or threatened)
	 Behaviour often associated with personality-related vulnerabilities (e.g. 
borderline personality), dysfunctional coping and intermittent stress in 
the absence of other clear psychiatric diagnosis.
	 A planned, consistent multidisciplinary response coordinated through 
the psychiatric team can sometimes help provide containment.
	 Reduction in the maladaptive expression of distress may occur with 
support from a key worker, counselling, psychotherapy or enhanced 
social support.
	 Occasional, psychiatric crisis admissions may be required but these 
should be kept to a minimum in favour of longer-term strategies.
	 Low-dose anti-psychotic medication may help to reduce arousal and 
subjective distress, avoiding prescriptions for large quantities and iden­
tifying a care professional or other reliable, willing carer to help super­
vise the medication initially if required.
2.  Refusal of medical treatment
	 Involve senior colleague and/or psychiatrist (to determine if mental 
disorder impairs capacity).
	 Explain clearly the risks of not having treatment.
	 Assess capacity to make informed decision and record it (see Informa­
tion box, below).
	 If treatment is considered necessary, attempt persuasion/negotiation, if 
possible including a friend or relative the patient trusts.
	 Continue trying to gain the patient’s trust, explaining merits of treat­
ment and risks of refusal. A patient who is frightened, angry or present­
ing in crisis may choose to cooperate as his/her distress settles.
	 If the patient has capacity and refuses treatment, a second opinion from 
a senior is advisable.
	 It is essential that discussions with the patient, management decisions 
and their reasons are clearly documented in detail and discussed with 
a senior colleague.
	 The Mental Health Act can be used to detain a patient who is refusing 
medical treatment in hospital if the patient is exhibiting symptoms of 
mental disorder that places their health, safety or that of others at risk 
and provides for the administration of treatment for a mental disorder 
that might be impairing a patient’s capacity to decide on their medical 
treatment.
531
Suicide and deliberate self-harm (DSH) 16 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
3.  Patients unwilling to remain in hospital 
for further assessment
	 The patient’s capacity to make this decision should be documented.
	 If considered at risk, appropriate staff should attempt to detain in hos­
pital under common law to permit an urgent mental health assessment 
by a psychiatrist and approved social worker. Reasons relating to the 
patient’s behaviour, mental state and possible risks should be carefully 
documented.
4.  Intoxicated or violent patients
	 The assistance of hospital security or the police might be necessary.
	 Assessment will be more productive if the patient is given time to sober 
up (in which case the behaviour may completely settle), as long as the 
patient or others are not put at risk.
	 Consider psychiatric opinion if an underlying psychiatric disorder is 
thought likely.
Information
Assessing capacity to withhold consent to examination, 
investigation or treatment
• Adults are presumed competent to refuse medical advice and 
treatment
• Decisions with more serious implications require greater 
capacity
• A patient lacks capacity if some impairment or disturbance of 
mental functioning causes inability to decide whether to consent 
to or refuse treatment, which is determined by:
– Inability to comprehend and retain information on indications 
and benefits of proposed treatment and in particular the 
possible risks of refusing it
– Being incapable of weighing up the information in order to 
arrive at a decision
• Temporary incapacity (e.g. due to head injury, altered mood, 
alcohol) may permit essential life-saving treatment without 
consent
Remember
Enforced physical treatment is given under common law and is not 
sanctioned by use of the Mental Health Act. Decision to go ahead 
depends on consideration of:
• Patient’s capacity to refuse treatment
• Reasonable professional practice and a doctor’s duty of care to 
the patient
• Necessity of the treatment to save life, prevent a serious 
incident or a deterioration in health
• Decision to treat being in the patient’s best interests.
532
Psychiatry
16 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
• Progress.  This patient had taken approximately 20 tablets of para­
cetamol (10 g) and was given N-acetylcysteine intravenously (p. 401) 
and her liver function remained normal. This was her first episode 
of DSH and she realised the seriousness of what she had done and 
the necessity for future counselling.
Further reading
Hewson B. The law on managing patients who deliberately harm them­
selves and refuse treatment. British Medical Journal 1999; 319: 905–907.
ACUTE ANXIETY
Case history (1)
You are called to the A&E to see a breathless young woman. She 
is acutely distressed and breathing rapidly. She feels light-headed 
and has paraesthesiae in her hands and feet.
Differential diagnoses such as a respiratory emergency (e.g. asthma, 
pulmonary embolus, and pneumothorax) must first be excluded (p. 325). 
Panic attack (see also p. 332) is suggested by:
	 Extreme fear
	 Subjective complaint of difficulty breathing in rather than out
	 Respiratory alkalosis (causing tetany and relative hypocalcaemia)
	 Arterial blood gases will show hypocapnia but normal oxygen levels
	 Sweating
	 Emotional trigger (shock)
	 Environmental trigger (crowd phobia).
Management
Hyperventilation is best treated by re-breathing into a paper bag in order 
to increase pCO2. However, this did not help this young woman and a 
minor tranquilliser was given (diazepam 5 mg orally). Lorazepam 1–2 mg, 
orally or IM is an alternative; this can be repeated 1 h later if necessary. 
She was sent home on diazepam and told to see her own doctor urgently 
for possible counselling.
Case history (2)
The nursing staff inform you that a 55-year-old man is refusing to 
have any more haemodialysis, having just started this treatment. A 
phobic reaction to dialysis is suggested by avoidance, abnormal 
fear and sympathetic over-drive, during dialysis or talking about it. 
Depressive illness is a common association of anxiety and should 
always be excluded (see p. 333). These phobias are also common 
in oncology (vomit phobia with chemotherapy).
533
Acute anxiety 16 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
How would you manage this patient?
	 Support and sympathy with explanation of the phobia.
	 Minor tranquilliser (see above) short term only: up to 2 weeks of 
diazepam 5 mg × 3 daily (long-half-life drugs are better).
	 Ask a psychologist to consider graded exposure therapy.
	 A selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (sertraline, citalopram, paroxet­
ine, fluoxetine) is often required in the presence of co-morbid depressive 
illness.
Information
Patients can be educated about panic attacks and how to prevent 
them when better: (seek behaviour therapy for phobias) and the 
use of a paper bag during an attack.
What are the physical symptoms and signs of anxiety?
	 Dilated pupils
	 Photosensitivity: patient might be wearing dark glasses
	 Phonosensitivity: patient cannot bear any noise
	 Dry mouth
	 Flushed face and neck
	 Sweating
	 Hyperventilation
	 Associated hypocapnia and respiratory alkalosis: causing relative 
hypocalcaemia (tingling or numbness) in extremities and face, light-
headedness and tetany (see p. 333)
	 Tachycardia (pulse may be as high as 140 bpm)
	 Nausea
	 Diarrhoea
	 Frequency of micturition
	 Increased muscle tension.
What are the psychological symptoms of anxiety?
	 Excessive fear
	 Derealisation (patient feels that the environment is less real and solid, 
with a feeling of detachment)
	 Fear of collapse
	 Catastrophic thinking (‘I’m about to die from a heart attack’).
Always look for the following associations
	 Phobias: abnormal fear and avoidance of particular situations or things
	 Depressive illness (see p. 528)
	 Obsessive–compulsive disorder: repetitive ruminations that are incon­
sistent with the personality, along with repeated behaviours; checking 
excessively or hand-washing because of fears of germs.
• Progress.  This man settled quickly with counselling and 5 mg 
of diazepam. He subsequently continued dialysis without any 
problems.
534
Psychiatry
16 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Further reading
Tyrer P, Baldwin D Generalised anxiety disorder. Lancet 2006; 368: 
2156–2166.
OPIATE DEPENDENCE
Drugs in this group include: diamorphine (heroin), morphine, pethidine, 
methadone, dihydrocodeine and buprenorphine.
Effects of opiate use
	 Euphoria
	 Analgesia
	 Relaxation
	 Drowsiness.
Heroin addicts are 16 times more likely to die than individuals of equiva­
lent age, chiefly as a result of overdose. They frequently present in the 
acute hospital setting.
Case history (1)
You are called to see a 23-year-old man admitted 24 h previously 
following a road traffic accident. He is verbally abusing nursing 
staff and wants to leave against medical advice. He is demanding 
methadone, stating that he is a heroin addict.
How would you assess this man?
	 Attempt to defuse the situation and prevent an escalation of disturbed 
behaviour.
	 Take history of drug use including each drug taken, amount and route.
	 Obtain information from other sources:
•	 Previously or currently attended drug support agencies if patient 
admits to having received help. They may be able to tell you if the 
patient has a regular prescription for methadone.
•	 Corroborative history from reliable other informant with patient’s 
consent.
	 Examine for evidence of opiate use: withdrawal symptoms begin within 
12 h of last use and increase in severity over the first 48 h. With longer-
acting opioids such as methadone, onset of withdrawal symptoms can 
be delayed and their duration increased. Opiate withdrawal that is 
uncomplicated by other drugs is subjectively unpleasant but not life-
threatening, and can present with:
•	 Agitation
•	 Anxiety
•	 Low mood
•	 Restlessness
•	 Tachycardia
•	 Sweating
•	 ‘Goose flesh’
•	 Dilated pupils
•	 Yawning
535
Opiate dependence 16 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
•	 Sneezing
•	 Vomiting
•	 Lacrimation
•	 Rhinorrhoea.
	 Look for evidence of recent drug use, e.g. needle marks, phlebitis, skin 
abscesses. Subjective complaints include craving, poor sleep (which can 
last months), abdominal cramps, nausea, diarrhoea, musculoskeletal 
pain.
How would you investigate this patient?
•	 Send urine for drug screen.
•	 Infection screen (risk of hepatitis B, C, HIV).
How would you manage and treat this patient?
Prescribing methadone
	 Oral methadone mixture should be given if you are satisfied a signifi­
cant habit exists, and this is confirmed by reliable sources or objective 
evidence of use or withdrawal symptoms.
	 If possible, seek advice from local specialist drug unit.
	 There are published guidelines on clinical management of drug use and 
dependence – a copy should be available in the hospital pharmacy.
	 Any registered medical practitioner can prescribe methadone.
	 Methadone tablets should not generally be prescribed because of their 
potential for misuse.
	 Dose required to control withdrawal can be carefully titrated in hospi­
tal. Start at low dose of methadone, e.g. 10 mL (1 mg per 1 mL mixture). 
Further 10 mL at 4-hourly intervals is used until objective signs of 
withdrawal are controlled. Establish daily requirement.
	 Doses above 40 mL (40 mg) daily should only be taken if there is reliable 
information that the patient has been receiving higher regular prescrip­
tion, but even in this case dose should be gradually titrated upwards.
Remember
Avoid high doses. Methadone overdose causes respiratory arrest 
– patients can overstate their requirements and physical tolerance 
to opiates can change quickly.
Symptomatic treatment of withdrawal symptoms may be 
indicated and includes:
	 Ibuprofen for pain.
	 Loperamide for diarrhoea.
	 Patients may demand more methadone than required to control with­
drawal symptoms in order to promote sleep. This should be avoided. 
Short-term use of hypnotic medication is an alternative. Diazepam also 
helps muscle spasm and anxiety.
	 Observe for evidence of withdrawal from other drugs, e.g.:
•	 Alcohol: DTs (see p. 526)
•	 Benzodiazepines: risk of convulsions.
536
Psychiatry
16 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Comorbid psychiatric disorder can be present:
•	 Depressive illness (see p. 528)
•	 Psychotic symptoms (if polydrug use includes stimulants or halluci­
nogenic drugs).
When condition stable
Gradually reduce methadone by 10% per day if aiming for abstinence. The 
patient wishes to remain on methadone in the longer term and was already 
receiving regular prescription prior to admission. He requestsreferral to 
local drug support service. The reduction regimen may require some flex­
ibility to promote cooperation.
Remember
Patients should be warned of the risks even of relatively low doses 
of methadone and be cautioned about its safe keeping, particularly 
if there are children at home (5–10 mL could be lethal for a child).
Case history (2)
A young man is rushed to A&E in a comatose state. His girlfriend 
tells you he used heroin after an abstinence of 4 weeks.
• Progress.  On discharge, as drug service support is required, arrange 
planned transfer of care and be specific about who will prescribe and 
when. The patient’s doctor should be informed and may be willing 
to prescribe. Avoid giving large prescriptions. Methadone should 
generally be prescribed for collection on a daily basis, but drug serv­
ices can advise on this. This patient continues on methadone supplied 
by the local drug support service.
How do you proceed?
Urgent cardiorespiratory support should be available.
	 Assess evidence of opiate toxicity (an acute medical emergency):
•	 Conscious level (Glasgow Coma Scale – 13)
•	 Respiratory depression – 12 bpm
•	 Bradycardia – 52/min
•	 Miosis – present
•	 Hypothermia. – 36.4°.
	 Examine for other causes of impaired consciousness (e.g. head injury).
	 Administer opiate antagonist naloxone (0.8–2 mg): IV naloxone has a 
high affinity for opiate receptors and reverses the signs of toxicity by 
displacing ingested opiates. Life-threatening symptoms may recur in 
view of the relatively short half-life (minutes) of naloxone, which may 
need to be re-administered depending on the half-life of the opiate taken 
(e.g. half-life of methadone is over 24 h).
537
The disturbed patient 16 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Heroin overdose, causing life-threatening respiratory depression, can 
occur after a period of abstinence as physical tolerance is reduced.
Remember
All patients need to be monitored in hospital for at least 24 h even 
if they make a brisk recovery.
• Progress.  This patient made a rapid recovery with the use of 
repeated naloxone and he agreed to be referred back to the Drug 
Dependency Unit.
THE DISTURBED PATIENT
A behaviourally disturbed patient is often distressed and frightened by 
their subjective experiences or the circumstances in which they find them­
selves. The behaviour may place the individual or others at risk.
Typical presentations:
	 Agitation and restlessness
	 Over-activity
	 Communication of distress, e.g. self-injury or mutilation, threats to 
harm self
	 Fluctuating and unpredictable behaviour
	 Intimidating, defensive or oversensitive behaviour
	 Verbally loud, aggressive or violent conduct.
Underlying causes of disturbed behaviour include:
1.  Organic mental disorders
	 Dementia: patients can be restless, aggressive and may wander because 
of disorientation. May be exaggerated by coexistent physical conditions, 
e.g. acute infection, constipation.
	 Delirium (see p. 515): arising from a number of causes and commonly 
associated with disturbed behaviour due to misinterpretation of sur­
roundings. Conscious level is impaired, often with fearfulness, percep­
tual abnormalities (visual or auditory hallucination) and abnormal 
thinking (e.g. persecutory delusions).
	 Epilepsy: ictal (e.g. temporal lobe) or post-ictal.
2.  Other psychiatric disorders
	 Major psychoses:
•	 Schizophrenia: delusional thinking or abnormal sensory experience 
(e.g. auditory hallucination) may be driving behaviour.
•	 Manic psychosis: elevation in mood can be associated with hyperac­
tive and disorganised behaviour.
	 Anxiety and depression (see pp. 538, 528): can be associated with agita­
tion, restlessness and high arousal. Major depression is associated with 
suicidality and self-harm.
3.  Substance use
Alcohol intoxication or withdrawal (see p. 526). Use of other drugs, e.g. 
stimulants, hallucinogenics, solvents.
538
Psychiatry
16 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
4.  Physical illness
Individuals may have a physical cause to explain their disturbed behav­
iour, e.g. chronic pain, side effects of medication.
5.  Personality factors in the absence of physical 
or psychiatric disorder
Personality vulnerabilities or ‘disorders’ can give rise to several distinct 
patterns of problematic behaviour, which may be associated with circum­
stances, crises, stress or intoxication. This can include exaggerated propen­
sities to express anger, violent, explosive or anti-social conduct or 
self-mutilating and cutting.
Case history
A young man walks into A&E. He is unkempt, preoccupied and 
suspicious. His behaviour is bizarre, disorganised and 
unpredictable. He has been argumentative and intimidating, 
causing distress to staff and other patients.
Management
	 Aim to identify cause and take control of the situation.
	 Of paramount concern is the safety of the patient, other patients, your­
self and colleagues.
	 Disturbed patients should be assessed in a safe area with adequate staff 
support (medical, nursing, security) and access to a panic alarm.
	 Consider the possibility that the patient might be concealing a weapon.
	 Specific management depends on the severity of the disturbed behav­
iour and the cause.
	 Clues to the diagnosis can often be found by carefully observing an 
uncooperative patient even from a distance while awaiting staff support, 
e.g. impairment of the conscious level may suggest delirium, drug 
intoxication; a smell of alcohol may be apparent. A major psychotic 
mental illness may be suggested from the appearance, behaviour and 
speech, e.g. preoccupation, suspiciousness, over-activity, thought disor­
der, delusional ideas.
	 Additional background information from reliable informants is invalu­
able but not always possible.
After an initial assessment of the situation, and with appropriate staff 
support: a further attempt to calm this patient should be made.
Use interpersonal skills/de-escalation
	 Approach the patient in a non-confrontational manner, avoiding inva­
sion of their personal space – disturbed patients may misinterpret their 
surroundings and the motives of others and whereas their behaviour 
can create fear in those around them they are often defensive and 
frightened themselves. The likelihood of cooperation is enhanced if the 
patient feels safe.
	 Clear communication with sensitive statements and questions is often 
helpful.
	 Ask the patient what he/she wants; listen and offer advice and 
reassurance.
539
The disturbed patient 16 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Attempt to interview the patient in a safe, relaxed setting.
	 If initial attempts to engage the patient fail, providing the situation has 
not escalated, give the patient some space and time before trying again. 
Make sure the patient is appropriately observed. The time can be used 
to consider alternative management.
Patient remains uncooperative
An uncooperative patient whose behaviour is of concern and suggests a 
mental health problem will require an urgent mental health assessment. 
An approved ‘clinician’ – under the Mental Health Act (often the duty 
psychiatrist) – is required to sign a medical recommendation that the 
patient be detained on mental health grounds. If this is appropriate, the 
patient will be transferred to the psychiatric team. Should the patient’s 
behaviour be considered to present a risk to themselves or others before 
this can be completed, the use of restraint and possibly medication (see 
below) under common law should be considered. The reasons for this 
course of action should be clearly documented and suitable staff should 
be available.
Following implementation of Mental Health Act 
As the patient’s behaviour remains disturbed and is a risk to himself and 
others, safe restraint should be used as a coordinated response by suitably 
trained nursing staff. This involves sufficient numbers so that at least one 
can hold each limb, with two nurses taking responsibility for giving the 
medication.
Medication 
	 Reduction in arousal can be achieved by a carefully planned regimen 
of anti-psychotic medication, preferably given orally and in liquid form 
in the first instance.
	 Before deciding on intramuscular medication, all non-invasive meas­
ures to calm the patient and secure cooperation should be attempted. 
Even patients who present as highly disturbed initially may agree to 
take oral medication when it becomes clear that the situation is under 
control.
	 Giving intramuscular medication to a potentially resistive and aroused 
patient is not without risk, which must be outweighed by risks of inac­
tion and clearly documented.
	 Resuscitation equipment must be available.
	 A patient receiving intramuscular medication under restraint should be 
held in the prone position to protect the airway. The patient is released 
gently when signs of relaxation and calming become evident and placed 
under constant observation.
	 The dose of anti-psychotic medication can be reduced by combination 
with a sedating benzodiazepine in the short term.
	 Start at low doses and increase gradually depending on response. A 
suitable regime is:
•	 Haloperidol 5 mg IM
•	 Lorazepam 1–2 mg IM.
	 Vital signs (pulse, temperature, blood pressure, conscious level) should 
be monitored every 15 min.
	 While the behaviour continues to present a risk, the dose may be 
repeated at intervals of 30 min to 1 h until the patient is settled, subject 
to regular monitoring of vital signs.
540
Psychiatry
16 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
When the patient is more settled
Further assessment can be carried out to establish an accurate diagnosis 
prior to starting regular treatment.
• Progress.  This patient’s doctor is eventually contacted and you are 
told that a diagnosis of schizophrenia was made 5 years ago. The 
patient had been well but the doctor said he had not attended the 
clinic (despite reminders) in the last 3 months and suspects he has 
run out of medication. He has been on olazapine 10 mg daily. This 
information is passed on to the psychiatric team who continue his 
management.
Remember
Particular caution should be used in patients who have never 
received anti-psychotic medication previously (‘neuroleptic naïve’) 
because of the possibility of adverse effects such as a 
hypersensitivity reaction or acute dystonia.
541
541
Dermatology 17 
A SWOLLEN RED LEG
Case history
The A&E officer asks you to come and see a 50-year-old man 
who is unwell and has a red, swollen leg. He thinks he needs 
anticoagulation for a possible DVT.
On arrival you check if this was of sudden onset or a chronically 
swollen leg. You ask if there is a past history of DVT or whether 
there are any risk factors, such as a long car journey, air travel, 
immobility or a family history of clotting disorders. You also ask 
about any recent illness, e.g. heart failure, blood disorder.
What should you do next?
You do a full medical examination.
On examination the patient weighs 102 kg and has a temperature of 
38°C. The leg is indeed red, swollen, hot and tender below the knee. You 
note a small ulcer on the medial side of the leg above the ankle. Dorsalis 
pedis pulse is palpable.
What is your diagnosis?
Cellulitis, probably due to streptococci gaining entry via the venous ulcer.
Differential diagnosis
	 Deep vein thrombosis
	 Ruptured Baker’s cyst
	 Lipodermatosclerosis
	 Acute allergic contact dermatitis: e.g. to dressings
	 Necrotising fasciitis: black necrotic areas within cellulitic area.
Information
Lipodermatosclerosis
•	 Hot, red and woody hard ‘atrophic’ skin
•	 Long-standing venous disease
•	 Can mimic cellulitis but the patient is well, there is no pyrexia, 
and it may be bilateral
542
Dermatology
17 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
How do you treat?
Penicillin V plus flucloxacillin 500 mg × 4 daily, having ascertained that he 
is not allergic to penicillin. Oral therapy should be for 10–14 days. When 
the cellulitis is very severe, parenteral benzylpenicillin 1.2 g × 4 daily and 
flucloxacillin 1 g × 4 daily, i.e. 3 days’ intravenous therapy should be given 
initially, followed by 10 days’ oral therapy.
• Progress.  The patient’s leg improved with antibiotics and he was 
discharged after 3 days. He was given compression stockings for his 
venous hypertension. He was referred to a dietitian for advice on 
weight reduction.
Further reading
Kilburn SA, Featherstone P, Higgins B, Brindle R. Interventions for cellu­
litis and erysipelas. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010; 6: CD004299.
Leg ulceration
Take a full history of associated diseases (diabetes mellitus, rheumatoid 
arthritis, past history of deep vein thrombosis, varicose veins, heart 
disease, hypertension, vasculitis, sickle cell, scleroderma).
Causes and signs
	 Venous hypertension:
•	 Ulcer: chronic and recurrent; site – internal malleolus
•	 Oedema
•	 Venous eczema
•	 Skin discoloration: atrophie blanche (stellate scarring with tel­
angiectasia), erythema, haemosiderin pigmentation
•	 Skin texture: lipodermatosclerosis.
	 Arterial disease:
•	 Ulcer: punched out; site – often lateral or higher up on leg (painful)
•	 Pulses: absent dorsalis pedis or posterior tibial
•	 Cool leg.
	 Vasculitis: non-blanching purpura.
	 Neuropathic: sensory signs of decreased sensation present particularly 
over pressure areas on feet; common in diabetics.
Investigations
•	 General: FBC, U&Es, LFTs, autoantibodies (vasculitis), blood 
sugar, vitamin B12, T Pallidum enzyme immunoassay 
(neuropathic ulcer)
•	 Venous: Doppler ultrasound – always perform before 
compression bandaging
•	 Arterial: Doppler ultrasound, digital substraction angiography
Investigations
•	 Streptococcal titres: ASOT, ADB (anti-DNase B)
•	 Swab/blood cultures rarely helpful
543
Erythema nodosum 17 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Management
	 Venous ulcers: elevation, exercise, compression dressings. Antibiotics 
if infected (always check Doppler pressures before considering com­
pression as many ulcers have mixed venous and arterial aetiology). 
Adequate analgesia.
	 Arterial ulcers: investigate arterial supply, dressings with NO compres­
sion. Adequate analgesia.
	 Vasculitic ulcers: vasculitic screen, e.g. ANCA, ANA, rheumatoid 
factor.
	 Neuropathic ulcers: keep ulcer clean and remove pressure or trauma 
from affected area.
Note: Operating on varicose veins rarely helps venous insufficiency prob­
lems – ‘re-plumbing’ of the veins is not possible.
Contact your hospital’s tissue viability nurse for assistance with dress­
ings and compression bandaging and for arranging longer-term commu­
nity nursing follow-up.
Information
Compression bandages
•	 Four-layer bandaging provides high levels of graduated 
compression with pressure decreasing up the leg
•	 80% of ulcers can be healed within 6 months
ERYTHEMA NODOSUM
Erythema nodosum (EN) is a hypersensitivity reaction to various antigens 
(e.g. drugs, infectious agents and unknown antigens), producing an 
inflammation in the dermis and subcutaneous layer (panniculitis).
It presents with painful, tender, dusky blue red nodules, usually on the 
shins and lower limbs (Fig 17.1).
Case history
An unmarried 16-year-old Asian girl presents to an inner city A&E 
with her mother. She has painful red lumps on her shins and 
arthralgia. Walking has become painful. She is otherwise well, with 
no relevant previous medical history.
On examination she has tender, red/purple lumps on her shins. 
No other signs. A clinical picture was of erythema nodosum.
Make the diagnosis
	 Spontaneous onset over days; evolution over a few days or weeks
	 Single or multiple deep bruise-like nodules 1–10 cm diameter (better felt 
than seen)
544
Dermatology
17 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Figure 17.1  Erythema nodosum. 
	 Tender and warm to touch
	 Predominantly affecting limbs (shins or lower limbs)
	 No age or sex limitation (but young females more common)
	 Sometimes associated with arthralgia
	 Always do a CXR looking for hilar lymphadenopathy or TB.
What is the cause?
	 Drugs:
•	 Oral contraceptives
•	 Aspirin and other NSAIDs
•	 Sulphonamides.
	 Infection:
•	 Streptococcal
•	 Tuberculosis
•	 Leprosy (patient from endemic area)
•	 Chlamydia (rare).
	 Sarcoidosis.
	 Inflammatory bowel disease.
	 Idiopathic (common).
	 Pregnancy.
Initial treatment
	 Aspirin 600 mg as required (unless the identified cause of the EN).
	 Bed rest if severe.
	 Tubigrip support bandages.
	 If severe symptoms and/or cutaneous ulceration, use dapsone (up to 
100 mg daily)/steroids (30 mg daily decreasing course).
545
Urticaria and angio-oedema 17 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Note: monitor for haemolytic anaemia and avoid dapsone if G6PD 
deficient.
When should she be referred?
	 Recurrent or unresolving symptoms
	 Ulceration
	 Sarcoidosis/tuberculosis/leprosy/inflammatory 
bowel 
disease 
suspected
	 Systemically unwell patient.
• Progress.  This girl went home with her mother, reassured that her 
illness would settle. After 7 days with occasional aspirin therapy she 
was much better and was able to restart school. Her chest X-ray 
showed hilar lymphadenopathy. With erythema nodosum this is 
characteristic of sarcoidosis.
She returned to the hospital after 6 months for a follow-up chest X-ray, 
which was normal.
URTICARIA AND ANGIO-OEDEMA
Urticaria or hives is characterised by short-lived dermal swelling (weals) 
anywhere on the body (Fig. 17.2). These usually itch and, except in some 
subtypes, resolve without bruising within 24 h (often within 10–20 min). 
They can form bizarre serpiginous or annular-shaped lesions. The 
latter show central clearing, not central necrosis as seen in erythema 
multiforme.
Angio-oedema is a deeper form of swelling affecting the dermis and 
subcutis, usually affecting the mucous membranes, e.g. eyes, lips, tongue, 
genitals, and much less commonly the larynx and gastrointestinal tract. It 
is generally not itchy but can be painful and disappears within 72 h. It may 
occur in isolation or with urticaria (45% cases).
The incidence of urticaria/angio-oedema is about 15% in a person’s 
lifetime and both conditions are more common in atopics.
Figure 17.2  Urticaria. 
546
Dermatology
17 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
• Diagnosis.  Urticaria with angio-oedema.
Classification of urticarias
Acute
By definition this lasts < 6 weeks. Few cases have an identifiable allergen. 
They are IgE mediated. In the most severe form there is an anaphylactic 
reaction but this is fortunately very rare:
	 Acute idiopathic urticaria and angio-oedema: accounts for > 90% 
of urticaria. A good history (not type 1 allergy testing) should exclude 
an allergic cause. Viral infections will sometimes set off an acute 
urticaria.
	 Acute allergic: drug reactions, insect bites, foods (e.g. peanuts or 
seafood), can cause this type of reaction, as well as contact urticaria 
caused by, e.g. latex, tomatoes. A history of an almost immediate reac­
tion (seconds to minutes) after contact with an allergen should alert one 
to this form.
Chronic
By definition if urticaria persists > 6 weeks. Only 2–4% cases have an 
identifiable cause and extensive investigation is not indicated. Some cases 
are autoimmune and functionally significant IgG (which acts against the 
high-affinity IgE receptors on mast cells) can be demonstrated in patient’s 
serum. In a few patients an acute illness (hepatitis, brucellosis), focal sepsis 
(e.g. dental abscess), dermatophyte or parasitic infections can precipitate 
a reaction but this is very rare.
Physical
Reproducible wealing occurs in response to a specific physical stimulus, 
e.g. friction, pressure, cold, heat, water, sun. The diagnosis might be sus­
pected from the patient’s history or site of urticaria i.e. pressure sites in 
cases of dermographism or delayed pressure urticaria.
General management
	 Explanation of condition and likelihood of not identifying specific 
cause.
	 Avoidance of non-specific factors, e.g. aspirin, NSAIDs, opiates.
	 H1 anti-histamines (non-sedating or combination of daytime non-
sedating H1 blockers and sedating H1 blocker at night); 90% of cases will 
respond to a non-sedating anti-histamine.
	 H2 anti-histamines, e.g. cimetidine 400 mg × 2 daily.
Case history
A 22-year-old woman presents in A&E with a 6-hour history of 
a florid raised red rash all over the body. It is very itchy and 
distressing and has caused swelling around her eyes and her right 
hand. Previous medical history was of atopic eczema as a child 
and mild hay fever.
On examination she had red, raised weals all over her body 
and periorbital swelling.
547
Urticaria and angio-oedema 17 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Immunotherapy:
•	 Short-term: a short, 7-day course of oral prednisolone 30 mg daily 
may be given in A&E to quickly settle an attack (especially if angio-
oedema prominent) while waiting for anti-histamines to work
•	 Long-term: dapsone, corticosteroids, IV immunoglobulin, ciclosporin. 
For very severe cases, refer to dermatology department.
Preferred regimes if no contraindications
	 Loratidine 10–20 mg daily or cetirizine 10–20 mg daily or fexofenadine 
180 mg daily (all non-sedating anti-histamines).
	 Sedative anti-histamines, e.g. hydroxyzine 25–50 mg at night.
Refer: to dermatology department if no response to anti-histamines.
Refer: to type 1 allergy clinic (usually different to dermatology) only if 
allergic urticaria is suspected from history.
Management of severe angio-oedema
See p. 409.
	 Adrenaline (epinephrine): 1 : 1000 (1 mg/mL) IM. Adult dose 
0.5–1.0 mL.
	 IV chlorphenamine: 10–20 mg (max. 40 mg/24 h).
	 IV hydrocortisone succinate: 100–300 mg.
Home (injectable adrenaline) pens
These should never be prescribed lightly and only after full investigation 
in an allergy clinic when relevant allergens have been proven and where 
a genuine anaphylactic reaction has occurred. They are most commonly 
used in those severely allergic to nuts. Injectable adrenaline pens are not 
appropriate for isolated severe cutaneous urticaria or angio-oedema.
Patients/parents need to attend an allergy clinic to be instructed in both 
when and how to use the pens and, indeed, how frequently if the first 
injection only gives temporary relief (two pens should be prescribed).
Adrenaline (epinephrine) 1 : 1000 (1 mg/mL) is available in pre-loaded 
injections to deliver a dose of 0.3 or 0.5 mg (adult) or 0.15 mg (paediatric) 
and injections should be carried out by the patient.
• Progress.  This patient was given prednisolone 30 mg daily for 7 
days and started on loratidine 20 mg daily. The nature of the com­
plaint was explained to her; no specific antigen was identified. She 
was seen by her doctor after 4 days and was completely free of 
symptoms. She continued with loratidine for 1 month.
Hereditary angio-oedema (HAE)
Skin lesions may develop and laryngeal obstruction can occur. Lesions 
appear as deep swellings with associated enlarging oedematous borders 
that last up to 2–4 days. Urticaria does not occur as part of HAE. Patients 
generally suffer from recurrent attacks of painful angio-oedema, which can 
be precipitated by minor trauma, emotional upset, infections and tempera­
ture change. Involvement of the gastrointestinal tract can cause severe 
acute pain and simulate a surgical emergency. Recurrent abdominal pain 
occurs often and starts in childhood. HAE is inherited in an autosomal 
dominant fashion with either a functional or absolute deficiency of C1 
esterase inhibitor (C1-INH). 80% of cases give a positive family history (e.g. 
of sudden death). Acquired forms are seen in SLE or lymphoma.
548
Dermatology
17 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Management
Patients are unresponsive to anti-histamines, which can exacerbate the 
condition, systemic steroids and adrenaline (epinephrine). Refer all 
patients for management: acute treatment of choice in A&E is intravenous 
(C1-INH) concentrates. If unavailable, fresh frozen plasma can be used. 
Most already diagnosed cases/families will know where local supplies of 
C1-INH are to be found. Icatibant (a bradykinin antagonist) and ecallan­
tide (a kallikrein inhibitor) are also of benefit in acute attacks.
In adults, chronic treatment or ‘prophylaxis’ with attenuated andro­
gens, e.g. stanozolol or danazol, is required if episodes are frequent.
Further reading
Morgan BP. Hereditary angioedema – therapies old and new. N Engl J Med 
2010; 363: 581–583 (and 513–22, 523–31, 532–41).
SUN-INDUCED RASH
Investigations
Two blood samples need to be sent for both absolute levels and 
functional assay of C1-INH (discuss with laboratory first). Only do 
this test in patients with recurrent angio-oedema who do not have 
urticaria. Refer all such patients to local immunologist/
dermatologist depending on local expertise.
Remember
Hereditary angio-oedema (HAE)
Patients can develop laryngeal obstruction requiring urgent 
treatment.
Case history
A 24-year-old-arrived in A&E with blisters on her face and arms. 
She had fallen asleep on the beach in the sun. She had applied 
factor 4 sunscreen and was surprised that she had developed an 
itchy rash. On examination she had papules and a few vesicles 
over the exposed areas.
Remember
•	 Always take a drug history in somebody who is photosensitive 
(e.g. doxycycline, amiodarone)
•	 Always keep SLE and porphyrias in mind for any 
photosensitivity case where diagnosis is not obvious.
549
Sun-induced rash 17 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
What is the diagnosis?
This is polymorphic light eruption, which occurs in 10–20% of the popula­
tion. The rash appears some hours after the exposure and can last for 
several hours or a few days following exposure. The rash may be papular 
or papulovesicular. This patient also had evidence of sunburn – remember, 
factor 4 does not protect for very long.
Differential diagnosis
Common
	 Polymorphic light eruption
	 Sunburn
	 Sunscreen allergy leading to photocontact dermatitis (presents as 
eczema rather than papules/vesicles)
	 Drug-induced photosensitive rash (eg doxycycline, amiodarone).
Rare
	 Photosensitive eczema
	 Lupus erythematosus (all forms)
	 Porphyrias
	 Actinic prurigo
	 Solar urticaria (very rare) gives rise to a rash immediately after sun 
exposure.
Note: ‘prickly heat’ or ‘heat rash’(miliaria) are incorrect labels often 
given to polymorphic light eruption. This is an intensely itchy papular 
eruption in the flexures in hot humid conditions. It is due to blockage of 
the sweat ducts and does not require sun exposure and is also not on sun-
exposed skin.
Information
UVA and UVB
•	 Medium wavelengths 280–310 nm (UVB): cause sunburn and 
long-term skin changes, e.g. ageing/cancer
•	 Long wavelengths 310–400 nm (UVA): do not cause sunburn 
(unless high doses through glass) but do cause 
photodermatoses. Also contribute to long-term skin damage
•	 Sunscreen preparations protect against UVB: the sun protection 
factor (SPF) number gives an indication of the amount of time 
that a person is protected against burning compared to 
unprotected skin. Most sunscreens also protect against UVA by 
utilising reflectants or chemical absorbers
Most sunscreens are insufficiently applied (and not reapplied after 
bathing) and so do not give the protection suggested by the SPF factor.
How would you treat this patient?
No treatment was necessary for this young woman because she was virtu­
ally asymptomatic. She was given a leaflet on sun exposure and told that 
her type of rash usually tended to improve over the summer period.
550
Dermatology
17 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Refer: to dermatology department if condition is not controlled by use 
of sun block and advise to slowly increase sun exposure in spring/early 
summer.
If the rash becomes worse each year, consider desensitising with low-
dose PUVA each spring or short bursts of oral prednisolone 30 mg daily 
for 1 week for an attack.
Further reading
Lehmann P. Sun exposed skin disease. Clinics in Dermatol 2011; 29: 
180–188.
GENERALISED RASH OR ERUPTION
Erythroderma means red skin. By definition, it is the term used when > 
90% of the skin is involved. Erythroderma is not an extensive maculopa­
pular rash.
Case history
A 63-year-old man presents in A&E unwell, shivering and red all 
over. He has suffered with chronic plaque psoriasis for 40 years 
and has been managed on topical therapy only. He smells of 
alcohol and admits to being a heavy drinker.
Examination reveals erythroderma and multiple tiny pustules 
over the trunk. He has a pyrexia of 39.5°C and is clinically 
dehydrated.
Clinical
Take a comprehensive history of onset, past history, previous skin disease, 
family history, medication, occupation and other systemic symptoms. 
These include chills, flu-like symptoms and itching and burning of the 
skin. A full skin examination, including nails, mouth, genitals, scalp and 
hair, should be performed, as well as a general examination of lymph 
nodes and organomegaly.
Differential diagnosis
	 Eczema
	 Psoriasis
	 Drug eruption
	 Idiopathic
	 Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (mycosis fungoides, Sézary syndrome)
	 Pemphigus foliaceus.
Are there any complications you should look out for?
Check for:
	 High-output cardiac failure from increased blood flow
	 Hypothermia from heat loss
	 Fluid loss
	 Hypoalbuminaemia
551
Pruritus 17 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Increased BMR, i.e. catabolic
	 Capillary leak syndrome in very severe cases of psoriasis can give rise 
to ARDS (Note: this can be seen in severe drug rash).
Management
	 Bed rest
	 Rehydrate, plenty of fluids orally or IV
	 Keep warm (space blankets)
	 Moisturise the skin
	 Refer all cases to dermatology urgently
	 Regular (hourly) observations, e.g. blood pressure, pulse fluid input/
output chart, core temperature, weight.
Investigate for cause and treat as appropriate according to primary skin 
disease.
Investigations
•	 FBC
•	 U&Es
•	 LFTs
•	 CXR
•	 Culture of blood, skin, urine, sputum if pyrexial
•	 Skin biopsy (later)
• Progress.  This man was treated initially with intravenous glucose/
saline with added potassium, then oral fluids. His core temperature 
fell to 37.2°, so he was kept warm with space blankets in a heated 
room.
He remained unwell for 2 weeks but then gradually improved.
PRURITUS
Differentiate whether there is a visible rash that is itchy or if there is 
‘normal looking’ skin (with no rash other than scratch marks) that is itchy.
Case history
A 19-year-old white man presents with a 6-week history of 
an itchy skin which has been ‘driving him mad’ especially at 
night-time and he can’t sleep. He is fed up with his doctor, who 
said he had scabies and has treated him four times with malathion 
without benefit. PMH/SH nil relevant. He had bad asthma as 
a child.
On examination he had multiple small red papules on trunk, 
around nipples, wrists, axillae and on the penis. These were 
accompanied by marked excoriations. No burrows were seen. 
A few lesions were seen on the soles of the feet.
552
Dermatology
17 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
• Diagnosis.  Scabies. The diagnosis of scabies was made on clinical 
grounds. Burrows are not always present but the distribution of non-
specific papules (occasionally vesicles) is highly suggestive. Sites 
commonly involved are axillae, nipples, penis, wrists, palms, soles 
and web spaces. The face/head is spared in adults. Scabies can be 
confirmed by skin scraping and microscopy. He lived with his girl­
friend (who was unaffected) and had recently visited a prostitute, 
who may have been the source of infection.
Causes of pruritus
Diseases of the skin associated with pruritus:
	 Eczema (Fig. 17.3)
	 Scabies
	 Urticaria
	 Psoriasis
	 Lichen planus
	 Dermatitis herpetiformis
	 Pemphigoid.
Systemic diseases associated with pruritus:
	 Hypothyroidism
	 Iron deficiency
	 Advanced chronic kidney disease
	 Liver disease (especially PBC and hepatitis C)
	 Lymphoma/myeloproliferative disease
	 Coeliac disease.
Figure 17.3  Eczema. 
General management of urticaria
Treat primary skin disease. Refer to dermatology.
	 Eczema: moisturisers and topical corticosteroids
	 Psoriasis: tar, vitamin D3 ointments, mild to moderate topical steroids, 
dithranol (causes staining)
	 Urticaria: non-sedating anti-histamines (see p. 553)
	 Lichen planus: superpotent topical steroids/oral steroids
	 Systemic diseases: see individual disease for treatment.
553
Cutaneous adverse drug reactions (ADR) 17 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Investigations
•	 Primary skin diseases: most cases can be diagnosed on clinical 
grounds but scrapings for direct microscopy (scabies), punch 
biopsy (+ immunofluorescence), serum IgE for atopic disease 
are helpful
•	 Systemic diseases: FBC, U&Es, LFTs, iron, folate, vitamin B12, 
TFTs, autoimmune hepatitis screen, including mitochondrial 
antibodies, endomysial/gliadin antibodies. Consider serum 
Igs/protein electrophoresis/CXR in selected cases
Progress
	 Scabies: malathion was given to him and his girlfriend. He was told to 
be careful in applying malathion all over his body, including crevices 
of his body and webs of his fingers. This should be washed off after 24 
hours. Sexual contacts (if known), even if asymptomatic and no rash, 
should be given two treatments 7 days apart.
	 Repeated scabies prescription leads to irritant dermatitis. Patients 
should be warned that the itching can go on for 1 month after successful 
treatment of scabies. Therefore give some crotamiton or topical steroid 
rather than further scabies prescription.
This patient’s scabies, on this occasion, was treated successfully because 
he was meticulous in the application of malathion.
Further reading
Batchelor JM, Grindlay DJC, Williams HC. What’s new in atopic eczema? 
An analysis of systematic reviews published in 2008 and 2009. Clinical 
and Experimental Dermatology 2010; 35: 823–828.
Menter A, Korman NJ, Elmets CA et al. Guidelines of care for the manage­
ment of psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis. Section 6. J Am Acad Dermatol 
2011; Feb 7 Epub.
CUTANEOUS ADVERSE DRUG REACTIONS (ADR)
The true incidence is unknown as many go unreported but the skin is the 
most commonly affected organ, involved in 30% of reported ADRs.
Pre-existing disease (SLE, CLL, HIV), advancing age (poly-pharmacy, 
reduced renal and hepatic clearance), sensitivity to other drugs (e.g. peni­
cillins: 10% cross-reactivity with cephalosporins) can all increase suscepti­
bility to the development of ADRs.
Case history (1)
A 24-year-old man developed a severe sore throat and a fever. He 
was seen by his doctor, who diagnosed a streptococcal sore 
throat and prescribed amoxicillin. Two days later he presented 
with a macropapular rash (Fig. 17.4).
On examination he was noted to have cervical lymphadenopathy 
and a small palpable spleen. Infectious mononucleosis was 
diagnosed with a monospot test and the amoxicillin was stopped.
554
Dermatology
17 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Remember
Always discuss the harm/benefit ratio of drugs with your patient. 
Also review their current drug therapy and check for interactions.
Figure 17.4  Maculopapular rash following amoxicillin therapy in infectious 
mononucleosis. 
• Progress.  Both cases resolved on stopping the drugs.
Case history (2)
A 54-year-old doctor presented with a 1-year history of early 
morning stiffness of her hands and Raynaud’s. She had 
self-medicated with a number of NSAIDs which had helped to 
ease the pain and stiffness. She was seen by a rheumatologist 
who found a slight deformity of her fingers but no other signs 
of rheumatoid arthritis. In view of the long history, she was 
prescribed sulphasalazine as a disease-modifying drug. A month 
later she developed a severe, itchy, morbilliform rash all over her 
body. This settled on stopping the sulphasalazine, which contains 
a sulphonamide and 5-ASA.
Remember
Never use amoxicillin in a patient unless glandular fever has been 
excluded.
555
Cutaneous adverse drug reactions (ADR) 17 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Classification
	 Type A: augmented (~80% of all ADRs) – exaggerated responses to 
known effects of the drug. Predictable and dose-related, e.g. skin necro­
sis after extravasation of vincristine, alopecia due to cytotoxic agents, 
cheilitis due to retinoids, urticaria triggered by opiates causing mast cell 
degranulation.
	 Type B: unpredictable/bizarre – idiosyncratic and therefore more dif­
ficult to diagnose (see below).
Physiology
There are a number of mechanisms but the pathogenesis of many cutane­
ous ADRs remains unknown.
Cutaneous ADRs can also be categorised morphologically into three 
groups:
1.	 Skin reactions specific to drugs
2.	 Rashes potentially caused by drugs
3.	 Established skin disease exacerbated by drugs.
Skin reactions specific to drugs
Fixed drug eruptions are very rare. They develop within 24 h of drug 
ingestion and are usually localised areas showing sharply demarcated, 
round, red, oedematous (and sometimes bullous) plaques that become 
violaceous or hyperpigmented with time. Lesions recur at the same site on 
re-exposure to the drug.
Pigmentation caused by drugs
	 Long-term amiodarone or chlorpromazine: purple/slate-grey pigmen­
tation on sun-exposed sites
	 Long-term minocycline: blue/black pigmentation of skin, nails, buccal 
mucosa, scars (may be irrreversible)
	 Mepacrine: reversible yellow skin pigmentation
	 Bleomycin: flagellate erythema then hyperpigmentation of trunk.
Rashes potentially caused by drugs
There are many different reaction patterns and only a few common ones 
will be considered here:
Maculopapular/exanthematic eruptions
This is the most common type of cutaneous ADR. It is thought to be a 
cell-mediated reaction (may also be immune complex) involving CD8 T 
cells (Table 17.1). There are widespread, symmetrical, itchy eruptions. 
Macules and papules may become confluent and develop into a sheet-like 
erythema, sometimes with fever and eosinophilia. When due to a drug, it 
usually begins on the trunk. Suspect a viral aetiology if it starts on the face 
and moves down and if there is associated lymphadenopathy and conjunc­
tivitis. After withdrawal of the drug, it usually settles over 2 weeks.
Note: if this eruption has progressed rapidly over 24 h it may herald the 
onset of the following:
• Erythroderma.  In which > 90% of the skin surface is erythematous 
and inflamed. 10% of cases are drug induced (e.g. sulphonamides, 
sulphonylureas, penicillins, barbiturates, allopurinol, gold, mercury, 
arsenicals).
• Toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN).  The development of vesicles 
and/or bullae and skin tenderness raises this possibility (this might 
556
Dermatology
17 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Type
Examples
Type 1
Immediate, IgE-mediated 
hypersensitivity
Urticaria and anaphylaxis due to 
penicillins
Type II
Cytotoxic
Allergic thrombocytopenic purpura
Type III
Immune complex formation
Morbilliform maculopapular rash
Serum sickness
Vasculitis, e.g. allopurinol and penicillin
Type IV
Cell mediated
Allergic contact dermatitis to topical 
medicaments
Erythema multiforme, toxic epidermal 
necrolysis
Lichenoid drug eruption
Table 17.1  Pathogenesis of some cutaneous ADRs 
(hypersensitivity reactions)
then be followed by ‘sheeting off’ of the epidermis, see below). 
Mucosal involvement also suggests TEN.
• Anti-convulsant hypersensitivity syndrome.  This is not just a severe 
ADR from an anti-convulsant but a distinct syndrome that, if undi­
agnosed, can lead to the death of patients if they are changed over 
to a different anti-convulsant that cross-reacts. The rash normally 
starts 2–4 weeks after starting any of the aromatic anti-convulsants 
(carbamazepine, phenytoin, phenobarbital, primidone). The rash is a 
non-specific maculopapular eruption that may involve mucosal sur­
faces and occasionally pustulates. The distinguishing clinical features 
from a ‘normal’ ADR are any of the following features:
	 Fever
	 Hepatosplenomegaly/lymphadenopathy
	 Conjunctivitis/peri-orbital oedema
	 Arthralgia
	 Pharyngitis
	 Severe malaise.
Blood tests may show:
	 Eosinophilia
	 Lymphocytosis with atypical lymphocytes
	 Raised hepatic transferases.
If the drug is not stopped immediately the patient may progress to 
multi-organ failure and need ITU care. All aromatic anti-convulsant drugs 
must be avoided in the future because further exposure is likely to lead 
to an even more severe reaction. Sodium valproate is a reasonable 
alternative.
• Photosensitivity  (see Table 17.2). Reactions range from erythema to 
blistering and characteristically spare the submental area, finger 
webs, under-eyebrow area and triangle of skin behind the ear lobe.
557
Cutaneous adverse drug reactions (ADR) 17 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
• Lichenoid eruption  (see Table 17.2). Similar to idiopathic lichen 
planus but often more widespread and rarely involves mucous 
membranes.
The spectrum of erythema mutiforme (EM), Stevens–Johnson 
syndrome (SJS) and toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN)
The classification of these diseases is confusing in the literature.
• Erythema multiforme (EM)  10% of cases are drug related (the majority 
are post-infectious, e.g. HSV, mycoplasma). They are mild and self-
limiting, and usually resolve within 2–4 weeks. They are characterised 
by target lesions of a central dusky erythema (sometimes with blister­
ing), a pale oedematous ring and a peripheral erythematous ring. These 
usually occur acrally (extremities) and symmetrically on extensor 
surfaces. They involve palms and soles. Mucosal involvement may 
be present but is mild and limited to one mucosal surface, e.g. the 
oral cavity.
• Stevens–Johnson syndrome (SJS) (also called erythema multiforme 
major)  This is a more severe and extensive eruption. Widespread 
atypical target lesions appear on the trunk, in which epidermal necrosis 
results in the formation of blisters and epidermal detachment involving 
< 10% of body surface area. At least two mucosal surfaces are involved 
(oral, ocular, genital). Mucosal lesions are often more prominent 
than skin lesions. Systemic toxicity may occur. Usually resolves within 
6 weeks.
• Stevens–Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis (SJS/TEN) 
overlap  When the extent of epidermal detachment is between 10% and 
30% of the body surface area, in the presence of other features of SJS, 
this is considered an SJS/TEN overlap. The skin lesions are often 
necrotic blisters rather than target lesions and mucosal lesions are prom­
inent and severe.
• Toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN)  This is of sudden onset (usually 
evolves over 24–48 h) with widespread morbilliform or confluent dusky 
erythema with skin tenderness, followed by widespread blistering 
(necrolysis) of the skin with histological evidence of full-thickness epi­
dermal necrosis, subepidermal separation and a sparse or absent dermal 
infiltrate. Nickolsky sign is positive. Mucous membrane involvement is 
usually severe, including ocular, genital, oral, nasopharynx and GI tract; 
mortality 20–30%.
Adverse prognostic factors include:
	 Age > 60 years
	 Area of involved skin > 50%
	 Plasma urea > 17 mmol/L
	 Neutropenia < 1.0 × 109/L
	 Idiopathic nature of TEN.
If extensive:
	 Ventilation may be required
	 Contact ITU, dermatology and ophthalmology urgently.
• Treatment of TEN
	 Early high-dose immunosuppression may help but remains controver­
sial (intravenous immunoglobulin is also commonly used).
	 Analgesia (opiate).
	 Dressings/human skin bank/autologous skin grafts.
	 Eye protection and review for scarring.
558
Dermatology
17 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
	 Pressure-relieving bed.
	 ITU-supportive therapy.
Remember
•	 All cases of TEN should be considered to be drug-induced and 
suspected drug(s) should be stopped immediately
•	 The most common drugs responsible are sulphonamides, 
penicillins, anti-convulsants and NSAIDs.
Established skin disease exacerbated by drugs (Table 17.2)
	 Psoriasis: can be destabilised by lithium and possibly beta blockers and 
anti-malarials.
	 Acne: can be aggravated by progesterone-containing contraceptives, 
lithium and corticosteroids.
	 Rosacea: worse with topical steroids.
	 Peri-oral dermatitis (POD): caused and exacerbated by topical 
steroids.
Diagnosis of adverse drug reactions
The key elements to a diagnosis are a meticulous drug history and a high 
index of suspicion.
	 Exclude other causes by history and examination.
	 Take a careful drug history: remember to ask about over-the-counter 
preparations, e.g. laxatives, tonics and cough medicines, vitamins and 
complementary treatments.
	 Start and stop dates of medication and relationship to onset of the rash.
	 When the eruption begins from 7 to 21 days after the first administration 
of a drug or within 48 h if the drug has caused a similar reaction in the 
past, this is highly suggestive of an ADR.
	 The timing is incompatible with an ADR if the drug was started after 
the onset of cutaneous or mucous membrane signs. If the onset is within 
24 h of the first dose, or more than 21 days after stopping the drug, a 
drug aetiology is doubtful. If there are several drugs, each should be 
considered as a potential cause.
	 Consult drug information for previous reports.
Maculopapular eruption
Photosensitivity
Lichenoid eruption
Antibiotics
Thiazides
Gold
(Penicillins, sulphonamides)
Sulphonamides
Beta blockers
Anticonvulsants
Amiodarone
Quinine/
anti-malarials
(Carbamazepine, phenytoin)
Tetracycline
Thiazides
NSAIDs
Nalidixic acid
Allopurinol
Table 17.2  Common drug associations
559
HIV and the skin 17 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Investigations
These are of little help!
•	 Blood eosinophilia (may be found in toxic erythema but is 
non-specific)
•	 Biopsy ‘may suggest but not prove a drug aetiology’:
–	 Lots of eosinophils: common
–	 Lichenoid pattern: rare
–	 SLE pattern: rare
–	 Vasculitis: sometimes
•	 Blood level of drug (may be useful to check for over-dosage)
•	 If a fixed drug eruption is suspected re-challenge may be 
helpful (in other situations it is rarely justifiable for fear of 
precipitating a more severe reaction)
•	 Patch testing is helpful in patients with suspected allergic 
contact dermatitis (type IV hypersensitivity reactions) but cannot 
be used for systemic adverse drug reactions
Treatment
	 Withdraw drug(s): symptomatic treatment with oral anti-histamines, 
topical steroids and moisturizers.
	 Severe reactions (SJS and TEN) require supportive therapy and monitor­
ing of infection, fluid balance and temperature. Patients may need ITU. 
Use of systemic immunosuppression may be considered if patients are 
seen within the first 24 h of onset.
	 Dressings: leave on.
	 Support mattress.
	 Opiate analgesia.
	 Give written information to patient and doctors to ensure no repeat 
exposure.
Figure 17.5 can be used as a guide to referral.
Further reading
Eshki M, Allanore L, Musette P et al. Twelve-year analysis of severe cases 
of drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms. Arch Derma­
tol 2009; 145: 67–72.
HIV AND THE SKIN
	 Up to 90% of HIV-positive patients will develop a mucocutaneous 
disease, sometimes related to drug therapy.
	 30–40% of people with AIDS will suffer from three different 
dermatoses.
	 A rash may be the presenting sign of HIV infection or AIDS (remember 
that up to 30% receive their diagnosis of AIDS and HIV at the same 
time, suggesting a large pool of undiagnosed patients).
• Cases:  Two patients with HIV presented to the clinic with different 
rashes, both of which are commoner in HIV patients. One presented 
with an eosinophilic folliculitis and the other with Stevens-Johnson/
toxic epidermal necrolysis (see Fig. 17.6a and b).
• Progress:  Both patients were referred to the HIV specialist for 
HAART.
560
Dermatology
17 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
What dermatoses have commonly been the presenting 
illness of HIV (or indeed other causes of 
immunosuppression)?
	 Extensive molluscum contagiosum in an adult
	 Kaposi’s sarcoma
	 Extensive seborrhoeic dermatitis or eosinophilic folliculitis
	 Pruritic papular eruption (PPE; also called itchy folliculitis) of HIV
	 Extensive oro-pharyngeal candida
	 Hairy leucoplakia.
Why is the skin so frequently affected?
The exact mechanisms are not known but include:
	 Immune deficiency: increased infection
	 Poor immune surveillance: increased skin tumours
	 Post infective: reactive arthritis
	 Autoantibodies: Sjögren’s syndrome, polymyositis, ITP, pemphigoid, 
vitiligo, alopecia areata
Figure 17.5  When to refer to a dermatologist in the case of an adverse drug 
reaction. SJS, Stevens–Johnson syndrome; TEN, toxic epidermal necrolysis. 
Maculopapular eruption ± fever
Suggestive drug history
• Onset 7–21 days after
  starting drug
• Onset on trunk
• Negative drug history
• Infectious contact
• Onset on face
• Lymphadenopathy
• Erythema of >90% skin
• Vesicles or blisters
• ± epidermal separation
• ± target lesions
• Mucosal involvement
   (>1 mucosal site)
• Rapid progression
• No vesicles or blisters?
• No mucosal involvement?
Stop drug
Anticipate resolution
 within 14 days
Consider erythroderma, SJS or TEN
Refer Dermatology URGENTLY
Contact ITU
Consider viral/infectious aetiology
561
HIV and the skin 17 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Figure 17.6  Rashes associated with HIV. a) Eosinophilic folliculitis – a classical 
HIV dermatosis (courtesy of Dr Michael Ardern Jones). b) Stevens-Johnson/toxic 
epidermal necrolysis is more common in HIV (courtesy of Dr David Paige).
a
b
	 Aberrant immune function TH1 to TH2 switch: eczema, pruritus, PPE
	 Graft-versus-host disease (GVHD): lichen planus, erythroderma.
What type of rashes are seen?
Many different rashes are seen, which can be arbitrarily divided:
	 Cutaneous infection
	 Opportunistic infection
	 Malignancy (BCC, SCC, KS, malignant melanoma)
	 Papulo-squamous/inflammatory
	 Oral lesions.
HAART has reduced the incidence of all skin lesions.
How would you diagnose the rashes?
The diagnosis can be difficult as frequently the rash is very extensive or 
there is an atypical clinical presentation. One should always have a low 
index for doing:
	 Skin biopsies: both for all the routine stains and for culture of bacteria, 
fungi, viruses and AFBs.
	 Skin swabs.
	 Serology screens.
	 Investigation of other ‘organs’ such as blood, stools, sputum, bone 
marrow: furthermore, treatment is often problematic as HIV rashes 
(even those that are common in immunocompetent people) tend to be 
562
Dermatology
17 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
resistant to standard therapies and the use of immunosuppressive drugs 
is usually contraindicated.
Information
Failure to diagnose scabies (especially crusted scabies) can lead 
to a high proportion of medical staff becoming infected.
Information
Cutaneous infections in HIV
•	 Bacterial: impetigo (Staphylococcus aureus), cellulitis/erysipelas 
(streptococci). Clinically, these infections tend to look much the 
same as in immunocompetent individuals. Deep-seated 
ecthyma may be seen.
•	 Viral:
–	 Herpes: may present with blisters, often extensive and 
ulcerative, especially perianally and orally
–	 Shingles/VZV: often painful, verrucous and extending over 
more than one dermatome and may be bilateral
•	 Fungal: dermatophyte and candidal infections are common in 
the skin and present typically. They often require systemic 
anti-fungal therapy for eradication (e.g. itraconazole 100 mg × 2 
daily for 2–4 weeks)
What opportunistic infections occur in the 
immunocompromised and how would you distinguish 
between them?
A variety of normally non-pathogenic organisms have been described in 
AIDS and other immunosuppressed patients. Clinically they are difficult 
to distinguish:
	 Cutaneous CMV may present with blisters, ulcers or necrotic lesion.
	 Fungi are common culprits and may present with nodules (often deep 
subcutaneous) or scaly papules (Cryptococcus is seen in the UK whereas 
Histoplasma is more common in the US).
	 Scabies presents typically with itchy papules and burrows in the web 
spaces, the wrists, genitalia, palms/soles. Crusted scabies (‘Norwegian 
scabies’) presents atypically with a rather crusted eczematous-looking 
rash often centred around the web spaces and it may not be itchy.
	 Non-tuberculous or ‘atypical’ mycobacteria are a particular problem 
in advanced AIDS and present with papules, nodules, ulcers or 
sporotrichosis-like lesions.
These infections can be localised to the skin but also present as a systemic 
infection. Malaise, fever, abdominal pain, headache or diarrhoea may be 
non-specifically suggestive of systemic infection. Biopsy and culture is the 
best way to diagnose these rashes.
What is hairy leucoplakia due to and what does it look like?
It is due to the Epstein–Barr virus in an immunosuppressed patient and is 
almost unique to HIV patients. It is a relatively late sign of HIV disease. 
563
HIV and the skin 17 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Clinically, white plaques appear on the sides of the tongue. Vertical 
ridging or corrugations are seen within the plaques. Unlike candidal infec­
tions, there are no small satellite lesions around the edge and the white 
material cannot be scraped off to leave raw areas underneath.
What types of malignancy occur in 
immunocompromised patients?
	 The two most common types of skin cancers (BCC and SCC) appear to 
be increased in HIV-positive patients. They look the same as in immu­
nocompetent patients.
	 Malignant melanoma may be increased in prevalence. The clinical 
appearance is typical.
	 Kaposi’s sarcoma is more common and more severe in AIDS patients 
(without available HAART therapy) than in classical KS or African KS. 
It presents as purplish-brown plaques and nodules. The nose, palate 
and genitalia seem common sites but remember they can spread inter­
nally. KS is predominantly seen in men who have sex with men with 
AIDS and, for unexplained reasons, the incidence declined during the 
1990s but has been increasing again since 2000. There is a strong link 
between herpes virus type 8 and the development of all types of KS, 
although other factors might be involved, as not all people with HHV 
type 8 get KS.
	 Lymphomas are more common with HIV and may present with lym­
phadenopathy, pleural effusions, night sweats and weight loss.
What are the more common ‘papulo-squamous’ dermatoses 
encountered in HIV patients?
The ‘papulo-squamous’ dermatoses encountered are:
	 Seborrhoeic dermatitis: 80%
	 Unexplained pruritus: 40%
	 Xerosis, ichthyosis: 30%
	 Pruritic papular eruption (PPE): 20%
	 Eczema: 10%
	 Psoriasis: 5%
	 Drug rashes: 20%.
In general, these rashes become more common (and severe) with progres­
sion of the disease.
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Itchy, red and scaly eczematous rash in the seborrhoeic areas (sides of nose, 
around eyes, forehead, scalp, sternum, glans penis). This looks similar to 
seborrheic dermatitis in immunocompetent patients but is often more 
extensive. It may appear in early ‘asymptomatic’ HIV disease.
• Therapy:  Topical miconazole/hydrocortisone cream, emollients, 
ketoconazole shampoo. If resistant, consider topical 0.1% tacrolimus 
ointment, topical lithium and oral itraconazole 100 mg × 2 daily for 
2 weeks.
Pruritus and xerosis (dry skin)
These often go together and the aetiology is unclear. Again they may be 
early manifestations of advanced HIV disease.
• Therapy:  Emollients, bath oils, aqueous cream as soap substitute. 
Sedating anti-histamines (e.g. hydroxyzine or chlorphenamine). 
564
Dermatology
17 
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Consider 0.5% menthol in aqueous cream or crotamiton. Photother­
apy if resistant.
PPE (pruritic papular eruption; also called itchy folliculitis)
A unique papular and (at times) pustular eruption centred on hair follicles. 
This is intensely itchy and usually involves the upper trunk, back and the 
proximal arms. Papules tend to arise, grow in size, frequently have the top 
scratched off and then recede as other new lesions arise. In African–
Caribbean patients lesions are often larger and more frequently involve 
the face. Skin biopsy reveals a lymphohistiocytic infiltrate around blood 
vessels and hair follicles, often accompanied by eosinophils.
The so-called unique HIV rash ‘eosinophilic folliculitis’ is probably a 
variant of PPE.
PPE tends to appear in more advanced HIV disease and becomes worse 
as CD4 counts fall.
• Therapy:  Medium-strength topical steroids, oral anti-histamines and 
low-dose long-term antibiotics (as used in acne) may help. Isotretin­
oin (20–40 mg daily) or PUVA is effective for resistant cases.
Eczema
The prevalence of eczema is probably increased in HIV patients, reflecting 
the eosinophilia and high IgE levels that are commonly seen. It looks 
similar to eczema in immunocompetent patients.
• Therapy:  As for normal eczema.
Psoriasis
The prevalence of psoriasis is increased in HIV (5% versus 2% in the 
normal population); 30% may get psoriatic arthropathy (versus 5% of 
normal psoriatics). The disease can be typical with red, scaly plaques on 
elbows and knees, and scaling in the scalp. However, psoriasis occasion­
ally becomes severe and widespread in advanced HIV patients. They may 
become erythrodermic or develop pustular psoriasis, especially on the 
soles of the feet. When the latter happens there is clearly an overlap with 
reactive arthritis.
• Therapy:  Topical steroids, calcipotriol (a synthetic vitamin D3 ana­
logue) and tar compounds will help mild cases. UVB or PUVA is 
useful for more advanced disease. Although there is some in vitro 
evidence that phototherapy may promote HIV replication, this has 
not been shown to be a problem in clinical practice.
Oral drugs for severe disease include acitretin or anti-retroviral drugs.
The other drugs used in ‘normal’ psoriasis include methotrexate, 
ciclosporin and hydroxyurea. Biological agents are now being used.
Further reading
Rodgers S, Leslie KS. Skin infections in HIV-infected individuals in the era 
of HAART. Current Opinion in Inf Dis 2011; 24: 124–129.
565
565
Index
NB: Page numbers in italics refer to boxes, figures and tables.
A
Abbreviated Mental Test (AMT), 
154, 154, 156, 161
ABCD2 score (stroke risk), 175
ABCDE basic life support, 
280–283, 281
Abdominal pain, 43–50
case history, 43
differential diagnosis, 44
investigations, 43–45
management, 44
patient information, 44–45
Abiotrophia spp, 310
Abscesses
liver see Liver abscess
lung see Lung abscess
pyogenic, 358
subphrenic see Subphrenic 
abscess
Absorption, reducing, 397
Acamprosate, 72
Accelerated hypertension, 320
Acebutolol, 301
Acetaminophen see Paracetamol
Acetazolamide, 465
Acetylcholine esterase inhibitors, 
158
Acetylcysteine, 397, 401–403
Aciclovir, 17, 17, 483
Acidosis, 241–243
case history, 241–242, 242
HCO3, role, 243, 244
management, 417
underlying problems, 242–243
Acinetobacter spp, 350
Acitretin, 564
Acquired bleeding disorders, 
106
Actinobacillus 
actinomycetemcomitans, 310
Acute abdominal pain, 56
Acute Addison’s disease, 443
Acute alcohol withdrawal, 34
Acute anxiety, 532–534
associated conditions, 533
case history, 532
management, 532–533
signs/symptoms, 533
Acute arrhythmias, treatment, 
273–274, 273
Acute asthma see Severe acute 
asthma
Acute autoimmune rheumatic 
disease, 202–206
Acute back pain, 213–215
case history, 213
examination, 214–215
investigations/diagnosis/
management, 214–215, 214
Acute breathlessness see 
Breathlessness, acute
Acute chest syndrome, 89
treatment, 89
Acute cholecystitis, 74, 75
Acute colitis, 40, 40, 41
Acute coronary syndromes, 
284–286, 336
classification, 288
symptoms, 288
Acute cough, 327–328
Acute diarrhoea, 37
Acute disseminated 
encephalomyelitis (ADEM)
case history, 484
diagnosis, 484–485
Acute dystonic reactions, 504–505
Acute glomerulonephritis (GN), 
251–253
case history, 251
rapidly progressive, 253
Acute haemolysis, 102, 105
Acute heart failure (AHF), 
233–238, 297–298
case history, 233, 297
management, 236–238, 294
treatment, 297–298
566
Index
﻿
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Acute hot joint, 182–183
case history, 182
causes, 182
examination, 183
history taking, 182
investigations, 183
management, 183
Acute kidney failure, 234
RIFLE classification, 234
Acute kidney injury, 245–246
case history, 245
dialysis, indications, 246
investigations, 245–246
priorities, 245–246
renal unit referral, 246
Acute leukaemias, 97–98, 134
features, 138
Acute limb ischaemia, case 
history, 324
Acute liver disease, 63
investigations, 63, 63
Acute lung injury (ALI), 390–393
case history, 390
causes, 391
features, 391, 391
investigations, 390
management, 390–392
pathophysiology, 391–392
Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia 
(ALL), 139
Acute myeloid leukaemia (AML), 
134, 134, 139
investigations, 134
Acute myocardial infarction (MI), 
172–173, 173, 288–289
Acute myocardial ischaemia, 
291–292
Acute pancreatitis, 44, 45
Acute pulmonary oedema, 172, 
173
Acute respiratory distress 
syndrome (ARDS), 390–392, 
391
Acute respiratory failure, 341
Acute urticaria, 546
Addison’s disease, 442–444
case history, 442
clinical findings, 443
investigations, 444
management, 443–444
treatment, 446
Adenocarcinoma, 46
Adenosine, 271, 274
Adrenal failure, causes, 443
Adrenal insufficiency, 442
Adrenaline (epinephrine), 547
Adrenocorticotropic hormone 
(ACTH) test, 444
Adverse drug reactions (ADR) see 
Cutaneous adverse drug 
reactions (ADR)
β2 agonists
long acting (LABA), 332
short acting (SAB), 330–332
Agranulocytosis, 436
AIDS see HIV/AIDS
Akinetic-rigid syndromes, 504
Albumin, 258
Alcohol
acute withdrawal, 34
deliberate self-harm (DSH), 
531–532
delirium tremens (DT), 520
side effects, 515
see also Excess alcohol use
Alemtuzumab, 482
Alendronate, 217
Alfacalcidol, 452
Allopurinol, 183, 256
Alzheimer’s disease (AD), 519
management, 158, 158
American Psychiatric Association, 
153
Amiloride, 187, 187
Aminophylline, 330, 331, 348
Amiodarone, 187, 433, 439–444
heart conditions, 274–277, 300
Amitriptyline, 17, 377, 514
Amourosis fugax, 466
Amoxicillin, 7, 19, 162–163, 
186–187, 494
adverse reactions, 553–554, 554
pneumonia, 353, 360
respiratory conditions, 343, 345, 
348, 361–362
Amphetamine, 515
Amphotericin, 378
Ampicillin, 19
Amyloid, treatment, 258
Anaemia, 77–81
assessment, 77
cancer, 142–144
causes, 140
chronic kidney disease (CKD), 
141, 250
classification, 77, 78
567
Index
﻿
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
defined, 77–80
drug-induced, 140
haemolytic see Haemolytic 
anaemia
investigations, 77
iron deficiency see Iron 
deficiency anaemia
leucoerythroblastic, 143–144
liver disease, 141–142
macrocytic see Macrocytic 
anaemia
microcytic see Microcytic 
anaemia
pernicious (PA), 83, 140
rheumatoid arthritis (RA), 
140–141
Anaesthetic agents, 515
Anagrelide, 100
Anaphylactic shock, 408–409, 408
examination, 408
history taking, 408
management, 408–409
prevention, 409
ANBP2 trial, 321
Androgens, 84
Aneurysm, 461, 463
features, 284–285
investigations, 285–286
Angina, 336
Angio-oedema, 545–546
hereditary (HAE), 547–548, 548
investigations, 548
management, 547–548
Angioplasty, 387
Angiotensin-converting-enzyme 
(ACE), 322
Angiotensin-converting-enzyme 
(ACE) inhibitors, 236–237
cough, 327
heart conditions, 173, 297–298, 
301–302, 304–305
hypertension, 321
side effects, 321
Angiotensin-receptor antagonists, 
304–305, 327
Anti-arrhythmics, 513
Antibiotics, 13, 60, 132, 162–163, 
364, 494
neutropenia, 377–378
pneumonia, 353–354, 356
side effects, 514
Anti-coagulant drugs, 171, 302, 
309
heart disease, 172–173
orally active, 119
overdosage, 111–112
see also Heparin; Warfarin
Anti-convulsant hypersensitivity 
syndrome, 556
Anti-convulsants, 514
Anti-depressants, 514
Anti-dopaminergics, 505–506
Anti-emetics, 514
Antiglobulin (Coombs’) tests, 101, 
128
Anti-histamines, 514, 547
H1, 546
H2, 546
Anti-hypertensive drugs, 321–323
Anti-infective drugs, 514
Anti-inflammatory drugs, 515
Anti-malarials, 514
Anti-muscarinic drugs, side 
effects, 514
signs, 514
treatment, 514
Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic 
antibody (ANCA) points, 252, 
253
Anti-phospholipid syndrome, 208, 
208
management, 209
Anti-platelet agents, 171, 301
Anti-psychotics, 511, 512, 514
Anti-retroviral drugs, 564
Anti-spasmodics, 514
Anti-TNFα agents, 199
Anuria, 230
Anxiety
syncope, 266
see also Acute anxiety
Aortic dissection, 291, 336
Aortic regurgitation (AR), 
307–308
Aortic sclerosis, case history, 306
Aortic stenosis (AS), 306–308, 307
vs hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy (HCM), 317, 
318
Apomorphine, 185
Apraxic gait, 499
Arrhythmias, 150
acute, 273–274, 273
early ventricular, 299
late, 300
poisoning, 396–397
568
Index
﻿
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Arrhythmias, post-infarction, 
298–300
case history, 298–299, 299
Arterial blood gas (ABG) 
sampling, 339, 339, 341, 341, 
343–344, 387
Arterial disease, 542
ulcers, 543
Arteriosclerotic parkinsonism, 
184
Arteritis, 181–183
assessment, 181–182
case history, 181
hospital discharge, 181–182
Artesunate, 16
Arthralgia, 379
Arthritis, 106
Ascites, 64–66
case history, 64–65
investigations, 64–65, 64–65
Asparaginase (crisantapase), 515
Aspergilloma, lung disease, 334
Aspergillus spp, pneumonia, 355
Aspergillus fumigatus, 23
Aspiration, 170
knee, 219
Aspirin, 19, 100, 213, 467, 544
haemolysis, 102, 102
heart conditions, 172, 285, 289, 
297, 301
stroke, 169, 171, 474
transient ischaemic attack (TIA), 
175, 476
see also Salicylate overdose
Assessment scales, 163
Asthma, 328–332
acute see Severe acute asthma
causes/triggers, 329
differential diagnosis, 328
Atenolol, 301, 513
Atheromatous renovascular 
disease, 238
Atonic seizures, 498
Atorvastatin, 302, 474
Atrial fibrillation (AF), 270, 
274–277, 300, 348
cardioversion, 273, 276
case history, 275
heart failure, 439
management, 275, 277
prevalence/risks, 274
thromboembolism, 276
Atrial flutter, 270
Atrial tachycardia, 270
Atropine, 300, 407, 514
Atypical meningitis, 494
Autoimmune haemolytic anaemia 
(AIHA)
diagnosis, 85
management, 85–86
Autoimmune rheumatic disease, 
acute, 202–206
Automatic implantable 
cardioverter defibrillator 
(AICD), 283, 283
AV nodal re-entry tachycardia 
(AVNRT), 270
Avascular necrosis, femoral head, 
90
Axonal injury, 489
case history, 489
Azathioprine, 86, 202, 213
B
B12 deficiency, 81, 82
causes, 82
Back pain
acute see Acute back pain
severe, 215–217
Bacteraemia, defined, 4
Bacterial chest infection, 23
Bacterial meningitis, 493
treatment, 494
Bacterial sepsis, 144–145
Balloon tamponade, 69
Barbiturates, 514–515
Barrett’s oesophagus, 46
Barthel Index, 163, 164
Bartonella spp, 310
Basic life support (ABCDE), 
280–283, 281
Bell’s palsy, 468–469, 468
investigations, 469
Bence Jones protein, 216
Bendroflumethiazide, 162–163, 
323
Benign paroxysmal positional 
vertigo (BPPV), 471
case history, 471
diagnosis, 471
management, 471–472
Benzodiazepines, 398, 535
excess alcohol use, 35, 72
side effects, 514–515
Benzylpenicillin, 7, 17, 19, 542
meningitis, 491, 494
569
Index
﻿
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Beta-blockers, 433, 438
heart conditions, 274, 277, 
285, 289–290, 295, 297–301, 
305
side effects, 321, 513
Beta-interferon, 481
Bezold–Jatisch reflex, 268
Bilateral subdural haematomas, 
477–478, 480
Biochemical screening, 136
Bismuth chelate, 515
Bisphosphonates, 144, 213, 
216–217
Bisoprolol, 298
Blackouts, 149–151
cardiovascular causes, 150
case history, 149
history taking, 149–150
investigations, 150
treatment, 150
Bladder function, 170
Bleeding disorders, 105–109
acquired, 106
case history, 105, 108–109
inherited, 105–106, 106–107
investigations, 106–109
rectal see Rectal bleeding
see also Haematemesis/
melaena
Blood, colour, 333–336
Blood pressure, 396
Blood transfusion, 125–131
case history, 126–127, 129
complications, 129, 129
investigations, 127–129, 128
BODE index, 347, 347
Bone marrow pathology, 99, 99
Bone pain, 376
Bornholm’s disease, 337
Bowel ischaemia, 243
Bradycardia, 277–312
case history, 278–279, 280
diagnosis, 278
Brain
brain death, 492
drugs affecting, 514
neurological deficits, 168
sodium concentration, 230
trauma see Severe brain injury; 
Traumatic brain injury
see also entries beginning 
Cerebral
Brainstem, stroke, 167–169
Breathlessness, acute, 325–326
assessment, 325–326
case history, 325
causes, 346
Breathlessness/wheeze, 328–332
see also entries beginning 
Respiratory
British National Formulary, 401
British Thoracic Society, 285
Bromocriptine, 514
Bronchiectasis, 334
Bronchodilators, 343, 345, 348
Bronchus, carcinoma of, 333–334, 
372–378
case history, 372
complications, 377
diagnosis, 372–378
differential diagnosis, 374–376
investigations, 373, 374–375, 379
management, 376
treatment, 376–377
Brucella spp, 310
Busulfan, 100
C
Cabergoline, 456
Calcipotriol, 564
Calcium, 213
Calcium channel blockers, 301, 
321, 513
Calcium gluconate, 452
Calcium pyrophosphate, 209, 211
Campylobacter spp, 13, 225
Candida albicans, 355
Cannabis, 515
CAPRICORN trial, 298
Captopril, 301–302
Capture beats, 272
Carbamazepine, 377, 456, 522, 556
Carbapenem, 6
Carbimazole, 187, 433, 435
Carbon monoxide, 515
Carboplatin, 376–377
Cardiac arrest, 280–283
basic life support (ABCDE), 
280–281, 281
Cardiac conditions
drugs, 513–516
markers, chest pain, 287, 288
pain, 336–338
sarcoidosis, 379
syncope, 265–266
Cardiobacterium hominis, 310
570
Index
﻿
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Cardiogenic hypotension, 387
Cardiogenic shock, 231, 292–293, 
368
case history, 292, 383
causes, 384
defined, 292
management, 293, 294
Cardiomyopathies, 315–317
case history, 315–316
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
(CPR), 188
principles, 188–189
Cardiovascular causes, blackouts, 
150
Cardiovascular support, 
poisoning, 396
Cardioversion, 273, 276
Carotid endarterectomy, 172, 175
Carotid sinus, 265
Carvedilol, 298, 513
Catecholamine crisis see 
Phaeochromocytoma
Catechol-O-methyl transferase 
(COMT) inhibitors, 185
Cawthorne–Cooksey exercises, 
471–472
Cefaclor, 364
Cefotaxime, 6–7, 494
Ceftazidime, 6, 356, 377
Ceftriaxone, 6–7, 9
Cefuroxime, 14, 132, 261, 358, 364, 
392–393
septicaemia, 6–7
Cellulitis, 541
treatment, 542
Central nutrition, 29
Central vestibular lesion, 470
Cephalosporin, 5–6, 40
Cerebral granulomatous angiitis
case history, 476
investigations, 476–477
Cerebral haemorrhage, 472
Cerebral infarction, 472–474, 473, 
478
Cervical myelopathy, 500
Chemotherapeutic drugs, 515
Chest conditions
HIV/AIDS, 22–24
‘silent’, 331
see also Acute chest syndrome
Chest pain, 284–286, 336–338
assessment, 284
cardiac markers, 287, 288
case history, 284–285
causes, 284
differential diagnosis, 336–338
investigations, 338
Chlamydia psittaci, 350
Chlamydia spp, 310
Chloramphenicol, 494
Chlordiazepoxide, 522
Chlormethiazole, 522
Chloroquine, 16, 514
Chlorphenamine, 547, 563–564
Chlorpromazine, 514
Chlorpropamide, 456
Cholangitis, 60
Cholecystitis, 73–75
case history, 73
diagnosis, 75
investigations, 73, 73, 74
Chondrocalcinosis of knee, 210
investigations, 210
management, 210–211, 210
Chronic Addison’s disease, 443
Chronic cough, 327
Chronic haemolytic anaemia, 147
Chronic kidney disease (CKD), 
109, 223–227
anaemia, 141
case history, 247
features, 248
investigations, 247–250, 247
management, 249
multidisciplinary approach, 249
patient preparation, 249–250, 
250
specific conditions, 250
stages, 247–248
Chronic liver disease, 65
management, 65–66
Chronic lymphoblastic 
(lymphocytic) leukaemia 
(CLL), 83–84, 85, 132, 139
features, 132, 133
management, 132–133
treatment, 133
Chronic myeloid leukaemia 
(CML)
diagnosis, 137
investigations, 137
referral, 137
Chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD), 328, 341, 
344–349
case history, 345, 347
571
Index
﻿
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
examination, 345
key points, 345–347
prognosis, 346–347
Chronic pain, 337
Chronic respiratory failure, 341
Chronic urticaria, 546
Chvostek’s sign, 450
Ciclosporin, 40, 256, 547
Cimetidine, 515, 546
Ciprofloxacin, 7, 14, 60, 102, 261, 
353, 361–362, 377
Cisplatin, 376
Citalopram, 160
Cladribine, 482
Clarithromycin, 353
Clock-drawing tests, 156, 157
Clonazepam, 499
Clopidogrel, 169, 171, 175
heart conditions, 286, 289, 297, 
301
Clostridium difficile, 6, 39, 186–187
pseudomembranous colitis, 
9–10, 10
‘Clouding of consciousness’, 509, 
516
Cluster headache, 503
case history, 503
causes, 503
Co-amilofruse, 187
Co-amoxiclav, 353, 357
Co-beneldopa, 479
Cocaine, 404–407, 405
case history, 405
side effects, 515
toxicity features, 406
Co-careldopa, 478–479, 478
Coeliac disease, 50, 51, 51
Cognitive screening, 519
Colchicine, 183, 256
Colon cancer, 53–54
case history, 53
patient advice, 53–54, 54, 55
risks, 54
Colonoscopy, 53, 53
Colorectal cancer, distribution, 55
Coma, 492
Community-acquired pneumonia 
(CAP), 350
antibiotics, 353–354
case history, 350, 352
diagnosis, 351
infecting organisms, 350
investigations, 350, 352–353, 352
severity, 350–351
signs, 350–357
Community-acquired 
Staphylococcus aureus, 310
Community-acquired Streptococcus 
pneumoniae, 350
Complete heart block, 278
Compression bandages, 543
Confusional Assessment Method 
(CAM), 153–154
Constipation, 36–37
case history, 36
causes, 37
treatment, 37
urinary tract infection (UTI), 
181
Consultant in Communicable 
Disease Control (CCDC), 8, 
13–14, 23
Coombs’ tests, 101, 128
COPERNICUS trial, 298
Cor pulmonale, 312–313, 348
investigations, 314
management, 313
pathophysiology, 313
prognosis, 313–314
Corticosteroids, 19, 22, 85, 183, 
362, 547
asthma, 330–332
side effects, 515
Cortisol, 84, 430
Co-trimoxazole, 21–22, 102
Cough, 326–328
associated features, 328
case history, 327
investigations, 328
syncope, 265
Coxiella burnetii, 310
Cranial (giant cell) arteritis, 
212–213
case history, 212
differential diagnosis, 212–213
features, 213
investigations, 212
steroids, 213
Creatinine clearance, estimation, 
247
Crisantaspase (asparaginase), 515
Crohn’s disease, 40, 42
vs ulcerative colitis, 40, 42
Cryptococcus spp fungal infections, 
562
Cryptococcus neoformans, 23
572
Index
﻿
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Crystal arthritis, 209–211
case history, 209–210
CURB criteria, community-
acquired pneumonia (CAP), 
351, 351
Cushing’s syndrome, 430–432
case history, 431
causes, 430
diagnosis, 431–432
management, 432
signs/symptoms, 431
Cutaneous adverse drug reactions 
(ADR), 553–559
case history, 554
classification, 555
diagnosis, 558
investigations, 559
physiology, 555
pigmentation, 555
rashes, 555–558, 556
skin disease, exacerbation, 558, 
558
skin reactions, 555
treatment, 559, 560
Cutaneous cytomegalovirus 
(CMV), 562
Cyclizine, 88
Cyclophosphamide, 202
Cycloplegics, 514
Cyclosporin, 564
Cytomegalovirus (CMV), 23, 355, 
562
D
Dabigatran, 120, 368, 476
Danazol, 548
Dapsone, 22, 102, 102, 544, 547
De Quervain’s thyroiditis see Viral 
thyroiditis
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT)
diagnosis, 119
investigations, 323, 368
prophylaxis, 367
treatment, 119–121, 323, 368
Dehydration, 225, 415
Deliberate self-harm (DSH), 
527–532
case history, 528
management, 528–532
treatment refusal, 530–531, 531
Delirium, 153–156, 509–513
Abbreviated Mental Test 
(AMT), 154, 154
case history, 153, 509, 513
causes, 155, 510
Confusional Assessment 
Method (CAM), 153–154
diagnosis, 153, 153, 509–513
differential diagnosis, 512
drug-induced, 513–532
elderly, 153–156
examination, 155
features, 509
history taking, 154
investigations, 155, 510–511, 511
management, 155–156, 511
as mnemonic, 155
nursing care, 511
predisposing factors, 510
prognosis, 512–513
risk factors, 155
treatment, 512, 514–515
Delirium tremens (DT), 519–522
case history, 520
complications, 521
features, 520
investigations, 521
long-term care, 522
treatment, 521–522
Delusions, persecutory, 510
Demeclocycline, 459–460
Dementia, 156–159, 516–519
case history, 156, 517
causes, 157, 517
defined, 156–158
differential diagnosis, 518
examination, 518
investigations, 157, 518–519
management, 158, 519
presentation, 517
Dementia-like syndrome, 157, 157
Depression, 159–161, 522–527
assessment, 159–161, 160, 
524–525, 524
associated conditions, 522–523
case history, 159, 523
categorisation, 523
causes, 532
differential diagnosis, 524–525
investigations, 524
management, 160–161, 525–526
treatment, 526–527
Dermatology, 541–564
Dermatoses
HIV, 560, 561
‘papulo-squamous’, 563–564
573
Index
﻿
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Desmopressin, 456
Diabetes insipidus (DI), 457–458
case history, 458
causes, 458, 458
management, 458
Diabetes mellitus, 411–429
case history, 411, 413, 422–423
diagnostic criteria, 411, 413
hospital admission, indications, 
411–413
India, 428
investigations, 423
pregnancy see Pregnancy, 
diabetes mellitus
spectrum, 412
treatment, 423, 424
type 1, 412, 413–414, 422–424, 
426, 430
type 2, 411, 412, 424–426
Diabetes mellitus, surgery, 
424–426
assessment, 425
case history, 424
management, 425
perioperative insulin, 426
urgent, 426
Diabetic foot, 427–429
case history, 427
classification, 428
examination, 427–428
history taking, 427
management, 428–429
pathogenesis, 428
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), 
413–418
assessment, 414, 417
case history, 413–414
causes of death, 417
fluid replacement, 415–416, 
416
investigations, 414
management, 415, 417
presentation, 414, 415
Diabetic nephropathy, treatment, 
258
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 
(DSM), 4th edition (DSM-
IV-TR), 153, 153
Dialysis, 254–257
avoiding, 254–257, 254, 255
case history, 254
indications, 246
monitoring, 254–256
Diamorphine, 87–88, 285, 297, 304
Diarrhoea, 37–40
case history, 38–39
causes, 38–39
diagnosis, 38–39
differential diagnosis, 39–40, 42
investigations, 37–40, 40
management, 38
Diastolic heart failure, 306
Diazepam, 407, 499, 535
acute anxiety, 532–533
delirium tremens (DT), 522
Diclofenac, 88, 121–122, 183, 187
rheumatology, 196, 211, 214
Diffuse axonal injury, 489
Digoxin, 433, 513, 516
heart conditions, 172, 274, 275, 
277, 305
Dihydrocodeine, 88
Dihydropyridines, 301
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), 
315
management, 315–316
Diloxanide furoate, 3
Diltiazem, 321
Dimercaprol, 102
Diplopia, 461–465
case history, 461, 463–464
causes, 464
investigations, 464–465
treatment, 463–464
Dipyradamole, 171, 474
Disease-modifying anti-rheumatic 
drugs (DMARDs), 198–200
Disodium pamidronate, 449
Disseminated intravascular 
coagulation (DIC), 109–112
case history, 110–111
diagnosis, 110
management, 111
Disturbed patient, 537–540
case history, 538
causes, 537–538
management, 538–540
presentation, 537
Diuretics, 321
Do not attempt resuscitation 
(DNAR), 188–189, 189
Dobutamine, 293, 295, 387
Döhle bodies, 144
Domperidone, 467, 505
Donepezil, 158, 158, 519
Dopamine, 293, 295
574
Index
﻿
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Dopamine agonists (DA), 185, 456, 
479
Dopamine antagonists, 514
Double vision see Diplopia
Doxapram, 348
Doxycillin, 353
Doxycycline, 16
Drop attacks, 486
Drug reactions (ADR), adverse see 
Cutaneous adverse drug 
reactions (ADR)
Drug users, pneumonia, 355
Drug withdrawal, 515–516
Drug-induced conditions
anaemia, 140
depression, 526
hyperkalaemia, 241
parkinsonism, 185
respiratory failure, 342
Drug-induced illness, elderly, 
186–189, 186
case history, 186–187
Duke criteria, infective 
endocarditis, 310
Dyskinesia, 478–479, 479, 504
treatment, 479
Dysphagia, 35–36, 170
case history, 35
diagnosis, 36
investigations, 35–36
Dysuria, defined, 260–261
E
Ecallantide, 548
Ecstasy (methylene 
dioxymethamphetamine, 
MDMA) abuse, 405, 
406–407
features, 406
investigations, 406
side effects, 515
treatment, 406–407
Ectopic calcification, 255
Eczema, 552, 564
management, 552
Eikenella corrodens, 310
Electrolytes see Fluid balance/
electrolytes
Electrophysiologist (EP), 277
Elimination, active, 397
Emboli, causes, 167
Empyema, 365, 365
Enalapril, 162–163, 327
Encephalitis, 482–486
case history, 482
causes, 483
investigations, 483–484, 484
Endocrine conditions, depression, 
532
Endoscopic retrograde 
choliangiopancreatography 
(ERCP), 59–61, 60
complications, 61
Enoxaparin, 289–290, 357, 507
Enoximone, 295
Enteral feeding, 29, 29
Enteric fever see Typhoid
Enterococcus spp, 6, 310
Enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli 
(EHEC), 11–12
case history, 12
differential diagnosis, 12
investigations, 12
management, 13
‘Eosinophilic folliculitis’, 564
Epilepsy, 498
alcohol dependence, 72
elderly, 149–150, 150
Epinephrine, 547
Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), 18–19, 
63, 146–147, 562–563
case history, 18
diagnosis, 18
investigations, 18–19
treatment, 19
Erythema multiforme (EM), 
557
major see Stevens–Johnson 
syndrome (SJS)
Erythema nodosum (EN), 378–381, 
543–548, 544
case history, 543
causes, 544
diagnosis, 543–545
referral, 545
treatment, 544–545
Erythroderma, 550, 550, 555–557
Erythromelalgia, toes, 96
Erythromycin, 132, 353, 360–362
Erythrovirus B19, 146, 147
Escherichia coli (E.coli), 4, 6–7, 
11–13
Escitalopram, 527
Esmolol, 271
Essential thrombocythaemia (ET), 
99, 99–100
575
Index
﻿
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Essential tremor, Parkinson’s 
disease (PD), 184
Etanercept, 141, 199
Ethambutol, 22–23, 218, 362
Ethanol, 397
Etidronate, 217
Etoposide, 376–377
Exanthematic eruptions, 555–557, 
556
Excess alcohol use, 71–73
case history, 71
treatment, 71–73
Extradural haemorrhage, 486
Extrapyramidal side effects 
(EPSEs), 512
F
Factor Leiden deficiency, 117
Faecal occult bloods, 50
Faints see Fits/faints; Syncope
Falciparum malaria, features, 
145–146
Falls, elderly, 151–152, 485–486
case history, 151, 485–486
causes, 485
diagnosis, 485–486
examination, 151
investigations, 152
management, 152
questions, 151–152
Famciclovir, 17
Familial adenomatous polyposis, 
53–54
Familial hypocalciuric 
hypercalcaemia (FHH), 448
Favism, 103
Febrile illness, causes, 15
Feeding see Nutrition
Felty’s syndrome, 121–122, 
122–125, 140
Femoral head, avascular necrosis, 
90
Fentanyl, 376
Ferritin, 79
Fever of unknown origin (FUO) 
see Pyrexia of unknown origin 
(PUO)
Fibrinogen degradation products 
(FDPs), 110
Fibrinolytic therapy, 170
Fifth’s disease, 146
Filgrastim (G-CSF), 378
Fingolimod, 482
Fits/faints, 496–503
associations, 497
case history, 496–498
diagnosis, 498
epilepsy, 498
features, 496–499, 497
investigations, 496
management, 498
see also Syncope
Flecainide, 276
Flenley acid-base nomogram, 340
Flexi sigmoidoscopy, 53–54
Flucloxacillin, 17, 221, 353, 542
Fluconazole, 378
Fludarabine, 86
Fluid balance/electrolytes, 
223–227
assessment, 223–227, 224, 225
case history, 225–226
investigations, 225
management, 226–227, 226, 
227
sodium problems, 227–228
Fluid replacement, 232
management, 415–416, 416
Fluids, dialysis, 254
Folate (folic acid) deficiency, 81, 
82
causes, 81–82, 140
depression, 525
treatment, 83
Folinic acid, 83
Fomepizole, 397
Food bolus obstruction, 35
Food poisoning, 11–13
4S trial, 302
Frequency, defined, 260–261
Friedreich’s sign, 202–203
Fulminant meningococcaemia, 7
management, 7
Functional bowel disease, 55
case history, 55
investigations, 55
management, 55
Fungal pneumonia, 355
Fungi, 562
Furosemide, 65, 187, 187, 240, 387, 
433, 513
heart failure, 297, 439
respiratory conditions, 234, 343, 
377
Fusidic acid, 221, 353
Fusion beats, 272
576
Index
﻿
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
G
Galantamine, 158, 158, 519
Gallstones, 60, 75
case history, 63
Gamma-butyric acid, 515
Gammahydroxybutyric acid 
(GHB) abuse, 407
features, 407
investigations, 407
treatment, 407
Gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding, 67
causes, 67, 68
management, 68–69, 68–69
Gastrointestinal (GI) drugs, 515
Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease 
(GORD), 45–46
case history, 45
features, 45
investigations, 45, 45
management, 46
Gaviscon, 46
Gentamicin, 7, 311, 377, 494
pneumonia, 353, 356
septicaemia, 6
Geriatric Depression Scale, 159, 
160, 163
Gestational diabetes, 429–430
Giant cell arteritis see Cranial 
arteritis
Giardiasis, 39
Gingko biloba, 158
Glandular fever, 63, 97–98, 
146–147
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS), 390, 
405, 482, 486, 487, 501
Glatiramer acetate, 482
Gliclazide, 187, 187
Glomerulonephritis see Acute 
glomerulonephritis (GN)
Glucocorticoids, 449
Glucose, 291, 456
Glucose-6-phosphate 
dehydrogenase (G6PD) 
deficiency, 100–105
case history, 101
defined, 100–103
diagnosis, 103–104
differential diagnosis, 101–103, 
102–103
investigations, 101
treatment, 104–105
Glycerol suppositories, 37
Glyceryl trinitrate, 187, 387, 433
Goitres, 435
Goodpasture’s disease, 253
Gout, 209–211
pseudo-gout, 211, 211
treatment, 256
Granesetron, 505
Granulation, 144
Granulicatella spp, 310
Granulocytes, immature, 144
Guillain–Barré syndrome, 506–507
case history, 506
diagnosis, 506
investigations, 506
management, 506–507
prognosis, 507
H
H2 antagonists, 515
HACEK group species, 310
Haematemesis/melaena, 66–69, 
385
case history, 66
causes of bleeding, 67
resuscitation, 66–69
Haematological oncology, 131–140
assessment, 134–135
case history, 131–133, 135–136
diagnosis, 135
differential diagnosis, 138, 139
disease groups, 131–138
features, 138
investigations, 133, 135–136
Haematuria, without albuminuria, 
259–260
causes, 259–260
examination, 260
history taking, 259–260
investigations, 260
Haemoglobin, elevated see 
Polycythaemia (PV)
Haemolysis, 102, 103
acute, 102, 105
causes, 105
intravascular, 104, 104
Haemolytic anaemia, 83–92
autoimmune see Autoimmune 
haemolytic anaemia (AIHA)
case history, 83–84
chronic, 147
features, 85
investigations, 85
microangiopathic (MAHA), 143
red cells, 84–86
577
Index
﻿
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Haemolytic transfusion reaction, 
127–129
Haemolytic uraemic syndrome 
(HUS), 12, 13
Haemophilia, 106–107
Haemophilus spp, 310, 494
Haemophilus influenzae, 23, 125, 
345, 350, 495
Haemoptysis, 333–336
case history, 333
causes, 333–336
management, 334–336, 335, 
335
massive, 335–336, 336
Haemorrhage, management, 130
Haemostasis, failure, 130
causes, 130
investigations, 130
Hairy leucoplakia, 562–563
Hallpike’s test, 470, 470, 470
Hallucinations/illusions, 509
HALO system, 46
Haloperidol, 88, 519, 539
delirium, 156, 512, 516
Head injury
associated problems, 488
case history, 489
follow up, 488–489
management, 488
NICE guidelines, 489
Headaches, 501–502
causes, 503, 504
chronic, 504
episodic, 504
sudden, 504
Heart block, 300
Heart disease, elderly, 172–177
case history, 172
investigations, 172–173
Heart failure, 243, 303–306
acute see Acute heart failure
case history, 303–304
investigations, 303–304
lifestyle changes, 305
management, 304–305
precipitating factors, 304
prosthetic valves, 309
treatment, 439–440
‘Heat rash’ (miliaria), 549
Heimlich manoeuvre, 326
Helicobacter pylori, 46–48, 301, 
390
peptic ulcer disease, 48, 49
Heparin, 118, 209, 368–369, 433, 
476
bleeding disorders, 111–112
thrombosis, 118, 286, 323
Heparin-induced 
thrombocytopenia with 
thrombosis (HIT), 121
Hepatic encephalopathy, 62
Hepatitis A virus (HAV), 58, 63
Hepatitis B virus (HBV), 58, 58
Hepatitis C virus (HCV), 57–59, 58
Hepatocellular damage, 61
investigations, 62–63
management, 61–62
Hereditary angio-oedema (HAE), 
547–548, 548
Hereditary non-polyposis colon 
cancer (HNPCC), 54, 54
Hernia repair, 115–116
Heroin, 534, 536
Herpes, ophthalmic, 18
Herpes simplex virus type 1 
(HSV1) encephalitis, 483–484
Hibernating myocardium, 295
Hiccups, 33–34
case history, 33
causes, 34
investigations, 33
Highly active anti-retroviral 
therapy (HAART), 21–23
Hip, osteoarthritis (OA), 191–196, 
192
Histoplasma spp, 562
Histoplasma capsulatum, 23
HIV/AIDS, 21–25, 147, 220
assessment, 24
case history, 21
chest conditions, 22–23
cutaneous infections, 562
diagnosis, 21
malignancy, 23–24, 563
opportunistic infections, 562
skin reactions, 559–564
treatment, 25
HIV-associated nephropathy 
(HIVAN), 258, 258
Hives see Urticaria
HOPE trial, 301–302
Hormone replacement therapy 
(HRT), 217
Hospital-acquired pneumonia see 
Severe hospital-acquired 
pneumonia (SHAP)
578
Index
﻿
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Hot joint see Acute hot joint
Humerus, osteomyelitis, 90
Hydrocortisone, 40, 438, 547, 563
Addison’s disease, 444, 446
hypopituitarism, 456, 456
respiratory conditions, 343, 348
surgery, 445
Hydroxocobalamin, 82–83
Hydroxycarbamide, 88, 100
Hydroxyurea, 564
Hydroxyzine, 88, 547, 563–564
Hyoscine, 44
Hypercalcaemia, 377, 446–448
case history, 446
causes, 447
features, 447
investigations, 446–447
management, 446
metabolic, 379
Hyperglycaemia, 415
Hyperkalaemia, 238–241
case history, 238
causes, 239–240, 239, 241
management, 241
potassium, 239–241, 240
Hyperketonaemia, 415
Hyperkinetic movement 
disorders, 505–506
Hypernatraemia, 227, 227, 229–230
case history, 229
treatment, 229, 230
Hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic 
state, 416, 418–420
assessment, 419
case history, 418
investigations, 419
management, 418–420
presentation, 418–419
Hyperparathyroidism, 250
biochemical features, 447–448
treatment, 448
Hypersplenism, 122, 122
pathophysiology, 123–125
Hypertension (HT), 171, 238, 249
assessment, 317–318
case history, 317, 320
causes, 318–319
drugs, side effects, 321–323
investigations, 319–320, 319, 
320
management, 320
pulmonary see Pulmonary 
hypertension
signs, 318–319
treatment, 321
venous, 542
Hyperthyroidism, 432–433
case history, 432, 434, 434
causes, 435
elderly, 433–434, 434
investigations, 433, 433, 435
treatment, 433, 435–437, 436
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 
(HCM), 316
vs aortic stenosis (AS), 317, 
318
practice points, 316–317
Hyperventilation, 332–333
case history, 332
syncope, 266
syndrome, 333
Hypocalcaemia, 449–451
assessment, 450
case history, 449
causes, 450–451
features, 449–450
investigations, 450
management, 449, 451, 451
Hypoglycaemic coma, 420–422, 
421
assessment, 421
case history, 420
causes, 422
investigations, 421
management, 421–422
non-diabetic, 422
presentation, 420, 421
Hypokinetic movement disorders, 
505
Hyponatraemia, 224, 227, 227, 
459
case history, 228
causes, 228, 460
investigations, 460
management, 228
treatment, 460
Hypoparathyroidism, 452
Hypopituitarism, 454–457
assessment, 455, 457
case history, 455
causes, 457
features, 455
investigations, 455, 457
management, 456, 456
pathophysiology, 454–455
presentation, 457
579
Index
﻿
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Hyposplenism, 123–125
see also Overwhelming 
post-splenectomy infection 
(OPSI)
Hypotension
cardiogenic, 387
hypovolaemic, 388
intubation, 344
orthostatic, 151–152, 266
postural, 152
treatment, 501
Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal 
axis, 445
Hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid 
axis, 436
Hypothermia, 175–177
case history, 176
causes, 176
features, 176, 177
investigations, 176
management, 176–177
Hypothyroidism, 440–442
case history, 440, 441
compensated, 442
treatment, 441–442
Hypovolaemic hypotension, 388
Hypovolaemic shock, 129, 231
arterial blood gas (ABG), 387
case history, 383
causes, 385
Hypoxaemia, 339, 343
I
Ibuprofen, 88, 183, 198, 467, 535
Icatibant, 548
Idiopathic intracranial 
hypertension (IIH), 464
management, 465
precipitating factors, 465
Idiopathic thrombocytopenic 
purpura (ITP), 113
diagnosis, 113
management, 114
Illusions, 509
Immune reconstitution 
inflammatory syndrome 
(IRIS), 23
Immunoglobulin, 547
Incontinence see Urinary tract 
infection (UTI)
Industrial chemicals, 515
Infection, 144–147, 254–255, 309, 
532
Infectious diseases, 1–19
Infectious mononucleosis, 553, 
554
Infective endocarditis, 309–312
case history, 309
Duke criteria, 310
investigations, 311
practical considerations, 
311–312
Inflammatory autoimmune 
vasculitis, 251–253
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), 
39
investigations, 39–40
manifestations, 42
Inflammatory disorders, iron 
status, 141–142
Infliximab, 40, 199
Influenza, viral, 350
Inhalation pneumonia, 355
Inherited bleeding disorders, 
105–106, 106–107
Inherited platelet disorder
diagnosis, 116
management, 116
Inherited thrombocytopenia, 113
Injectable adrenaline pens, 547
Insect stings/bites, 408
Insulin
intravenous/subcutaneous, 424
management, 417
surgery, 426
INTERCEPT trial, 301
Intercostal tube insertion, 371–372
Interferons, 515
Interpersonal skills, 538–539
Intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP), 
293
Intramuscular medication, 512
Intubation, 344
Iodine, 440
Ipratropium, 330
Irinotecan, 376–377
Iron deficiency anaemia, 50–52, 80
case history, 50
causes, 80
investigations, 50–52, 51
treatment, 80
Iron status, inflammatory 
disorders, 141–142
Ischaemic heart disease, 302, 316
Ischaemic stroke, 472, 473
Isoniazid, 218, 358–362, 496
580
Index
﻿
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Isotretinoin, 564
Itchy folliculitis, 564
J
Jaundice, 59–63
case history, 59–61
investigations, 59, 60, 61
K
Kaposi’s sarcoma (KS), 23, 561, 
563
Ketamine, 515
Ketones, 418
Kidney disease
acute see Acute kidney failure
chronic see Chronic kidney 
disease (CKD)
injury see Acute kidney injury
presentation, 223
Kingella kingae, 310
Klebsiella spp, 350
Knee aspiration, 219
see also Chondrocalcinosis of 
knee
L
β-lactamase inhibitor, penicillin 
with, 6
Lactate levels, 387
Laxatives, 88
Left pleural effusion, 364, 365
Left ventricular failure (LVF), 303, 
328
Legionella spp, 310, 350
Legionnaire’s disease, 353
Legs, weakness, 377
Leg ulcers, 542–543
causes, 542
investigations, 542
management, 543
see also Swollen red leg; 
Swollen/painful leg
Leucoerythroblastic anaemia, 
143–144
Leukaemia, 131
vs lymphoma, 138, 139
see also Acute leukaemias
Levodopa (LD), 185, 478, 478, 514
Levothyroxine, 162–163, 441, 456
Lewy body dementia, 158
Libman–Sacks endocarditis, 
208–209
Lichen planus, management, 552
Lichenoid eruptions, 558
Lidocaine, 183, 513
Life support
advanced, algorithm, 282
basic ABCDE, 280–281, 281
Lipid-lowering drugs, 302
Lipodermatosclerosis, 541
Lisinopril, 323, 513
Listeria meningitis, 494, 495
Lithium, 514
Liver abscess, 3
treatment, 3–4
Liver biochemistry, abnormal, 
57–66
case history, 57
investigations, 57–59, 58
Liver disease
anaemia, 141–142
bleeding, 108
see also Acute liver disease
Liver failure, 70–71
case history, 70
management, 70–71
signs, 70
Liver function tests, 57, 58
Lobar pneumonia, 351
Locked-in syndrome, 490–491, 
492
Loperamide, 535
Loratidine, 547
Lorazepam, 156, 499, 532, 539
Low molecular weight heparin 
(LMWH), 286, 289–290, 297, 
368, 507
Lumbar puncture, 493, 501
indications/contraindications, 
494
Lung abscess, 357–358
case history, 357, 357
diagnosis, 358
differential diagnosis, 357–358
Lung cancer
investigations, 373, 374–375, 
379
small cell (SCLC), 376–377, 
376
non-small cell (NSCLC), 376
Lung disease
aspergilloma, 334
intrinsic, 339
polycythaemia, 94, 96
Lungs, venous congestion, 334
Lupus nephritis, treatment, 258
581
Index
﻿
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Lymphomas, 131, 563
high-grade, 138
vs leukaemia, 138, 139
Lysergic acid (LSD), 515
M
Macrocytic anaemia
case history, 80–81
causes, 81–83
diagnosis, 82
investigations, 80–81, 82–83
management, 82–83
Macropapular rash, 553, 554
Macroscopic haematuria, 259
Maculopapular eruptions, 
555–557, 558
Magnesium sulphate, 37, 274, 331
Malaria, 16, 101, 103, 145–146
features of falciparum malaria, 
145–146
management, 16
Malignancy, HIV/AIDS, 23–24, 
563
Malignant melanoma, 563
Malignant pleural effusion, 
363–364
Malnutrition Universal Screening 
Tool (MUST), 28
Mannitol, 474, 488
Mefloquine, 514
Megaloblastic anaemia, 81
Meggitt–Wagner classification, 
diabetic foot ulcers, 428
Melaena see Haematemesis/
melaena
Melkersson–Rosenthal syndrome, 
469
Memantine, 158, 158, 519
Membranous nephropathy, 
treatment, 258
Meningitis, 491–493
case history, 491, 495
causes, 493–496
diagnosis, 493
investigations, 491, 491, 493, 495
treatment, 494
Meningococcal meningitis, 7–9, 
491, 494
case history, 7, 7
causes, 494–495
chemoprophylaxis, 8–9, 9
diagnosis, 7
investigations, 8
Meningococcal septicaemia, 113
Meningoencephalitis, causes, 483
Mental disorders, 528
organic, 537
Mental Health Act, 530, 531, 539
Meptazinol, 216–217
Metabolic conditions
acidosis, 340
alkalosis, 340
depression, 532
hypercalcaemia, 379
syncope, 266
Metformin, 412–413
Methadone, 535–536, 535–536
Methanol, 515
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus (MRSA), 6
Methionine, 397, 402
Methotrexate, 81, 83, 121–122, 515, 
564
Methylene blue, 102
Methylprednisolone, 183, 481, 481
Metoclopramide, 44, 467, 504–505, 
504
Metoprolol, 285, 289–290, 299, 301
Metronidazole, 3, 6, 39–40, 358, 
364
Miconazole, 563
Microangiopathic haemolytic 
anaemia (MAHA), 143
Microcytic anaemia
case history, 79
differential diagnosis, 77–79
investigations, 79
see also Iron deficiency anaemia
Microscopic haematuria, 259
Microscopic polyangiitis, 251–253
Micturation syncope, 265
Midazolam, 499
Migraine, 467
case history, 502
diagnosis, 502–503
management, 502
treatment, 467
Miliaria, 549
Milrinone, 295
Minimal change disease, 258
treatment, 258
Mini-Mental State Examination 
(MMSE), 154, 156, 163
Mirtazapine, 160
Misoprostol, 183
Mitoxantrone, 482
582
Index
﻿
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Mitral regurgitation, 308
Mitral valve disease, 308
case history, 308
Mobitz type II second-degree 
heart block, 267
Modification of diet in renal 
disease (MDRD), 247
Monoamine oxidase inhibitor 
(MAOI-B), 185, 479
Mononeuritis (third nerve palsy), 
461
multiplex, 468, 469
Monospot test, 19, 97–98
Moraxella catarrhalis, 23
Morphine, 87, 214, 234, 285
Movement disorders, 504–506
case history, 504–505
diagnosis, 504–505
hyperkinetic, 505–506
hypokinetic, 505
Multidisciplinary approach, 249
Multidrug-resistant tuberculosis 
(MDRTB), 22
Multi-infarct dementia, 158
Multiple myeloma, 507
diagnosis, 136, 136
Multiple sclerosis (MS), 480–482, 
500
case history, 480–481
investigations, 480–481
optic neuritis, 480–482
treatment, 481–482
Multisystem vasculitis, 251–253
diagnosis, 252, 253
Murmurs, prosthetic valves, 309
Musculoskeletal conditions, 337
Myasthenia gravis
case history, 463
investigations, 463
Mycobacteria tuberculosis (MTB), 
22–23
treatment, 22–23
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
case history, 361–362
key points, 362
treatment, 362
Mycobacterium avium intracellulare, 
220, 362
Mycoplasma pneumonia N.B., 
treatment, 353
Mycoplasma spp, 345, 350
Mydriatics, 514
Myelodysplasia (MDS), 140
Myeloma, 131
multiple, diagnosis, 136, 136
Myeloproliferative disorder, 99, 
100
Myocardial infarction (MI)
acute, 172–173, 173, 288–289
defined, 288
high-risk survivors, 302
management, 289–290
secondary prevention, 301–302
shock, 385
Myocardial infarction (MI), 
‘silent’, 163
management, 163
Myocardial ischaemia
acute, 291–292
features, 45
Myocardial stunning, 295
N
Nalidixic acid, 102
Naloxone, 390, 536
Naphthalene, 102, 102, 105
Naproxen, 467
Natalizumab, 482
National Institute for Clinical 
Excellence (NICE) guidelines, 
158, 489
National Poisons Information 
Service, 396, 400
National Service Framework 
(NSF) guidelines, 302
National Stroke Guidelines, 170, 
175
Neisseria meningitidis, 4, 125
Nephrotic syndrome, 257–259
case history, 257
investigations, 257–258
management, 257
see also Systemic lupus disease/
nephrotic syndrome
Nerve root, 337, 377
Neurally mediated syndromes, 
268
Neurological conditions
coma, 342
deficits, stroke, 168, 169–170
depression, 532
syncope, 266
Neuropathic ulcers, 542–543
Neutropenia
investigations, 377
management, 377–378
583
Index
﻿
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Neutrophil leucocytosis, 144, 144
Nickolsky sign, 557
Nifedipine, 301, 321
Nimodipine, 501
Niridazol, 102
Nitrates, 297, 304
Nitrazepam, 514
Nitrofurantoin, 102
Nocardia asteroides, 23
Non-dihydropyridines, 301
Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma 
(NHL), 24, 139
Non-infective meningitis, 494
Non-invasive ventilation (NIV), 
305, 343–344, 344
Non-small cell lung cancer 
(NSCLC), 376
Non-specific illness, elderly, 
161–172
case history, 161–162
Non-ST elevation MI (NSTEMI), 
291, 292
Non-steroidal antiinflammatory 
drugs (NSAIDs), 44, 88, 183, 
188, 467
rheumatology, 196, 198, 217
side effects, 515
Non-tuberculous (atypical) 
mycobacteria, 562
Norton Scale, pressure ulcers, 179
Nutrition, 27–30
assessment, 27, 28
case history, 27
enteral feeding, 29, 29
parenteral feeding, 27, 27, 29–30
patient selection, 27–29
O
Ocular lesions, sarcoidosis, 379
Oculogyric crises, 504–505
treatment, 505
Oesophageal cancer, 35, 36
management, 36
Oesophageal conditions, 337
rupture, 337
varicies, 68, 68–69
Oestrogen, 456
Olanzapine, 156, 540
Oliguria, 230
Omeprazole, 46, 196
Oncology see Haematological 
oncology
Ondansetron, 505
Ophthalmic herpes, 18
Opiates, 376
Opiate dependence, 534–537
assessment, 534–535
case history, 534, 536
effects, 534
investigations, 535
management, 535–537
withdrawal symptoms, 535–536
Optic neuritis, 480–482
Oral contraceptive pill, 207
Orthostatic hypotension, 151–152, 
266
Osmolality, calculation, 418
Osteoarthritis (OA), 191–196
assessment, 191, 192–194
case history, 191
diagnosis, 191, 195
examination, 191–195
features, 191–196, 192
hospitalisation, 195–196
treatment, 196
Osteomyelitis, 218–219
case history, 218
differential diagnosis, 218–219
humerus, 90
investigations, 218
Osteopenia, 216
Osteoporosis, 215–217
case history, 215
differential diagnosis, 215–216, 
216
investigations, 215
management, 216–217
Ovarian malignancy, 64
Overwhelming post-splenectomy 
infection (OPSI), 125
major pathogens, 125
pathophysiology, 125
prevention, 125
Oxygen dissociation curve, 342
P
Pacemakers, 277–312
classification, 278
common, 278
post-MI, 300
problems, 278–279
Pamaquine, 103
Pamidronate, 377
Pancreatitis, acute, 44, 45
Papilloedema palsies, case history, 
464
584
Index
﻿
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
‘Papulo-squamous’ dermatoses, 
563–564
Paracentesis (ascitic tap), 64
Paracetamol, 44, 88, 169, 467
Paracetamol poisoning, 62–63, 
398–402
antidotes, 401–402
case history, 398, 528
examination, 399, 400
management, 399–400, 401
treatment, 402
Parenteral nutrition, 27, 27, 29–30
Parkinson’s disease (PD), 184–185, 
478–479
case history, 184, 478
diagnosis, 184, 185
differential diagnosis, 184–185
features, 184–185
management, 185
Paroxysmal hemicrania, case 
history, 503
Partial left lateral medullary 
syndrome, 472
case history, 472
Patient controlled analgesia 
(PCA), 87–88
Patient wishes, cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation (CPR), 188–189
Pegylated interferon, 59
Penicillin, 19, 311, 491, 494, 542
with β-lactamase inhibitor, 6
Pentamidine, 22
Peptic ulcer disease, 46–49
alarm features, 47
case history, 48–49
history taking, 46–47
hospital discharge, 49
investigations, 47–49
stigmata, 49
treatment, 48
Pericarditis, 287, 287, 336
Peripheral neuropathy, 71
Peripheral nutrition, 29
Peripheral vestibular lesions, 470
Pernicious anaemia (PA), 83, 140
Persecutory delusions, 510
Personality factors, 538
pH, 241–242, 242
Phaeochromocytoma 
(catecholamine crisis), 
452–454
associations, 453
case history, 452, 453
diagnostic tests, 454
management, 454
presentation, 452–453
Phencyclidine, 515
Phenobarbital, 499, 556
Phenothiazines, 156, 512, 514
Phenoxybenzamine, 454
Phenytoin, 499, 556
Philadelphia chromosome, 137
Philadelphia Geriatric Center 
Morale Scale, 163, 166
Photosensitivity, 556, 556, 558
Physical illness, 538
Physical urticaria, 546
Pigmentation, drugs, 555
Piperacillin, 389, 392–393
Pituitary apoplexy, 455
Plant alkaloids, 515
Plasma D-dimers, 367, 367
Plasmodium falciparum, 16, 145
Platelet count, elevated, 98–116
case history, 98
causes, 98–100
complications, 100
investigations, 99
management, 100
Platelet disorders, 112–115
case history, 112–113, 115–116
inherited, 116
investigations, 112–113
Pleural effusion, 363–366, 373, 379
case history, 363–364, 365
causes, 364–365
investigations, 363–364
management, 364
signs, 363
treatment, 364
Pleurisy, 337
Pneumococcal meningitis, 
493–494, 494
Pneumococcal sepsis, 123–124, 124
Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia, 
21, 354
case history, 354, 354
treatment, 22, 355
Pneumonia, 350–357, 360, 374–376
case history, 360
community-acquired see 
Community-acquired 
pneumonia
hospital-acquired see Severe 
hospital-acquired pneumonia 
(SHAP)
585
Index
﻿
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
investigations, 360–361, 361
lobar, 351
severe, 341
types, 355
see also Pneumocystis jiroveci 
pneumonia
Pneumothorax, 369–372
case history, 369–370, 370
causes, 369–372
diagnosis, 369, 371
differential diagnosis, 370–371
management, 369–372
Poisoning, 395–410
poison-induced delirium, 515
Polycythaemia, 92–96
apparent/relative, 93, 94, 95
case history, 92–93
causes, 93–96, 93
diagnosis, 94–95, 95
investigations, 94–95
management, 93–94, 96
secondary, 95
Polycythaemia vera (PV), 94–95, 
95
complications, 96
features, 95, 96
Polymorphic light eruption, 549
Polymyalgia rheumatica (PMR), 
212–213
Portosystemic encephalopathy 
(PSE), 70
Post-herpetic neuralgia, 18
Postural hypotension, 152
Potassium, 239–241, 240
replacement, 417, 417
Potassium iodide, 438
Pott’s disease, 218
Pramipexole, 185, 479
Prasugrel, 301
Pravastatin, 302
Prednisolone, 19, 40, 187, 212, 
445
dermatology, 547, 550
neurology, 468, 496
respiratory conditions, 345, 348
rheumatology, 200, 217
Pregnancy, diabetes mellitus, 
429–439
case history, 429–430
management, 429–430
Pressure ulcers, 177–179
assessment, 178
case history, 177
causes, 178
investigations, 178, 178
management, 178–179
risk factors, 177–179
‘Prickly heat’, 549
Primaquine, 102, 102
Primary pulmonary artery 
hypertension, 314
Primidone, 556
Probenecid, 102
Prochlorperazine, 44, 88
Proctoscopy, 53
Procyclidine, 505, 512
Progestogen, 456
Progressive supranuclear palsy 
(PSP) (Steele–Richardson 
syndrome), 485, 485
Propofol, 499
Propranolol, 301, 433, 435, 438, 
454, 513
Propylthiouracil (PTU), 435, 438
Prosthetic valves, 309
Pruritic papular eruption (PPE), 
564
Pruritus, 551–553
case history, 551
causes, 552
investigations, 553
treatment, 563–564
Pseudodementia, 516
Pseudo-gout, 209–211, 211
management, 211
Pseudomembranous colitis, 11–16
case history, 10
differential diagnosis, 10
investigations, 10
management, 11
prevention, 11
questions, 10
Pseudomonas spp, 6, 350, 392–393, 
495
Psittacosis, 353–354
Psoriasis, 564
management, 552
Psychiatric disorders, 537
Psychiatric liaison referral, 530
Psychological conditions, 533
Pulmonary embolism (PE), 
366–369
associated conditions, 366–367
case history, 366
diagnosis, 366
haemoptysis, 334
586
Index
﻿
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
investigations, 367–368
treatment, 368–369
Pulmonary haemorrhage, 252, 334
Pulmonary hypertension, 312–314
case history, 312, 314
diagnosis, 314
investigations, 312
see also Cor pulmonale
Pulmonary oedema, 432
acute, 172, 173
flash, 233–238
Pulmonary sarcoidosis, 380
Pulmonary tuberculosis, 334
Pulse patterns, valvular heart 
disease, 307
Pyoderma gangrenosum, 43
Pyogenic abscess, 358
Pyogenic streptococci, 4
Pyrazinamide, 22–23, 218, 358–362
Pyrexia of unknown origin (PUO), 
1–4, 358
case study, 1
causes, 2
defined, 1–4
investigations, 2–3, 2–3
management, 1
questions, 1
Pyrimethamine, 16, 22
Q
Q fever, 353–354
Quality of life, 189
Quinine sulfate, 16
Quinolone, 5, 102
R
Radioiodine, 436
Raloxifene, 217
Ramipril, 297–298, 301–302
Ramsay Hunt syndrome, 18, 468
Rasagiline, 479
Rash/eruption, generalised, 
550–553
case history, 550
complications, 550–551
differential diagnosis, 550
history taking, 550–551
HIV/AIDS, 561–562
investigations, 551
management, 551
see also Cutaneous adverse drug 
reactions (ADR); Sun-induced 
rash
Reactive arthritis, features, 220
Recombinant human growth 
hormone, 456
Recreational drugs, 515
Rectal bleeding, 52–54
case history, 52
investigations, 53
management, 52–53
Recurrent meningitis, 494
Red blood cells, 84–86, 92
Re-entrant tachycardia, 270
Referred pain, 337–338
Reiter’s disease, 219
Renal disease, 109
Renal failure, 109, 295
Renal tract imaging, 246, 246
Renal transplants, 256
monitoring, 256–257, 256
Renal unit referral, 246
Renal/ureteric colic, 262–264
case history, 262
causes, 262
diagnosis, 262–264
examination, 263
history taking, 262–263
investigations, 263, 263–264
management, 263
Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone 
system, 322
Renoprotection, 250
Renovascular disease, 234–235, 
235–237
atheromatous, 238
investigations, 238
management, 236
Replacement therapy, 
hypopituitarism, 455, 456
Respiratory conditions
acidosis, 339, 343
alkalosis, 340
HIV/AIDS, 22–23
management, 24
Respiratory failure, 338–344, 348
acid-base changes, 339–340, 340
arterial blood gas (ABG) 
sampling, 339, 339, 341, 341, 
343–344
case history, 343
diagnosis, 339
investigations, 339, 339, 343–344
key points, 348–349
management, 341
mechanical ventilation, 344
587
Index
﻿
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
sarcoidosis, 381
signs, 341–342
treatment, 342, 342, 348
Respiratory support, poisoning, 
396
Resuscitation
do not attempt (DNAR), 
188–189, 189
haematemesis/melaena, 66–69
see also Cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation (CPR)
Returning traveller, 14–16
case history, 14
diagnosis, 16
diarrhoea, 38
differential diagnosis, 15
investigations, 15–16, 15
questions, 14–16
Revascularisation, 292, 298
Rhabdomyolysis, 243
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA), 
121–122, 197–200
case history, 197
differential diagnosis, 197–200
investigations, 198, 198
management, 197–198
manifestations, 199–200, 199
Rib erosion, 373
Ribavirin, 59
Rifampicin, 9, 218
tuberculosis, 22–23, 358–362, 496
Right ventricular infarction, 
295–297
case history, 272–273, 295–296
Right-sided endocarditis, 312
Risedronate, 217
Risperidone, 512
Rituximab, 86
Rivastigmine, 158, 158, 519
Rizatriptan, 467
Romiplostim, 115
Ropinirole, 185, 479
Rotigotine, 479
Rouleaux, 142
Royal College of Physicians, 163
S
Salbutamol, 345, 348
Salicylate overdose, 402–404
case history, 402–403
features, 403
treatment, 403
Salmon calcitonin, 216–217
Salmonella spp, 13
Salmonella typhi, 13–14
Sarcoidosis, 378–381, 379, 545
case history, 378, 380
defined, 379–381
investigations, 380
presentation, 378–381
Scabies, 552–553, 562
Schizophrenia, 540
Scopolamine, 514
Seborrhoeic dermatitis, 561, 563
Sedatives, 515
Sedative withdrawal
presentation, 516
treatment, 516
Seizures
atonic, 498
treatment, 498–499
Selective oestrogen-receptor 
modulator (SERM), 217
Selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors (SSRIs), 527
Selegiline, 185, 479
Self-harm see Deliberate self-harm 
(DSH)
Self-poisoning, 395–398
assessment, 395
case history, 395
investigations, 395
management, 396–398
Sengstaken–Blakemore tube, 69
Sepsis, 144–147, 243
Septic arthritis, 219–221
case history, 219
investigations/management, 
219–221, 219, 220, 221
Septic shock, 5, 231
case history, 388
causes, 385, 388
management, 386, 389
pathophysiology, 389
Septicaemia, 4–9
case history, 4
causes, 4
differential diagnosis, 5
investigations, 5
management, 5–6
meningococcal meningitis, 7–9
predisposing factors, 4, 5
Serum creatinine, 234
Serum transferrin receptor assay, 
79
VII nerve lesion see Bell’s palsy
588
Index
﻿
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Severe acute asthma, 330
case history, 329
intensive care, 331
life-threatening, 331, 341
management, 330–331
treatment, 331–332
Severe brain injury, 488, 489–491
case history, 489–491
differential diagnosis, 492
examination, 490
investigations, 490
prognosis, 490
Severe hospital-acquired 
pneumonia (SHAP), 350
bacteriology, 356
case history, 355–356
diagnosis, 356
investigations, 356
management, 356–357
Severe hypercalcaemia, 448–449
case history, 448
management, 449
Sexually transmitted infections 
(STIs), 15, 21–25
Shigella spp, 13
Shingles, 16–18
case history, 16
investigations, 17
management, 17
secondary infection, 17
Shock, 68, 383–390
cardiogenic see Cardiogenic 
shock
causes, 384–385
diagnosis, 385
examination, 385–387
hypovolaemic see Hypovolaemic 
shock
investigations, 385, 387
management, 386
physiology, 384, 384
septic see Septic shock
treatment, 387–388
SHOCK trial, 293
Shy–Drager parkinsonism, 185
Sick sinus syndrome, 150
Sickle-cell disease (SCD), 86–89
anaemia, 123–124, 124
case history, 86
complications, 89, 89, 90
diagnosis, 91, 91–92
investigations, 86
questions, 86–87
treatment, 87–89
types, 44
Sixth nerve palsy, 464, 465
Skin condition, 170
cancers, 563
lesions, sarcoidosis, 379
reactions, 542, 555
Small bowel obstruction, 32, 33
differential diagnosis, 32
management, 32
Small cell lung cancer (SCLC), 
376–377, 376
Smoking, 172
Sodium problems, 227–228
Sodium urate, 209
Solitary nodules, 437
Solvents, 515
Somatostatin, 69
Sotalol, 274, 277
Speech and Language Therapist 
(SALT), 171
Spinal cord compression, 500, 500, 
507
case history, 507
diagnosis, 508
investigations, 507
Spinal tuberculous osteomyelitis, 
218
Spirometry, 346
Spironolactone, 65, 305, 513
Spleen, size, 122
Splenectomy, 123
see also Overwhelming 
post-splenectomy infection 
(OPSI)
Splenomegaly, 121–125
case history, 121–124
causes, 122, 122
Squamous cell carcinoma, 36, 334
ST elevation myocardial infarction 
(STEMI), 285, 287, 291–292
diabetes mellitus, 423, 424
management, 285–286
Stanozol, 548
Staphylococcal pneumonia, 
treatment, 353
Staphylococcus aureus, 4, 17, 218, 
495
community-acquired 
pneumonia (CAP), 350, 352
septic arthritis, 220–221
Statins, 172, 175, 291, 302
Status epilepitcus, 498
589
Index
﻿
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Steele–Richardson syndrome, 485, 
485
Steele–Richardson–Olszewski 
parkinsonism, 185
Steroids, 19, 40, 187, 343, 444–446, 
507
case history, 444
cranial (giant cell) arteritis, 
213
dermatology, 544, 564
Stevens–Johnson syndrome (SJS), 
557
/toxic epidermal necrolysis 
(SJS/TEN) overlap, 557, 
560
Stings/bites, insect, 408
Stone formation, 263–264, 
263–264
Streptococci, Group A, 4
Streptococcus bovis, 310
Streptococcus pneumoniae, 4, 23, 87, 
123–124, 124–125, 345, 350
Streptococcus pyogenes, 17, 19
Streptococcus viridans, 311
Stridor, 377
causes, 329
upper airway obstruction with, 
328
Stroke, 163–172, 472–474
case history, 167, 473
causes, 167, 476–477
diagnosis, 169
investigations, 170, 171, 473–474, 
473, 478
management, 169–171, 474
pathology, 167
pathophysiology, 472
prognosis, 171
questions, 167
risk factors, 171
secondary prevention, 171–172
signs, 167–169, 168
see also Transient ischaemic 
attack (TIA)
Subarachnoid haemorrhage
case history, 501
diagnosis, 501–502
Subdural haemorrhage, 477–479
case history, 477
diagnosis, 477–478, 480
management, 477–478
Sublingual glyceryl trinitrate 
(GTN), 285
Subphrenic abscess, 33
treatment, 33–34
Substance use, 537
Suicide
increased risk, detection, 528, 
529
prevention, 529
thoughts, 159, 529
see also Deliberate self-harm 
(DSH)
Sulfadoxine, 16
Sulfasalazine, 102, 554
Sumatriptan, 467
Sun-induced rash, 548–550
case history, 548
diagnosis, 549–550
differential diagnosis, 549
treatment, 549–550
Superior venacaval obstruction, 
377
Supraventricular tachycardia 
(SVT), 270
adenosine, 274
features, 270, 271
management, 271–272
Swallowing difficulty see 
Dysphagia
Swollen red leg, 541–543
diagnosis, 541
differential diagnosis, 541
examination, 541–542
investigations, 542
treatment, 542
Swollen/painful leg, 323–324
case history, 323
causes, 323
Sympatho-adrenal response, 
shock, 384
Syncope, 265–277
case history, 265–267
diagnosis, 265, 267–268
differential diagnosis, 265–266
investigations, 266–267, 267
treatment, 268
Syndrome of inappropriate 
anti-diuretic hormone 
(SIADH), 459–460
case history, 459
causes, 460
presentation, 459
Synovial fluid, 221
Systemic inflammatory response 
syndrome (SIRS), defined, 4
590
Index
﻿
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Systemic lupus disease/nephrotic 
syndrome, 202–206
case history, 202–203
diagnosis, 203–206, 204
investigations, 203–205, 205
management, 203
prognosis, 206
Systemic lupus disease/vasculitis, 
200–202
case history, 200
diagnosis, 202
differential diagnosis, 200, 
201
investigations, 200, 201
Systolic heart failure, 306
T
Tachyarrhythmias see Tachycardia
Tachycardia, 268–274
case history, 268, 271
classification, 270
hospitalisation, 268, 269
questions, 268
Tardive dyskinesia
case history, 505
diagnosis, 505–506
Tazobactam, 389
Temazepam, 519
Temporal arteritis, 181
Tension pneumothorax, 371
Terlipressin, 69
Testosterone, 456
Tetany, 333
causes, 450
Tetracosactide test, 444
Tetracycline, 353
β-thalassaemia trait, 79, 80
Theophyllines, 348
Thiamine, 35, 65, 71, 521
Thiazides, 321, 456
Thiopentone, 499
Third nerve palsy, 461, 462
Thrombocytopenia, 115, 124–125
causes, 113, 113
microangiopathic haemolytic 
anaemia (MAHA), 143–144, 
144
questions, 113
with thrombosis (HIT), 
heparin-induced, 121
see also Idiopathic 
thrombocytopenic purpura 
(ITP)
Thrombocytosis, 98, 100
Thromboembolism, 276
see also Venous thromboembolic 
disease (VTE)
Thrombolysis, 286–291, 291, 299, 
299
contraindications, 286
respiratory disorders, 368, 368
shock, 387
Thrombophilia, 117–118, 120, 
120
Thrombosis, 116–131, 206–209
case history, 116–119, 121, 206
differential diagnosis, 207, 208
examination, 206–207
investigations, 116–121, 117, 
207, 208
see also Deep vein thrombosis 
(DVT)
Thyroid disorders, 434
Thyroid function, 439–444
Thyroid function tests, 434
interpretation, 441
Thyroid storm, 438–439
case history, 438
treatment, 438–439
Thyrotoxicosis, 187
Thyroxine, 84
Tietze’s disease, 337
Tilt test, 267
Timolol, 301
TOE-guided approach, 276
Toes, erythromelalgia, 96
Torsade de pointes, 272–273, 
272
Toxic confusional state see 
Delirium
Toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN), 
555–557
/Stevens–Johnson syndrome 
(SJS/TEN) overlap, 557, 
560
treatment, 557–558
Tranquillising drugs, 512
Transcobalamin II deficiency, 
81
Transient ischaemic attack (TIA), 
174–175, 466, 466, 475–476
case history, 174, 475
examination, 174
history taking, 174
hospitalisation, 175
investigations, 174, 475–476
591
Index
﻿
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
management, 175
prognosis, 175
treatment, 476
Transjugular intra-hepatic 
portosystemic shunt (TIPS), 
69
Transplants, 254–257
case history, 256
drug interactions, 256
Trauma
management, 487
musculoskeletal, 337
Traumatic brain injury, 486–493
case history, 486, 487
effects/complications, 487–488
Tricyclic anti-depressants (TCAs), 
514, 527
Tricyclic anti-depressants (TCAs), 
overdose, 404
features, 404
treatment, 404
Trimethoprim, 7, 181
Triptans, 467
Trousseau’s sign, 450
Tuberculosis (TB), 355, 358–363, 
376
case history, 358–360
investigations, 359, 359
management, 360
risk factors, reactivation, 
360
Tuberculosis with meningitis 
(TBM), 495
case history, 358
investigations, 495–496, 495
management, 496
treatment, 358–362
Typhoid, 13–14
case history, 13
diagnosis, 14
investigations, 13
management, 14
U
Ulcerative colitis, 40, 41, 42
vs Crohn’s disease, 40, 42
findings, 40
management, 40, 40
Ulcers
venous, 543
see also Diabetic foot; Peptic 
ulcer disease; Pressure 
ulcers
Unconsciousness, causes, 390
Uncooperative patients, 539
Unstable angina (UA), 289, 292
case history, 289
Upper airway obstruction, 326, 
327
case history, 326
causes, 327
with stridor, 328
Urate crystals, 211, 211
Urea breath tests, 47, 47
Ureidopenicillin, 377
Ureteric colic see Renal/ureteric 
colic
Urgency, defined, 260–261
Urinary tract disease, 
presentation, 223
Urinary tract infection (UTI), 5, 7, 
179–181, 260–262
case history, 179–180, 260
examination, 180, 261–262
history taking, 180–181
investigations, 180, 261
management, 261–262
treatment, 181
Urine output, 230–233
case history, 230
history taking/examination, 
231–233
management, 231, 232
poor, causes, 231, 231
Urine tests, 245
Urticaria (hives), 545–548, 
545
classification, 546
management, 546–547, 552
UVA wavelengths, 549
UVB wavelengths, 549
V
Valaciclovir, 17
VALIANT trial, 302
Valsartan, 301–302, 327
Valvular heart disease, 306–309
prosthetic valves problems, 
309
pulse patterns, 307
surgery, 308
see also Mitral valve disease
Vancomycin, 6, 378
Varicella zoster virus see 
Shingles
Vascular disease, 254–255
592
Index
﻿
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Vasculitis, 542
haemoptysis, 334
inflammatory autoimmune, 
251–253
leg ulcers, 542–543
multisystem, 251–253
treatment, 258
see also Systemic lupus disease/
vasculitis
Vasovagal attacks, 497
Vasovagal syncope, 265
Vaughan–Williams classification, 
arrhythmias, 273
Venesect, 349
Venlafaxine, 160
Venous hypertension, 542
Venous thromboembolic disease 
(VTE), 118–119
warfarin and, 118–119, 
119
Venous ulcers, 543
Ventilator-associated pneumonia, 
350
Ventricular ‘escape’ rhythms, 
300
Ventricular tachycardia (VT), 
270–272, 272, 300
adenosine, 274
features, 271–272, 271
management, 274
Venturi mask, 343
Verapamil, 274, 277
Verotoxin-producing E. coli 
(VTEC) see Enterohaemorrhagic 
Escherichia coli (EHEC)
Vertigo, 469–474
case history, 469
causes, 471
diagnosis, 470–472
see also Benign paroxysmal 
positional vertigo 
(BPPV)
Vestibular neuronitis, 470
Vicia faba (fava beans), 103
Vinca alkaloids, 515
Violent patients, 531–532
Viral infections, 146–147
Viral meningitis, 494
Viral (de Quervain’s) thyroiditis
case history, 437
diagnosis, 437
features, 437–438
Viridans streptococci, 310
Vision, loss of, 466–467
case history, 466–467
diagnosis, 466–467
differential diagnosis, 466–467, 
466
Visual hallucinations/illusions, 
509
Vitamin B, 71
Vitamin B12 deficiency, 81, 81, 
83
Vitamin C, 71
Vitamin D, 213
Vitamin E, 158
Vitamin K, 102, 102, 112
Vitamin K deficiency, 108
causes, 108
management, 109
Vomiting, 31–43
case history, 31
causes, 31
investigations, 32, 32, 33
see also Haematemesis/
melaena
W
Walking difficulty, 499–501
case history, 499–500
diagnosis, 500–501, 500
Warfarin, 323, 433
anti-phospholipid syndrome, 
209
bleeding disorders, 111–112
pleural effusion, 368
thrombosis, 117
transient ischaemic attack (TIA), 
175, 476
venous thromboembolic disease 
(VTE), 118–119, 119
Waterlow Score, pressure ulcers, 
163, 165, 179
Wegener’s granulomatosis, 
251–253
Weight loss, 34–35
case history, 34
diagnosis, 34
investigations, 34–35, 35
Wernicke–Korsakoff syndrome, 
71, 521
White blood cell count, elevated, 
97–98
case history, 97
causes, 97, 97
investigations, 97–98
593
Index
﻿
Kumar & Clark’s Cases in Clinical Medicine
Wolff–Chaikoff effect, 439, 440
Wolff–Parkinson–White (WPW) 
tachycardia, 270
World Health Organization 
(WHO), 15, 216
WOSCOPS trial, 302
X
Xanthochromia, 501
Xerosis, 563–564
Z
Zolmitriptan, 467
This page intentionally left blank
