Use of the current edition of the electronic version of this book (eBook) is subject to the terms of the nontransferable, limited license granted on 
studentconsult.inkling.com. Access to the eBook is limited to the first individual who redeems the PIN, located on the inside cover of this book, at 
studentconsult.inkling.com and may not be transferred to another party by resale, lending, or other means. 
2020_ME
Any screen.  
Any time.  
Anywhere.
Activate the eBook version  
of this title at no additional charge. 
Unlock your eBook today.
1.  Visit studentconsult.inkling.com/redeem
2.  Scratch box below to reveal your code
3.  Type code into “Enter Code” box
4.   Click “Redeem”
5.   Log in or Sign up
6.  Go to “My Library”
It’s that easy!
Elsevier eBooks for Medical Education gives you the power to browse and search 
content, view enhanced images, highlight and take notes—both online and offline.
For technical assistance:  
email studentconsult.help@elsevier.com 
call 1-800-401-9962 (inside the US)  
call +1-314-447-8300 (outside the US)
Place Peel Off 
Sticker Here
MEDICAL 
PHARMACOLOGY
	 THERAPEUTICS
&
DEDICATION
To our families
Derek G. Waller, BSc, DM, MB, BS, FRCP
Former Consultant Physician and Senior Clinical Lecturer
Department of Medicine 
University Hospital Southampton 
Southampton 
United Kingdom
Anthony P. Sampson, MA, PhD, FHEA, FBPhS
Professorial Fellow in Clinical Pharmacology & Director of Undergraduate Programmes
Faculty of Medicine 
University of Southampton 
Southampton 
United Kingdom
Andrew W. Hitchings, BSc, MBBS, PhD, FRCP, FFICM, 
FHEA, FBPhS
Reader in Clinical Pharmacology
St George’s, University of London
Honorary Consultant in Neurointensive Care
St George’s University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust 
London 
United Kingdom
For additional online content visit StudentConsult.com
Sixth Edition
MEDICAL 
PHARMACOLOGY
	 THERAPEUTICS
&
London  New York  Oxford  Philadelphia  St Louis  Sydney 2022
ELSEVIER
Copyright © 2022 by Elsevier Limited. All rights reserved.
First edition 2001
Second edition 2005
Third edition 2010
Fourth edition 2014
Fifth edition 2018
The rights of Derek G. Waller, Anthony P. Sampson and Andrew W. Hitchings to be identified as 
authors of this work has been asserted by them in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and 
Patents Act 1988.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic 
or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, 
without permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further 
information about the Publisher’s permissions policies and our arrangements with organizations 
such as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found at our 
website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the 
Publisher (other than as may be noted herein).
Notice
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in 
evaluating and using any information, methods, compounds or experiments described herein. 
Because of rapid advances in the medical sciences, in particular, independent verification of 
diagnoses and drug dosages should be made. To the fullest extent of the law, no responsibility is 
assumed by Elsevier, authors, editors or contributors for any injury and/or damage to persons or 
property as a matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of 
any methods, products, instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.
Content Strategist: Alexandra Mortimer
Content Development Specialist: Veronika Watkins
Project Manager: Joanna Souch
Design: Amy L. Buxton
Illustration Manager: Anitha Rajarathnam
Marketing Manager: Deborah Watkins
Printed in Poland
ISBN: 978-0-7020-8159-0
Last digit is the print number:  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
v
Contents 
Preface, vii
Drug Dosage and Nomenclature, viii
SECTION 1  GENERAL PRINCIPLES, 1
	 1.	 Principles of Pharmacology and Mechanisms of 
Drug Action, 1
	2.	 Pharmacokinetics, 32
	3.	 Drug Discovery, Safety and Efficacy, 62
	4.	 Neurotransmission and the Peripheral Autonomic 
Nervous System, 71
SECTION 2  THE CARDIOVASCULAR 
SYSTEM, 89
	5.	 Ischaemic Heart Disease, 89
	6.	 Systemic and Pulmonary Hypertension, 108
	 7.	 Heart Failure and Shock, 128
	8.	 Cardiac Arrhythmias, 142
	9.	 Cerebrovascular Disease and Dementia, 160
10.	 Peripheral Artery Disease, 169
11.	 Haemostasis, 175
SECTION 3  THE RESPIRATORY 
SYSTEM, 192
12.	 Asthma and Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease, 192
13.	 Respiratory Disorders: Cough, Respiratory 
Stimulants, Cystic Fibrosis, Idiopathic Pulmonary 
Fibrosis and Neonatal Respiratory Distress 
Syndrome, 211
SECTION 4  THE RENAL SYSTEM, 218
14.	 Diuretics, 218
15.	 Disorders of Micturition, 229
16.	 Erectile Dysfunction, 236
SECTION 5  THE NERVOUS SYSTEM, 242
17.	 General Anaesthetics, 242
18.	 Local Anaesthetics, 252
19.	 Opioid Analgesics and the Management of Pain, 258
20.	 Anxiety, Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder and 
Insomnia, 273
21.	 Schizophrenia and Bipolar Disorder, 281
22.	 Depression, Attention Deficit Hyperactivity 
Disorder and Narcolepsy, 292
23.	 Seizures and Epilepsy, 308
24.	 Extrapyramidal Movement Disorders and 
Spasticity, 323
25.	 Other Neurological Disorders: Multiple Sclerosis, 
Motor Neuron Disease and Guillain–Barré 
Syndrome, 336
26.	 Migraine and Other Headaches, 342
SECTION 6  THE MUSCULOSKELETAL 
SYSTEM, 350
27.	 The Neuromuscular Junction and Neuromuscular 
Blockade, 350
28.	 Myasthenia Gravis, 357
29.	 Nonsteroidal Antiinflammatory Drugs, 361
vi	
CONTENTS
30.	 Rheumatoid Arthritis, Other Inflammatory 
Arthritides and Osteoarthritis, 371
31.	 Hyperuricaemia, Gout and Pseudogout, 383
SECTION 7  THE GASTROINTESTINAL 
SYSTEM, 389
32.	 Nausea and Vomiting, 389
33.	 Dyspepsia, Peptic Ulcer Disease and 
Gastrooesophageal Reflux Disease, 397
34.	 Inflammatory Bowel Disease, 408
35.	 Constipation, Diarrhoea and Irritable Bowel 
Syndrome, 415
36.	 Liver Disease, 423
37.	 Obesity, 432
SECTION 8  THE IMMUNE SYSTEM, 437
38.	 The Immune Response and Immunosuppressant 
Drugs, 437
39.	 Antihistamines and Allergic Disease, 450
SECTION 9  THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM 
AND METABOLISM, 457
40.	 Diabetes Mellitus, 457
41.	 The Thyroid and Control of Metabolic Rate, 473
42.	 Calcium Metabolism and Metabolic Bone 
Disease, 480
43.	 Pituitary and Hypothalamic Hormones, 491
44.	 Corticosteroids (Glucocorticoids and 
Mineralocorticoids), 503
45.	 Female Reproduction, 512
46.	 Androgens, Antiandrogens and Anabolic 
Steroids, 530
47.	 Anaemia and Haematopoietic Colony-Stimulating 
Factors, 535
48.	 Lipid Disorders, 545
SECTION 10  THE SKIN AND EYES, 558
49.	 Skin Disorders, 558
50.	 The Eye, 567
SECTION 11  ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY, 578
51.	 Drugs for Infections, 578
SECTION 12  CANCER, 630
52.	 Drugs for Cancer, 630
SECTION 13  GENERAL FEATURES: TOXICITY 
AND PRESCRIBING, 661
53.	 Drug Toxicity and Overdose, 661
54.	 Substance Abuse and Dependence, 677
55.	 Prescribing, Adherence and Information About 
Medicines, 693
56.	 Drug Therapy in Special Situations, 700
Index, 712
vii
Preface
The sixth edition of Medical Pharmacology and Thera-
peutics has been revised and updated to build upon 
the strengths and popular approach of previous edi-
tions. Its aim remains to provide a single volume for 
healthcare professionals and students requiring a 
sound knowledge of the basic principles of clinical 
pharmacology combined with the practice of drug 
prescribing for the management of disease.
Medical Pharmacology and Therapeutics relates key 
information on basic pharmacology to other relevant 
biomedical sciences in order to underpin the clini-
cal contexts, and each disease-based chapter is then 
structured to reflect the ways that relevant drugs are 
used in clinical practice. The chapters covering generic 
concepts in pharmacology and therapeutics include 
sections on drug action at a cellular level, pharmaco-
kinetics, pharmacogenetics, drug development, drug 
toxicity and the principles of prescribing. The sections 
on clinical management in each disease area have been 
thoroughly revised and updated in line with best prac-
tice and the relevant national guidelines, including on 
COVID-19.
Each chapter in this sixth edition retains the follow-
ing key features:
• An up-to-date and succinct explanation of the major 
pathogenic mechanisms of disease and consequent 
clinical symptoms and signs, helping the reader to 
put into context the actions of drugs and the conse-
quences of their therapeutic use.
• A comprehensive review of major drug classes 
relevant to the disease in question. Basic pharma-
cology is described with clear identification of the 
molecular targets, clinical characteristics, important 
pharmacokinetic properties and unwanted effects 
associated with individual drug classes. Example 
drugs are covered in depth to illustrate the common 
pharmacological characteristics of their class and to 
introduce the reader to those drugs currently in the 
most widespread clinical use.
• A structured approach to the principles of disease 
management, outlining the core principles of drug 
choice and planning a therapeutic regimen for many 
common diseases.
• Drug compendia at the close of each chapter enable 
any drug encountered by the reader in day-to-day 
work or study to be placed within its drug class and 
its key features related to the example drugs cov-
ered in the chapter.
• An expanded section of self-assessment questions 
for learning and revision of the concepts and con-
tent in each chapter, including one-best-answer 
(OBA), extended-matching-item (EMI), true-false 
and case scenario-based questions.
It is our intention that the sixth edition of this book 
will encourage readers to develop a deeper under-
standing of the principles of drug usage that will 
help them to become safe and effective prescribers, 
to enable them to evaluate the findings of basic and 
clinical research, to encourage them to teach and train 
others in their profession, and to develop the skills of 
lifelong learning that will enable them to tackle chang-
ing healthcare needs and emerging threats.
DGW
APS
AWH
viii
Drug Dosage and Nomenclature
DRUG NOMENCLATURE
In the past, the nonproprietary (generic) names of 
some drugs have varied from country to country, 
leading to potential confusion. Progressively, interna-
tional agreement has been reached to rationalise these 
variations in names and a single recommended Inter-
national Nonproprietary Name (INN) given to all 
drugs. Where the previously given British Approved 
Name (BAN) and the INN have differed, the INN is 
now the accepted name and is used throughout this 
book.
A special case has been made for two medicinal sub-
stances: adrenaline (INN: epinephrine) and noradren-
aline (INN: norepinephrine). Because of the clinical 
importance of these substances and the widespread 
European use and understanding of the terms adren-
aline and noradrenaline, manufacturers have been 
asked to continue to dual-label products adrenaline 
(epinephrine) and noradrenaline (norepinephrine). In 
this book, where the use of these agents as adminis-
tered drugs is being described, dual names are given. 
In keeping with European convention, however, adren-
aline and noradrenaline alone are used when referring 
to the physiological effects of the naturally occurring 
substances.
DRUG DOSAGES
Medical knowledge is constantly changing. As new 
information becomes available, changes in treatment, 
procedures, equipment and the use of drugs become 
necessary. The authors and the publishers have taken 
care to ensure that the information given in the text is 
accurate and up to date. However, readers are strongly 
advised to confirm that the information, especially 
with regard to drug usage, complies with the latest 
legislation and standards of practice.
SECTION 1  General Principles
1
Principles of Pharmacology and Mechanisms 
of Drug Action
1
Chapter Outline
Studying Pharmacology  1
Finding Drug Information  2
Receptors and Receptor-Mediated Mechanisms  2
Actions of Drugs at Binding Sites (Receptors)  3
Major Types of Receptors  3
Other Sites of Drug Action  10
Properties of Receptors  11
Properties of Drug Action  14
Dose–Response Relationships  14
Selectivity  15
Potency  15
Efficacy  15
Types of Drug Action  15
Agonists  16
Antagonists  16
Partial Agonists  17
Inverse Agonists  17
Allosteric Modulators  17
Enzyme Inhibitors and Activators  18
Nonspecific Actions  18
Physiological Antagonists  18
Tolerance to Drug Effects  18
Genetic Variation in Drug Responses  18
Summary  20
Self-Assessment  20
Answers  20
Further Reading  21
Examples of Cell Surface Receptor Families and  
Their Properties  22
Appendix: Student Formulary  27
STUDYING PHARMACOLOGY
Drugs are defined as active substances administered to 
prevent, diagnose or treat disease, to alleviate pain and 
suffering, or to extend life. Pharmacology is the study of 
the effects of drugs on biological systems, with medical 
(or clinical) pharmacology concerned with the drugs 
that doctors and some other healthcare professionals 
prescribe for their patients. The prescribing of drugs 
has a central role in therapeutics and gaining a good 
knowledge of pharmacology is essential for health pro-
fessionals to become safe and effective prescribers.
Drugs may be chemically synthesised or purified 
from natural sources with or without further modifica-
tion, but their development and clinical use are based 
on rational evidence of efficacy and safety derived 
from controlled experiments and randomised clinical 
trials. Drugs can be contrasted with placebos (placebo is 
Latin for ‘I will please’), defined as inactive substances 
administered as though they are drugs, but which have 
no therapeutic effects other than pleasing the patient, 
providing a sense of security and progress. Pharma-
cology evolved on the principle of studying known 
quantities of purified, active substances to identify 
their specific mechanisms of action and to quantify 
their effects in a reproducible manner, usually com-
pared against a placebo or other control substance.
Much of the success of modern medicine is based 
on pharmacological science and its contribution to the 
development of safe and effective pharmaceuticals. 
This book is confined to pharmacology as it relates to 
human medicine and aims to develop knowledge and 
understanding of medical pharmacology and its appli-
cation to therapeutics. The objectives of learning about 
medical pharmacology and therapeutics are:
• to understand the ways that drugs work to affect 
human systems, as a basis for safe and effective 
prescribing;
• to appreciate that pharmacology must be under-
stood in parallel with related biological and medical 
sciences, including biochemistry, physiology and 
pathology;
• to develop numerical skills for calculating drug 
doses and dilutions, and to enable accurate com-
parison of the relative benefits and risks of different 
drugs; and
• to comprehend and participate in pharmacological 
research, advancing the better treatment of patients.
The answer to the frequently asked question ‘What 
do I need to know?’ will depend upon the individ-
ual requirements of the programme of study and the 
examinations that will be taken. The depth and type 
of knowledge required in different areas and topics 
2	
SECTION 1  General Principles
will vary when progressing through the programme; 
for example, early in the course it may be important 
to know whether a drug has a narrow safety margin 
between its wanted and unwanted effects, and in the 
later years this may translate into detailed knowledge 
of how the drug’s effects are monitored in clinical 
use. Personal enthusiasm for medical pharmacology 
is important and should be driven by the recognition 
that prescribing medicines is the most common inter-
vention doctors (and increasingly other health profes-
sionals) use to improve the health of their patients.
FINDING DRUG INFORMATION
Learning about medical pharmacology is best app­
roached using a variety of resources in a range of learn-
ing scenarios and preferably in the context of basic 
science and therapeutics, not from memorising lists of 
drug names. The following provides a useful structure 
to organise the types of information that you should 
aim to encounter:
• the nonproprietary (generic) drug name (not the pro-
prietary or trade name);
• the class or group to which the drug belongs;
• the way the drug works (its mechanism of action), 
usually shared to variable extents by other drugs in 
the same class;
• the main clinical effects of the drug and hence the 
reasons for using it (its indications);
• where it fits into the overall therapeutic pathway for 
that indication (its place in therapy);
• any reasons why the drug should not be used in a 
particular situation (its contraindications);
• whether the drug is a prescription-only medicine 
(PoM) or is available over-the-counter (OTC) without 
prescription;
• how the drug is given (routes of administration);
• how its effects are quantified and its doses modified 
if necessary (therapeutic drug monitoring);
• how the drug is absorbed, distributed, metabolised 
and excreted (ADME; its pharmacokinetics), particu-
larly where these show unusual characteristics;
• the drug’s unwanted effects, including any interac-
tions with other drugs or foods;
• whether there are nonpharmacological treatments 
that are effective alternatives to drug treatment or 
will complement the effect of the drug.
The Appendix at the end of this chapter provides a 
formulary of core members of each major drug class to 
give students in the early stages of training a manage-
able list of the drugs most likely to be encountered in 
clinical practice. At the end of later chapters, a Compen-
dium provides a classified listing and key characteristics 
of those drugs discussed within the main text of each 
chapter and also other drugs listed in the corresponding 
section of the British National Formulary (BNF).
The BNF (https://bnf.nice.org.uk) and its equivalent 
for prescribing in children, the BNFC (https://bnfc.
nice.org.uk) contain monographs for all drugs licensed 
in the UK and they are the key drug references for UK 
prescribers. They are also available as a mobile device 
app (iOS and Android) from BNF Publications. Students 
should become familiar at an early stage with using the 
BNF for reference. More detailed information on indi-
vidual drugs (the summaries of product characteristics 
[SPC]), patient information leaflets (PIL) and contact 
details for pharmaceutical companies is available from 
the electronic Medicines Compendium (eMC; www 
.medicines.org.uk/emc/).
RECEPTORS AND RECEPTOR-MEDIATED 
MECHANISMS
Pharmacology describes how the physical interaction 
of drug molecules with their macromolecular targets 
(‘receptors’) modifies biochemical, immunological, 
physiological and pathological processes to generate 
desired responses in cells, tissues and organs. Drugs 
have been designed to interact with many differ-
ent types of macromolecules that evolved to facili-
tate endogenous signalling between cells, tissue and 
organs, or to play key roles in the normal cellular and 
physiological processes that maintain controlled con-
ditions (homeostasis). Drugs may also target macro-
molecules produced by pathogens, including viruses 
and bacteria. Although the term ‘receptor’ was origi-
nally applied in pharmacology to describe any such 
drug target, more commonly a receptor is now defined 
in biochemical terms as a molecule on the surface of a 
cell (or inside it) that receives an external signal and 
produces some type of cellular response.
The function of such a receptor can be divided typi-
cally into three main stages:
1.	 The generation of a biological signal. Homeostasis 
is maintained by communication between cells, tis-
sues and organs to optimise bodily functions and 
responses to external changes. Communication is 
usually by signals in the form of chemical messen-
gers, including neurotransmitter molecules, local 
mediators or endocrine hormones. The signal mol-
ecule is termed a ligand because it ligates (ties) to the 
specialised cellular macromolecule. The cellular mac-
romolecule is a receptor because it receives the ligand.
2.	 Cellular recognition sites (receptors). The signal is 
recognised by responding cells by its interaction 
with a site of action, binding site or receptor, which 
may be in the cell membrane, the cytoplasm or the 
nucleus. Receptors in the cell membrane react with 
extracellular ligands that cannot readily cross the 
cell membrane (such as peptides). Receptors in the 
cytoplasm often react with lipid-soluble ligands that 
can cross the cell membrane.
3.	 Cellular changes. Interaction of the signal and its 
site of action in responding cells results in func-
tional changes within the cell that give rise to an 
appropriate biochemical or physiological response 
to the original homeostatic stimulus. This response 
	
	
Principles of Pharmacology and Mechanisms of Drug Action  CHAPTER 1	
3
may be cell division, a change in cellular metabolic 
activity or the production of substances that are 
exported from the cell.
Each of these three stages provides important targets 
for drug action, and this chapter will outline the prin-
ciples underlying drug action mainly in stages 2 and 3.
ACTIONS OF DRUGS AT BINDING SITES 
(RECEPTORS)
For very many drugs, the first step in producing a bio-
logical effect is by interaction of the drug with a recep-
tor, either on the cell membrane or inside the cell, and it 
is this binding that triggers the cellular response. Drugs 
may be designed to mimic, modify or block the actions 
of endogenous ligands at that receptor. The classified 
list of key receptors at the end of this chapter shows that 
cell-membrane and cytosolic receptors tend to occur in 
different families (receptor types), reflecting their evo-
lution from common ancestors. Within any one family 
of receptors, different receptor subtypes have evolved 
to facilitate increasingly specific signalling and distinct 
biological effects. As might be expected, different recep-
tor families have different characteristics, but subtypes 
within each family retain common family traits.
In pharmacology, the perfect drug would be one 
that binds only to one type or subtype of receptor and 
consistently produces only the desired biological effect 
without the unwanted effects that can occur when 
drugs bind to a related receptor. Although this ideal is 
impossible to attain, it has proved possible to develop 
drugs that bind avidly to their target receptor to pro-
duce their desired effect and have very much less (but 
not zero) ability to bind to other receptors, even ones 
within the same family, which might otherwise pro-
duce unwanted effects.
Where a drug binds to one type of receptor in pref-
erence to another, it is said to show selectivity of binding 
or selectivity of drug action. Selectivity is never absolute 
but is high with some drugs and lower with others. A 
drug with a high degree of selectivity is likely to show 
a greater difference between the dose required for its 
biological action and the dose that produces unwanted 
actions at other receptor types. Even a highly selec-
tive drug may produce unwanted effects if its target 
receptors are also found in tissues and organs other 
than those in which the drug is intended to produce its 
therapeutic effect.
MAJOR TYPES OF RECEPTORS
Despite the great structural diversity of drug mol-
ecules, most act on the following major types of recep-
tors to bring about their pharmacological effects:
• Transmembrane ion channels. These control the passage 
of ions across membranes and are widely distributed.
• Seven-transmembrane (7TM) (heptahelical) receptors. This 
is a large family of receptors, most of which signal via 
guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G-proteins). 
Following activation by a ligand, second messenger 
substances are formed inside the cell, which can bring 
about cellular molecular changes, including the open-
ing of transmembrane ion channels.
• Enzyme-linked transmembrane receptors. This is a fam-
ily of transmembrane receptors with an integral or 
associated enzymic component, such as a kinase or 
phosphatase. Activation of these enzymes produces 
changes in cells by phosphorylating or dephosphor-
ylating intracellular proteins, including the receptor 
itself, thereby altering their activity.
• Intracellular (nuclear) receptors. These receptors are 
found in the nucleus or translocate to the nucleus 
from the cytosol to modify gene transcription and 
the expression of specific cellular proteins.
Transmembrane Ion Channels
Transmembrane ion channels that create pores across 
phospholipid membranes are ubiquitous and allow 
the transport of ions into and out of cells. The intracel-
lular concentrations of ions are controlled by a combi-
nation of two types of ion channel:
• ion pumps and transporters, which transport spe-
cific ions from one side of the membrane to the other 
in an energy-dependent manner, usually against 
their concentration gradient;
• ion channels, which open to allow the selective, passive 
transfer of ions down their concentration gradients.
Based on concentration gradients across the cell 
membrane:
• both Na+ and Ca2+ ions will diffuse into the cell if 
their channels are open, making the electrical poten-
tial of the cytosol more positive and causing depo-
larisation of excitable tissues;
• K+ ions will diffuse out of the cell, making the elec-
trical potential of the cytosol more negative and 
inhibiting depolarisation;
• Cl− ions will diffuse into the cell, making the cytosol 
more negative and inhibiting depolarisation.
The two major families of ion channel are the ligand-
gated ion channels (LGICs) and the voltage-gated ion chan-
nels (VGICs; also called ionotropic receptors). LGICs are 
opened by the binding of a ligand, such as the neuro­
transmitter acetylcholine, to an extracellular part of the 
channel. VGICs, in contrast, are opened at particular 
membrane potentials by voltage-sensing segments of 
the channel. Both channel types can be targets for drug 
action. Both LGICs and VGICs can control the move-
ment of a specific ion, but a single type of ion may flow 
through more than one type of channel, including both 
LGIC and VGIC types. This evolutionary complexity 
can be seen in the example of the multiple types of K+ 
channel described in Chapter 8 (listed in Table 8.1).
LGICs include nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, γ- 
aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors, glycine receptors 
and serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine) 5-HT3 receptors. 
They are typically pentamers, with each subunit com-
prising four transmembrane helices clustering around 
a central channel or pore. Each peptide subunit is 
4	
SECTION 1  General Principles
orientated so that hydrophilic chains face towards the 
channel and hydrophobic chains towards the membrane 
lipid bilayer. Binding of an active ligand to the receptor 
causes a conformational change in the protein and results 
in extremely fast opening of the ion channel. The nico-
tinic acetylcholine receptor is a good example of this type 
of structure (Fig. 1.1). It requires the binding of two mol-
ecules of acetylcholine for channel opening, which lasts 
only milliseconds because the ligand rapidly dissociates 
and is then inactivated by acetylcholinesterase. Drugs 
may modulate LGIC activity by binding directly to the 
channel, or indirectly by acting on G-protein–coupled 
receptors (GPCRs; discussed later), with the subsequent 
intracellular events then affecting the status of the LGIC.
VGICs include Ca2+, Na+ and K+ channels. The K+ 
channels consist of four distinct peptide subunits, each of 
which has between two and six transmembrane helices; 
in Ca2+ and Na+ channels there are four domains, each 
with six transmembrane helices, within a single large 
protein. The pore-forming regions of the transmem-
brane helices are largely responsible for the selectivity of 
the channel for a particular ion. Both Na+ and K+ chan-
nels are inactivated after opening; this is produced by an 
intracellular loop of the channel, which blocks the open 
channel from the intracellular end. The activity of VGICs 
may thus be modulated by drugs acting directly on the 
channel, such as local anaesthetics which maintain Na+ 
channels in the inactivated site by binding at an intra-
cellular site (see Chapter 18). Drugs may also modulate 
VGICs indirectly via intracellular signals from other 
receptors. For example, L-type Ca2+ channels are inac-
tivated directly by calcium channel blockers, but also 
indirectly by drugs which reduce intracellular signalling 
from the β1 subtype of adrenoceptors (see Fig. 5.5).
The ability of highly variable transmembrane sub-
units to assemble in a number of configurations leads 
to the existence of many different subtypes of channels 
for a single ion. For example, there are many different 
voltage-gated Ca2+ channels (L, N, P/Q, R and T types).
Seven-Transmembrane Receptors
Also known as 7TM receptors, heptahelical receptors 
and serpentine receptors, this family is an extremely 
important group, as the human genome has about 750 
sequences for 7TM receptors and they are the targets 
of over 30% of current drugs. The function of over a 
hundred 7TM receptors is still unknown. The structure 
of a hypothetical 7TM receptor is shown in Fig. 1.2; the 
ACh
C
N
ACh
α
α
γ
δ
β
M1
M2
M3
M4
Extracellular
Na+
Intracellular
A
B
Fig. 1.1  The acetylcholine nicotinic receptor, a typical ligand-
gated transmembrane ion channel. (A) The receptor is constructed 
from subunits with four transmembrane regions (M1–M4). (B) Five 
subunits are assembled into the ion channel, which has two sites for 
acetylcholine (ACh) binding, each formed by the extracellular domains 
of two adjacent subunits. On acetylcholine binding, the central pore 
undergoes conformational change that allows selective Na+ ion flow 
down its concentration gradient into the cell. C, Carboxyl terminus; N, 
amino terminus.
Extracellular
Intracellular
Lipid layer
Agonist 
binding site
Cell membrane
Carboxyl end
Amino end
Fig. 1.2  Hypothetical seven-transmembrane (7TM) receptor. The 
7TM receptor is a single polypeptide chain with its amino (N-) terminus 
outside the cell membrane and its carboxyl (C-) terminus inside the cell. 
The chain is folded such that it crosses the membrane seven times, 
with each hydrophobic transmembrane region shown here as a thick-
ened segment. The hydrophilic extracellular loops create a confined 
three-dimensional environment in which only the appropriate ligand 
can bind. Other potential ligands may be too large for the site or show 
much weaker binding characteristics. Selective ligand binding causes 
conformational change in the three-dimensional form of the receptor, 
which activates signalling proteins and enzymes associated with the 
intracellular loops, such as G-proteins and nucleotide cyclases.
	
	
Principles of Pharmacology and Mechanisms of Drug Action  CHAPTER 1	
5
N-terminal region of the polypeptide chain is on the 
extracellular side of the membrane, and the polypep-
tide traverses the membrane seven times with helical 
regions, so that the C-terminus is on the inside of the 
cell. The extracellular loops provide the receptor site 
for an appropriate agonist (a natural ligand or a drug), 
the binding of which alters the three-dimensional con-
formation of the receptor protein. The intracellular 
loops are involved in coupling this conformational 
change to the second messenger system, usually via a 
heterotrimeric G-protein, giving rise to the term GPCR 
(G-protein–coupled receptor).
The G-protein system
The heterotrimeric G-protein system (Fig. 1.3) consists 
of α, β and γ subunits.
• The α-subunit. Eighteen different types have been 
identified, belonging to four families (αs, αi, αq and 
α12/13). The α-subunit is important because it binds 
guanosine diphosphate (GDP) and guanosine tri-
phosphate (GTP) in its inactive and active states, 
respectively; it also has GTPase activity, which is 
involved in terminating its own activity. When an 
agonist binds to the receptor, GDP (which is nor-
mally present on the α-subunit) is replaced by 
GTP. The active α-subunit–GTP dissociates from 
the βγ-subunits and can activate enzymes such as 
adenylyl cyclase. The α-subunit–GTP complex is 
inactivated when the GTP is hydrolysed back to 
GDP by the GTPase, a process that is accelerated by 
GTPase-activating proteins (GAP).
• The βγ-complex. There are 5 isoforms of β-subunit 
and 12 isoforms of γ-subunit that can combine into 
dimers, the normal function of which is to inhibit the 
α-subunit when the receptor is unoccupied. When 
the receptor is occupied by a ligand, the βγ-complex 
dissociates from the α-subunit and can itself acti-
vate cellular enzymes, such as phospholipase C. 
The α-subunit–GDP and βγ-subunit then recombine 
with the receptor protein to give the inactive form of 
the receptor–G-protein complex.
Second messenger systems
Second messengers are the key distributors of an exter-
nal signal, as they are released into the cytosol as a con-
sequence of receptor activation and are responsible for 
affecting a wide variety of intracellular enzymes, ion 
channels and transporters. There are two complemen-
tary second messenger systems: the cyclic nucleotide 
system and the phosphatidylinositol system (Fig. 1.4).
Cyclic nucleotide system.  This system is based on cy-
clic nucleotides, such as:
• Cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), which is 
synthesised from adenosine triphosphate (ATP) by 
adenylyl cyclase. cAMP induces numerous cellu-
lar responses by activating protein kinase A (PKA), 
β
Agonist
binding
Replacement
of GDP
by GTP
E
E
β
α
E
E
β
α
E
E
β γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
α
E
E
α
Inactive receptor
GDP
GDP
GTP
Recombination of
GDP α- and βγ-subunits 
with transmembrane
receptor
GTP
hydrolysis
E
Dissociation
GDP
Intracellular
effects
Intracellular
effects
Intracellular
effects
β
E
α
GTP
Fig. 1.3  The functioning of G-protein subunits. Ligand (agonist) binding results in replacement of guanosine diphos-
phate (GDP) on the α-subunit by guanosine triphosphate (GTP) and the dissociation of the α- and βγ-subunits, each of 
which can affect a range of intracellular systems (shown as E in the figure) such as second messengers (e.g. adenylyl 
cyclase and phospholipase C), or other enzymes and ion channels (see Figs. 1.4 and 1.5). Hydrolysis of GTP to GDP 
inactivates the α-subunit, which then recombines with the βγ-dimer to reform the inactive receptor.
6	
SECTION 1  General Principles
which phosphorylates proteins, many of which are 
enzymes. Phosphorylation can either activate or 
suppress cell activity.
• Cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP), which is 
synthesised from GTP by guanylyl cyclase. cGMP 
exerts most of its actions through protein kinase G, 
which, when activated by cGMP, phosphorylates 
target proteins.
There are 10 isoforms of adenylyl cyclase in mam-
mals; these show different tissue distributions and 
could be important sites of selective drug action in the 
future. The cyclic nucleotide second messenger (cAMP 
or cGMP) is inactivated by hydrolysis by phospho-
diesterase (PDE) isoenzymes to give AMP or GMP. 
There are 12 different families of PDE isoenzymes 
(Table 1.1), some of which are the targets of important 
drug groups, including selective PDE4 inhibitors used 
in respiratory disease and PDE5 inhibitors used in 
erectile dysfunction.
The phosphatidylinositol system.  The other second 
messenger system is based on inositol 1,4,5-triphos-
phate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (DAG), which are syn-
thesised from the membrane phospholipid phospha-
tidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) by phospholipase 
C (see Fig. 1.4). There is a number of isoenzymes of 
phospholipase C, which may be activated by the 
α-subunit–GTP or βγ-subunits of G-proteins. The main 
function of IP3 is to mobilise Ca2+ in cells. With the in-
crease in Ca2+ brought about by IP3, DAG can activate 
protein kinase C (PKC) and phosphorylate target pro-
teins. IP3 and DAG are then inactivated and converted 
back to PIP2.
Which second messenger system is activated 
when a GPCR binds a selective ligand depends 
primarily on the nature of the Gα-subunit, as illus-
trated in Fig. 1.5:
• Gs: Stimulation of adenylyl cyclase (increases 
cAMP), activation of Ca2+ channels.
• Gi/o: Inhibition of adenylyl cyclase (reduces cAMP), 
inhibition of Ca2+ channels, activation of K+ channels.
• Gq/11: Activation of phospholipase C, leading to 
DAG and IP3 signalling.
• G12/13: Activation of cytoskeletal and other proteins 
via the Rho family of GTPases, which influence 
smooth muscle contraction and proliferation.
The βγ-complex also has signalling activity: it can 
activate phospholipases and modulate some types of 
K+ and Ca2+ channels.
Activation of these second messenger systems by 
G-protein subunits thus affects many cellular pro-
cesses such as enzyme activity (either directly or by 
altering gene transcription), contractile proteins, ion 
channels (affecting depolarisation of the cell) and cyto-
kine production. The many different isoforms of Gα, Gβ 
and Gγ proteins may provide important future targets 
for selective drugs.
It is increasingly recognised that GPCRs may assem-
ble into dimers of identical 7TM proteins (homodimers) 
or into heterodimers of different receptor proteins; the 
functional consequences of GPCR dimerisation and its 
implications for drug therapy are unclear.
Protease-activated receptors
Protease-activated receptors (PARs) are GPCRs stimu-
lated unusually by a ‘tethered ligand’ located within 
the N terminus of the receptor itself, rather than by 
an independent ligand. Proteolysis of the N-terminal 
sequence by serine proteases such as thrombin, trypsin 
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Phospholipase C
DAG
Inactivation by
phosphorylation
P
Hydrolysis
to inositol
IP3
adenosine
ribose
ATP
Adenylyl
cyclase
adenosine
ribose
cAMP
Inactivation by
phosphodiesterase
adenosine
ribose
5 - AMP
acyl
glycerol
inositol
acyl
PIP2
acyl
acyl
glycerol
inositol
Fig. 1.4  Second messenger systems. Stimulation of G-protein–coupled receptors produces intracellular changes by 
activating or inhibiting cascades of second messengers. Examples are cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), and 
diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol triphosphate (IP3) formed from phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2). See also 
Fig. 1.5. ATP, Adenosine triphosphate.
	
	
Principles of Pharmacology and Mechanisms of Drug Action  CHAPTER 1	
7
and tryptase enables the residual tethered ligand to 
bind to the receptor within the second extracellular 
loop (Fig. 1.6). To date, four protease-activated recep-
tors (PAR 1–4) have been identified, each with dis-
tinct N-terminal cleavage sites and different tethered 
ligands. The receptors appear to play roles in platelet 
activation and clotting (see Chapter 11), and in inflam-
mation and tissue repair. Most of the actions of PAR 
are mediated by Gi, Gq and G12/13.
Enzyme-Linked Transmembrane Receptors
Enzyme-linked receptors, most notably the receptor 
tyrosine kinases, are similar to the GPCRs in that they 
have a ligand-binding domain on the surface of the 
cell membrane; they traverse the membrane; and they 
have an intracellular effector region (Fig. 1.7). They dif-
fer from GPCRs in their extracellular ligand-binding 
domain, which is very large to accommodate their 
polypeptide ligands (including hormones, growth fac-
tors and cytokines), and in having only one transmem-
brane helical region. Importantly, their intracellular 
action requires a linked enzymic domain, most com-
monly an integral kinase which activates the receptor 
itself or other proteins by phosphorylation. Activa-
tion of enzyme-linked receptors enables binding and 
activation of many intracellular signalling proteins, 
leading to changes in gene transcription and in many 
cellular functions. There are five families of enzyme-
linked transmembrane receptors:
• Receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) family. Ligand binding 
causes receptor dimerisation and transphosphory-
lation of tyrosine residues within the receptor itself 
and sometimes in associated cytoplasmic proteins. 
Up to 20 classes of RTK include receptors for growth 
factors, many of which signal via proteins of the 
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase cascade, 
Table 1.1  Isoenzymes of phosphodiesterase. 
ENZYME
MAIN SUBSTRATE
MAIN SITE(S)
EXAMPLES OF 
INHIBITORS
THERAPEUTIC 
POTENTIAL
PDE1
cAMP + cGMP
Heart, brain, lung, lymphocytes, 
vascular smooth muscle
–
Atherosclerosis?
PDE2
cAMP + cGMP
Adrenal gland, brain, heart, lung, liver, 
platelets, endothelial cells
–
Involved in memory?
PDE3
cAMP + cGMP
Heart, lung, liver, platelets, adipose 
tissue, inflammatory cells, smooth 
muscle
Aminophylline
Cilostazol
Dipyridamole
Enoximone
Milrinone
Asthma (Chapter 12)
Congestive heart 
failure (Chapter 7)
Peripheral vascular 
disease (Chapter 10)
PDE4
cAMP
Sertoli cells, endothelial cells, kidney, 
brain, heart, liver, lung, inflammatory 
cells
Aminophylline
Roflumilast
Asthma, COPD 
(Chapter 12)
Inflammation
IBD?
PDE5
cGMP
Smooth muscle, endothelium, 
neurons, lung, platelets
Sildenafil
Tadalafil
Vardenafil
Dipyridamole
Erectile dysfunction 
(Chapter 16)
Pulmonary hypertension 
(Chapter 6)
PDE6
cGMP
Photoreceptors, pineal gland
Sildenafil (weak)
Undefined
PDE7
cAMP
Skeletal muscle, heart, kidney, 
brain, pancreas, spinal cord, 
T-lymphocytes
–
Inflammation 
(combined with 
PDE4 inhibitor)?
Spinal cord injury?
PDE8
cAMP
Testes, eye, liver, skeletal muscle, 
heart, kidney, ovary, brain, 
T-lymphocytes
–
Undefined
PDE9
cGMP
Kidney, liver, lung, brain
–
Undefined
PDE10
cAMP + cGMP
Testes, brain, thyroid
–
Schizophrenia?
PDE11
cAMP + cGMP
Skeletal muscle, prostate, kidney, liver, 
pituitary and salivary glands, testes
Tadalafil (weak)
Undefined
PDE12
cAMP and 
oligoadenylates
Many tissue sites
–
Undefined
Selective inhibitors of some PDE isoenzymes are shown; methylxanthines such as caffeine, theophylline and theobromine are nonselective inhibitors of multiple PDE 
isoenzymes.
cAMP, Cyclic adenosine monophosphate; cGMP, cyclic guanosine monophosphate; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease, 
PDE, phosphodiesterase.
8	
SECTION 1  General Principles
leading to effects on gene transcription, apopto-
sis and cell division. Several RTKs are the targets 
of anticancer drugs, including trastuzumab, an 
inhibitor of HER-2 (human epidermal growth fac-
tor receptor-2), used in metastatic breast cancer (see 
Chapter 52).
• Tyrosine phosphatase receptor family. These dephos-
phorylate tyrosines on other transmembrane recep-
tors or cytoplasmic proteins; they are particularly 
common in immune cells. Ranibizumab is a vascu-
lar endothelial growth factor inhibitor, a receptor-
linked tyrosine phosphatase, used for the treatment 
Adenylyl cyclase/
guanylyl cyclase
cAMP/
cGMP
Protein kinases
(e.g., A, G) 
Receptor-
activated
G-protein
Gi
Gs
Gq
Phospholipase C
DAG
IP3
Protein kinase C
Release of Ca2+
from sarcoplasmic
reticulum
Intracellular enzymes
Ion channels (Ca2+ and K+)
Contractile proteins
+
+
–
Fig. 1.5  The intracellular consequences of receptor activation. The second messengers, cyclic adenosine mono-
phosphate (cAMP), cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP), diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP3), 
produce a number of intracellular changes, either directly or indirectly via actions on protein kinases (which phosphorylate 
other proteins) or by actions on ion channels. The pathways can be activated or inhibited depending upon the type of 
receptor and G-protein and the particular ligand stimulating the receptor. The effect of the same second messenger can 
vary depending upon the biochemical functioning of cells in different tissues.
G-protein
G-protein
G-protein
Protease
hydrolysis
Inactive receptor
Protease activation
Active receptor
Amino acid sequence with agonist activity
Second 
messengers
Fig. 1.6  Protease-activated receptors. These G-protein–coupled receptors are activated by proteases such as thrombin 
which hydrolyse the extracellular peptide chain to expose a segment that acts as a tethered ligand (shown in red) and acti-
vates the receptor. The receptor is inactivated by phosphorylation of the intracellular (C-terminal) part of the receptor protein.
	
	
Principles of Pharmacology and Mechanisms of Drug Action  CHAPTER 1	
9
of age-related macular degeneration of the retina 
(see Chapter 50).
• Tyrosine kinase–associated receptor family (or non–receptor 
tyrosine kinases). These lack integral kinase activity but 
activate separate kinases associated with the receptor; 
examples include inflammatory cytokine receptors 
and signalling via the JAK/Stat pathways to affect 
inflammatory gene expression. Imatinib is an inhibi-
tor of ABL and other non–receptor tyrosine kinases 
(nRTK) and is used in treatment of chronic myeloid 
leukaemia (see Chapter 52).
• Receptor serine-threonine kinase family. Activation of 
these phosphorylates serine and threonine residues 
in target cytosolic proteins; everolimus is a serine-
threonine kinase inhibitor used in renal and pancre-
atic cancer.
• Receptor guanylyl cyclase family. Members of this 
family catalyse the formation of cGMP from GTP 
via a cytosolic domain; linaclotide is a guanylate 
cyclase 2C receptor agonist used in irritable bowel 
syndrome.
Intracellular (Nuclear) Receptors
Many hormones act at intracellular receptors to pro-
duce long-term changes in cellular activity by altering 
the genetic expression of enzymes, cytokines or recep-
tor proteins. Such hormones are lipophilic to facilitate 
their movement across the cell membrane. Examples 
include the thyroid hormones and the large group of 
steroid hormones, including glucocorticoids, min-
eralocorticoids and the sex steroid hormones. Their 
actions on DNA transcription are mediated by interac-
tions with homo/heterodimeric intracellular receptors 
(Table 1.2) either located in the cytoplasm but capa-
ble of translocating to the nucleus (types 1 and 3) or 
retained within the nucleus (type 2).
The intracellular receptor typically includes a highly 
conserved DNA-binding domain with zinc-containing 
loops and a variable ligand-binding domain (Table 1.3). 
The sequence of hormone binding and action for type 
1 intracellular receptors is shown in Fig. 1.8. Type 1 
receptors are typically found in an inactive form in the 
cytoplasm linked to chaperone proteins such as heat-
shock proteins (HSPs). Binding of the hormone induces 
conformational change in the receptor; this causes dis-
sociation of the HSP and reveals a nuclear localisation 
sequence (or NLS) which enables the hormone–receptor 
complex to pass through nuclear membrane pores into 
the nucleus. Via their DNA-binding domain, the active 
hormone–receptor complexes can interact with hor-
mone response elements (HRE) at numerous sites in 
the genome. Binding to the HRE usually activates gene 
transcription, but sometimes it silences gene expression 
and decreases mRNA synthesis.
OH
OH
L
i
g
a
n
d
OPO3
L
i
g
a
n
d
2–
L
i
g
a
n
d
OPO3
2–
OH
L
i
g
a
n
d
Single
inactive
receptor
Activation
of
intracellular
enzymes
Ligand-binding site
Extracellular
Intracellular
Tyrosine
residue
Ligand binding
to two receptors
Mutual phosphorylation
and activation
Fig. 1.7  Enzyme-linked transmembrane receptors. This receptor 
tyrosine kinase has a large extracellular domain, a single transmem-
brane segment and an integral kinase domain. Ligand binding causes 
phosphorylation of tyrosine residues on the receptor and on other tar-
get proteins, leading to intracellular changes in cell behaviour. Other 
enzyme-linked receptors have tyrosine phosphatase, serine-threonine 
kinase or guanylyl cyclase enzymic activity.
Table 1.2  Some families of intracellular receptors.
SUBTYPES
Type 1 (Cytoplasmic)
Oestrogen receptors
ER (α, β)
Progesterone receptors
PR (A, B)
Androgen receptors
AR (A, B)
Glucocorticoid receptor
GR
Mineralocorticoid receptor
MR
Type 2 (Nuclear)
Thyroid hormone receptors
TR (α1,2,3, β1,2,3)
Vitamin D receptor
VDR
Retinoic acid receptors
RAR (α, β, γ)
Retinoid X receptors
RXR (α, β, γ)
Liver X (oxysterol) receptors
LXR (α, β)
Peroxisome proliferator-activated 
receptors
PPAR (α, β/δ, γ1,2,3)
10	
SECTION 1  General Principles
Translocation and binding to DNA involves a vari-
ety of different chaperone, co-activator and co-repres-
sor proteins, and the system is considerably more 
complex than indicated in Fig. 1.8. Co-activators are 
transcriptional cofactors that also bind to the receptor 
and increase the level of gene induction; an example 
is histone acetylase, which facilitates transcription by 
increasing the ease of unravelling of DNA from histone 
proteins. Co-repressors also bind to the receptor and 
repress gene activation; an example is histone deacety-
lase, which prevents further transcription by tighten-
ing histone interaction with the DNA.
Type 2 intracellular receptors, such as the thyroid 
hormone receptors (TR) and the peroxisome prolifera-
tor-activated receptor (PPAR) family (see Table 1.2), are 
found within the nucleus bound to co-repressor pro-
teins, which are liberated by ligand binding without a 
receptor translocation step from the cytoplasm. PPAR 
nuclear receptors function as sensors for endogenous 
fatty acids, including eicosanoids (see Chapter 29), and 
regulate the expression of genes that influence meta-
bolic events.
Intracellular receptors are the molecular targets of 
10% to 15% of marketed drugs, including steroid drugs 
acting at type 1 receptors and other drugs acting at 
type 2 receptors. Steroids show selectivity for differ-
ent type 1 intracellular receptors (ER, PR, AR, GR, MR; 
see Table 1.2), which determine the spectrum of gene 
expression that is affected (see Chapters 14, 44, 45 and 
46). Steroid effects are also determined by the differen-
tial expression of these receptors in different tissues. 
Intracellular hormone–receptor complexes typically 
dimerise to bind to their HRE sites on DNA. Steroid 
receptors form homodimers (e.g. ER–ER), whereas 
most type 2 receptors form heterodimers, usually with 
RXR (e.g. RAR–RXR). The thiazolidinedione drugs 
used in diabetes mellitus and the fibrate class of lipid-
lowering drugs act on specific members of the PPAR 
family of type 2 receptors.
OTHER SITES OF DRUG ACTION
Probably every protein in the human body has the 
potential to have its structure or activity altered by for-
eign compounds. Traditionally, all drug targets were 
described pharmacologically as ‘receptors’, although 
many drug targets would not be defined as receptors 
in biochemical terms; in addition to the receptor types 
discussed previously, drugs may act at numerous other 
sites.
• Cell-membrane ion pumps. In contrast to passive dif-
fusion, primary active transport of ions against their 
concentration gradients occurs via ATP-dependent 
ion pumps, which may be drug targets. For exam-
ple, Na+/K+-ATPase in the brain is activated by the 
anticonvulsant drug phenytoin, whereas in cardiac 
tissue it is inhibited by digoxin; K+/H+-ATPase in 
gastric parietal cells is inhibited by proton pump 
inhibitors such as omeprazole.
• Transporter (carrier) proteins. Secondary active trans-
port involves carrier proteins, which transport a 
specific ion or organic molecule across a membrane; 
the energy for the transport derives not from a cou-
pled ATPase but from the co-transport of another 
Cell membrane
Nuclear
membrane
mRNA
mRNA
Increased synthesis
of cytokines,
enzymes, receptors
Decreased synthesis
of cytokines,
enzymes, receptors
HSP90
HR
HSP90
HR ST
HR ST
ST
HRE
Gene
Fig. 1.8  The activation of intracellular hormone receptors. Steroid 
hormones (ST) are lipid-soluble compounds which readily cross cell 
membranes and bind to their intracellular receptors (HR). This bind-
ing displaces a chaperone protein called heat-shock protein (HSP90) 
and the hormone–receptor complex enters the nucleus, where it can 
increase or decrease gene expression by binding to hormone response 
elements (HRE) on DNA. Intracellular receptors for many other ligands 
are activated in the nucleus itself.
Table 1.3  The structure of steroid hormone 
receptors.
SECTION OF 
PROTEIN
DOMAIN
ROLE
A/B
N-terminal variable 
domain
Regulates transcriptional 
activity
C
DNA-binding 
domain (DBD)
Highly conserved; 
binds receptor to 
hormone response 
element (HRE) 
in DNA by two 
zinc-containing 
regions
D
Hinge region
Enables intracellular 
translocation to the 
nucleus
E
Ligand-binding 
domain (LBD)
Moderately conserved; 
enables specific 
ligand binding; 
contains nuclear 
localisation sequence 
(NLS); also binds 
chaperone proteins
F
C-terminal domain
Highly variable; 
facilitates homo- or 
heterodimerisation
	
	
Principles of Pharmacology and Mechanisms of Drug Action  CHAPTER 1	
11
molecule down its concentration gradient, either 
in the same direction (symport) or in the opposite 
direction (antiport). Examples include:
• Na+/Cl− co-transport in the renal tubule, which is 
blocked by thiazide diuretics (see Chapter 14);
• the reuptake of neurotransmitters into nerve ter-
minals by a number of transporters selectively 
blocked by classes of antidepressant drugs (see 
Chapter 22).
• Enzymes. Many drugs act on the intracellular or 
extracellular enzymes that synthesise or degrade the 
endogenous ligands for extracellular or intracellular 
receptors, or which are required for growth of bacte-
rial, viral or tumour cells. Table 1.4 provides examples 
of drug groups that act on enzyme targets. The PDE 
isoenzymes that regulate second messenger molecules 
are important drug targets and are listed in Table 1.1. 
In addition to being sites of drug action, enzymes are 
involved in inactivating many drugs, while some drugs 
are administered as inactive precursors (prodrugs) that 
are enzymatically activated (see Chapter 2).
• Adhesion molecules. These regulate the cell-surface inter-
actions of immune cells with endothelial and other 
cells. Natalizumab is a monoclonal antibody directed 
against the α4-integrin component of vascular cell 
adhesion molecule (VCAM)-1 and is used to inhibit 
the autoimmune activity of lymphocytes in relapsing-
remitting multiple sclerosis (see Chapter 25). Other 
monoclonal antibody-based therapies are targeted at 
cellular and humoral proteins, including cytokines 
and intracellular signalling proteins to suppress 
inflammatory cell proliferation, activity and recruit-
ment in immune disease.
• Organelles and structural proteins. Examples include 
some antimicrobials that interfere with the func-
tioning of ribosomal proteins in bacteria, and some 
types of anticancer drugs that interrupt mitotic cell 
division by blocking microtubule formation.
The sites of action of some drugs remain unknown 
or poorly understood. Conversely, many receptors 
have been discovered for which the natural ligands are 
not yet recognised; these orphan receptors may repre-
sent targets for novel drugs when their pharmacology 
is better understood.
PROPERTIES OF RECEPTORS
Receptor Binding
The binding of endogenous ligands and most drugs 
to their receptors is normally reversible; consequently, 
the intensity and duration of the intracellular changes 
Table 1.4  Examples of enzymes as drug targets.
ENZYME
DRUG CLASS OR USE
EXAMPLES
Acetylcholinesterase (AChE)
AChE inhibitors (Chapter 27)
Neostigmine, edrophonium, 
organophosphates
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
ACE inhibitors (Chapter 6)
Captopril, perindopril, ramipril
Antithrombin (AT)III
Heparin anticoagulants (ATIII enhancers) 
(Chapter 11)
Enoxaparin, dalteparin
Carbonic anhydrase
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors  
(Chapters 14, 50)
Acetazolamide
Coagulation factor Xa
Direct oral inhibitors of Factor Xa (Chapter 11)
Rivaroxaban
Cyclo-oxygenase (COX)-1
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs) (Chapter 29)
Ibuprofen, indometacin, naproxen
Cyclo-oxygenase (COX)-2
Selective COX-2 inhibitors (Chapter 29)
Celecoxib, etoricoxib
Dihydrofolate reductase
Folate antagonists (Chapters 51, 52)
Trimethoprim, methotrexate
DOPA decarboxylase
Peripheral decarboxylase inhibitors (PDIs) 
(Chapter 24)
Carbidopa, benserazide
HMG-CoA reductase
Statins (HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors) 
(Chapter 48)
Atorvastatin, rosuvastatin, simvastatin
Monoamine oxidases (MAOs) A and B
MAO-A and MAO-B inhibitors (Chapters 22, 
24)
Moclobemide, selegiline
Phosphodiesterase (PDE) isoenzymes
PDE inhibitors (Chapters 12, 16)
Theophylline, sildenafil
(see Table 1.1)
Reverse transcriptase (RT)
Nucleos(t)ide and nonnucleoside RT 
inhibitors (Chapter 51)
Zidovudine, efavirenz
Ribonucleotide reductase
Ribonucleotide reductase inhibitor (Chapter 52)
Hydroxycarbamide (hydroxyurea)
Thrombin
Direct oral thrombin inhibitors (Chapter 11)
Dabigatran
Viral proteases
HIV/hepatitis protease inhibitors (Chapter 51)
Saquinavir, boceprevir
Vitamin K epoxide reductase
Coumarin anticoagulants (Chapter 11)
Warfarin
Xanthine oxidase
Xanthine oxidase inhibitors (Chapter 31)
Allopurinol
12	
SECTION 1  General Principles
are dependent on repeated ligand–receptor interac-
tions that continue for as long as the ligand molecules 
remain in the local environment of the receptors. The 
duration of activity of a reversible drug therefore 
depends mainly on its distribution and elimination 
from the body (pharmacokinetics), which typically 
requires hours or days (see Chapter 2), not on the 
duration of binding of a drug molecule to its receptor, 
which may last only a fraction of a second. For a revers-
ible drug, the extent of drug binding to the receptor 
(receptor occupancy) is proportional to the drug con-
centration: the higher the concentration, the greater the 
occupancy. The interaction between a reversible ligand 
and its receptor does not involve covalent chemical 
bonds but weaker, reversible forces, such as:
• ionic bonding between ionisable groups in the 
ligand (e.g. NH3
+) and the receptor (e.g. COO−);
• hydrogen bonding between amino-, hydroxyl-, keto- 
and other groups in the ligand and the receptor;
• hydrophobic interactions between lipid-soluble 
sites in the ligand and receptor; or
• van der Waals forces, which are very weak inter-
atomic attractions.
The receptor protein is not a rigid structure: bind-
ing of the ligand alters the conformation and biological 
properties of the protein, enabling it to trigger intracel-
lular signalling pathways (induced fit model). Different 
ligands may stabilise different conformational states 
of the same receptor that are distinct from those pro-
duced by the endogenous ligand. Rather than simply 
switching a receptor between inactive and active 
states, a ‘biased’ ligand may produce preferential 
receptor signalling via specific G-protein pathways or 
by non–G-protein effectors, such as the family of arres-
tin proteins, leading to different cellular behaviours. 
Drugs may therefore have functional selectivity to gen-
erate different cell responses from the same receptor, in 
addition to the classical concept of different responses 
being generated by drugs acting selectively at different 
receptors.
Receptor Selectivity
There are numerous possible extracellular and intra-
cellular signals produced in the body, which can affect 
many different processes. A fundamental property of a 
useful ligand–receptor interaction is therefore its selec-
tivity, that is, the extent to which the receptor can rec-
ognise and respond to the correct signals, represented 
by one ligand or group of related ligands. Some recep-
tors show high selectivity and bind a single endoge-
nous ligand (e.g. acetylcholine is the only endogenous 
ligand that binds to N1 nicotinic receptors (also known 
as ‘ganglion-type’ or NG receptors; see Chapter 4)), 
whereas other receptors are less selective and will bind 
a number of related endogenous ligands (e.g. the β1-
adrenoceptors on the heart will bind noradrenaline, 
adrenaline and to some extent dopamine, all of which 
are catecholamines).
The ability of receptors to recognise and bind the 
appropriate ligand depends on the intrinsic character-
istics of the chemical structure of the ligand. The for-
mulae of a few ligand families that bind to different 
receptors are shown in Fig. 1.9. Differences in structure 
that determine selectivity of action between receptors 
may be subtle, such as the those illustrated between 
the structures of testosterone and progesterone, which 
nevertheless have markedly different hormonal effects 
on the body due to their receptor selectivity. Receptors 
are protein chains folded into tertiary and quaternary 
structures such that the necessary arrangement of 
specific binding centres is brought together in a small 
volume – the receptor site (Fig. 1.10). Receptor selec-
tivity occurs because the three-dimensional organisa-
tion of the different sites for reversible binding (such 
as anion and cation sites, lipid centres and hydrogen-
bonding sites) corresponds better to the three-dimen-
sional structure of the endogenous ligand than to that 
of other ligands.
There may be a number of subtypes of a receptor, all 
of which can bind the same ligand but which differ in 
their ability to recognise particular variants or deriva-
tives of that ligand. The different characteristics of the 
receptor subtypes therefore allow a drug (or natural 
ligand) with a particular three-dimensional structure to 
show selective actions by recognising one receptor pref-
erentially, with fewer unwanted effects from the stimu-
lation or blockade of related receptors. For example, α1-, 
α2-, β1-, β2- and β3-adrenoceptors all bind adrenaline, 
but isoprenaline, a synthetic derivative of adrenaline, 
binds selectively to the three β-adrenoceptor subtypes 
rather than the two α-adrenoceptor subtypes (see 
Chapter 4). As the adrenoceptor subtypes occur to a 
different extent in different tissues, and produce differ-
ent intracellular changes when stimulated or blocked, 
drugs can be designed that have highly selective and 
localised actions. The cardioselective β-adrenoceptor 
antagonists such as bisoprolol are selective block-
ers of the β1-adrenoceptor subtype that predominates 
on cardiac smooth muscle, with much less binding to 
the β2-adrenoceptors that predominate on bronchial 
smooth muscle. Although ligands may have a much 
higher affinity for one receptor subtype over another, 
this is never absolute, so the term selective receptor 
binding is preferred over specific receptor binding.
Traditionally, receptor subtypes were discovered 
pharmacologically when a new agonist or antagonist 
compound was found to alter some but not all of the 
activities of a currently known receptor class. Devel-
opments in molecular biology, including the Human 
Genome Project, have accelerated the recognition 
and cloning of new receptors and receptor subtypes, 
including orphan receptors for which the natural 
ligands are unknown. These developments are impor-
tant in guiding identification of new drugs with greater 
selectivity and fewer unwanted effects. Based on such 
information it is recognised that there are multiple 
	
	
Principles of Pharmacology and Mechanisms of Drug Action  CHAPTER 1	
13
types of most receptors, and that there is genetic varia-
tion among individuals in the structures, properties 
and abundance of these receptors, which can lead to 
differences in drug responses (pharmacogenetic varia-
tion; discussed later). Greater understanding of genetic 
differences underlying human variability in drug 
responses offers the potential for individualisation of 
the mode of treatment and selection of the optimal 
drug and dosage (personalised medicine).
Drug Stereochemistry and Activity
The three-dimensional spatial organisation of recep-
tors means that the ligand must have the correct con-
figuration to fit the receptor, analogous to fitting a 
right hand into a right-handed glove. Drugs and other 
organic molecules show stereoisomerism if they con-
tain four different chemical groups attached to a single 
carbon atom, or one or more double bonds, with the 
result that compounds with the same molecular for-
mula can exist in different three-dimensional configu-
rations. If a drug is an equal (racemic) mixture of two 
stereoisomers, the stereoisomers may show different 
receptor binding characteristics and biological proper-
ties. Most often, one stereoisomer is pharmacologically 
active while the other is inactive, but in some cases the 
inactive isomer may be responsible for the unwanted 
effects of the racemic mixture. Alternatively, the two 
isomers may be active at different receptor subtypes 
NH2
OH
HO
HO
R
+
O
+
N
O
OH
OH
HO
HO
HO
C
OH
O–
O
IV
II
I
VII
VI
V
III
H-bonding
Ionic centre
R centre
Aromatic
centre
H-bonding
–
Adrenoceptor
Muscarinic receptor
Fig. 1.10  Receptor ligand-binding sites. The coloured areas are 
schematic representations of the regions of the adrenoceptor (top) and 
muscarinic receptor (bottom) responsible for binding their respective 
catecholamine and acetylcholine ligands. In the muscarinic receptor, 
cross-sections of the seven transmembrane segments are labelled I–
VII. Different segments provide different properties (hydrogen bonding, 
anionic site, etc.) to make up the active binding site.
CHCH2NH2
OH
OH
OH
CH2CH2NH2
OH
OH
CH2CH2NH2
HO
N
H
Dopamine
Noradrenaline
5-Hydroxytryptamine (5-HT; serotonin)
CH2CH2NH2
N
HN
Histamine
A
NH2
CH2
COOH
NH2
CH2CH2CH
COOH
O
HO
CH2CH2CH2
NH2
HO
O
NH2
C
COOH
O
HO
CH2
CH
Glycine
Glutamate
Aspartate
- Aminobutyrate
(GABA)
γ
C
C
B
O
C
O
CH3
Progesterone
O
Testosterone
OH
C
Fig. 1.9  Groups of related chemicals that show selectivity for dif-
ferent receptor subtypes in spite of similar structure. (A) Biogenic 
amines; (B) amino acids; (C) steroids.
14	
SECTION 1  General Principles
and have synergistic or even opposing actions. The dif-
ferent isomers may also show different rates of metab-
olism. As a consequence, there has been a trend for the 
development of single stereoisomers of drugs for ther-
apeutic use; one of the earliest examples was the use of 
levodopa, the levo-isomer of dihydroxyphenylalanine 
(DOPA) in Parkinson’s disease (see Chapter 24).
Receptor Numbers
The number of receptors present in, or on the surface 
of, a cell is not static. There is usually a high turnover 
of receptors being formed and removed continuously. 
Cell-membrane receptor proteins are synthesised in 
the endoplasmic reticulum and transported to the 
plasma membrane. Regulation of functional receptor 
numbers in the membrane occurs both by transport to 
the membrane (often as homo- or heterodimers) and 
by removal by internalisation. The number of recep-
tors within the cell membrane may be altered by the 
drug being used for treatment, with either an increase 
in receptor number (upregulation) or a decrease (down-
regulation) and a consequent change in the ability of the 
drug to effect the desired therapeutic response. This 
change may be an unwanted loss of drug activity con-
tributing to tolerance to the effects of the drug (e.g. opi-
oids; see Chapter 19). As a result, increased doses may 
be needed to maintain the same activity. Alternatively, 
the change in receptor number may be an important 
part of the therapeutic response itself. One example is 
tricyclic antidepressants (see Chapter 22); these pro-
duce an immediate increase in the availability of mono-
amine neurotransmitters, but the therapeutic response 
is associated with a subsequent, adaptive downregu-
lation in monoamine receptor numbers occurring over 
several weeks.
PROPERTIES OF DRUG ACTION
Drug actions can show a number of important pro- 
perties:
• dose–response relationship,
• selectivity,
• potency,
• efficacy.
DOSE–RESPONSE RELATIONSHIPS
Using a purified preparation of a single drug, it is 
possible to define accurately and reproducibly the 
relationship between the doses of drug administered 
(or concentrations applied) and the biological effects 
(responses) at each dose. The results for an individ-
ual drug can be displayed on a dose–response curve. 
In many biological systems, the typical relationship 
between an increasing drug dose (or concentration in 
plasma) and the biological response is a hyperbola, 
with the response curve rising with a gradually dimin-
ishing slope to a plateau, which represents the maximal 
biological response. Plotting instead the logarithm of 
the dose (or concentration) against the response (plot-
ted on a linear scale) generates a sigmoid (S-shaped) 
curve. The sigmoid curve provides a number of advan-
tages for understanding the relationship between drug 
dose and response: a very wide range of doses can 
be accommodated easily on the graph, the plateau of 
maximal response is clearly defined, and the central 
portion of the curve (between about 15% and 85% of 
maximum) approximates to a straight line, allowing 
the collection of fewer data points to delineate the rela-
tionship accurately.
Fig. 1.11 shows the relationship between drug dose 
(on a logarithmic X-axis) and the responses it produces 
(on a linear Y-axis) at two types of adrenoceptors. In 
each case, the upward slope of the curve to the right 
reflects the law that a greater number of reversible 
molecular interactions of a drug (D) with its receptor 
(R), due in this case to increasing drug dose, leads to 
more intracellular signalling by active drug–receptor 
complexes (DR) and hence a greater response of the 
cell or tissue (within biological limits). This principle 
is diametrically opposed to the principle of homeopa-
thy, which argues that serially diluting a drug solution 
until there are essentially no drug molecules remain-
ing enhances its activity, a belief that is not supported 
theoretically or experimentally.
% Maximum response
Increasing dose of β-adrenoceptor agonist
(logarithmic scale)
100
50
0
D1
D2
D3
Drug action at
β1-adrenoceptor
Drug action at
β2-adrenoceptor
Fig. 1.11  Dose–response relationship and receptor selectivity. Each 
curve shows the responses (expressed as percentage of maximum 
on a linear vertical axis) produced by a hypothetical β-adrenoceptor 
agonist drug at a range of doses shown on a logarithmic horizontal 
axis. Plotting the logarithmic dose allows a wide range of doses to be 
shown on the same axes and transforms the dose–response relation-
ship from a hyperbolic curve to a sigmoid curve, in which the central 
portion is close to a straight line. The two curves illustrate the relative 
selectivity of the same drug for the β1-adrenoceptor compared with the 
β2-adrenoceptor. At most doses the drug produces β1-adrenoceptor 
stimulation with less effect on β2-adrenoceptors. If dose D1 is 10 times 
lower than dose D2, the selectivity of the drug for the β1-adrenoceptor 
is tenfold higher. This selectivity diminishes at the higher end of the log 
dose–response curve and is completely lost at a dose (D3) that pro-
duces a maximum response on both β1- and β2-adrenoceptors.
	
	
Principles of Pharmacology and Mechanisms of Drug Action  CHAPTER 1	
15
SELECTIVITY
As drugs may act preferentially on particular receptor 
types or subtypes, such as β1- and β2-adrenoceptors, it 
is important to be able to quantify the degree of selec-
tivity of a drug. For example, in understanding the 
therapeutic efficacy and unwanted effects of the bron-
chodilator drug salbutamol, it is important to recog-
nise that it is approximately 10 times more effective in 
stimulating the β2-adrenoceptors in the airway smooth 
muscle than the β1-adrenoceptors in the heart.
In pharmacological studies, selectivity is likely to 
be investigated by measuring the effects of the drug 
in vitro on different cells or tissues, each expressing 
only one of the receptors of interest. Comparison of the 
two log dose–response curves in Fig. 1.11 shows that 
for any given level of response, smaller doses of the 
drug being tested are required to stimulate the β1-
adrenoceptor compared with those required to stimu-
late the β2-adrenoceptor; the drug is therefore said to 
have selectivity of action at the β1-adrenoceptor. An 
example is dobutamine, which is used to selectively 
stimulate β1-adrenoceptors on the heart in acute heart 
failure. The degree of receptor selectivity is given by 
the ratio of the doses of the drug required to produce a 
given level of response via each receptor type. It is clear 
from Fig. 1.11 that the ratio is highly dose-dependent 
and that the selectivity disappears at extremely high 
drug doses because the dose then produces the maxi-
mal response of which the biological tissue is capable.
POTENCY
The potency of a drug in vitro is largely determined by 
the strength of its binding to the receptor, which is a 
reflection of the receptor affinity, and by the inherent abil-
ity of the drug/receptor complex to elicit downstream 
signalling events. The more potent a drug, the lower the 
concentration needed to give a specified response. In 
Fig. 1.12, drug A1 is more potent than drug A2 because it 
produces a specified level of response at a lower concen-
tration. It is important to recognise that potencies of dif-
ferent drugs are compared using the doses required to 
produce (or block) the same response (often chosen arbi-
trarily as 50% of the maximal response). The straight-
line segments of log dose–response curves are usually 
parallel for drugs that share a common mechanism of 
action, so the potency ratio is broadly the same at most 
response values – for example, at 20%, 50% or 80%, but 
not at 100% response. A drug concentration sufficient to 
produce half of the greatest response achievable by that 
drug is described as its EC50 (the effective concentration 
for 50% of the maximal response). The EC50 (or ED50 if 
drug dose is considered) is a convenient way to compare 
the potencies of similar drugs: the lower the EC50 (or 
ED50), the more potent the drug.
In vivo, the potency of a drug, defined as the dose of 
the drug required to produce a desired clinical effect, 
depends not only on its affinity for the receptor, the 
receptor number and the efficiency of the stimulus– 
response mechanism, but also on pharmacokinetic 
variables that determine the delivery of the drug to its 
site of receptor action (see Chapter 2). Therefore the 
relative potencies of related drugs in vivo may not 
directly reflect their in vitro receptor-binding properties.
EFFICACY
The efficacy of a drug is its ability to produce the 
maximal response possible for a particular biological 
system and relates to the extent of functional change 
that can be imparted to the receptor by the drug, based 
on its affinity for the receptor and its ability to induce 
receptor signalling (discussed later). Drug efficacy is 
arguably of greater clinical importance than potency 
because a greater therapeutic benefit may be obtained 
with a more efficacious drug, whereas a more potent 
drug may merely allow a smaller dose to be given for 
the same clinical benefit. In turn, efficacy and potency 
need to be balanced against drug toxicity to produce 
the best balance of benefit and risk for the patient. Drug 
toxicity and safety are discussed in Chapters 3 and 53.
TYPES OF DRUG ACTION
Drugs can be classified by their receptor action as:
• agonists,
• antagonists,
• partial agonists,
A2 + RA
A2 + IA
Response (%)
Concentration of agonist (logarithmic scale)
100
50
0
A1
A2
A3
Fig. 1.12  Concentration–response curves for agonists in the absence 
and presence of competitive and noncompetitive antagonists. 
Responses are plotted at different concentrations of two different full 
agonists (A1 being more potent than A2) and also a partial agonist (A3), 
which is unable to produce a maximal response even at high concen-
trations. Responses are also shown for the full agonist A2 in the pres-
ence of a fixed concentration of a competitive (reversible) antagonist 
(RA) or a fixed concentration of a noncompetitive (irreversible) antago-
nist (IA). The competitive antagonist reduces the potency of agonist A2 
(the curve is shifted parallel to the right), but high concentrations of A2 
can surmount the effects of the competitive antagonist and produce a 
maximal response. A noncompetitive antagonist reduces agonist activ-
ity either by irreversibly blocking the agonist binding site, or by changing 
its conformation by binding reversibly or irreversibly at an allosteric site. 
Unlike competitive antagonists, a noncompetitive antagonist reduces 
the maximal response even at high agonist concentrations, as shown 
in the curve A2 + IA compared with A2 alone.
16	
SECTION 1  General Principles
• inverse agonists,
• allosteric modulators,
• enzyme inhibitors or activators,
• nonspecific, or
• physiological antagonists.
AGONISTS
An agonist, whether a therapeutic drug or an endog-
enous ligand, binds to the receptor or site of action and 
changes the conformation of the receptor to its active 
state, leading to signalling via second messenger path-
ways. An agonist shows both affinity (the strength 
of binding for the receptor) and intrinsic activity (the 
extent of conformational change imparted to the recep-
tor leading to receptor signalling). Drugs differ in their 
affinity and intrinsic activity at the same receptor, as 
well as between different receptors.
Agonists are traditionally divided into two main 
groups (see Fig. 1.12):
• full agonists (curves A1 and A2), which give an 
increase in response with an increase in concen-
tration until the maximum possible response is 
obtained for that system;
• partial agonists (curve A3), which also give an 
increase in response with increase in concentration 
but cannot produce the maximum possible response 
in the system.
The reasons for this difference, and also a third 
group of agonists (inverse agonists), are described as 
follows.
Affinity and Intrinsic Activity
The affinity of a drug is related to the aggregate strength 
of the molecular interactions between the drug and its 
receptor site of action, which determines the relative 
rates of drug binding and dissociation. The higher the 
affinity, the lower the drug concentration required to 
occupy a given fraction of receptors. Affinity therefore 
determines the drug concentration necessary to pro-
duce a certain response and is directly related to the 
potency of the drug. In Fig. 1.12, drug A1 is more potent 
than drug A2, but both can produce a maximal response 
(they have the same efficacy as they are full agonists).
Intrinsic activity describes the ability of the bound 
drug to induce the conformational changes in the recep-
tor that induce receptor signalling. Although affinity 
is a prerequisite for binding to a receptor, a drug may 
bind with high affinity but have low intrinsic activity. 
A drug with zero intrinsic activity is an antagonist (as 
discussed later).
It should be noted that the rate of binding and rate 
of dissociation of a reversible drug at its receptor are of 
negligible importance in determining its rate of onset 
or duration of effect in vivo, because these depend 
mainly on the rates of delivery of the drug to, and 
removal from, the target organ; that is, on the overall 
absorption, distribution and elimination rates of the 
drug from the body (see Chapter 2).
Spare Receptors
Some full agonists that have relatively low intrinsic 
activity may have to occupy all the available recep-
tors to produce a maximal response. However, many 
full agonists have sufficient affinity and intrinsic activ-
ity that the maximal response can be produced even 
though many receptors remain unoccupied; that is, 
there may be spare receptors (or a receptor reserve). The 
concept of spare receptors does not imply a distinct 
pool of permanently redundant receptors, only that a 
proportion of the receptor population is unoccupied at 
a particular point in time. Spare receptors may func-
tion to enhance the speed of cellular response because 
an excess of available receptors reduces the distance 
and therefore the time that a ligand molecule needs to 
diffuse to find an unoccupied receptor; an example is 
the excess of acetylcholine nicotinic N2 receptors (also 
known as ‘muscle-type’ or NM receptors) that contrib-
utes to fast synaptic transmission in the neuromuscu-
lar junction (see Chapter 27).
The concept of spare receptors is also helpful when 
considering changes in receptor numbers during chronic 
treatment, particularly receptor downregulation. As 
maximal responses are often produced at drug concen-
trations that do not attain 100% receptor occupancy, the 
same maximal response may still be produced when 
receptor numbers are downregulated, but only with 
higher percentage occupancy of the reduced number of 
receptors. If receptors are downregulated still further, 
the number remaining may be insufficient to generate 
a maximal response. Receptor downregulation may 
therefore contribute to a decline in responsiveness to 
some drugs during chronic treatment (drug tolerance).
ANTAGONISTS
Pharmacological antagonists (often called ‘blockers’) 
reduce the activity of an agonist at the same receptor, and 
can be contrasted with physiological antagonists (dis-
cussed later) that act at another type of receptor or at other 
sites of action to oppose the physiological response to the 
agonist. Pharmacological antagonists can be competitive 
(surmountable) or noncompetitive (non-surmountable).
A competitive antagonist binds reversibly to the 
ligand binding site of a receptor, either alone or in 
competition with a drug agonist or natural ligand. 
It therefore must have affinity for the ligand binding 
site (which may be as high as that of any agonist), but 
it has zero intrinsic activity. It therefore cannot cause 
the conformational change that converts the receptor 
to its active state and induces intracellular signalling. 
The antagonist will, however, competitively impair 
access of agonist molecules to the ligand binding site 
and thereby reduce receptor activation. The presence 
of a competitive antagonist may only be detectable 
by its impairment of agonist activity, and the extent 
of antagonism will depend on the relative amounts of 
agonist and antagonist. For example, β1-adrenoceptor 
antagonists lower the heart rate markedly only when 
	
	
Principles of Pharmacology and Mechanisms of Drug Action  CHAPTER 1	
17
it is already elevated by endogenous agonists such as 
adrenaline and noradrenaline. The reversible binding 
of competitive antagonists means that the receptor 
blockade can be overcome (surmounted) by an increase 
in the concentration of an agonist. Therefore competi-
tive antagonist drugs move the dose–response curve 
for an agonist in a parallel fashion to the right but do 
not alter the maximum possible response at high ago-
nist concentrations (as shown in curve A2 + RA when 
compared with A2 alone in Fig. 1.12).
Noncompetitive antagonists either bind to the recep-
tor irreversibly (covalently) at the ligand binding site, 
denying access to the agonist, or they change the con-
formation of the receptor by binding reversibly or irre-
versibly at another site (allosteric binding), producing 
conformational changes that impede the ability of the 
agonist to access its binding site or that block the confor-
mational changes in the receptor needed for intracellular 
signalling. In either case, the effects of noncompetitive 
antagonists cannot be negated (surmounted) by compe-
tition from the agonist, so they reduce the magnitude 
of the maximum response that can be produced by any 
concentration of agonist (as shown by curve A2 + IA in 
Fig. 1.12). A noncompetitive antagonist will also cause a 
rightward shift of the agonist log dose–response curve 
if there is no reserve of spare receptors.
Like agonists, antagonists exhibit varying degrees of 
selectivity of action. For example, phenoxybenzamine 
is an antagonist which blocks the ligand binding site of 
α-adrenoceptors, but not that of β-adrenoceptors. Con-
versely, propranolol is an antagonist of β-adrenoceptors, 
but not α-adrenoceptors. Bisoprolol is further selective 
for the β1-adrenoceptor subtype and has less blocking 
action at β2-adrenoceptors (or α-adrenoceptors).
PARTIAL AGONISTS
An agonist that is unable to produce a maximal 
response is a partial agonist (e.g. drug A3 in Fig. 1.12). 
Even maximal occupancy of all available receptors pro-
duces only a submaximal response due to low intrin-
sic activity of the partial agonist, for example because 
of incomplete amplification of the receptor signal via 
the G-proteins. Despite their name, partial agonists 
can be considered to have both agonist and antago-
nist properties, depending on the presence and type 
of other ligands. A partial agonist usually shows weak 
agonist activity in the absence of another ligand, and 
such partial agonism can be blocked by an antagonist. 
But in the presence of a full agonist, a partial agonist 
will behave as a weak antagonist because it prevents 
access to the receptor of a molecule with higher intrin-
sic ability to initiate receptor signalling; this results 
in a reduced response. Partial agonism is responsible 
for the therapeutic efficacy of several drugs, includ-
ing buspirone, buprenorphine, pindolol and salbuta-
mol. These drugs can act as stabilisers of the variable 
activity of the natural ligand, as they enhance receptor 
activity when the endogenous ligand levels are low 
or zero, but block receptor activity when endogenous 
ligand levels are high.
INVERSE AGONISTS
The previously provided definitions of agonists, par-
tial agonists and antagonists reflect the classical model 
of drug–receptor interactions, in which an unoccupied 
receptor has no signalling activity. It is now recognised 
that many GPCRs show constitutive signalling inde-
pendently of an agonist. Inverse agonists were first rec-
ognised when some compounds were found to show 
negative intrinsic activity: they acted alone on unoc-
cupied receptors to produce a change opposite to that 
caused by an agonist. Inverse agonists shift the recep-
tor equilibrium towards the inactive state, thereby 
reducing the level of spontaneous receptor activity. 
An inverse agonist can be distinguished from the typi-
cal antagonists discussed previously, which, on their 
own, bind to the receptor without affecting receptor 
signalling, as they have zero intrinsic activity (‘neutral’ 
or ‘silent’ antagonists). The action of a neutral antago-
nist depends on depriving the access of agonists to the 
receptor; a neutral antagonist can therefore block the 
effects of either a positive or inverse agonist at a recep-
tor with spontaneous signalling activity.
The role of inverse agonism in the therapeutic effects 
of drugs remains to be fully elucidated, but a number 
of drugs exhibit this type of activity (Table 1.5). The 
same drug may even show a mixed pattern of full or 
partial agonism, inverse agonism or antagonism at dif-
ferent receptors. Some drugs (e.g. some β-adrenoceptor 
antagonists) can act as neutral antagonists at a receptor 
in one tissue and as inverse agonists when the same 
receptor is expressed in a different tissue, probably due 
to association of the receptor with different G-proteins.
ALLOSTERIC MODULATORS
Allosteric modulation has been described previously 
in the context of one type of noncompetitive antago-
nist, which does not compete directly with an agonist 
for access to the ligand binding site (also called the 
Table 1.5  Examples of drugs with inverse agonist 
activity.
RECEPTOR
DRUGS
α1-Adrenoceptor
Prazosin, terazosin
β1-Adrenoceptor
Metoprolol, carvedilol, propranolol
Angiotensin II 
receptor (AT1)
Losartan, candesartan, irbesartan
Cysteinyl-leukotriene 
(CysLT1)
Montelukast
Dopamine (D2)
Haloperidol, clozapine, olanzapine
Histamine (H1)
Cetirizine, loratadine
Histamine (H2)
Cimetidine, ranitidine, famotidine
Muscarinic (M1)
Pirenzepine
Opioid (µ, MOR)
Naloxone, naltrexone
18	
SECTION 1  General Principles
orthosteric site), but binds to a different (allosteric) 
site. Allosteric modulation changes receptor activity 
by altering the conformation of the orthosteric binding 
site or of sites involved in intracellular signalling. Allo-
steric modulators can also enhance the binding of the 
natural ligand or other drugs to the receptor or enhance 
their propensity to induce receptor signalling. In some 
cases, an allosteric modulator may not bind to the allo-
steric site (or only bind poorly) in the absence of the 
agonist, but its allosteric binding increases when bind-
ing of the agonist to the orthosteric site alters receptor 
conformation. An example of allosteric modulators is 
the family of benzodiazepine anxiolytic drugs, which 
allosterically alter the affinity of chloride channels for 
the neurotransmitter ligand GABA and enhance its 
inhibitory activity on neurons (see Chapter 20).
ENZYME INHIBITORS AND ACTIVATORS
The site of action of many drugs is an enzyme, which 
may be an intracellular or cell-surface enzyme or one 
found in plasma or other body fluids. Such drugs act 
reversibly or irreversibly either on the catalytic site or at 
an allosteric site on the enzyme to modulate its catalytic 
activity; most often the effect is inhibition. Important 
examples of enzyme inhibitors are shown in Table 1.4. 
An example of an enzyme activator is heparin, which 
enhances the activity of antithrombin III, a protease 
that regulates the activity of the coagulation pathway.
NONSPECIFIC ACTIONS
A few drugs produce their desired therapeutic outcome 
without interaction with a specific site of action on a pro-
tein; for example, the diuretic mannitol exerts an osmotic 
effect in the lumen of the kidney tubule, which reduces 
reabsorption of water into the blood (see Chapter 14).
PHYSIOLOGICAL ANTAGONISTS
Physiological antagonism is said to occur when a drug 
has a physiological effect opposing that of an agonist 
but without binding to the same receptor. The increase 
in heart rate produced by a β1-adrenoceptor agonist, 
an effect which mimics the action of the sympathetic 
autonomic nervous system, can be blocked pharma-
cologically with an antagonist at β1-adrenoceptors 
or physiologically by a muscarinic receptor agonist, 
which mimics the opposing (parasympathetic) auto-
nomic nervous system. The site of action of the physi-
ological antagonist may be on a different cell, tissue or 
organ than that of the agonist.
TOLERANCE TO DRUG EFFECTS
Tolerance to drug effects is defined as a decrease in 
response to repeated doses, often necessitating an 
increase in dosage to maintain an adequate clinical 
response. Tolerance may occur through pharmacoki-
netic changes in the concentrations of a drug available 
at the receptor or through pharmacodynamic changes 
at the drug receptor. Pharmacokinetic effects are dis-
cussed in Chapter 2; some drugs stimulate their own 
metabolism, so they are eliminated more rapidly on 
repeated dosing, and lower concentrations of the drug 
are available to produce a response.
Most clinically important examples of tolerance arise 
from pharmacodynamic changes in receptor numbers 
and in concentration–response relationships. Desensitisa-
tion is used to describe both long- and short-term changes 
arising from a decrease in response of the receptor. Desen-
sitisation can occur by a number of mechanisms:
• decreased receptor numbers (downregulation), due 
to decreased transcriptional expression or receptor 
internalisation;
• decreased receptor binding affinity;
• decreased G-protein coupling;
• modulation of the downstream response to the ini-
tial signal.
GPCRs can show rapid desensitisation (within 
minutes) during continued activation, which occurs 
through three mechanisms:
• Homologous desensitisation. The enzymes activated 
following selective binding of an agonist to its 
receptor–G-protein complex include G-protein–
coupled receptor kinases (GRKs), which interact 
with the βγ-subunit of the G-protein and inactivate 
the occupied receptor protein by phosphorylation; a 
related peptide, arrestin-2, enhances the GRK-medi-
ated desensitisation of the GPCR and may itself acti-
vate distinct cell signalling pathways.
• Heterologous desensitisation. Also known as cross-
desensitisation, this occurs when an agonist at one 
receptor causes loss of sensitivity to other agonists. 
The agonist increases intracellular cAMP which acti-
vates PKA or PKC; these phosphorylate the cross-
desensitised receptors (whether occupied or not), 
and members of the arrestin family prevent them 
from coupling with G-proteins. Other mechanisms 
of heterologous desensitisation exist.
• Receptor internalisation. Internalisation can occur 
within minutes when constant activation of a GPCR 
makes the receptor unavailable for further agonist 
action by uncoupling the G-protein from the receptor. 
The phosphorylated receptor protein is endocytosed 
and may undergo intracellular dephosphorylation 
prior to re-entering the cytoplasmic membrane.
Downstream modulation of the signal may also occur 
through feedback mechanisms or simply through deple-
tion of some essential cofactor. An example of the latter is 
the depletion of the thiol (-SH or sulfydryl) groups nec-
essary for the generation of nitric oxide during chronic 
administration of organic nitrates (see Chapter 5).
GENETIC VARIATION IN DRUG RESPONSES
Biological characteristics, including responses to drug 
administration, vary among individuals, and genetic 
differences can contribute to these interindividual 
	
	
Principles of Pharmacology and Mechanisms of Drug Action  CHAPTER 1	
19
variations. For most drugs, the nature of the response 
is broadly similar in different individuals, but the 
magnitude of the response to the same dose can differ 
markedly, at least partly due to genetic factors. Such 
variability creates the need to individualise drug dos-
ages for different people.
Drug responses may follow a unimodal (Gaussian) 
distribution, reflecting the aggregate of many small 
genetic variations in receptors, enzymes or transporters 
that respond to or handle the drug (Fig. 1.13A). Genetic 
variation may also give rise to discrete subpopulations 
of individuals in which a drug shows distinctly differ-
ent responses (see Fig. 1.13B), such that some individu-
als may have no response to a standard dose, whereas 
others show toxicity. Understanding genetic variation 
is of increasing importance in drug development (see 
Chapter 3) because it allows the possibility of genetic 
screening to optimise drug and dosage selection (per-
sonalised or individualised medicine).
Pharmacogenetics has been defined as the study of 
genetic variation that results in differing responses to 
drugs. Such variation may arise from genetic factors 
that alter the structure, expression or regulation of drug 
targets (pharmacodynamic effects) or that change the 
metabolic fates of drugs in the body, usually by alter-
ing proteins involved in their absorption, distribution 
or elimination (pharmacokinetic effects, discussed in 
Chapter 2). Pharmacogenetic research has been under-
taken for many decades, largely in relation to variability 
in vivo, and has often used classic genetic techniques 
such as studies of patterns of inheritance in twins.
Pharmacogenomics has been defined as the investi-
gation of variation in DNA and RNA characteristics 
related to drug response, and the term refers mainly to 
genome-wide approaches that define the presence of 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) which affect 
the activity of the gene product. Molecular biological 
techniques have predicted more than 3 million SNPs 
in the human genome. SNPs can be:
• in the upstream regulatory sequence of a coding 
gene, which can result in increased or decreased 
expression of the gene product (this product remains 
identical to the normal or ‘wild-type’ gene product);
• in the coding region of the gene resulting in a gene 
product with an altered amino acid sequence (this 
may have higher activity, although this is unlikely; 
similar activity; lower activity; or no activity at all, 
compared with the wild-type protein);
• inactive, because they are in noncoding or non-
regulatory regions of the genome, or, if in a coding 
region, because the base change does not alter the 
amino acid encoded, due to the redundancy of the 
genetic code.
There is still a major challenge in defining the func-
tional consequences of the large numbers of identified 
SNPs (functional genomics), particularly in the context 
of combinations of genetic variants (haplotypes). Such 
studies often require very large numbers of subjects to 
allow comparison of function in multiple, small haplo-
type subgroups.
Rapid advances in molecular biology have allowed 
analysis of interindividual differences in the sequences 
of many genes encoding drug receptors and proteins 
involved in drug metabolism and transport. Polymor-
phism in the latter is likely to have the greatest impact 
on dosage selection (see Chapter 2), whilst polymor-
phism in drug targets may be more important in deter-
mining the optimal drug for a particular condition. 
Gaussian distribution of response
Polymorphic distribution of response
Response
Response
Number of subjects
Number of subjects
A
B
Fig. 1.13  Interindividual variation in response. The graphs show the numbers of individual subjects in a population 
plotted against their varying levels of response to a single dose of a drug. (A) In the unimodal distribution, most individuals 
show a middling response and the overall shape is a normal (Gaussian) distribution. Part of this variability may result from 
polymorphism in multiple genes encoding drug receptors and proteins involved in the drug’s absorption and elimination. 
(B) The bimodal distribution shows discrete responder and nonresponder subgroups, possibly due to a single genetic 
polymorphism in a drug receptor or drug-metabolising enzyme.
20	
SECTION 1  General Principles
For example, genetic variation in angiotensin AT1 
receptors, β1-adrenoceptors and Ca2+ ion channels 
may determine the relative effectiveness of angioten-
sin II receptor antagonists, β-adrenoceptor antagonists 
(β-blockers) and calcium channel blockers in the treat-
ment of primary hypertension.
In practice, although genetic polymorphism has 
been reported in many receptor types and these have 
been a major focus of research in relation to the aetiol-
ogy of disease, relatively few studies to date have dem-
onstrated a clear influence on drug responses. Common 
polymorphisms have been identified in the human β2-
adrenoceptor gene ADRB2, and certain variants have 
been associated with differences in receptor downreg-
ulation and loss of therapeutic response in people with 
asthma while using β2-adrenoceptor agonist inhalers 
(see Chapter 12). The clinical response in people with 
asthma to treatment with leukotriene modulator drugs 
is influenced by genetic polymorphism in enzymes of 
the leukotriene (5-lipoxygenase) pathway. Variants in 
the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), an RTK, 
in non–small-cell lung cancer strongly predict tumour 
response to EGFR inhibitors such as gefitinib. Such 
examples support genotyping, particularly of tumour 
tissue, to target drug treatments to those individuals 
most likely to respond.
Conversely, pharmacogenetic information may be 
used to avoid a particular treatment in people likely to 
experience serious adverse reactions to a specific drug. 
Variation in human leucocyte antigen (HLA) genes has 
been associated with adverse skin and liver reactions 
to several drugs, including abacavir, an antiretroviral 
drug used in HIV infection.
Compared with pharmacodynamic targets, genetic 
variation has been more extensively characterised in 
drug-metabolising enzymes, particularly in cytochrome 
P450 isoenzymes and others involved in glucuronida-
tion, acetylation and methylation. Gene variations in 
drug-metabolising enzymes are discussed at the end 
of Chapter 2. Detailed information on human geno-
typic variation can be found in the Online Mendelian 
Inheritance in Man (OMIM) database (www.ncbi.nlm 
.nih.gov/omim). Therapeutic exploitation of genotypic 
differences will require specific information about indi-
viduals based on detailed genetic testing. Until such 
genetic information is routinely incorporated in clini-
cal trials, careful monitoring of clinical response will 
remain the best guide to successful treatment.
SUMMARY
The therapeutic benefits of drugs arise from their abil-
ity to interact selectively with target receptors, most of 
which are regulatory molecules involved in the con-
trol of cellular and systemic functions by endogenous 
ligands. Drugs may also cause unwanted effects and 
judging the balance of benefit and risk is at the heart 
of safe and effective prescribing. Increasing knowledge 
of the complexity of receptor pharmacology and 
improvements in drug selectivity offer the promise of 
safer drugs in the future, especially when information 
on genetic variation is more routinely available.
SELF-ASSESSMENT
Each chapter includes a self-assessment section with varied 
question types including True/False questions, One-Best-
Answer (OBA) questions, Extended-Matching-Items (EMI) 
questions and Case-Based questions, followed by the correct 
answer and an explanation.
TRUE/FALSE QUESTIONS
	 1.	 Clinical pharmacology is the study of drugs that 
doctors use to treat disease.
	 2.	 Drugs always act at receptors on the external sur-
face of cells.
	 3.	 Diluting drugs enhances their pharmacological 
effects.
	 4.	 Drugs produce permanent biochemical changes in 
their receptors.
	 5.	 Plotting the dose of a drug (or its plasma concen-
tration) against drug response usually produces a 
sigmoid curve.
	 6.	 The EC50 is the concentration of drug that produces 
a half-maximal response.
	 7.	 On a log dose–response plot, the drug with a curve 
to the right is more potent than a drug with a curve 
on the left.
	 8.	 A receptor antagonist is defined as a drug with 
zero affinity for the receptor.
	 9.	 A competitive antagonist shifts the log dose–
response curve of an agonist to the right, without 
affecting the maximal response.
10.	 A partial agonist is one that, even at its highest 
dose, cannot achieve the same maximal response 
as a full agonist at the same receptor.
11.	 A full agonist achieves a maximal response when 
all its receptors are occupied.
12.	 Changes in receptor numbers can cause tolerance 
to drug effects.
ONE-BEST-ANSWER (OBA) QUESTION
1.	 What type of molecular interaction is distinctive of a 
drug binding irreversibly to a receptor?
A.	Covalent bonding
B.	 Ionic bonding
C.	Hydrogen bonding
D.	Hydrophobic interaction
E.	 Van der Waals forces
ANSWERS
TRUE/FALSE ANSWERS
1.	 True. Clinical pharmacology also deals with drugs 
used in disease prevention and diagnosis, and in the 
alleviation of pain and suffering.
	
	
Principles of Pharmacology and Mechanisms of Drug Action  CHAPTER 1	
21
	 2.	 False. Although many types of receptors are 
found in cell membranes, including ion channels, 
GPCRs and tyrosine kinase receptors, other drug 
targets, including steroid receptors and many 
enzymes (e.g. cyclo-oxygenase, PDE), are intracel-
lular and others are humoral, such as thrombin in 
plasma.
	 3.	 False. The relationship between the dose or con-
centration of a drug and the response may be com-
plex but is typically dependent on the number of 
interactions between the drug molecules and their 
molecular target, a consequence of the law of mass 
action, and so are usually greater at higher drug 
concentrations, within biological limits.
	 4.	 False. Molecular interactions between most drugs 
and their receptors are transient, and the con-
formational changes induced in the receptor are 
reversible.
	 5.	 False. Plotting drug dose or plasma concentration 
against response typically produces a hyperbola. A 
sigmoid (S-shaped) curve is produced by plotting 
the logarithm of dose or concentration against the 
response.
	 6.	 True. The EC50 (or ED50) is the concentration (or 
dose) effective in producing 50% of the maximal 
response and is a convenient way of comparing 
drug potencies.
	 7.	 False. A drug with its log dose–response curve to 
the left is the more potent, as it produces a given 
level of response at a lower dose.
	 8.	 False. A full (‘neutral’ or ‘silent’) antagonist must 
have affinity to bind to its receptor, but it has zero 
intrinsic ability to activate the receptor. Partial 
agonists can also have an antagonist effect in the 
presence of a full agonist. Receptors with inherent 
signalling activity, even when unoccupied, can be 
antagonised by inverse agonists.
	 9.	 True. A fixed dose of a competitive antagonist 
shifts the log dose–response curve of the agonist to 
the right in a parallel fashion; it can be surmounted 
by increasing the dose of agonist, so that the same 
maximal response can be achieved.
10.	 True. A partial agonist has low intrinsic ability to 
induce conformational change in the receptor, so it 
does not elicit a maximal response even with full 
receptor occupancy.
11.	 False. Many full agonists are able to elicit a maxi-
mal response when less than 100% of receptors are 
occupied; the unoccupied receptors are termed 
‘spare receptors.’
12.	 True. Tolerance may be caused by desensitisation, 
internalisation or downregulation of receptors, 
requiring higher drug doses to maintain the same 
response. Tolerance also often results from enhanced 
drug elimination that alters the concentrations of 
drugs available to interact with the receptor.
OBA ANSWER
1.	 Answer A is correct. Drugs may interact reversibly 
with their binding sites on a receptor by ionic bond-
ing, hydrogen bonding, hydrophobic bonding and 
van der Waals forces, but covalent bonds produce 
irreversible binding.
FURTHER READING
Armstrong, J.F, Faccenda, E., Harding, S.D., Pawson, A.J., Southan, 
C., Sharman, J.L., et  al., 2019. The IUPHAR/BPS guide to 
pharmacology in 2020: extending immunopharmacology 
content and introducing the IUPHAR/MMV guide to malaria 
pharmacology. Nucl. Acids Res. 48 (D1), D1006–D1021.
Audi, S., Burrage, D.R., Lonsdale, D.O., et al., 2018. The ‘top 100’ 
drugs and classes in England: an updated ‘starter formulary’ 
for trainee prescribers. Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 84, 2562–2571.
Katritch, V., Cherezov, V., Stevens, R.C., 2012. Diversity and 
modularity of G protein-coupled receptor structures. Trends 
Pharmacol. Sci. 33, 17–27.
Kenakin, T., 2004. Principles: receptor theory in pharmacology. 
Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 25, 186–192.
Keravis, T., Lugnier, C., 2012. Cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase 
(PDE) isozymes as targets of the intracellular signalling 
network: benefits of PDE inhibitors in various diseases and 
perspectives for future therapeutic developments. Br. J. 
Pharmacol. 165, 1288–1305.
Khilnani, G., Khilnani, A.J., 2011. Inverse agonism and its 
therapeutic significance. Indian J. Pharmacol. 43, 492–501.
Luttrell, L.M., 2014. More than just a hammer: ligand ‘bias’ and 
pharmaceutical discovery. Mol. Endocrinol. 28, 281–294.
Maxwell, S., Walley, T., 2003. Teaching safe and effective 
prescribing in UK medical schools: a core curriculum for 
tomorrow’s doctors. Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 55, 496–503.
Odoemelam, C.S., Percival, B., Wallis, H., Chang, M-W, Ahmad, 
Z., et  al., 2020. G-protein coupled receptors: structure and 
function in drug discovery. RSC Adv. 10, 36337–36348.
Rosenbaum, D.M., Rasmussen, S.G.F., Kobilka, B.K., 2009. 
The structure and function of G-protein-coupled receptors. 
Nature 459, 356–363.
Schöneberg, T., Kleinau, G., Brüser, A., 2016. What are they 
waiting for? Tethered agonism in G protein-coupled receptors. 
Pharmacol. Res. 108, 9–15.
Wang, L., McLeod, H.L., Weinshilboum, R.M., 2011. Genomics 
and drug response. N. Engl. J. Med. 364, 1144–1153.
22	
SECTION 1  General Principles
Examples of Cell Surface Receptor Families and Their Properties.
This is a reference list of members of important families of GPCRs, LGICs and VGICs, many of which are therapeutic drug targets. 
Examples of agonists and antagonists are also shown; these include endogenous ligands and some drugs not currently in clinical 
use. For further information see the relevant sections of Armstrong, J.F., et al. 2019. The IUPHAR/BPS Guide to Pharmacology in 
2020: extending immunopharmacology content and introducing the IUPHAR/MMV guide to malaria pharmacology. Nucl. Acids Res. 
48 (D1), D1006-D1021. For examples of important intracellular receptors and enzymes targeted by therapeutic drugs, see Tables 1.2 
and 1.4.
TYPE
TYPICAL LOCATION(S)
PRINCIPAL 
TRANSDUCTION 
MECHANISM
MAJOR BIOLOGICAL 
ACTIONS
AGONISTS
ANTAGONISTS
G-Protein–Coupled Receptors (GPCRs)
Cholinergic
Muscarinic
M1
CNS, salivary, gastric; 
minor role in 
autonomic ganglia
Gq
Neurotransmission 
in CNS, gastric 
secretion
Nonselective for all M 
receptors: carbachol
Pirenzepine 
Nonselective for 
all M receptors:  
atropine, 
ipratropium, 
oxybutynin, 
tolterodine
M2
Heart, CNS
Gi
Bradycardia, smooth 
muscle contraction 
(GI tract, airways, 
bladder)
M3
Smooth muscles, 
secretory glands, 
CNS
Gq
Contraction, secretion
Darifenacin, 
tiotropium
M4
CNS
Gi
Inhibitory autoreceptor
M5
CNS
Gq
Unclear
Adrenergic
α-Adrenoceptors
α1 (α1A, α1B, 
α1D)
CNS, postsynaptic 
in sympathetic 
nervous system, 
human prostate 
(α1A)
Gq
Contraction of 
arterial smooth 
muscle, decrease 
in contractions of 
gut, contraction of 
prostate tissue
Phenylephrine, 
methoxamine, NA 
≥ Adr
Prazosin, indoramin 
(tamsulosin α1A)
α2 (α2A, α2B, 
α2C)
Presynaptic (in 
both α- and 
β-adrenergic 
neurons)
Gi
Decreased NA release
Clonidine, Adr > NA 
(oxymetazoline α2A)
Yohimbine
β-Adrenoceptors
β1
CNS, heart (nodes 
and myocardium), 
kidney
Gs
Increased force and 
rate of cardiac 
contraction, renin 
release
Dobutamine, NA > Adr
Atenolol, 
metoprololol
β2
Bronchial smooth 
muscle, also 
widespread
Gs
Bronchodilation, 
decrease in 
contraction of gut, 
glycogenolysis
Salbutamol, salmeterol, 
terbutaline, Adr > NA
Butoxamine
β3
Adipocytes, bladder
Gs
Lipolysis, bladder 
emptying
Adr = NA
–
Cannabinoids
CB1
CNS (FC, Am, BG, 
Hi, Cb) – see 
footnote for key to 
CNS areas)
Gi/o
Behaviour, pain, 
nausea, stimulation 
of appetite, 
addiction, 
depression, 
hypotension
Tetrahydrocannabinol, 
anandamide, 
2-arachidonylglycerol, 
nabilone
Rimonabant
	
	
Principles of Pharmacology and Mechanisms of Drug Action  CHAPTER 1	
23
CB2
Leucocytes, 
osteocytes
Gi/o
Immunity, bone growth
Tetrahydrocannabinol, 
nabilone
Dopamine
D1
CNS (NA, OT, Pu, 
St), kidney, heart
Gs
Vasodilation in kidney
Fenoldopam
Chlorpromazine
D2
CNS (CP, NA, 
OT, SN), 
pituitary gland, 
chemoreceptor 
trigger zone, 
gastrointestinal 
tract
Gi
Cognition 
(schizophrenia), 
prolactin secretion, 
nigrostriatal control 
of movement, 
memory
Cabergoline, 
pramipexole, 
ropinirole, rotigotine
Butyrophenones, 
chlorpromazine, 
domperidone, 
metoclopramide, 
sulpiride
D3
CNS (FC, Me, Mi) 
(limbic system)
Gi
Cognition, emotion
Cabergoline, 
pramipexole, 
ropinirole, rotigotine
Chlorpromazine, 
sulpiride
D4
CNS, heart
Gi
Cognition 
(schizophrenia)
Cabergoline, ropinirole, 
rotigotine
Chlorpromazine, 
clozapine
D5
CNS (Hi, Hy)
Gs
Similar to D1
5-Hydroxytryptamine (5-HT, serotonin)
5-HT1A
CNS, blood vessels
Gi
Anxiety, appetite, 
mood, sleep
Buspirone
5-HT1B
CNS, blood vessels
Gi
Vasoconstriction, 
presynaptic inhibition
Sumatriptan, eletriptan, 
naratriptan, 
zolmitriptan
5-HT1D
CNS, blood vessels
Gi
Anxiety, 
vasoconstriction
Sumatriptan, eletriptan, 
naratriptan, 
zolmitriptan
Metergoline
5-HT1E
CNS, blood vessels
Gi
5-HT1F
CNS
Gi
Sumatriptan, eletriptan
5-HT2A
CNS, GI tract, 
platelets, smooth 
muscle
Gq
Schizophrenia, platelet 
aggregation, 
vasodilation/
vasoconstriction
LSD, psilocybin
Ketanserin, atypical 
antipsychotics, 
e.g. olanzapine
5-HT2B
CNS, GI tract, 
platelets
Gq
Contraction, 
morphogenesis
5-HT2C
CNS, GI tract, 
platelets
Gq
Satiety
5-HT4
CNS, myenteric 
plexus, smooth 
muscle
Gs
Anxiety, memory, gut 
motility
Metoclopramide, 
renzapride
5-HT5a
CNS
Gi
Anxiety, memory, 
mood
5-HT6
CNS
Gs
Anxiety, memory, 
mood
5-HT7
CNS, GI, blood 
vessels
Gs
Anxiety, memory, 
mood
LSD
Histamine
H1
CNS, endothelium, 
smooth muscle
Gq
Sedation, sleep, 
vascular 
permeability, 
inflammation
Cetirizine, 
desloratadine
H2
CNS, cardiac 
muscle, stomach
Gs
Gastric acid secretion
Dimaprit
Cimetidine, 
ranitidine
Examples of Cell Surface Receptor Families and Their Properties–cont’d.
TYPE
TYPICAL LOCATION(S)
PRINCIPAL 
TRANSDUCTION 
MECHANISM
MAJOR BIOLOGICAL 
ACTIONS
AGONISTS
ANTAGONISTS
Continued
24	
SECTION 1  General Principles
H3
CNS (presynaptic), 
myenteric plexus
Gi
Appetite, cognition
Thioperamide, 
pitolisant
H4
Eosinophils, 
basophils, mast 
cells
Gi
4-Methylhistamine
(Adriforant)
Gamma-Aminobutyric Acid Receptor Type B (GABAB)
GABAb
Brain neurons, glial 
cells, spinal motor 
neurons and 
interneurons
Gi
Inhibition of 
neurotransmission 
in brain and spinal 
cord
Baclofen
Leukotrienes
BLT1
Immune cells
Gi, Gq
Leucocyte 
chemoattraction
LTB4
BLT2
Immune cells
Gi
Leucocyte 
chemoattraction
LTB4
CysLT1
Smooth muscle
Gq
Allergy, 
bronchoconstriction, 
mucus secretion
LTD4 > LTC4
Montelukast, 
pranlukast, 
zafirlukast
CysLT2
Smooth muscle
Gq
Allergy, inflammation
LTC4 = LTD4
Gemilukast
Peptides
Angiotensin II
AT1
Blood vessels, 
adrenal cortex, 
brain
Gq/Go
Vasoconstriction, 
salt retention, 
aldosterone 
synthesis, increased 
noradrenergic 
activity, cardiac 
hypertrophy
Candesartan, 
losartan, 
valsartan
AT2
Blood vessels, 
endothelium, 
adrenal cortex, 
brain
Gi/o, tyrosine 
and ser/thr 
phosphatases
Weak vasodilation 
(endothelial nitric 
oxide release), 
fetal development, 
vascular growth
Bradykinin
B1 (induced)
Widespread (induced 
by injury, cytokines)
Gq
Acute inflammation; 
stimulates nitric 
oxide synthesis
ACE inhibitors 
(indirect, by 
blocking bradykinin 
breakdown)
B2 (constitutive)
Gq
Chronic inflammation. 
Most kinin actions 
(vasodilation, pain)
Icatibant
Endothelin
ETA
Endothelium
Gq
Vasoconstriction, 
angiogenesis
Bosentan, 
ambrisentan
ETB
Endothelium
Gq, Gi
Indirect vasodilation 
(nitric oxide 
release), direct 
vasoconstriction, 
natriuresis
Bosentan
Neurokinin
NK1
Peripheral and 
central nervous 
system
Gq
Nociception, vomiting 
reflex
Substance P, 
neurokinins A and B
Aprepitant, 
fosaprepitant, 
rolapitant
Examples of Cell Surface Receptor Families and Their Properties–cont’d.
TYPE
TYPICAL LOCATION(S)
PRINCIPAL 
TRANSDUCTION 
MECHANISM
MAJOR BIOLOGICAL 
ACTIONS
AGONISTS
ANTAGONISTS
	
	
Principles of Pharmacology and Mechanisms of Drug Action  CHAPTER 1	
25
NK2 / NK3
Peripheral and 
central nervous 
system
Gs, Gq
Nociception
Neurokinins A and B
Opioids
DOP (δ), KOP 
(κ), MOP (µ),
Brain, spinal cord, 
peripheral sensory 
neurons
Gi
Analgesia, nociception, 
respiratory 
depression, sedation
Endogenous opioids, 
opioid drugs 
(morphine)
Naloxone, 
naltrexone
Protease-Activated Receptors
PAR1, PAR2, 
PAR3, PAR4
Platelets, endothelial 
cells, epithelial 
cells, myocytes, 
neurons
Gq, Gi
Activated by proteolytic 
cleavage
Trypsin, thrombin, 
tryptase
Vasopressin and Oxytocin
Vasopressin V1a Brain, uterus, blood 
vessels, platelets
Gq
Vasoconstriction, 
platelet aggregation
Desmopressin
Conivaptan, 
demeclocycline
Vasopressin V1b Pituitary, brain
Gq
Modulates ACTH 
secretion
Desmopressin
Conivaptan, 
demeclocycline
Vasopressin V2
Kidney
Gs
Antidiuretic effect on 
collecting duct and 
ascending limb of 
loop of Henle
Desmopressin
Conivaptan 
demeclocycline, 
tolvaptan
Oxytocin OXT
Brain, uterus
Gq, Gi
Lactation, uterine 
contraction, CNS 
actions (mood)
Oxytocin > 
arg-vasopressin
Atosiban
Purinergic Receptors (Purinoceptors)
Adenosine A1
Heart, lung
Gi
Cardiac depression, 
vasoconstriction, 
bronchoconstriction
Methylxanthines
Adenosine A2A
Widespread
Gs
Vasodilation, 
inhibition of platelet 
aggregation, 
bronchodilation
Regadenoson
Methylxanthines
Adenosine A2B
Leucocytes
Gs
Bronchoconstriction
Methylxanthines
Adenosine A3
Leucocytes
Gi
Inflammatory mediator 
release
Methylxanthines
Purinergic 
P2Y family 
(P2Y1, P2Y2, 
P2Y4, P2Y6, 
P2Y11,P2Y14)
Widespread
Gq, Gs or Gi
Depends upon 
G-protein coupling
ATP, ADP, UTP, UDP, 
UDP-glucose
P2Y12: clopidogrel, 
ticlopidine, 
ticagrelor
Ligand-Gated Ion Channels (LGICs)
Nicotinic N1 (NG 
or ‘ganglion-
type’)
Autonomic ganglia
LGIC (mainly Na+/
K+)
Ganglionic 
neurotransmission
Carbachol, nicotine
Trimetaphan, 
mecamylamine
Nicotinic N2 (NM 
or ‘muscle-
type’)
Neuromuscular 
junction
LGIC (mainly Na+/
K+)
Skeletal muscle 
contraction
Nicotine, 
suxamethonium 
(depolarising)
Gallamine, 
vecuronium, 
atracurium
Nicotinic NN 
(‘CNS-types’ 
- various)
Central nervous 
system
LGIC (mainly Na+/
K+)
Post- and presynaptic 
excitation
Nicotine, cytisine 
(partial), varenicline 
(partial)
Mecamylamine
Serotonin 
5-HT3
CNS (AP), enteric 
nerves, sensory 
nerves
Ligand-gated Na+/
K+ channel
Emesis
Granisetron, 
ondansetron, 
metoclopramide
Examples of Cell Surface Receptor Families and Their Properties–cont’d.
TYPE
TYPICAL LOCATION(S)
PRINCIPAL 
TRANSDUCTION 
MECHANISM
MAJOR BIOLOGICAL 
ACTIONS
AGONISTS
ANTAGONISTS
Continued
26	
SECTION 1  General Principles
GABAA
Brain neurons, spinal 
motor neurons and 
interneurons
Ligand-gated Cl− 
channel (open)
Inhibition of 
neurotransmission 
in brain and spinal 
cord
Muscimol, barbiturates, 
benzodiazepines, 
zolpidem
Picrotoxin, 
flumazenil 
(benzodiazepine 
antagonist)
Glycine GlyR
Brain neurons, spinal 
motor neurons and 
interneurons
Ligand-gated Cl− 
channel (open)
Inhibition of 
neurotransmission 
in brain and spinal 
cord
Intravenous 
anaesthetics, alanine, 
taurine
Strychnine, 
caffeine, 
tropisetron, 
endo­-
cannabinoids
Ionotropic 
glutamate 
(NMDA) 
receptor
CNS (BG, CP, 
sensory pathways)
Ligand-gated Ca2+ 
channel (slow)
Synaptic plasticity, 
excitatory transmitter 
release; excessive 
amounts may cause 
neuronal damage
NMDA
Ketamine, 
phencyclidine, 
memantine
Ionotropic 
glutamate 
(kainate) 
receptor
CNS (Hi)
Ligand-gated Ca2+ 
channel (fast)
Synaptic plasticity, 
transmitter release
Kainate
Topiramate
Ionotropic 
glutamate 
(AMPA) 
receptor
CNS (similar to 
NMDA receptors)
Ligand-gated Ca2+ 
channel (fast)
Synaptic plasticity, 
transmitter release
AMPA
Topiramate
Purinergic 
P2X family 
(P2X1–P2X7)
CNS, autonomic 
nervous system 
(P2X2), smooth 
muscle (P2X1), 
leucocytes
LGICs (Na+, Ca2+, 
K+)
Neuronal 
depolarisation, influx 
of Na+ and Ca2+, 
efflux of K+
ATP
Suramin
Voltage-Gated Ion Channels (VGICs)
Epithelial 
sodium 
channel 
(ENaC)
Renal tubule, 
airways, colon
Na+ channel, 
tonically open
Sodium reabsorption 
in aldosterone-
sensitive distal 
tubule and collecting 
duct
Expression upregulated 
by aldosterone
Amiloride, 
triamterene
L-type calcium 
channels 
(Cav1.1–1.4)
Widespread
Voltage-gated 
Ca2+ channels 
(dihydropyridine-
sensitive)
Vascular and cardiac 
smooth muscle 
contraction, prolong 
cardiac action 
potential
Nifedipine, 
amlodipine, 
diltiazem, 
verapamil
Ryanodine 
(RyR1, 
RyR2, RyR3)
Skeletal muscle 
(RyR1), heart 
(RyR2), 
widespread (RyR3)
Ca2+ channels
Calcium-induced Ca2+ 
release (CICR)
Cytosolic Ca2+, ATP, 
ryanodine, caffeine
Dantrolene
ACE, Angiotensin-converting enzyme; ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone (corticotropin); Adr, adrenaline; ADP, adenosine diphosphate; AMPA, α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-
methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid; ATP, adenosine triphosphate; CNS, central nervous system; GI, gastrointestinal; LSD, lysergic acid diethylamide; LT, leukotriene; NA, 
noradrenaline; NMDA, N-methyl d-aspartate; UDP, uridine diphosphate; UTP, uridine triphosphate.
Key to CNS areas: Am, Amygdala; AP, area postrema; BG, basal ganglia; Cb, cerebellum; CP, caudate putamen; FC, frontal cortex; Hi, hippocampus; Hy, hypothala-
mus; Me, medulla; Mi, midbrain; NA, nucleus accumbens; OT, olfactory tubercle; Pu, putamen; St, striatum; SN, substantia nigra.
Examples of Cell Surface Receptor Families and Their Properties–cont’d.
TYPE
TYPICAL LOCATION(S)
PRINCIPAL 
TRANSDUCTION 
MECHANISM
MAJOR BIOLOGICAL 
ACTIONS
AGONISTS
ANTAGONISTS
	
	
Principles of Pharmacology and Mechanisms of Drug Action  CHAPTER 1	
27
Appendix: Student Formulary.
This student formulary used for educational purposes at the University of Southampton Faculty of Medicine is adapted from 
the formulary described by Maxwell and Walley, 2003 (Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 55, 496–503). See also the lists of commonly 
prescribed drugs in Audi et al. 2018 (Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 84, 2562-2571) and the World Health Organisation (WHO) Model 
List of Essential Medicines at www.who.int/medicines/publications/essentialmedicines/en/
THERAPEUTIC PROBLEM
CORE DRUGS
Gastrointestinal System
Emergency treatment of poisoning
Adsorbent: activated charcoal
Paracetamol antidotes, e.g. acetylcysteine, methionine
Opioid antagonist, e.g. naloxone
Organophosphate antidote, e.g. pralidoxime
Dyspepsia, GORD and gastric 
ulcer healing
Antacids, e.g. magnesium salts
Compound alginates, e.g. Gaviscon
Proton pump inhibitors, e.g. omeprazole, lansoprazole
H2 receptor antagonists, e.g. ranitidine, cimetidine
Helicobacter pylori antibiotics: clarithromycin, amoxicillin, metronidazole
Motility stimulants, e.g. metoclopramide
Others: misoprostol, sucralfate
Inflammatory bowel disease 
(ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s 
disease)
Corticosteroids, e.g. prednisolone
Aminosalicylates, e.g. sulfasalazine, mesalazine
Cytokine inhibitors, e.g. infliximab
Antibiotic-associated colitis
Antibiotics for Clostridioides difficile, e.g. metronidazole, vancomycin
Diarrhoea
Oral rehydration therapy
Opiate antimotility drugs, e.g. loperamide
Constipation
Bulk-forming laxatives, e.g. ispaghula, methylcellulose
Stimulant laxatives, e.g. senna, docusate
Osmotic laxatives, e.g. magnesium hydroxide, lactulose
Antispasmodics
Antimuscarinics, e.g. atropine, hyoscine
Others: mebeverine
Cardiovascular System
Hypertension
β-Adrenoceptor antagonists, e.g. atenolol
α-Adrenoceptor antagonists, e.g. doxazosin
Centrally acting drugs, e.g. clonidine
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, e.g. captopril, ramipril, perindopril
Angiotensin receptor antagonists, e.g. candesartan, losartan
Thiazide diuretics, e.g. bendroflumethiazide, indapamide
Loop diuretics, e.g. furosemide, bumetanide
Potassium-sparing diuretics, e.g. amiloride, spironolactone
Compound potassium-sparing diuretic: co-amilofruse
Calcium channel blockers, e.g. nifedipine verapamil
Potassium channel openers, e.g. minoxidil, nicorandil
Heart failure
β-Adrenoceptor antagonist: bisoprolol
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, e.g. captopril, ramipril, perindopril
Positive inotropic drugs:
Cardiac glycosides, e.g. digoxin
PDE inhibitors, e.g. milrinone
Acute coronary syndrome (angina, 
myocardial infarction)
Many drugs listed under hypertension plus the following:
Inhibitors of platelet aggregation, e.g. aspirin, dipyridamole, clopidogrel, abciximab
Thrombolytics, e.g. alteplase, tenecteplase
Heparin: unfractionated, LMW heparins (enoxaparin, dalteparin), fondaparinux
Direct oral anticoagulants (DOAC), e.g. dabigatran, rivaroxaban
Vitamin K antagonists, e.g. warfarin
Thrombolytics, e.g. alteplase, tenecteplase
Hyperlipidaemia
Statins, e.g. simvastatin, atorvastatin, pravastatin, rosuvastatin
Fibrates, e.g. gemfibrozil, fenofibrate
Arrhythmias
Antiarrhythmic drugs of class I (e.g. lidocaine), class II (β-adrenoceptor antagonists), 
class II (e.g. amiodarone, sotalol), class IV (calcium channel blockers, e.g. verapamil), 
others (e.g. adenosine, digoxin)
Continued
28	
SECTION 1  General Principles
Respiratory System
Asthma, COPD, respiratory failure
Oxygen
β2-Adrenoceptor agonists, e.g. salbutamol, salmeterol
Antimuscarinics, e.g. ipratropium, tiotropium
Methylxanthines, e.g. theophylline, aminophylline
PDE type 4 inhibitor, e.g. roflumilast
Leukotriene antagonist: montelukast
Antiallergic drugs, e.g. cromoglicate, nedocromil
Magnesium sulfate
Inhaled corticosteroids, e.g. beclometasone, fluticasone
Oral corticosteroid, e.g. prednisolone
β2-Agonist/corticosteroid co-formulations, e.g. Seretide
Allergy, anaphylaxis
Antihistamines, e.g. cetirizine, loratadine
Adrenaline
Cough suppression
Dextromethorphan, codeine
Central Nervous System
Insomnia, anxiety
Benzodiazepines, e.g. temazepam, diazepam
Z-drugs, e.g. zopiclone, zolpidem
Others, e.g. buspirone, propranolol
Schizophrenia, mania
Conventional antipsychotics, e.g. chlorpromazine, haloperidol, flupentixol
Atypical antipsychotics, e.g. aripiprazole, clozapine, olanzapine, quetiapine, risperidone
Depot preparations, e.g. fluphenazine decanoate
Mood stabilisers, e.g. lithium
Depression
Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), e.g. amitriptyline
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), e.g. citalopram, fluoxetine, sertraline
Serotonin-noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors, e.g. venlafaxine
Monoamine oxidase-B inhibitors, e.g. moclobemide
Others, e.g. mirtazepine
Analgesia
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs): see section on musculoskeletal disease
Compound analgesics, e.g. co-codamol, co-dydramol
Moderately potent opioid analgesics, e.g. tramadol
Potent opioid analgesics, e.g. fentanyl, morphine, oxycodone
Nausea and vertigo
Dopamine antagonists, e.g. metoclopramide
Serotonin receptor antagonists, e.g. ondansetron
Muscarinic receptor antagonists, e.g. hyoscine hydrobromide
Others: betahistine
Migraine
Acute: 5-HT1 receptor agonists, e.g. sumatriptan, naratriptan, zolmitriptan
Prophylaxis: β-adrenoceptor antagonists, e.g. propranolol, antiepileptic drugs, calcitonin 
gene-related peptide antagonists
Epilepsy
Sodium channel blockers, e.g. carbamazepine, lamotrigine, phenytoin, zonisamide
Benzodiazepines, e.g. diazepam, clonazepam
GABA reuptake inhibitors e.g. tiagabine
GABA transaminase inhibitor: vigabatrin
Other GABA-related drugs e.g. sodium valproate, gabapentin, pregabalin
Neuronal calcium channel blocker, e.g. ethosuximide
Neuronal potassium channel openers, e.g. retigabine
Others, e.g. levetiracetam
Parkinson’s disease
Levodopa/DOPA decarboxylase co-formulations, e.g. co-careldopa, co-beneldopa
Dopamine receptor agonists, e.g. ropinirole, rotigotine, apomorphine
COMT inhibitors, e.g. entacapone
MAO-B inhibitors: selegiline, rasagiline
Antimuscarinic drugs, e.g. procyclidine
Others, e.g. amantadine
Dementia (Alzheimer’s)
Anticholinesterases, e.g. donepezil
NMDA receptor antagonists, e.g. memantine
Appendix: Student Formulary—cont’d.
THERAPEUTIC PROBLEM
CORE DRUGS
	
	
Principles of Pharmacology and Mechanisms of Drug Action  CHAPTER 1	
29
Infectious Diseases
Community- and hospital-acquired 
infections
Drugs acting on bacterial cell walls:
Penicillins, e.g. benzylpenicillin
Penicillinase-resistant penicillins, e.g. flucloxacillin
Broad-spectrum penicillins, e.g. amoxicillin, co-amoxiclav 
Cephalosporins, e.g. cefalexin, cefuroxime, cefotaxime
Monobactams, e.g aztreonam
Carbapenems, e.g. ertapenem, imipenem
Glycopeptides, e.g. vancomycin
Others e.g. daptomycin, polymyxins
Drugs acting on bacterial DNA:
Quinolones e.g. ciprofloxacin, moxifloxacin
Metronidazole (for anaerobes & protozoans)
Nitrofurantoin 
Drugs acting on bacterial protein synthesis:
Macrolides, e.g. azithromycin, clarithromycin
Aminoglycosides, e.g. gentamicin, streptomycin
Tetracyclines, e.g. doxycycline, oxytetracycline
Others e.g. chloramphenicol, clindamycin, fusidic acid
Drugs acting on bacterial metabolism:
Sulfonamides, e.g. sulfadiazine, sulfamethoxazole
Folate inhibitors, e.g. trimethoprim
Drugs used in tuberculosis:
Isoniazid, rifampicin, ethambutol, pyrazinamide
Antifungal drugs: 
Polyenes, e.g. amphotericin, 
Imidazoles and triazoles, e.g. clotrimazole, fluconazole
Squalene epoxidase inhibitor, e.g. terbinafine
Echinocandins, e.g. caspofungin
Drugs for HIV infections:
Nucleoside HIV RT inhibitors, e.g. abacavir, lamivudine
Nonnucleoside HIV RT inhibitors, e.g. efavirenz
HIV protease inhibitors, e.g. ritonavir, fosamprenavir
HIV fusion-entry inhibitors, e.g. enfuvirtide
HIV integrase inhibitors, e.g. raltegravir 
Drugs for herpesviruses and CMV infections:
Viral DNA polymerase inhibitors, e.g. aciclovir, ganciclovir, foscarnet 
Drugs for influenza virus infections:
Neuraminidase inhibitors, e.g. zanamivir
M2 ion channel inhibitor: amantadine
Drugs for viral hepatitis:
Nucleoside analogues, e.g. entacavir, tenofovir
HCV protease inhibitors, e.g. boceprevir
Interferon alfa
Antimalarial drugs, e.g. mefloquine, proguanil, atovaquone, artemisinins, primaquine
Drugs for coronavirus disease (COVID-19):
Corticosteroid: dexamethasone
Nucleotide analogue: remdesivir
Endocrine System
Diabetes mellitus, thyroid disease 
and hypothalamo-pituitary 
hormones
Insulins, e.g. soluble insulin
Insulin analogues, e.g. insulin lispro, insulin glargine
Biguanide: metformin
SGLT-2 inhibitors, e.g. dapagliflozin
Sulfonylureas, e.g. gliclazide
Meglitinides, e.g. repaglinide, nateglinide
DPP4 inhibitors, e.g. saxagliptin
GLP agonists, e.g. exenatide
Thiazolidinediones, e.g. pioglitazone
Appendix: Student Formulary—cont’d.
THERAPEUTIC PROBLEM
CORE DRUGS
Continued
30	
SECTION 1  General Principles
AThyroid disease, e.g. levothyroxine, carbimazole
ADH mimetics, e.g. desmopressin
LHRH, e.g. gonadorelin
Human growth hormone, e.g. somatropin
Osteoporosis
Calcium, vitamin D, calcitonin, parathyroid hormone, teriparatide
Bisphosphonates, e.g. alendronic acid, risedronate
Selective oestrogen receptor modulators (SERM), e.g. clomifene
Genitourinary System
Urinary retention, benign prostatic 
hypertrophy and prostate 
cancer
α1-Adrenoceptor antagonists, e.g. doxazosin
5α-Reductase inhibitors, e.g. finasteride
Antiandrogens, e.g. flutamide
Urinary frequency/incontinence
Antimuscarinic drugs, e.g. darifenacin, fesoterodine
Erectile dysfunction
PDE5 inhibitors, e.g. sildenafil, tadalafil
Obstetrics and Gynaecology
Steroidal contraception
Combined hormonal contraceptives (oral, transdermal patch)
Progestogen-only contraceptives (oral, subdermal implant)
Progestogen-containing intrauterine device
Emergency contraception, e.g. levonorgestrel, ulipristal
Injectable contraception, e.g. medroxyprogesterone acetate
Dyswmenorrhoea
Combined oral hormonal contraceptives
NSAIDs, e.g. mefenamic acid
Menorrhagia
Antifibrinolytic agent, e.g. tranexamic acid
Progestogen-containing intrauterine device
Endometriosis
Progestins
Gonadorelin analogues, e.g. goserelin
Danazol
Induction of labour
Oxytocics, e.g. oxytocin
Prostaglandin analogues, e.g. gemeprost
Prevention of pre-term labour 
(tocolysis)
Calcium channel blockers, e.g. nifedipine
β-Adrenoceptor agonists, e.g. terbutaline
Induction of abortion
Oxytocics, mifepristone
Antiprogestogen, e.g. mifepristone
Prostaglandin analogues, e.g. gemeprost
Postpartum haemorrhage
Oxytocics, ergometrine
Menopause
Oestrogens (with progestins)
Others: tibolone, raloxifene
Malignant Disease and Immunosuppression
Cancer and immunosuppression
Alkylating agents, e.g. cyclophosphamide
Cytotoxic antibiotics, e.g. doxorubicin
Antimetabolites, e.g. methotrexate, fluorouracil
Vinca alkaloids, e.g. vinblastine, vincristine
Taxanes, e.g. paclitaxel
Topoisomerase I and II inhibitors, e.g. irinotecan, etoposide
Tyrosine kinase (TK) inhibitors, e.g. imatinib, dasatinib, erlotinib
TK receptor inhibitors, e.g. bevacizumab, trastuzumab
Other cytotoxic drugs, e.g. crisantaspase, cisplatin
Antioestrogens, e.g. tamoxifen, anastrazole
Immunosuppressant drugs, e.g. azathioprine, corticosteroids, ciclosporin
Immunobiologicals, e.g. rituximab (anti-B-lymphocyte CD20), interferon alfa
Others, e.g. asparaginase, procarbazine
Appendix: Student Formulary—cont’d.
THERAPEUTIC PROBLEM
CORE DRUGS
	
	
Principles of Pharmacology and Mechanisms of Drug Action  CHAPTER 1	
31
Musculoskeletal Disease
Rheumatoid arthritis
NSAIDs, e.g. indometacin, diclofenac
Corticosteroids, e.g. prednisolone
Disease-modifiers, e.g. methotrexate, azathioprine, sulfasalazine, leflunomide, 
ciclosporin, cyclophosphamide
Cytokine (TNFα) inhibitors, e.g. infliximab, etanercept, adalimumab
B-cell CD20 inhibitor, e.g. rituximab
T-cell CD80/CD86 inhibitor, e.g. abatacept
Antimalarial, e.g. hydroxychloroquine
Myasthenia gravis
Anticholinesterases, e.g. pyridostigmine
Spasticity
Skeletal muscle relaxants, e.g. baclofen, dantrolene
Gout
Acute: NSAIDs, colcichine
Chronic: Xanthine oxidase inhibitors (e.g. allopurinol, febuxostat); uricosuric agents (e.g. 
sulfinpyrazole); recombinant urate oxidase (rasburicase).
Ophthalmology
Glaucoma
β-Adrenoceptor antagonists, e.g. timolol
Prostaglandin analogues, e.g. latanoprost
Sympathomimetics (α2-agonists), e.g. brimonidine
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, e.g. acetazolamide
Miotics, e.g. pilocarpine
Conjunctivitis
Topical antibiotics, e.g. chloramphenicol
Tear deficiency
Ocular lubricants, e.g. hypromellose
Others
Mydriatics, e.g. phenylephrine
Mydriatics/cycloplegics, e.g. atropine, tropicamide
Topical formulations (eye drops) of many drugs, including antiinflammatory corticosteroids 
(e.g. betamethasone), antivirals and local anaesthetics (e.g. tetracaine)
Surgery, Anaesthetics and Intensive Care
Surgery, anaesthetics and 
intensive care
Many drugs used are listed in other sections, including opioid analgesics, 
sympathomimetics and antiemetics, plus the following:
Intravenous (induction) anaesthetics, e.g. thiopentone, propofol
Inhalation (maintenance) anaesthetics, e.g. isoflurane
Muscle relaxants, e.g. suxamethonium, atracurium
Antimuscarinics, e.g. atropine, glycopyrronium
Anticholinesterases, e.g. neostigmine
Local anaesthetics, e.g. lidocaine, bupivacaine
Appendix: Student Formulary—cont’d.
THERAPEUTIC PROBLEM
CORE DRUGS
ADH, Antidiuretic hormone; CMV, cytomegalovirus; COMT, catechol-O-methyltransferase; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; DPP4, dipeptidyl peptidase 
4; GLP, glucagon-like peptide; GORD, gastrooesophageal reflux disease; HER2, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2; LHRH, luteinising hormone-releasing 
hormone; LMW, low molecular weight; MAO-B, monoamine oxidase B; NMDA, N-methyl d-aspartate; NSAID, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug; PDE, phosphodies-
terase; RT, reverse transcriptase; SGLT, sodium-glucose co-transporter 2; TNFα, tumour necrosis factor alpha.
32
Pharmacokinetics
2
Chapter Outline
The Biological Basis of Clinical Pharmacokinetics  32
General Considerations  33
Absorption  37
Absorption from the Gut  37
Absorption from Other Routes  38
Distribution  39
Reversible Protein Binding  40
Irreversible Protein Binding  40
Distribution to Specific Tissues  40
Elimination  41
Metabolism  41
Excretion  45
The Mathematical Basis of Clinical 
Pharmacokinetics  47
General Considerations  47
Absorption  48
Distribution  50
Elimination  52
Chronic Administration  54
Pharmacokinetics of Biological Drugs  55
Genetic Variation and Pharmacokinetics  56
Self-Assessment  57
Answers  59
Further Reading  61
Pharmacokinetics refers to the movement of drugs 
into, through and out of the body. The nature of the 
response of an individual to a particular drug depends 
on the inherent pharmacological properties of the drug 
at its site of action, but the speed of onset, the intensity 
and the duration of the response usually depend on 
parameters such as:
• the rate and extent of uptake of the drug from its site 
of administration;
• the rate and extent of distribution of the drug to dif-
ferent tissues, including the site of action;
• the rate of elimination of the drug from the body.
Overall, the response to a drug depends upon a 
combination of the effects of the drug at its site of 
action in the body, called pharmacodynamics (or ‘what 
the drug does to the body’) and the way the body 
influences drug delivery to its site of action, called 
pharmacokinetics (or ‘what the body does to the drug’; 
Fig. 2.1). Both pharmacodynamic and pharmacoki-
netic aspects are subject to a number of variables, 
which affect the dose–response relationship. Phar-
macodynamic aspects are determined by processes 
such as drug–receptor interaction and are specific 
to the class of the drug (see Chapter 1). Pharmaco-
kinetic aspects are determined by general processes 
such as transfer across membranes, metabolism and 
elimination from the body, which apply irrespective 
of the pharmacodynamic properties, but together 
these determine the dosage regimen (dose and fre-
quency) for drugs in a clinical setting.
The core of pharmacokinetics is based on four pro-
cesses, sometimes referred to collectively as ADME:
• Absorption—The transfer of the drug from its site of 
administration to the general circulation.
• Distribution—The transfer of the drug from the 
general circulation into the different tissues of the 
body.
• Metabolism—The extent to which the drug molecule 
is chemically modified in the body.
• Excretion—The removal of the parent drug and any 
metabolites from the body; metabolism and excre-
tion together account for drug elimination.
This chapter will first describe each of these 
processes qualitatively in biological terms, and 
then in terms of the clinical calculations that deter-
mine many of the quantitative aspects of drug 
prescribing.
THE BIOLOGICAL BASIS OF CLINICAL 
PHARMACOKINETICS
Most drug structures bear little resemblance to normal 
dietary constituents such as carbohydrates, fats and 
proteins, and they are handled in the body by different 
processes. Drugs that bind to the same receptor as an 
endogenous ligand rarely resemble the natural ligand 
sufficiently closely in chemical structure to share the 
same carrier processes or the same pathways of metab-
olism. Consequently, the movement of drugs in the tis-
sues is mostly by simple passive diffusion rather than 
by specific transporters, whereas metabolism is usually 
by enzymes of low substrate specificity that can handle 
a wide variety of drug substrates and other xenobiotics 
(foreign substances).
	
	
Pharmacokinetics  CHAPTER 2	
33
general circulation. Drugs acting at intracellular sites 
must also cross the cell membrane to exert an effect. 
The main mechanisms by which drugs can cross mem-
branes (Fig. 2.2) are:
• passive diffusion through the lipid layer,
• diffusion through pores or ion channels,
• carrier-mediated processes,
• pinocytosis.
Passive diffusion
To dissolve in body fluids a drug usually needs a 
degree of aqueous solubility, but to cross a phospho-
lipid bilayer by direct diffusion (see Fig. 2.2), it must 
have a degree of lipid solubility, such as that shown 
by ethanol or steroids. All drugs can move passively 
down a concentration gradient, and when a concentra-
tion gradient occurs across a membrane permeable to 
the drug, then a state of equilibrium will eventually be 
reached in which equal concentrations of the diffusible 
form of the drug are present in solution on each side 
of the membrane. The net rate of diffusion is directly 
proportional to the concentration gradient across the 
membrane, and to the area and permeability of the 
membrane, but inversely proportional to its thickness 
(Fick’s law).
Passage through membrane pores or ion channels
Movement through channels occurs down a concentra-
tion gradient and is restricted to extremely small water-
soluble molecules (<100 Da), such as gases and ions. 
This is applicable to therapeutic ions such as lithium 
and also radioactive iodine. Water itself crosses mem-
branes rapidly via a family of aquaporin protein chan-
nels found in epithelial membranes in the renal tubule 
Extracellular fluid
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
Closed
ion channel
Passive diffusion
through lipid
bilayer (lipid-
soluble drugs)
Diffusion
through open
ion channel
(small molecules,
water-soluble drugs)
Facilitated
diffusion
(SLC transporters)
(nutrients, e.g.,
glucose, and some
amine
neurotransmitters)
Active
transport
(ABC transporters)
(numerous drugs,
see Table 2.1)
ATP
ADP
NBD
TMD
TMD
TMD
NBD
Fig. 2.2  The passage of drugs across membranes. Molecules can cross the membrane by simple passive diffusion 
through the lipid bilayer or via a channel, or by facilitated diffusion, or by ATP-dependent active transport. ABC, ATP-
binding cassette superfamily of transport proteins; D, drug; NBD, nucleotide-binding domain; SLC, solute carrier super-
family of transporters; TMD, transmembrane domain (see Table 2.1).
Pharmacology
Pharmacodynamics
Dose–response relationship
Pharmacokinetics
Specific to drug or
drug class
Interaction with cellular
component, e.g. receptor
or target site
Effects at the site of action
Concentration–effect 
relationship
Reduction in symptoms
Modification of disease
progression
Unwanted effects
Drug interactions
Inter- and intraindividual 
differences
Absorption from the site
of administration
Delivery to the site of 
action
Elimination from the body
Time to onset of effect
Duration of effect
Accumulation on repeat
dosage
Drug interactions
Inter- and intraindividual 
differences
Nonspecific, general
processes
Fig. 2.1  Factors determining the response of an individual to a drug.
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
Passage Across Membranes
With the exception of intravenous or intraarterial injec-
tions, a drug must cross at least one membrane in its 
movement from the site of administration into the 
34	
SECTION 1  General Principles
and elsewhere. Some aquaporins may also allow the 
passage of very small, uncharged drug molecules. In 
the laboratory, transient water-filled pores can be cre-
ated artificially in phospholipid bilayers by applying 
a strong external electric field, and this process (elec-
troporation) is used to introduce large or charged mol-
ecules, such as DNA, drugs and probes into live cells 
in suspension.
Carrier-mediated processes
Two carrier-mediated processes are of widespread 
importance in the transmembrane transport of drugs, 
particularly those with low lipid solubility.
Active transport utilises energy in the form of 
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and transports drugs 
into or out of cells against their concentration gradi-
ent. It is performed particularly by a family of non-
specific carriers termed the ATP-binding cassette 
(ABC) superfamily of membrane transporters (see 
Fig. 2.2 and Table 2.1). In humans, the ABC active 
transporter superfamily contains 49 members organ-
ised into seven subfamilies (A–G) based on their 
relative sequence homology. P-glycoprotein (P-gp), 
also known as multidrug resistance 1 (MDR1) or 
ABCB1 transporter, transports a wide range of drug 
substrates, including anticancer drugs, steroids and 
immunosuppressive agents, from the cytoplasm to 
the extracellular side of the cell membrane, and there-
fore acts as an efflux transporter. Inhibition of P-gp 
by verapamil increases the concentrations of anti-
cancer drugs at their intracellular sites of action (see 
Chapter 52). ABCB transporter proteins contain two 
hydrophobic transmembrane domains, which consist 
of different numbers of membrane-spanning α-helices 
(12 in P-gp), and two hydrophilic nucleotide (ATP)-
binding domains, which bind and hydrolyse intracel-
lular ATP. The transporter is on the apical surface and 
acts as an efflux pump that transports substrates from 
the cell into the interstitial fluid, plasma, bile, urine or 
gut lumen. Examples of other ABC transporters are 
given in Table 2.1.
Facilitated transport of a molecule by a carrier either 
aids its passive movement down its own concentration 
gradient, or uses the electrochemical gradient of a co-
transported solute to transport the molecule against 
its own concentration gradient – in neither case is the 
use of ATP required. The major examples are members 
of the solute carrier (SLC) superfamily of transport-
ers (see Fig. 2.2 and Table 2.1). The SLC superfamily 
comprises over 300 types of organic anion transport-
ers (OATs), organic anion-transporting polypeptides 
(OATPs), organic cation transporters (OCTs), organic 
cation/carnitine transporters (OCTNs), and members 
of other transporter families (see Table 2.1). OAT1 
to OAT4 are present in various tissues; OAT1 is the 
classic organic anion transporter in the kidney, which 
secretes urate and penicillins and is blocked by pro-
benecid (see Chapter 31). Organic cation transporters 
(OCT1, OCT2 and OCT3) effect facilitated diffusion 
and can transport cations in both directions across the 
membrane. Substrates common to all three OCT trans-
porters are serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT), 
noradrenaline, histamine and agmatine; although 
some drugs are substrates for the transporters (see 
Table 2.1), many basic drugs act as inhibitors of the 
transporters.
Members of the ABC and SLC transporter families 
are therefore important in many of the processes by 
which drugs are absorbed in the gut, distributed into 
tissues and eliminated in the liver or kidney. Inter-
actions between drugs at the same transporter, or 
between drugs and the natural substrates of the trans-
porter, may contribute to variation in kinetic param-
eters for individual drugs between patients and over 
time. Genetic variation in the expression and func-
tioning of transporters may also contribute to drug 
toxicity.
Pinocytosis
This can be regarded as a form of carrier-mediated 
entry into the cell cytoplasm. Pinocytosis is normally 
concerned with the uptake of endogenous macro-
molecules and may be involved in the uptake of 
recombinant therapeutic proteins; drugs can also be 
incorporated into a lipid vesicle or liposome for pino-
cytotic uptake (e.g. amphotericin and doxorubicin; see 
Chapter 51).
Drug Ionisation and Membrane Diffusion
Ionisation is a fundamental property of those drugs 
that are either weak acids, such as aspirin, or weak 
bases, such as propranolol. The presence of an ionisa-
ble group(s) is essential for the mechanism of action of 
most drugs, because ionic forces represent a key part of 
many ligand–receptor interactions (see Chapter 1). The 
extent of ionisation may also influence the extent of 
absorption of a drug, its distribution into organs such 
as the brain or adipose tissue, and the mechanism and 
route of its elimination from the body.
Drugs with ionisable groups exist in equilibrium 
between charged (ionised) and uncharged (nonion-
ised) forms (Fig. 2.3). The extent of ionisation of a drug 
depends on the strength of the ionisable group and the 
pH of the solution. The extent of ionisation is given by 
the acid dissociation constant, Ka.
	
Ka
conjugate base H
conjugate acid
=
+
[
][
]
[
]

(Equation 2.1)
The term conjugate acid refers to a form of the drug 
able to release a proton, such as:
• a nonionised acidic drug (Drug–COOH), or
• an ionised basic drug (Drug–NH3
+).
The conjugate base is the corresponding equilibrium 
form of the drug that has lost a proton, such as:
• an ionised acidic drug (Drug–COO−), or
• a nonionised basic drug (Drug–NH2).
	
	
Pharmacokinetics  CHAPTER 2	
35
The value of Ka is normally a very small fraction of 
1, so it is easier to compare compounds using the nega-
tive logarithm of Ka, which is called pKa. For example, a 
Ka of 10−5 becomes pKa 5, and a Ka of 10−10 becomes pKa 
10. Based on the equation given previously, a strong 
acid (such as an −SO3H functional group) that read-
ily donates its H+ ion will have a relatively high Ka 
value (e.g. 10−1 or 10−2) and hence a low pKa (i.e. 1 or 
2), whereas weakly acidic groups, which donate their 
H+ ion less readily, have a pKa of 4 to 5. Conversely, 
for basic functional groups, the stronger the base, the 
greater its ability to retain the H+, resulting in low Ka 
and high pKa values. Strongly basic groups therefore 
have a pKa of 10 to 11, while weakly basic groups have 
a pKa of 7 to 8.
Drugs are 50% ionised when the pH of the solu-
tion equals the pKa of the drug. Acidic drugs (low 
pKa values) are least ionised in acidic solutions (low 
pH) and most ionised in alkaline solutions (high pH). 
Conversely, basic drugs (high pKa values) are least 
Table 2.1  Examples of Carrier Molecules Involved in Drug Transport.
TRANSPORTER
TYPICAL SUBSTRATES
SITES IN THE BODY
ABC Superfamily
ATP-binding cassette superfamily of transport proteins. All use ATP hydrolysis and 
function as active efflux or uptake transporters.
MDR1 or P-glycoprotein 
(ABCB1)
Hydrophobic and cationic (basic) molecules; 
numerous drugs, including anticancer drugs
Apical surface of membranes of epithelial 
cells of intestine, liver, kidney, blood–
brain barrier, testis, placenta and lungs
MRP1 (ABCC1)
Numerous, including anticancer drugs, 
glucuronide and glutathione conjugates
Basolateral surface of membranes of most 
cell types with high levels in lung, testis 
and kidney and in blood–tissue barriers
MRP2 (ABCC2)
Numerous, including anticancer drugs, 
glucuronide and glutathione conjugates
Apical surface of membranes; mainly in 
liver, intestine and kidney tubules
BCRP (ABCG2) Breast cancer 
resistance protein
Anticancer, antiviral drugs, fluoroquinolones, 
flavonoids
Apical surface of breast ducts and lobules, 
small intestine, colon epithelium, liver, 
placenta, brain barrier and lung
SLC Superfamily
Solute carrier superfamily of transporters. Comprises organic anion transporters (OATs), 
organic anion-transporting polypeptides (OATPs), organic cation transporters (OCTs), 
organic cation/carnitine transporters (OCTNs) and many other families. Solute carriers do 
not use ATP hydrolysis and most function as uptake transporters.
OAT1 (SLC22A6)
Anionic drugs, aciclovir, adefovir, NSAIDs, 
penicillins, diuretics and phase 2 drug 
metabolites
Kidney (basolateral), brain, placenta, 
smooth muscle
OAT2 (SLC22A7)
Anionic drugs, aciclovir, salicylate, 
acetylsalicylate, PGE2, dicarboxylates
Kidney (basolateral), liver
OAT3 (SLC22A8)
Similar to OAT1
Kidney (basolateral), liver, brain, smooth 
muscle, testis
OAT4 (SLC22A11)
Methotrexate, pravastatin, sulfated sex 
steroids
Kidney (apical), placenta
OATP1B1 (SLCO1B1)
Pravastatin, rosuvastatin
Liver
OATP1B3 (SLCO1B3)
Methotrexate, rosuvastatin
Liver
OCT1 (SLC22A1)
Cationic drugs, serotonin, noradrenaline, 
histamine, agmatine, aciclovir, ganciclovir, 
metformin
Mainly in the liver, but also in kidney, small 
intestine, heart, skeletal muscle and 
placenta
OCT2 (SLC22A2)
Cationic drugs, serotonin, noradrenaline, 
histamine, agmatine, amantadine, 
metformin, cimetidine
Mainly in the kidney, but also in placenta, 
adrenal gland, neurons and choroid 
plexus
OCT3 (SLC22A3)
Cationic drugs, serotonin, noradrenaline, 
histamine, agmatine, metformin
Liver, kidney, intestine, skeletal and 
smooth muscle, heart, lung, spleen, 
neurons, placenta and the choroid 
plexus
OCTN1 (SLC22A4)
Carnitine, acetylcholine
Kidney, intestine
OCTN2 (SLC22A5)
Carnitine, choline
Kidney, skeletal muscle
ABC, ATP-binding cassette; ATP, adenosine triphosphate; MRP, multidrug-resistance-associated protein; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs; PGE2, prosta-
glandin E2; SLC, solute carrier.
For further details of ABC and SLC transporters, see Nigam, 2015, and Jetter & Kullak-Ublick, 2020, in the Further Reading section.
36	
SECTION 1  General Principles
ionised in alkaline solutions (high pH), and most ion-
ised in acid solutions (low pH). In either case, the ion-
ised form of the molecule can generally be regarded 
as the water-soluble form and the nonionised form as 
the lipid-soluble form. The ease with which an ioni-
sable drug can diffuse across a lipid bilayer is deter-
mined by the lipid solubility of its nonionised form 
(Fig. 2.4).
The pH of body fluids is controlled by the buffer-
ing capacity of the ionic groups present in endogenous 
molecules such as phosphate ions and proteins. When 
the fluids on each side of a membrane have the same 
pH value, there will be equal concentrations of both 
the diffusible (nonionised) form and the nondiffusible 
(ionised) form of the drug on each side of the mem-
brane at equilibrium (see Fig. 2.4).
When the fluids on each side of a membrane are at 
different pH values, the concentrations of the nonion-
ised form on each side of the membrane at equilibrium 
will remain equal, as it can diffuse reversibly across 
the membrane, but the concentrations of the ionised 
form will be determined by the pH of the solution. This 
results in pH-dependent differences in total drug con-
centration on each side of a membrane (pH trapping or 
partitioning), with the total drug concentration being 
higher on the side of the membrane on which it is 
most ionised. This is exemplified by the pH difference 
between urine (pH 5–7) and plasma (pH 7.4), which 
can influence renal elimination of drugs (Fig. 2.5). The 
relatively low pH of the urine forces an acidic drug 
to become predominantly nonionised, allowing its 
reabsorption into the plasma, while the higher pH in 
plasma (7.4) converts the drug to the ionised form, 
preventing it diffusing back and trapping (partition-
ing) it in the plasma. The opposite situation prevails 
with basic drugs, which are enabled to diffuse from the 
plasma into urine, where they become trapped.
After drug overdose, when the aim is to enhance 
drug elimination, alkalinisation of the urine (using 
intravenous sodium bicarbonate) can be used to reduce 
reabsorption of acidic drugs, such as aspirin, leading 
to their faster elimination in the urine. Acidification of 
the urine (with oral ammonium chloride) can enhance 
Extracellular fluid
Intracellular fluid
Administration
Ionisation
Redistribution
to other tissues
Protein
binding
Metabolism
Excretion
Protein
binding
Dissolution
in fat
Ionisation
D
D
D
Fig. 2.3  The effect of pH on drug ionisation. Acidic conditions (low pH, high H+ concentrations) push the equilibrium 
of acidic drugs towards their nonionised (protonated) form, and basic drugs towards their ionised form. Basic conditions 
(high pH) have the opposite effect.
For an acidic
drug (DH)
Urine (pH 6)
Membrane
Plasma (pH 7.4)
Overall
Overall
For a basic drug (D)
–
+
DH
D
D
D
+
DH
–
DH
DH
DH
D
D
Fig. 2.5  Partitioning of acidic and basic drugs across a pH gradi-
ent. Only the nonionised forms (DH and D) can diffuse across the mem-
brane. In urine (pH 6), the nonionised acidic drug (DH) can be readily 
reabsorbed into the plasma, where its ionised form (D−) becomes con-
centrated, while the ionised basic drug (D+) is trapped within the urine. 
Alkalinising the urine would reduce reabsorption of the acid drug and 
enhance that of the basic drug.
Acid–
Base-H+
Base
Acid-H
Low pH
High pH
(e.g. – COO–)
(e.g. – COOH)
(e.g. – NH3+)
(e.g. – NH2)
Low pH
High pH
Ionised
water-
soluble form
Nonionised
lipid-
soluble form
Fig. 2.4  Passive diffusion and the factors that affect drug con-
centrations in equilibrium between nonionised and ionised forms. 
In this case, the pH is assumed to be the same on each side of the 
membrane. See Fig. 2.5 for drug partitioning when there is a pH gradi-
ent across the membrane.
	
	
Pharmacokinetics  CHAPTER 2	
37
ionisation and renal elimination of basic drugs, such as 
dexamfetamine.
The pH difference between gastric contents (pH 1–2) 
and plasma (pH 7.4) affects the absorption of many 
oral drugs. The acidity of stomach contents means that 
an acidic drug is present largely in its nonionised (pro-
tonated) form, allowing it to pass into plasma where 
its ionised form becomes partitioned. In contrast, basic 
drugs are highly ionised in the stomach, and absorp-
tion is negligible until the stomach empties and the 
drug can be absorbed from the more alkaline lumen of 
the duodenum (pH ~8).
Drugs that are fixed in their ionised form at all pH 
values, such as the quaternary amine compound suxa-
methonium (see Chapter 27), cross cell membranes 
extremely slowly or not at all. They are given by injec-
tion (because of lack of absorption from the gastro-
intestinal tract) and have limited effects on the brain 
(because of lack of entry).
ABSORPTION
Absorption is the process of transfer of the drug from 
the site of administration into the general or systemic 
circulation.
ABSORPTION FROM THE GUT
The easiest and most convenient route of adminis-
tration of medicines is orally, by swallowing tablets, 
capsules or syrups. The large surface area of the small 
intestine combined with its high blood flow can give 
rapid and complete absorption of oral drugs. How-
ever, this route presents a number of obstacles for a 
drug before it reaches the systemic circulation.
Drug Structure
Drug structure is a major determinant of absorp-
tion. Drugs need to be lipid-soluble to be absorbed 
from the gut. Highly polar acids and bases tend to be 
absorbed only slowly and incompletely, with much 
of the unabsorbed dose being voided in the faeces. 
High polarity may, however, be useful for delivery of 
the drug to a site of action in the lower bowel (see 
Chapter 34). The structures of some drugs can make 
them unstable either at the low pH of the stomach 
(e.g. benzylpenicillin) or in the presence of diges-
tive enzymes (e.g. insulin). Such compounds must be 
given parenterally, or possibly by a topical route (e.g. 
inhalation for insulin).
Drugs that are weak acids or bases undergo pH 
partitioning between the gut lumen and mucosal 
cells. Acidic drugs will be least ionised in the stom-
ach lumen, and most absorption would be expected at 
this site, but absorption in the stomach is limited by its 
relatively low surface area (compared with the small 
intestine) and by the presence of a zone of neutral pH 
on the immediate surface of the gastric mucosal cells 
(the mucosal bicarbonate layer; see Chapter 33). As 
a consequence, the bulk of the absorption of drugs, 
even weak acids such as aspirin, occurs in the small 
intestine.
Drug Formulation
A drug cannot be absorbed when it is taken in a tab-
let or capsule until the vehicle disintegrates and the 
drug is dissolved in the gastrointestinal contents to 
form a molecular solution. Most tablets disintegrate 
and dissolve quickly and completely, and the whole 
dose rapidly becomes available for absorption. How-
ever, some formulations are designed to disintegrate 
slowly so that the rate of release and dissolution of 
drug from the formulation determines the rate of 
absorption. In modified-release (i.e. slow-release) 
formulations, the drug is either incorporated into a 
complex matrix from which it diffuses slowly or in a 
crystallised form that dissolves slowly. Dissolution of 
a tablet in the stomach can also be prevented by coat-
ing it in an acid-insoluble layer, producing enteric-
coated formulations. This is useful for drugs such as 
omeprazole (see Chapter 31), which is unstable in an 
acid environment, and allows delivery of the intact 
drug to the duodenum.
Gastric Emptying
The rate of gastric emptying determines how soon a 
drug taken orally is delivered to the small intestine, 
the major site of absorption. Delay between oral drug 
ingestion and the drug being detected in the circula-
tion is usually caused by delayed gastric emptying. 
Drugs that slow gastric emptying (e.g. antimuscarin-
ics) can delay the absorption of other drugs taken at 
the same time.
Food has complex effects on drug absorption; it 
slows gastric emptying and delays drug absorption, 
and it can also bind drugs and reduce the total amount 
of drug absorbed. Gastric emptying is slowed the most 
when the food is high in fat or protein content.
First-Pass Metabolism
Metabolism of drugs can occur before and during their 
absorption, and this can limit the amount of parent 
compound that reaches the general circulation. Drugs 
taken orally must pass four major metabolic barriers 
before they reach the general circulation. If there is 
extensive metabolism of a drug at one or more of the 
sites listed in the sections that follow, only a fraction of 
the original oral dose reaches the general circulation as 
the parent compound. This process is known as first-
pass metabolism because it occurs at the first passage 
through the organ.
Intestinal lumen
The intestinal lumen contains digestive enzymes 
secreted by the mucosal cells and pancreas that can 
split peptide, ester and glycosidic bonds. Intestinal 
proteases prevent the oral administration of peptide 
38	
SECTION 1  General Principles
drugs, such as insulin and other products of molecular 
biological approaches to drug development. In addi-
tion, the lower bowel contains large numbers of aerobic 
and anaerobic bacteria capable of performing a range 
of metabolic reactions on drugs, especially hydrolysis 
and reduction.
Intestinal wall
The walls of the upper intestine are rich in cellular 
enzymes such as monoamine oxidase (MAO), aro-
matic l-amino acid decarboxylase, cytochrome P450 
isoenzymes (e.g. CYP3A4) and the enzymes respon-
sible for the phase 2 conjugation reactions described 
later. In addition, the luminal membrane of the intes-
tinal cells (enterocytes) contains efflux transporters 
such as P-gp (noted previously), which may limit the 
absorption of a drug by transporting it back into the 
intestinal lumen. Drug molecules that enter the entero-
cyte may thus undergo three possible fates: diffusion 
into the hepatic portal circulation, metabolism within 
the cell or transportation back into the gut lumen (by 
P-gp). The substrate specificities of CYP3A4 and P-gp 
overlap, and for common substrates, their combined 
actions can prevent most of the oral dose of some 
drugs reaching the hepatic portal circulation.
Liver
Blood from the intestine is delivered by the hepatic por-
tal circulation directly to the liver, which is the major 
site of drug metabolism in the body. Hepatic first-pass 
metabolism can be avoided by administering the drug 
to a region of the gut from which the blood does not 
drain into the hepatic portal vein (e.g. the buccal cavity 
or rectum); a good example of this is the buccal admin-
istration of glyceryl trinitrate (see Chapter 5). Drugs 
that avoid or survive hepatic first-pass metabolism 
after administration and enter the systemic circulation 
may nevertheless undergo repeated cycles of hepatic 
metabolism on subsequent passes through the liver 
from the hepatic artery.
Lung
Cells of the lungs have high affinities for many basic 
drugs and are the main site of metabolism for many 
local hormones via monoamine oxidase or peptidase 
activity.
ABSORPTION FROM OTHER ROUTES
Percutaneous (Transcutaneous) Administration
The human epidermis (especially the stratum cor-
neum) is an effective permeability barrier to water 
loss and to the transfer of water-soluble compounds. 
Although lipid-soluble drugs can cross this barrier, the 
rate and extent of entry are very limited. Consequently, 
this route is only effective for use with potent, non-
irritant drugs such as glyceryl trinitrate (see Chapter 
5) or fentanyl (see Chapter 19), or to produce a local 
effect. The slow and continued absorption from der-
mal administration (e.g. via adhesive patches) can be 
used to produce low but relatively constant blood con-
centrations of some drugs (e.g. nicotine replacement 
therapy; see Chapter 54).
Intradermal and Subcutaneous Injection
Intradermal or subcutaneous injection avoids the bar-
rier presented by the stratum corneum, and entry 
into the general circulation is limited mainly by 
the rate of blood flow to the site of injection. How-
ever, these sites generally only allow the administra-
tion of small volumes of drugs and tend to be used 
mostly for local effects, such as local anaesthesia, or 
to deliberately limit the rate of drug absorption, such 
as insulin glargine that precipitates on subcutaneous 
injection, creating a depot that liberates insulin slowly 
(see Chapter 40). Subdermal implants are increas-
ingly used for long-term hormonal contraception. The 
implants are flexible polymer rods or tubes inserted 
under the skin of the upper arm that slowly release the 
hormone for up to 3 years, with contraception being 
reversible by removal of the implant (see Chapter 45).
Intramuscular Injection
The rate of absorption from an intramuscular injection 
depends on two variables: the local blood flow and 
the water solubility of the drug. An increase in either 
of these factors enhances the rate of removal from the 
injection site. Absorption of drugs from the injection 
site can be prolonged intentionally by incorporation of 
the drug into a lipophilic vehicle, such as flupentixol 
decanoate (see Chapter 21), creating a depot formula-
tion in a small volume of thin vegetable oil from which 
the drug is released over days or weeks.
Intranasal Administration
The nasal mucosa provides a good surface area for 
absorption and has low levels of proteases and drug-
metabolising enzymes compared with the gastroin-
testinal tract. As a consequence, the intranasal route 
is used for the administration of some drugs, such as 
triptan drugs for migraines (see Chapter 26) and des-
mopressin (see Chapter 43), as well as drugs designed 
to produce local effects, such as nasal decongestants 
and topical corticosteroids (see Chapter 39).
Inhalation
Although the lungs possess the characteristics of a 
good site for drug absorption (a large surface area and 
extensive blood flow), inhalation is rarely used to pro-
duce systemic effects. The principal reasons for this 
are the difficulty of delivering nonvolatile drugs to 
the alveoli and the potential for local toxicity to alveo-
lar membranes. Drug administration by inhalation is 
therefore largely restricted to:
• volatile compounds, such as general anaesthetics 
(see Chapter 17);
	
	
Pharmacokinetics  CHAPTER 2	
39
• locally-acting drugs, such as bronchodilators and 
corticosteroids used in the treatment of airway dis-
ease such as asthma and chronic obstructive pulmo-
nary disease (see Chapter 12).
Drugs in the latter group are not volatile and have to 
be given either as aerosols containing droplets of dis-
solved drug or as fine particles of the solid drug (dry 
powder; see Chapter 12). Particles greater than 10 µm 
in diameter settle out in the pharynx and upper air-
ways, which are poor sites for absorption, and the drug 
then passes back up the airways via ciliary motion 
and is eventually swallowed. Particles less than 1 µm 
in diameter are not deposited in the airways and are 
immediately exhaled. Only 4% to 6% of an inhaled 
dose may be deposited in the small airways, although 
the percentage of deposited drug may be higher with 
modern inhaler devices delivering particle sizes closer 
to the optimum for airways deposition (2–5 µm).
Minor Routes
Drugs may be applied topically to almost any body sur-
face or orifice to produce a local effect. Absorption from 
the site of administration into the circulation may be 
important both in limiting the duration of local action 
and in the production of unwanted systemic actions.
DISTRIBUTION
Distribution is the process by which the drug is trans-
ferred reversibly from the general circulation into 
the tissues as the concentrations in blood increase, 
and then returns from the tissues into blood when 
the blood concentrations decrease. For most lipid-
soluble drugs this occurs by passive diffusion across 
cell membranes (see Fig. 2.2). Once equilibrium is 
reached, any process that removes the drug from 
one side of the membrane results in a net movement 
of drug across the membrane that re-establishes the 
equilibrium (see Fig. 2.4). Drugs that are less lipid-
soluble can penetrate tissues by diffusing through 
intercellular junctions.
After an intravenous injection of the drug, there 
is a high initial plasma concentration and the drug 
may rapidly enter well-perfused tissues such as 
the brain, liver and lungs (Table 2.2). This may be 
so rapid that these tissues can be assumed to equili-
brate instantaneously with plasma and represent 
part of the ‘central’ compartment (described later). 
However, the drug will continue to enter poorly 
perfused tissues, and this will lower the plasma 
concentration. The high concentrations in the rap-
idly perfused tissues then decrease in parallel with 
the decreasing plasma concentration, resulting in a 
net transfer of drug back into the plasma (Fig. 2.6). 
This redistribution is important for terminating the 
action of some drugs given as a rapid intravenous 
injection or bolus. For example, intravenous thio-
pental produces rapid anaesthesia, but effects in the 
brain are short-lived because continued uptake into 
muscle and adipose tissue lowers its concentrations 
in the blood and therefore indirectly in the brain (see 
Figs. 2.6 and 17.2).
The processes of elimination (such as metabolism 
and excretion) are of major importance and are dis-
cussed in detail in the upcoming sections. Elimination 
results in a net transfer of the drug from other tissues 
via the circulation to the organ(s) of elimination (see 
the dashed lines in Fig. 2.6).
Table 2.2  Relative Organ Perfusion Rates in a Typical 
Adult at Rest.
ORGAN
PROPORTION 
OF CARDIAC 
OUTPUT (%)
BLOOD FLOW 
(ML/MIN PER 
100 G OF TISSUE)
Well-Perfused Organs
Lung
100
1000
Adrenals
0.5
200
Kidneys
15
350
Thyroid
1.5
500
Liver
27
110
Heart
4
100
Gastrointestinal tract
15
300
Brain
12
56
Placenta (full term)
—
10–15
Poorly-Perfused Organs
Skin
5
12
Skeletal muscle (at rest)
12
4
Bone, connective tissue
3
3
Adipose (fat)
4
3
Plasma
Concentration
Concentration
Concentration
Time
Time
Poorly perfused tissues
Well-perfused tissues
A
B
A
B
A
B
Time
Fig. 2.6  A simplified scheme for the redistribution of drugs 
between tissues. The initial decrease in plasma concentrations results 
from uptake into well-perfused tissues, which essentially reaches equi-
librium at point A. Between points A and B, the drug continues to enter 
poorly perfused tissues, resulting in a decrease in the concentrations 
in both plasma and well-perfused tissues. At point B all tissues are in 
equilibrium. The additional presence of an elimination process would 
produce a decrease from point B (shown as a dashed line), which 
would be parallel in all tissues.
40	
SECTION 1  General Principles
REVERSIBLE PROTEIN BINDING
Many drugs show an affinity for sites on nonrecep-
tor proteins, resulting in reversible binding to form a 
complex:
Drug + protein 
 Drug–protein complex
Such binding occurs with plasma proteins, most 
commonly with albumin, which binds many acidic 
or steroidal drugs, and α1-acid glycoprotein, which 
binds many basic or neutral drugs (Table 2.3). Drugs 
may also bind reversibly with proteins in extravas-
cular tissues. The drug–protein binding interac-
tion resembles the drug–receptor interaction as it is 
rapid, reversible and saturable, and different ligands 
can compete for the same site. It does not result in 
a pharmacological effect but lowers the free concen-
tration of the drug available to act at receptors; the 
amounts of drug remaining available may be only a 
minute fraction of the total body load. Proteins such 
as albumin can therefore act as depots, releasing the 
bound drug relatively rapidly when the free fraction 
of the drug is distributed to other compartments or 
eliminated.
Competition for binding to proteins in plasma or 
inside cells can occur between different drugs (one 
type of drug interaction; see Chapter 56) and between 
drugs and endogenous ligands. Relatively few interac-
tions of this type have important clinical consequences, 
although a highly protein-bound drug such as aspi-
rin can displace other drugs such as warfarin from 
their binding sites on plasma proteins; the increase in 
unbound drug concentration can increase the biologi-
cal activity of the displaced drug. An example of drug 
interaction with an endogenous ligand is the displace-
ment of bilirubin from albumin by sulfonamide antibi-
otics, causing an increase in the bilirubin concentration 
in plasma. In neonates, this can lead to severe encepha-
lopathy (kernicterus).
IRREVERSIBLE PROTEIN BINDING
Certain drugs, because of chemical reactivity of the 
parent compound or a metabolite, undergo covalent 
binding to plasma or tissue components such as pro-
teins or nucleic acids. When the binding is irrevers-
ible (e.g. the interaction of some cytotoxic drugs with 
DNA), this can be considered as equivalent to elimi-
nation because the parent drug cannot reenter the cir-
culation. In contrast, some covalent binding may be 
slowly reversible, such as the dissolution of the disul-
fide bridges formed by captopril with its target, angio-
tensin-converting enzyme (ACE), and with plasma 
proteins (see Chapter 6); the covalently bound drug 
will not dissociate rapidly in response to a decrease in 
the concentration of free drug, and such binding repre-
sents a slowly equilibrating reservoir of drug.
DISTRIBUTION TO SPECIFIC TISSUES
Two systems require more detailed consideration of 
drug distribution: the brain, because of the difficulty of 
drug entry, and the fetus, because of the potential for 
drug toxicity.
Brain
Lipid-soluble drugs readily pass from the blood into 
the brain, and for such drugs the brain represents a 
typical well-perfused tissue (see Table 2.2). In contrast, 
the entry of water-soluble drugs into the brain is much 
slower than into other well-perfused tissues, giving 
rise to the concept of a blood–brain barrier as a highly 
selective permeability barrier that separates the blood 
from the extracellular fluid of the brain. The functional 
basis of the barrier to water-soluble drugs (Fig. 2.7) is 
reduced permeability of brain capillaries owing to:
• tight junctions between adjacent endothelial cells 
(capillaries are composed of an endothelial layer a 
single cell thick, with no smooth muscle),
• smaller size and lower number of pores in the endo-
thelial cell membranes, and
• the presence of a contiguous surrounding layer of 
astrocytes.
In addition, efflux transporters in the endothelial 
cells are an important part of the blood–brain bar-
rier and return drug molecules back into the circula-
tion, thereby preventing their entry into the brain and 
reducing effects in the central nervous system.
Water-soluble endogenous compounds needed for 
normal brain functioning, such as carbohydrates and 
amino acids, enter the brain via specific uptake trans-
porters of the SLC superfamily (see Table 2.1). Some 
drugs (e.g. levodopa) may enter the brain using these 
transport processes, and in such cases the rate of trans-
port of the drug will be influenced by the concentra-
tions of competitive endogenous substrates.
There is limited drug-metabolising ability in the 
brain and drugs leave the brain by diffusion back into 
plasma, either by active transport processes in the 
Table 2.3  Examples of Drugs That Undergo Extensive 
Binding to Plasma Proteins.
BOUND TO ALBUMIN
BOUND TO α1-ACID GLYCOPROTEIN
Dexamethasone
Chlorpromazine
Digitoxin
Erythromycin
Furosemide
Lidocaine
Ibuprofen
Methadone
Indometacin
Propranolol
Phenytoin
Quinine
Salicylates
Tricyclic antidepressants
Sulfonamides
Thiazides
Tolbutamide
Warfarin
	
	
Pharmacokinetics  CHAPTER 2	
41
choroid plexus or by elimination in the cerebrospi-
nal fluid. Organic acid transporters (OAT) of the SLC 
superfamily (see Table 2.1) are important in removing 
polar neurotransmitter metabolites from the brain.
Fetus
Lipid-soluble drugs can readily cross the placenta 
and enter the fetus. The placental blood flow is low 
compared with that in the liver, lung and spleen 
(see Table 2.2); consequently, the fetal drug concen-
tration equilibrates slowly with that in the maternal 
circulation. Highly polar and/or very large mole-
cules (such as heparin; see Chapter 11) do not read-
ily cross the placenta. The fetal liver has only low 
levels of drug-metabolising enzymes, so it is mainly 
the maternal elimination that clears the fetal circula-
tion of drugs.
After delivery, the neonate may show effects from 
drugs given to the mother close to delivery (such as 
pethidine for pain control; see Chapter 19). Such effects 
may be prolonged because the neonate now has to rely 
on his/her own immature elimination processes (see 
Chapter 56).
ELIMINATION
Elimination is the removal of a drug’s activity from 
the body by metabolism and excretion. By convention, 
when a parent drug molecule is transformed into one 
or more metabolites, it is considered to have been elim-
inated, even if the metabolites still remain in the body. 
Excretion occurs when the parent drug molecule is 
expelled in the body’s liquid, solid or gaseous ‘waste’. 
Any drug metabolites will also be excreted.
METABOLISM
A degree of lipid solubility is a useful property of most 
drugs as it allows the compound to cross lipid barriers 
and hence to be given via the oral route. Metabolism is 
necessary for the elimination of lipid-soluble drugs from 
the body because it converts a lipid-soluble molecule 
into water-soluble metabolites capable of rapid elimina-
tion in the urine. A lipid-soluble molecule filtered into 
the kidney tubule would otherwise be reabsorbed from 
the tubule into the circulation (discussed later).
Metabolism of the drug produces one or more new 
chemical entities, which may show different biological 
properties from the parent compound:
• Changes in pharmacological activity. Decreased phar-
macological activity is the most common result of 
drug metabolism, arising from reduced receptor 
binding due to the changed molecular structure of 
the metabolite(s). Sometimes metabolites may be 
more potent than the parent drug; for example, a 
prodrug is administered as an inactive compound 
that is converted by metabolism into the active drug.
• Changes in the nature of pharmacological activity. The 
metabolite shows qualitatively different pharmaco-
logical or toxicological properties.
Drug metabolism can be divided into two phases 
(Fig. 2.8). Although many compounds undergo both 
phases of metabolism, it is possible for a drug to 
undergo only a phase 1 or a phase 2 reaction, or for 
a proportion of the drug to be excreted unchanged. 
Tight junctions between
endothelial cells
Endothelial cell
Mitochondrion
Nontight
junction
Astrocyte foot
projection
Mitochondrion
Carrier
system
Basal
lamina
Endothelial cell
Nucleus
Tight
junction
Active transport
Astrocyte
Foot process of astrocyte
Fig. 2.7  The blood–brain barrier. The barrier arises from the low number of membrane pores, the tight junctions 
between adjacent cells and the presence of efflux transporters that remove any drug that enters the endothelial cell. 
The presence of astrocytes is the stimulus for these changes in endothelial structure and function. Astrocytes are one 
of the several types of cells found in the central nervous system that make up the glia; they have numerous sheet-like 
processes and may provide nutrients to neurons.
42	
SECTION 1  General Principles
Phase 1 metabolism (often an oxidation, reduction or 
hydrolysis reaction) is sometimes described as pre-
conjugation, because it produces a molecule that is a 
suitable substrate for a phase 2 or conjugation reaction. 
The enzymes involved in these reactions have low sub-
strate specificities and can metabolise a wide range of 
drug substrates and other xenobiotics.
Phase 1
Cytochrome P450 is a superfamily of membrane-bound 
haemoprotein isoenzymes (Table 2.4). They are present 
in the smooth endoplasmic reticulum of cells (Fig. 2.9), 
particularly in the liver, which is the major site of drug 
oxidation; the amounts in other tissues are low in com-
parison. The cytochrome P450 families CYP1 to CYP4 
are involved in drug metabolism; the specific isoen-
zymes CYP2C9, CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 are involved 
in the phase 1 metabolism of approximately 10%, 24% 
and 55% of drugs, respectively.
Oxidation reactions (Table 2.5) are the most important 
of the phase 1 reactions and can occur at carbon, nitrogen 
or sulfur atoms within the drug structure. In most cases, 
an oxygen atom is retained in the metabolite, although 
some reactions, such as dealkylation, result in loss of the 
oxygen atom in a small fragment of the original mol-
ecule. Oxidation reactions are catalysed by a diverse 
group of enzymes, of which the cytochrome P450 system 
is the most important. The cytochrome P450 isoenzyme 
binds both the drug and molecular oxygen (Fig. 2.10) 
and catalyses the transfer of one oxygen atom to the sub-
strate, while the other oxygen atom is reduced to water:
RH + O2 + NADPH + H+ → ROH + H2O + NADP+
D
Cytochrome
P450
Active
site
D
D in
cytosol
M
M
MS
D in
cytosol
M
MS
M
MGA
P450
Active
site
UDPGT
Phospholipid
bilayer
Fig. 2.9  Drug metabolism in the smooth endoplasmic reticulum. The lipid-soluble drug (D) partitions into the lipid 
bilayer of the endoplasmic reticulum. The cytochrome P450 oxidises the drug to a metabolite (M) that is more water-
soluble and diffuses out of the lipid layer. The metabolite may undergo a phase 2 (conjugation) reaction catalysed by 
UDP-glucuronyl transferase (UDPGT) in the endoplasmic reticulum to give a glucuronide conjugate (MGA) or with sulfate 
in the cytosol to give a sulfate conjugate (MS).
Phase
1
Benzene
0%
Phenol
0.3%
Phenyl sulfate
99.9%+
Phase
2
Percentage
ionised
at pH 7.4
OH
O – SO3
–
Fig. 2.8  The two phases of drug metabolism. Benzene is shown as 
a simple example of a lipid-soluble substance undergoing phase 1 and 
phase 2 metabolism. In phase 1, benzene is oxidised to phenol and 
in phase 2 the phenol is conjugated with sulfate to produce a highly 
hydrophilic metabolite-conjugate (phenyl sulfate).
Table 2.4  Cytochrome P450 superfamily.
ISOENZYME
COMMENTS
CYP1A
Important for methylxanthines and 
paracetamol; induced by smoking
CYP2A
Limited number of substrates; significant 
interindividual variability
CYP2B
Limited number of substrates
CYP2C
CYP2C9 is an important isoform; 
CYP2C19 shows genetic 
polymorphism
CYP2D
Metabolises numerous drugs; CYP2D6 
shows genetic polymorphism
CYP2E
Metabolises alcohol
CYP3A
Main isoform in liver and intestine; me-
tabolises 50%–60% of current drugs
CYP4
Metabolises fatty acids
Human liver contains at least 20 isoenzymes of cytochrome P450. Families 
CYP1–4 are involved in drug metabolism.
	
	
Pharmacokinetics  CHAPTER 2	
43
The reaction involves initial binding of the drug 
substrate to the ferric (Fe3+) form of cytochrome P450, 
followed by reduction (via a specific cytochrome 
P450 reductase) and then binding of molecular oxy-
gen. Further reduction is followed by molecular re-
arrangement, with release of the reaction products 
(drug metabolite and water) and regeneration of ferric 
cytochrome P450.
Oxidations at nitrogen and sulfur atoms are fre-
quently performed by a second enzyme of the endoplas-
mic reticulum, the flavin-containing mono-oxygenase, 
which also requires molecular oxygen and nicotin-
amide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH). A 
number of other enzymes, such as alcohol dehydroge-
nase, aldehyde oxidase and MAO, may be involved in 
the oxidation of specific functional groups.
Reduction reactions (see Table 2.5) are less common 
than oxidation reactions but occur at unsaturated car-
bon atoms and at nitrogen and sulfur centres by the 
actions of cytochrome P450 and cytochrome P450 
reductase (and also by the intestinal microflora).
Hydrolysis and hydration reactions (see Table 2.5) 
involve the addition of water to the drug molecule. 
In hydrolysis, the molecule is then split by the addi-
tion of water. A number of ubiquitous enzymes can 
hydrolyse ester and amide bonds in drugs. Intestinal 
bacteria are also important for the hydrolysis of esters 
and amides, and of drug conjugates eliminated in the 
bile (discussed later). In hydration reactions, the water 
molecule is retained in the drug metabolite. Hydration 
of an epoxide ring by epoxide hydrolase is an impor-
tant reaction in the metabolism and toxicity of many 
aromatic drugs (e.g. carbamazepine; see Chapter 23).
Phase 2
Phase 2 (conjugation) reactions involve the forma-
tion of a covalent bond between the drug, or its phase 
1 metabolite, and an endogenous substrate. Table 2.6 
shows the types of phase 2 reactions, the functional 
group necessary in the drug molecule and the acti-
vated species needed for the reaction. The products of 
conjugation reactions are usually highly water-soluble 
and lack biological activity.
The activated endogenous substrate for glucuro-
nide synthesis is uridine-diphosphate glucuronic acid 
(UDPGA). UDP-glucuronyl transferases in the endo-
plasmic reticulum close to the cytochrome P450 system 
(see Fig. 2.9) transfer glucuronate to the drug. Glucuro-
nide conjugation in the gut wall and liver is important 
in the first-pass metabolism of substrates such as sim-
ple phenols.
Sulfate conjugation is performed by a cytosolic 
enzyme, which utilises high-energy sulfate (3′-phos-
phoadenosine 5′-phosphosulfate or PAPS) as the rate-
limiting endogenous substrate. Saturation of sulfate 
Table 2.5  Examples of Oxidation, Reduction and 
Hydrolytic Reactions.
Oxidation
Alkyl groups
RCH3 → RCH2OH → RCHO → RCOOH
Deamination
RCH2NH2 → RCHO + NH3
Amines
R′-NH-R → R′-N(OH)-R
Reduction
Aldehydes
RCHO → RCH2OH
Disulfides
R–S–S–R′ → RSH + HSR′
Hydrolysis
Esters
RCO⋅OR′ → RCOOH + HOR′
Amides
RCO⋅NHR′ → RCOH + H2NR′
R, R′, Aliphatic groups.
ROH
H2O
Fe3+
Fe3+–RH
Fe2+–RH
Fe2+–RH
Fe3+–RH
Fe3+–RH
O2
_
O2
O2
e–
RH
e–
O2
2–
2H+
From reduced
cytochrome b5
or cytochrome
P450 reductase
From NADPH-
cytochrome P450
reductase
Fig. 2.10  The oxidation of substrate (RH) by cytochrome P450. Fe3+, the active site of cytochrome P450 in its ferric 
state; RH, drug substrate; ROH, oxidised metabolite. Cytochrome b5 is present in the endoplasmic reticulum and can trans-
fer an electron to cytochrome P450 as part of its redox reactions. NADPH, Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate.
44	
SECTION 1  General Principles
conjugation contributes to the hepatotoxic consequences 
of overdose with paracetamol (acetaminophen; see 
Chapter 53).
Acetylation and methylation reactions often decrease 
polarity because they block an ionisable functional group 
(see Table 2.6), but they mask active groups such as 
amino and catechol moieties. These reactions are primar-
ily involved in inactivation of neurotransmitters such as 
noradrenaline and local hormones such as histamine.
The conjugation of drug carboxylic acid groups with 
amino acids is unusual because the drug is converted to a 
high-energy form (a Coenzyme A derivative) prior to the 
formation of the conjugate bond by transferase enzymes. 
Conjugation with the tripeptide glutathione (GSH or 
l-α-glutamyl-l-cysteinylglycine) is catalysed by a fam-
ily of transferases which covalently bind the drug to the 
thiol group in the cysteine (Fig. 2.11). The substrates are 
often reactive drugs or activated metabolites, which are 
inherently unstable (see Chapter 53), and the reaction 
can also occur nonenzymatically. The glutathione conju-
gate then undergoes further metabolic reactions.
Glutathione conjugation is a detoxification process 
in which glutathione acts as a scavenging agent to 
protect the cell from toxic damage. Glutathione conju-
gates and endogenous cysteine conjugates, such as the 
cysteinyl-leukotriene (LT) C4, are transported out of 
cells by the MRP1 transporter (see Table 2.1).
The complex array of biotransformation reactions 
typically involved in drug metabolism is illustrated by 
the anxiolytic drug diazepam (see Chapter 20), which is 
metabolised to biologically active intermediates before 
undergoing conjugation with glucuronide (Fig. 2.12).
Factors Affecting Drug Metabolism: Inducers 
and Inhibitors
The liver is the main site of drug metabolism; the large 
surface area of the sinusoids, combined with high levels 
of enzyme activity in hepatocytes, can result in very rapid 
drug uptake and metabolism as the blood flows through 
the liver (see Chapter 56 for normal sinusoid architecture 
and the effects of liver disease on hepatic drug uptake). 
Environmental influences, including chemical contami-
nants and therapeutic drugs, may induce or inhibit the 
activity of hepatic drug-metabolising enzymes, particu-
larly cytochrome P450 isoenzymes (Table 2.7). This can 
affect both the bioavailability and the elimination of 
other drugs undergoing hepatic elimination, a form of 
drug interaction that will be discussed later.
Inducing agents increase the cellular expression of 
cytochrome P450 enzymes. This occurs over a period of a 
few days, during which the inducer interacts with nuclear 
receptors to increase mRNA transcription of genes cod-
ing for cytochrome P450. The increased amounts of the 
enzyme last for a few days after the removal of the induc-
ing agent and are removed by normal protein turnover. 
Environmental contaminants such as benzo[a]pyrene in 
cigarette smoke induce CYP1A. Therapeutic drugs can 
induce members of the CYP2 and CYP3 families. Chronic 
consumption of alcohol induces CYP2E.
RX
R
S
CYS
GLU
GLY
Hydrolysis
R
S
Cysteine
Lyase
R
SH
Further metabolism
Excretory
product
N-acetylation
GLU
CYS
GLY
HS
Glutathione transferase
or spontaneous reaction
Glutathione
Unstable drug or
reactive metabolite
Fig. 2.11  The formation and further metabolism of glutathione 
conjugates. There are multiple types of glutathione transferase that 
detoxify substances by glutathione conjugation.
Table 2.6  Major Conjugation Reactions.
REACTION
FUNCTIONAL GROUP
ACTIVATED SPECIES
PRODUCTS
Glucuronidation
–OH
–COOH
–NH2
Uridine-diphosphate glucuronic acid 
(UDPGA)
Glucuronide conjugates
Sulfation
–OH
–NH3
3′-Phosphoadenosine-5′-phosphosulfate 
(PAPS)
–O–SO3H
–NH–SO3H
Acetylation
–NH2
Acetyl-CoA
–NH–COCH3
Methylation
–OH
–NH2
–SH
S-Adenosyl methionine
–OCH3
–NHCH3
–SCH3
Amino acid conjugation
–COOH
Drug-CoA
CO-NH⋅CHR⋅COOH
Glutathione conjugation
Various
–
Glutathione conjugates
	
	
Pharmacokinetics  CHAPTER 2	
45
In contrast, inhibition of cytochrome P450 by drugs 
occurs by direct reversible competition for the enzyme 
active site, not a change in enzyme expression, so the time-
course closely follows the absorption and elimination of 
the inhibitor substance. Examples of inhibitors are the his-
tamine H2 receptor antagonist cimetidine (see Chapter 33) 
and components of grapefruit juice (see Table 2.7).
The activity of drug-metabolising enzymes is also 
dependent on the delivery of their drug substrates 
by the circulation. The metabolism of many drugs is 
affected significantly by lower hepatic blood flow in 
the very young and in the elderly (see Chapter 56). 
Genetic variation in drug-metabolising enzymes is dis-
cussed at the end of this chapter.
EXCRETION
Drugs and their metabolites may be eliminated via cir-
culation by various routes:
• In fluids (urine, bile, sweat, tears, breast milk, etc.). Impor-
tant for low-molecular-weight polar compounds; 
urine is the major route, while breast milk is important 
because of the potential for exposure of the breastfed 
infant.
• In solids (faeces, hair, etc.). Faecal elimination is most 
important for high-molecular-weight compounds 
excreted in bile; the sequestration of drugs into hair 
is not quantitatively important, but the distribution 
of a drug along the hair shaft can indicate the his-
tory of drug intake during the preceding weeks.
• In gases (expired air). Important only for volatile 
compounds.
Excretion via the Urine
There are three processes involved in the handling of 
drugs and their metabolites in the kidney, the sum of 
which determines the total urinary excretion:
Total excretion = glomerular filtration 
+ tubular secretion – reabsorption
Glomerular filtration
All molecules less than about 20 kDa in mass undergo 
filtration under positive hydrostatic pressure through 
pores of 7- to 8-nm diameter in the glomerular mem-
brane. The glomerular filtrate comprises about 20% of 
the flow of plasma to the glomeruli, and hence about 
20% of all water-soluble, low molecular-weight com-
pounds free in the plasma enter the filtrate on each 
pass. Blood cells, plasma proteins and protein-bound 
drugs are not filtered, so the efficiency of glomerular 
filtration for a drug is influenced by the extent of bind-
ing to cells and plasma proteins.
Reabsorption
The glomerular filtrate contains numerous constituents 
that the body cannot afford to lose. Most of the water 
is reabsorbed, and there are specific tubular uptake 
Cytochrome P450
Cytochrome P450
Ring oxidation
N-demethylation
N
N
CH3
O
Cl
Diazepam
UDPGT
Cytochrome P450
Water-soluble
glucuronide
conjugate
Water-soluble
glucuronide
conjugate
N-demethylation
N
N
CH3
O
Cl
Temazepam
N
N
H
O
Cl
Oxazepam
Cytochrome P450
N
N
H
O
Cl
Desmethyldiazepam
(nordiazepam)
OH
UDPGT
OH
Ring oxidation
Fig. 2.12  Complex pathways of metabolism in humans. This figure illustrates that a single drug, in this case diaz-
epam, may generate a number of active metabolites before phase 2 conjugation terminates the activity of the parent 
drug and metabolites.
46	
SECTION 1  General Principles
processes for carbohydrates, amino acids, vitamins 
and other substances (see Chapter 14). A few drugs 
also pass from the tubule back into the plasma, as they 
are substrates for these specific uptake processes. The 
urine is concentrated on its passage down the renal 
tubule; as the tubule-to-plasma concentration gradi-
ent increases, only the most water-soluble molecules 
remain in the urine. Because of extensive reabsorption, 
lipid-soluble drugs are not eliminated via the urine, 
but are returned to the circulation until they are metab-
olised to water-soluble products that can be efficiently 
removed from the body by renal excretion. The pH of 
urine is usually less than that of plasma; consequently, 
pH partitioning between urine (pH 5–6) and plasma 
(pH 7.4) may increase or decrease the tendency of the 
compound to be reabsorbed (see Fig. 2.5).
Tubular secretion
The renal tubule also has secretory transporters (see 
Table 2.1) on both the basolateral and apical mem-
branes for compounds that are acidic (OATs) or basic 
(organic cation transporters, OCTs). Drugs and their 
metabolites, especially the glucuronic acid and sulfate 
conjugates, may undergo an active carrier-mediated 
elimination, primarily by OATs but also by multidrug-
resistance-associated proteins (MRPs). Because tubu-
lar secretion rapidly lowers the plasma concentration 
of unbound drug, there will be a rapid dissociation of 
any drugs bound to plasma proteins. As a result, even 
highly protein-bound drugs may be cleared almost 
completely from the blood in a single passage through 
the kidney.
Excretion Via the Faeces
Uptake into hepatocytes and subsequent elimination 
in bile is the principal route of elimination of larger 
molecules (molecular weight >500 Da). Conjugation 
with glucuronic acid increases the molecular weight of 
the substrate by almost 200 Da, so bile is an important 
route for eliminating glucuronide conjugates. Once the 
drug or its conjugate has entered the intestinal lumen 
via the bile (Fig. 2.13), it passes down the gut and 
may eventually be eliminated in the faeces. However, 
some drugs or conjugates may be reabsorbed from the 
Table 2.7  Examples of Common Substrates, Inhibitors and Inducers of Cytochrome P450 Isoenzymes.
ISOENZYME
SUBSTRATES
INHIBITORS
INDUCERS
CYP1A2
Caffeine, clozapine, haloperidol, naproxen, 
olanzapine, paracetamol, propranolol, 
theophylline, verapamil, warfarin
Cimetidine, ciprofloxacin, 
efavirenz, grapefruit juice
Carbamazepine, chargrilled 
meat, cigarette smoke, 
rifampicin
CYP2A6
Coumarin, halothane, nicotine
Grapefruit juice, ketocon-
azole, tranylcypromine
Dexamethasone, phenobar-
bital, rifampicin
CYP2B6
Bupropion, cyclophosphamide, efavirenz, 
ifosfamide, ketamine, methadone, 
propofol, selegiline, tramadol
Ticlopidine, voriconazole
Artemisinin, carbamazepine, 
phenobarbital, phenytoin, 
rifampicin
CYP2C8
Cerivastatin, montelukast, repaglinide
Gemfibrozil, trimethoprim
Rifampicin
CYP2C9
Celecoxib, clopidogrel, diclofenac, fluox-
etine, glibenclamide, glipizide, ibuprofen, 
losartan, tamoxifen, tolbutamide, venlafax-
ine, S-warfarin
Amiodarone, capecitabine, 
voriconazole
Carbamazepine, nevirapine, 
phenobarbital, rifampicin, 
St John’s Wort
CYP2C19
Amitryptiline, celecoxib, citalopram, clopido-
grel, diazepam, fluvastatin, indometacin, 
omeprazole, pantoprazole, phenytoin, 
proguanil, propranolol, venlafaxine, 
R-warfarin
Esomeprazole, pantoprazole, 
voriconazole
Carbemazepine, efavirenz, 
prednisone, rifampicin, 
ritonavir, St John’s Wort
CYP2D6
Amitriptyline, bisoprolol, clonidine, codeine, 
desipramine, encainide, many SSRIs, 
metamfetamine, metoprolol, ondansetron, 
propranolol, risperidone
Bupropion, fluoxetine, parox-
etine, rolapitant
Dexamethasone, rifampicin
CYP2E
Ethanol, halothane (and other inhalation 
anaesthetics), paracetamol
Disulfiram
Ethanol
CYP3A4
Numerous drugs of many different classes, 
e.g. amlodipine, alfentanil, atorvastatin, 
carbamazepine, ciclosporin, diazepam, 
diltiazem, erythromycin, fluconazole, lido-
caine, midazolam, nifedipine, saquinavir, 
sildenafil, tamoxifen, terfenadine
Antivirals (indinavir, nelfinavir, 
ritonavir), clarithromycin, 
erythromycin, grape-
fruit juice, itraconazole, 
ketoconazole
Carbamazepine, efavirenz, 
phenobarbital, phenytoin, 
pioglitazone, rifampicin, St 
John’s Wort
SSRIs, Selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors.
Information in table mainly from Flockhart, D.A., 2007. Drug Interactions: Cytochrome P450 Drug Interaction Table. Indiana University School of Medicine. http:// 
medicine.iupui.edu/clinpharm/ddis/clinical-table. Prescribing information on drug interactions is available in the British National Formulary.
	
	
Pharmacokinetics  CHAPTER 2	
47
lumen of the gut and reenter the hepatic portal vein. 
As a result, a drug can be recycled between the gut 
lumen, hepatic portal vein, liver, bile and back to the 
gut lumen; this is described as enterohepatic circula-
tion. Some of the reabsorbed drug may escape hepatic 
extraction and proceed into the hepatic vein, maintain-
ing the drug concentrations in the general circulation.
The water-soluble glucuronide conjugates of drugs 
or of their oxidised metabolites that are excreted into 
the bile undergo little reabsorption in the upper intes-
tine, but the bacterial flora of the lower intestine may 
hydrolyse the conjugate, so the original, lipid-soluble 
drug or its metabolite is liberated and can be reab-
sorbed and undergo enterohepatic circulation.
THE MATHEMATICAL BASIS OF CLINICAL 
PHARMACOKINETICS
The use of mathematics to describe the fate of a drug in 
the body can be complex and daunting for undergrad-
uates. Nevertheless, a basic knowledge is essential for 
understanding many aspects of drug handling and the 
rational prescribing of drugs:
• why oral and intravenous treatments may require 
different doses,
• the calculation of dosages and dose intervals during 
chronic therapy,
• why a loading dose may be needed,
• the dosage adjustment that may be necessary in 
hepatic and renal disease,
• the calculation of dosages for vulnerable patient 
groups.
Such clinical calculations are a skill tested in the Pre-
scribing Safety Assessment (PSA) for final-year medi-
cal students in the UK (see Chapter 55).
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
The processes of drug absorption, distribution, metab-
olism and excretion (ADME) are described in this 
section in mathematical terms, as it is important to 
quantify the rate and extent to which the drug under-
goes each process.
For nearly all physiological and metabolic pro-
cesses, the rate of reaction is not uniform but propor-
tional to the amount of substrate (drug) available: this 
is described as a first-order reaction. Diffusion down a 
concentration gradient, glomerular filtration and enzy-
matic hydrolysis are examples of first-order reactions. 
At higher concentrations, the drug diffuses or is filtered 
or hydrolysed at a faster rate than at lower concentra-
tions. Protein-mediated reactions, such as metabolism 
and active transport, are also first order, because if the 
concentration of the substrate is doubled, then the rate 
of formation of product is also doubled. However, as 
the substrate concentration increases, the enzyme or 
transporter can become saturated with substrate, and 
the rate of reaction cannot respond to a further increase 
in concentration. The process then occurs at a fixed 
maximum rate independent of substrate concentra-
tion, and the reaction is described as a zero-order reac-
tion; rare examples are the metabolism of ethanol (see 
Chapter 54) and phenytoin (see Chapter 23), in which 
the same amount drug, not the same proportion, is 
metabolized per unit of time. When the substrate con-
centration has decreased sufficiently for enzyme sites 
to become available again, then the reaction will revert 
to first order.
Zero-Order Reactions
If a drug is being processed (absorbed, distributed or 
eliminated) according to zero-order kinetics, then the 
change in concentration with time (dC/dt) is a fixed 
amount (mass) of the drug per time, independent of 
concentration:
	
d
d
C
t
k
= −
(Equation 2.2)
The units of k (the reaction rate constant) are there-
fore a mass per unit time (e.g. mg/min). A graph of 
concentration against time will produce a straight line 
with a slope of −k (Fig. 2.14A).
First-Order Reactions
In first-order reactions, the change in concentration at 
any time (dC/dt) is proportional to the concentration 
present at that time:
	
d
d
C
t
kC
= −

(Equation 2.3)
General circulation
Bile
Drug
Drug
Drug
Conjugate
Liver
Conjugate
Conjugate
Conjugate
Drug
Drug
Small
intestine
Colon/rectum
Bacterial hydrolysis
Fig. 2.13  Enterohepatic circulation of drugs. Drug molecules may cir-
culate repeatedly between the bile, gut, portal circulation, liver and general 
circulation, particularly if the drug conjugate is hydrolysed by the gut flora.
48	
SECTION 1  General Principles
The rate of change will be high at high drug con-
centrations but low at low drug concentrations (see 
Fig. 2.14B), and a graph of concentration against time 
will produce an exponential decrease. Such a curve can 
be described by an exponential equation:
	
C
C
kt
=
−
0e

(Equation 2.4)
where C is the concentration at time t and C0 is the initial 
concentration (when time = 0). This equation may be 
written more conveniently by taking natural logarithms:
	
lnC
C
kt
=
−
0

(Equation 2.5)
and a graph of lnC against time will produce a straight 
line with a slope of −k and an intercept of lnC0 (see 
Fig. 2.14C).
The units of the rate constant k (1/time, e.g. per 
hour) may be regarded as the proportional change 
per unit of time but are difficult to use practically, so 
the rate of a first-order reaction is usually described in 
terms of its half-life (t1/2), which is the time taken for a 
concentration to decrease by one-half. In the next half-
life, the drug concentration falls by one-half of the 
remaining concentration, to a quarter of the original 
concentration, and then to one-eighth in the next half-
life, and so on. The half-life is therefore independent 
of concentration and is a characteristic for a particular 
first-order process and a particular drug. The intrave-
nous drug shown in Fig. 2.15 has a t1/2 of 1 hour.
The relationship between the half-life and the rate 
constant is derived by substituting C0 = 2 and C = 1 
into the previous equation, when the time interval t 
will be one half-life (t1/2), giving:
	
ln
ln
.
.
/
.
/
/
/
/
/
1
2
0
0 693
0 693
0 693
1 2
1 2
1 2
1 2
=
−
=
−
=
=
kt
kt
t
k
k
t
or

(Equation 2.6)
(Note: 0.693 = ln2)
A half-life can be calculated for any first-order pro-
cess (e.g. for absorption, distribution or elimination). In 
practice, the ‘half-life’ normally reported for a drug is 
the half-life for its elimination from plasma (the slow-
est, terminal phase of the plasma concentration–time 
curve; discussed later).
ABSORPTION
The mathematics of absorption apply to all nonintra-
venous routes (e.g. oral, inhalation, percutaneous) and 
are illustrated by absorption from the gut lumen.
Rate of Absorption
The rate of absorption after oral administration is 
determined by the rate at which the drug is able to 
pass from the gut lumen into the systemic circula-
tion. Following oral doses of some drugs, particu-
larly lipid-soluble drugs with very rapid absorption, 
it may be possible to see three distinct phases in the 
plasma concentration–time curve, which reflect dis-
tinct phases of absorption, distribution and elimi-
nation (Fig. 2.16A). For most drugs, however, slow 
absorption masks the distribution phase (see Fig. 2.16B). 
A number of factors can influence this pattern:
• Gastric emptying. Basic drugs undergo negligible 
absorption from the stomach, so there can be a delay 
of up to an hour between drug administration and 
the detection of drug in the general circulation.
• Food. Food in the stomach slows drug absorption 
and also gastric emptying.
• Decomposition or first-pass metabolism before or during 
absorption. This will reduce the amount of drug that 
reaches the general circulation but will not affect the 
rate of absorption, which is usually determined by 
lipid solubility.
• Modified-release formulations. If a drug is elimi-
nated rapidly, the plasma concentrations will show 
rapid fluctuations during regular oral dosing, and 
to maintain a therapeutic plasma concentration 
C
Slope = –k
(units = mass/time)
Time
Time
Time
Slope = –k
(units = 1/time)
InC0
Zero order
First order
C
InC
A
B
C
Fig. 2.14  Zero- and first-order kinetics. (A) The zero-order reaction is a uniform change in concentration over time, 
representing the same amount (mass) of drug being removed per unit of time. (B) The first-order reaction is an exponen-
tial curve in which concentrations fall fastest when they are highest; the curve reflects the same proportion of drug being 
removed per unit of time. (C) Plotting the natural logarithm of the concentration (lnC) in a first-order reaction against time 
generates a straight line with slope −k (where k is the rate constant) and the intercept gives the concentration at time 
zero, C0.
	
	
Pharmacokinetics  CHAPTER 2	
49
it may be necessary to take the drug at very fre-
quent intervals, which can reduce adherence to 
the intended regimen. The frequency with which a 
drug is taken can be reduced by giving a modified-
release formulation that releases drug at a slower 
rate. The plasma concentration then becomes more 
dependent on the rate of absorption than the rate 
of elimination.
Extent of Absorption
Bioavailability (F) is defined as the fraction of the 
administered dose that reaches the systemic circulation 
as the parent drug (unaltered, not as metabolites). For 
intravenous administration the bioavailability (F) is 
therefore 1, as 100% of the parent drug enters the gen-
eral circulation. For oral administration, bioavailability 
may also be complete (F = 1) or it may be incomplete 
(F < 1) resulting from:
• incomplete absorption and loss in the faeces because 
the tablet or capsule failed to disintegrate fully, or 
because the drug molecules did not fully dissolve, 
or are adsorbed onto gut contents, or are insuffi-
ciently lipid-soluble to be absorbed; or
• first-pass metabolism in the gut lumen, during pas-
sage across the gut wall or by the liver before the 
absorbed drug reaches the systemic circulation.
The bioavailability of a drug has important thera-
peutic implications because it is the major factor deter-
mining the equivalent drug dosage for different routes 
of administration. For example, if a drug has an oral 
bioavailability (F) of 0.1, the oral dose needed for ther-
apeutic effectiveness will need to be 10 times higher 
than the corresponding intravenous dose (F = 1).
The bioavailability is a characteristic of the drug 
and, providing that absorption and elimination are 
not saturated, it is independent of the drug dose, 
Rate of absorption > rate of distribution
Time after dosage
Plasma drug
concentration
Absorption phase
Distribution phase
Elimination phase
Rate of absorption < rate of distribution
Time after dosage
Plasma drug
concentration
Absorption phase
Distribution phase
Elimination phase
A
B
Fig. 2.16  Plasma concentration–time profiles after oral administration of drugs with different rates of absorption. 
The processes of distribution and elimination start as soon as some of the drug has entered the general circulation. 
(A) A clear distribution phase is seen if the rate of absorption is so rapid as to be essentially complete before distribution 
is finished. (B) For most drugs, the rate of absorption is slower and masks the distribution phase.
100
80
60
40
20
0
0 
1 
2 
3 
4
5
4
3
2
1
0
0 
1 
2 
3 
4
Time (hour)
Time (hour)
C
In (concentration)
Slope = –k
Fig. 2.15  The elimination half-life of a drug in plasma. Here the drug concentration C decreases by 50% every hour 
(i.e. the half-life is 1 hour).
50	
SECTION 1  General Principles
meaning that the same proportion of a large dose 
will be absorbed into the circulation as with a small 
dose of the same drug. Bioavailability is normally 
determined by comparison of plasma concentrations 
measured after oral administration (when the fraction 
F of the parent drug enters the general circulation) 
with measurements following intravenous adminis-
tration (when, by definition, F = 1). The amount in the 
circulation cannot be compared at a single time point, 
because intravenous and oral dosing show different 
concentration–time profiles, so instead the total area 
under the plasma concentration–time curve (AUC) 
from t = 0 to t = infinity is used, as this reflects the 
total amount of drug that has entered the general cir-
culation. If the oral and intravenous (IV) doses admin-
istered are equal:
	
F = AUC
AUC
oral
IV 
(Equation 2.7)
or if different doses are used:
	
F =
×
×
AUC
Dose
AUC
Dose
oral
IV
IV
oral

(Equation 2.8)
This calculation assumes that the elimination is first 
order.
An alternative method to calculate F is to measure 
the total urinary excretion of the parent drug (Aex) 
following oral and intravenous administration of iden-
tical doses:
	
F = Aex
Aex
oral
IV 
(Equation 2.9)
DISTRIBUTION
Distribution concerns the rate and extent of movement 
of the parent drug from the blood into the extravascu-
lar tissues after administration, and also its return from 
the tissues into the blood during elimination.
Rate of Distribution
Because a distinct distribution phase is not usually 
seen when a drug is taken orally (see Fig. 2.16B), the 
rate of distribution is normally measured following an 
intravenous bolus dose. Some intravenous drugs reach 
equilibrium between blood and tissues very rapidly, 
and a distinct distribution phase is not apparent. In 
Fig. 2.17A the slope of the logarithm of plasma concentra-
tion against time, therefore, mainly reflects elimination of 
the drug; this is described as a one-compartment model.
Most intravenous drugs, however, take a finite time 
to distribute into the tissues; the initial distribution out 
of the plasma, combined with underlying elimination, 
produces a steep initial slope (slope A–B in Fig. 2.17B), 
followed by a slower terminal phase (slope B–C) in 
Fig. 2.17  Plasma concentration–time curves for the distribution of intravenous drugs into one- and two-compartment 
models. (A) When distribution of an intravenous drug bolus into tissues is so rapid as to be essentially instantaneous, the 
slope of the plasma concentration–time curve mainly reflects the rate of elimination (one-compartment model). (B) When 
distribution is slower, the initial fall in concentration (slope A–B) is due to simultaneous distribution and elimination followed 
by the terminal elimination phase (two-compartment model; slope B–C). Back-extrapolating to D at time zero allows the 
contribution of distribution during A–B to be distinguished from the underlying contribution of elimination.
A
B
In C
In C
Time
Slope = –k
Model
Model
Dose
V
Elimination
One-compartment
Two-compartment
 Instantaneous distribution
A
B
Time
Dose
V1
 Slower distribution
C
V2
Elimination
D
A
B
	
	
Pharmacokinetics  CHAPTER 2	
51
which distribution has been largely completed and 
elimination predominates. Back-extrapolation of this 
terminal elimination phase to time zero gives an initial 
value (D), which is the theoretical log concentration 
that would have been obtained if distribution had been 
instantaneous. The actual rate of distribution can there-
fore be estimated by the difference between the rapid 
initial fall in concentration (distribution plus elimina-
tion, A–B) and the underlying rate of elimination alone 
(D–B). In practice, knowing the rate of drug distribution 
is rarely of clinical importance.
Such a two-compartment model in which the drug 
in one compartment (e.g. blood) equilibrates more 
slowly with a second compartment (e.g. poorly per-
fused tissues; or a fetus) is also shown in Fig. 2.18. The 
rate of distribution into the second compartment is 
dependent on the solubility of the drug:
• For water-soluble drugs, the rate of distribution 
depends on the rate of passage across membranes 
(i.e. the diffusion characteristics of the drug).
• For lipid-soluble drugs, the rate of distribution depends 
on the rate of delivery (the blood flow) to those tis-
sues, such as adipose tissue, that accumulate the drug.
The plasma concentration–time curves of some drugs 
show three or more distinct phases, due to distribution of 
the drug from the central compartment into two or more 
peripheral compartments at different rates; such multi-
compartment models are of limited clinical importance.
Extent of Distribution
The extent of distribution of a drug from plasma into 
tissues is more important clinically than the rate, 
because it determines the total amount of a drug that 
has to be administered to produce a particular plasma 
concentration (and therapeutic effect). In humans only 
the concentration in blood or plasma can be measured 
easily, so the extent of distribution must be estimated 
from the amount remaining in blood, or more usually 
plasma, after completion of distribution.
The parameter that describes the extent of distribu-
tion is the apparent volume of distribution (Vd). In gen-
eral terms, the concentration of a drug solution is the 
amount (or dose) of drug dissolved in a volume. Rear-
ranging this gives:
Vd
Total amount dose of drug in the body
Plasma concentration
=
(
)

(Equation 2.10)
For example, if an intravenous dose of 50 mg of a 
particular drug is injected, and after an appropriate 
interval to allow time for distribution to reach equilib-
rium, the total concentration of the drug in plasma is 
found to be 1 mg/L, then the apparent volume of dis-
tribution (Vd) is:
Vd
Total amount dose
Plasma concentration
mg
mg
L
L
=
(
) =
=
50
1
50
/
After giving the dose it appears that the drug has 
been dissolved in 50 L of plasma. However, the plasma 
volume in adult humans is only about 3 to 4 L, so much 
of the drug must have left the plasma and entered tis-
sues in order to give the low plasma concentration 
remaining (1 mg/L).
Vd is a characteristic of a particular drug and is inde-
pendent of dose. Its clinical usefulness becomes appar-
ent when a physician needs to estimate how much of the 
drug should be given to a patient to produce a desired 
plasma concentration. If an initial plasma concentration 
of 2.5 mg/L of the drug is needed for a clinical effect, 
this could be produced by giving an intravenous dose 
of the known Vd multiplied by the desired plasma con-
centration (50 L × 2.5 mg/L; i.e. a dose of 125 mg).
In practice, in measuring the Vd value of a drug, it 
has to be remembered that distribution usually takes 
time to reach equilibrium, and that during this time 
elimination is steadily reducing the total amount 
of drug in the body. In calculating Vd, therefore, it is 
usual to extrapolate the log concentration curve back 
to time zero (as illustrated in Fig. 2.17B) to find the 
Dose
Elimination
Elimination
Elimination
Elimination
Dose 
administration
Instantaneous 
equilibration 
with V1
Equilibration 
between V1 
and V2 
Elimination 
from V1 lowers 
concentrations 
in V1 and V2 in 
parallel
V1
V2
V2
V1
V2
V1
V2
V1
Fig. 2.18  Schematic diagram of drug distribution. A drug injected 
instantly into the circulation (V1) distributed slowly into the tissues (V2). 
At equilibrium, the drug concentrations are transiently the same in vol-
umes V1 and V2. Distribution into the tissues is then reversed as the 
drug in the circulation is gradually eliminated.
52	
SECTION 1  General Principles
theoretical concentration as if the drug has distributed 
instantaneously and significant elimination has not yet 
occurred:
Vd
Total amount (dose)
Extrapolated plasma concentration at
=
 time zero

(Equation 2.11)
It is important to recognise that apparent Vd may 
not be a true physiological volume. If the Vd calculated 
for a drug is 3 to 4 L, this might indicate that it has been 
confined within the circulatory volume, whereas a Vd 
value of about 40 L might mean it has been able to pass 
into tissues and is distributed uniformly into the total 
volume of body water, which is about 40 L in adults. 
Vd is only a theoretical measure based on how much 
the concentration of drug remaining in the plasma has 
been diluted by its distribution into extravascular tis-
sues. Although a large Vd may indeed occur when the 
drug is distributed at uniform concentrations into a 
large body compartment (such as total body water), 
the same high Vd may also occur if the drug has been 
highly bound or sequestered by a tissue component 
within one or more smaller compartments. For exam-
ple, binding tightly to tissue proteins in a single organ, 
or sequestration of a lipophilic drug at high concentra-
tions into adipose (fat) cells, may reduce the plasma 
drug concentration to the same extent (and produce 
the same large Vd). Identifying such effects can be 
achieved only by measuring drug concentrations in 
tissues, which is rarely practicable in humans.
The Vd of a drug is nevertheless an important concept 
as it indicates the theoretical volume that has to be cleared 
of the drug indirectly by the organs of elimination, such 
as the liver and kidneys, which extract the drug directly 
from the plasma for metabolism and excretion. Together 
with clearance (the volume of plasma from which the 
drug can be cleared in a certain time), it determines the 
overall rate of elimination and therefore the half-life of 
the drug. In turn, the rate of elimination equals the rate 
of dosing required to maintain a steady plasma concen-
tration and the half-life determines the duration of action 
of a single dose and hence the optimal interval between 
repeated doses of the drug (discussed later).
ELIMINATION
The rate at which the drug is eliminated is important 
because it usually determines the duration of response, 
the time interval between doses and the time to reach 
equilibrium during repeated dosing.
Rate of Elimination
The rate of elimination of a drug from the circulation 
(and its associated plasma half-life) is usually indi-
cated by the terminal slope of the log concentration–
time curve (slope B–C in Fig. 2.17B). The elimination 
half-lives of drugs range from a few minutes to many 
days (and, in rare cases, weeks).
The activity of the organ of elimination
The main organs of elimination (the liver and kidneys) 
can only remove drugs delivered to them via the blood. 
As long as the elimination process is not saturated (i.e. 
it remains first order), a constant proportion (not a con-
stant amount) of the drug carried in the blood will be 
removed on each passage through the organ of elimi-
nation, whatever the drug concentration in the blood. 
In effect, this is equivalent to a constant proportion of 
the blood flow to the organ being cleared of drug. For 
example, if 10% of the drug carried to the liver by the 
plasma (at a flow rate of 1000 mL/min) is cleared by 
uptake and metabolism, this is equivalent to a clearance 
of 10% of the plasma flow (100 mL/min); if the drug is 
metabolised more efficiently such that 20% of the drug 
is cleared, this gives a clearance of 200 mL/min.
Clearance is therefore the volume of blood or plasma 
cleared of drug per unit time, not the amount of drug 
cleared in that time, which will also depend on the 
drug concentration in the plasma. If the plasma drug 
concentration is high, there is a greater amount of the 
drug in the volume that is cleared per unit time, result-
ing in a greater rate of elimination; if the drug con-
centration is low, the same clearance will eliminate a 
smaller amount of the drug per unit time. Overall, the 
rate of drug elimination from the body is therefore the 
product of plasma concentration of the drug (Cp) and 
its plasma clearance (CL), a relationship which can be 
rearranged to:
CL
Rate of elimination from the body
Drug concentration in plasma
=
 (Equation 2.12)
The plasma clearance is a characteristic value for a 
particular drug (Table 2.8), although it may be altered 
in renal or hepatic disease (Chapter 56); it is a constant 
Table 2.8  Pharmacokinetic Parameters of Selected 
Drugs (in a 70-kg Adult Male).
DRUG
CLEARANCE 
(CL), (ML/MIN)
APPARENT 
VOLUME OF 
DISTRIBUTION 
(Vd) (L)
HALF-
LIFE (T1/2) 
(HOURS)
Warfarin
3
8
37
Digitoxin
4
38
161
Diazepam
27
77
43
Valproic acid
76
27
5.6
Digoxin
130
640
39
Ampicillin
270
20
1.3
Amlodipine
333
1470
36
Nifedipine
500
80
1.8
Lidocaine
640
77
1.8
Propranolol
840
270
3.9
Imipramine
1050
1600
18
Half-life (t1/2) = 0.693Vd/CL. A long half-life may result from a high Vd 
(e.g. amlodipine), a low CL (e.g. digoxin), or both.
	
	
Pharmacokinetics  CHAPTER 2	
53
for first-order reactions and is independent of dose or 
concentration. The units of clearance are volume per 
time, such as mL/min or L/hour.
Reversible passage of drug from the blood 
into tissues
The organs of elimination can only act on a drug that 
is delivered to them via the blood supply, and the 
amount of drug eliminated depends on its concen-
tration within the volume of plasma being cleared 
per unit time. By definition, a drug that is distrib-
uted at equilibrium into a large apparent volume of 
distribution has a low plasma concentration; hence 
the rate of elimination is inversely proportional to 
apparent Vd:
	
Elimination
d
∝1
V 
(Equation 2.13)
The overall rate constant of elimination (k) can there-
fore be related directly to the volume of plasma cleared 
per minute (CL) and inversely to the total apparent 
volume of plasma that has to be cleared (Vd):
	
k
V
= CL
d

(Equation 2.14)
As also (from Eq. 2.6): k
t
= 0 693
1 2
.
/
Therefore:
t
V
1 2
0 693
/
.
=
d
CL
The relationship between elimination, volume of 
distribution and clearance is illustrated in Fig. 2.19. 
The elimination rate constant (k) or half-life (t1/2) are 
the best indicators of a fall in drug concentration with 
time, and for most drugs this will be accompanied by a 
decrease in therapeutic activity.
Clearance is the best measure of the ability of the 
organs of elimination to remove the drug and deter-
mines the average plasma concentrations (and there-
fore therapeutic activity) at steady state (discussed 
later). Clearance is usually determined using the AUC 
extrapolated to infinity after an intravenous dose. Clear-
ance and the AUC of a given dose of drug are inversely 
related: if clearance was zero, the drug would not be 
eliminated and its plasma concentration would remain 
at equilibrium indefinitely (the AUC would be infi-
nitely large). Conversely, if the clearance were infinite, 
the AUC would be zero as the drug would be elimi-
nated instantly. The ratio of an intravenous drug dose 
to the AUC (note: not the logarithm of plasma concen-
tration) is therefore a measure of clearance:
	
CL
Dose
AUC
=

(Equation 2.15)
If an oral drug is used instead, the dose in this 
equation would be corrected by its bioavailability (i.e. 
F × Dose).
The two equations for clearance (Eqs. 2.14 and 2.15) 
can be combined to derive Eq. 2.16, which is used 
to calculate Vd more reliably than the extrapolation 
method given in Eq. 2.11 and Fig. 2.17B:
	
CL
Dose
AUC
Dose
AUC
d
d
=
=
⋅
=
×
k V
V
k

(Equation 2.16)
The plasma clearance of a drug is the sum of all pos-
sible clearance processes (metabolism + renal excre-
tion + biliary excretion + exhalation etc). Measurement 
of its component processes is only really possible for 
renal clearance, performed by relating the rate of uri-
nary excretion to the midpoint plasma concentration. 
Subtracting renal clearance from the total plasma clear-
ance gives a reasonable estimate of metabolic (mainly 
hepatic) clearance, which cannot be measured directly. 
Being able to estimate both renal and hepatic clearance 
values can be useful in predicting the impact of renal 
or liver disease.
Extent of Elimination
The extent of elimination is of limited value because 
eventually all the drug will be removed from the body. 
Measurement of the parent drug and its metabolites in 
Rate ∝ CL
Rate ∝  I
Vd
Drug
removed
Pure
plasma
Clearance
(mL/min)
Volume (mL)
Fig. 2.19  The relationship between clearance, apparent volume of 
distribution and overall elimination rate. The drug is eliminated by 
the clearance process, which removes whatever amount of the drug 
is present in a fixed volume of plasma, per unit time. With the drug 
removed, the pure plasma is returned to the reservoir to maintain a 
constant volume (the apparent volume of distribution, Vd). The fluid, 
therefore, continuously recycles via the clearance process and the 
concentration of drug within it decreases exponentially.
54	
SECTION 1  General Principles
urine and faeces can give useful insights into the extent 
of renal and biliary elimination.
CHRONIC ADMINISTRATION
Repeated drug doses are used to maintain a constant 
concentration of the drug in the plasma and presum-
ably at the site of action for a persistent therapeutic 
effect. In practice, a perfectly stable concentration can 
only be achieved by maintaining a constant intrave-
nous infusion that has reached a steady-state balance 
between drug input and drug elimination (Fig. 2.20).
Time to Reach Steady State
During constant infusion, the time to reach steady state 
is dependent on the elimination half-life; as a rule of 
thumb, about 93% to 96% of steady state is approached 
after four or five times the elimination half-life. A drug 
with slow elimination takes a long time to reach its 
steady state, as it will accumulate to high plasma con-
centrations before its elimination rate rises to match 
the rate of drug infusion (because the elimination rate 
depends on plasma concentration; Eq. 2.12). Since the 
elimination half-life is also dependent on volume of 
distribution (Eq. 2.14), a high Vd can also contribute to 
delay in achieving steady state. It is easy to envisage 
the slow ‘filling’ of such a high volume of distribution 
during regular administration.
Plasma Concentration at Steady State
Once steady state has been reached, the plasma and 
tissues are in equilibrium and the distribution rate and 
Vd will no longer affect the plasma concentration. The 
key insight is that a steady-state concentration (Css) 
is achieved when the rate of elimination equals the 
rate of infusion. From Eq. 2.12, the rate of elimination 
equals CL × Css, so at steady state the rate of infusion 
also equals CL × Css, or:
	
Css
Rate of infusion
CL
=
	
(Equation 2.17)
Alternatively, the rate of an intravenous infusion 
and the Css achieved can be used to calculate plasma 
clearance:
	
CL
Rate of infusion
ss
=
C
	
(Equation 2.18)
Clearance and volume of distribution can also be 
calculated using the AUC between zero and infinity 
and the terminal slope after cessation of the infusion 
(see Fig. 2.20).
Oral Administration
Most chronic administration of drugs is by the oral route, 
and the rate and extent of absorption affect the shape 
of the plasma concentration–time curves. Because oral 
therapy is by intermittent doses, there will be a series 
of peaks and troughs reflecting the intervals between 
repeated doses (Fig. 2.21). The rate of absorption will 
influence the profile, because very rapid absorption 
will exaggerate fluctuations, whereas slow absorption 
will dampen down the peaks. As not all the adminis-
tered dose (D) will be absorbed, the rate of dosage during 
chronic oral therapy is corrected for bioavailability (F):
D
F
t
×
InC
Time
A
Css
B
C
Slope = –k
Fig. 2.20  Constant intravenous infusion (between points A and 
C). A steady-state concentration (Css) is reached at point B and can 
be used to calculate clearance if the rate of infusion is known (rate of 
infusion = CL × Css). Conversely, knowing a drug’s clearance means 
that a doctor using this equation can calculate the rate of intravenous 
infusion required to produce a desired Css in a patient. Clearance can 
also be calculated from the total dose infused between A and C and 
the area under the total curve (AUC). The negative slope after ending 
the infusion gives the terminal elimination phase (–k), the rate of which 
determines the time taken to approach Css (approximately four to five 
half-lives).
InC
Time
Css
Fig. 2.21  Chronic oral therapy (solid line) compared with intrave-
nous infusion (dashed red line) at the same dosage rate. Each oral 
dose shows rapid absorption and distribution to reach a peak, followed 
by a slower elimination phase in which concentrations fall to a trough. 
Successive peaks (or successive troughs) align with the dose interval. 
Cessation of therapy after any dose would produce the lines shown 
in blue. The dose rate (D/t) corrected for oral bioavailability (F) equals 
steady-state plasma concentration (Css) × clearance (CL), so knowing 
a drug’s clearance and bioavailability means a doctor can calculate the 
dose and the dose interval to produce a desired Css in a patient.
	
	
Pharmacokinetics  CHAPTER 2	
55
where t is the interval between doses. A dose interval 
of 24 hours is equivalent to once-daily dosing, whereas 
an interval of 12 hours is twice-daily dosing, and so 
forth. When steady state is achieved, the rate of admin-
istration required to maintain it is equal to the rate of 
elimination, which is the clearance (CL) multiplied 
by the drug concentration (Css) averaged between the 
peaks and troughs (the dashed line in Fig. 2.21), so:
	
D
F
t
Css
×
=
×
CL
	
(Equation 2.19)
or rearranging for Css:
C
D
F
t
ss =
×
× CL
This important equation for maintenance dosing 
means it is possible to alter plasma Css by altering 
either the dose (D) or the dose interval (t). For exam-
ple, the plasma Css could be doubled by giving twice 
the dose at the same intervals, or by giving the same 
dose twice as frequently. Allowing that bioavailabil-
ity (F) is taken into account for different routes, and 
that clearance (CL) is usually constant unless there is a 
change in hepatic or renal function, it can be seen that 
the plasma Css is dependent only on dose-rate.
Loading Dose
A problem may arise when a rapid onset of effect 
is required for a drug that has a long half-life; for 
example, if the half-life of a drug is 24 hours, the 
steady-state conditions will not be reached until 
approximately 4 to 5 days after dosing starts (i.e. four 
to five half-lives later), and if the half-life of another 
drug is 1 week, reaching its steady state would take 
about 4 to 5 weeks. Increasing the dose rate (by 
increasing the dose or shortening the dose interval) 
would accelerate the rise in plasma concentrations, 
but if sustained, the higher dose-rate would lead to 
a higher steady-state concentration being achieved 
than desired.
This delay between starting treatment and reach-
ing the steady-state therapeutic concentration can be 
avoided if needed by administering a loading dose. This 
is a high initial dose that ‘loads up’ the body to shorten 
the time to achieve steady-state concentrations, after 
which it can be maintained by the normal dose-rate. 
The key principle is that the loading dose is the single 
dose required to produce the desired concentration in 
the apparent volume of distribution, so:
	
Loading dose
ss
d
=
×
C
V 	
(Equation 2.20)
The loading dose is equivalent to the total body load 
of drug that would be achieved more slowly by the 
chronic dosage regimen (Eq. 2.19).
In cases where Css or Vd are not known, the load-
ing dose can be calculated based on the parameters of 
the proposed maintenance regimen by replacing Css 
with the rearrangement of Eq. 2.19 and replacing Vd 
by Eq. 2.14:
Loading dose
CL
CL











D
F
t
k
D
F
t
k
D
F
t
t
1 44
1 2
.
/

(Equation 2.21)
This last equation shows that the magnitude of the 
loading dose required (if any) is proportional to the 
drug half-life. If a drug has such a long half-life that a 
very large loading dose is required, the loading dose 
may be given in divided doses over 24 to 36 hours. 
Otherwise, variations in its distribution to differ-
ent tissues may cause high local concentrations and 
toxicity.
Following the loading dose, the steady-state plasma 
concentration can be sustained indefinitely by the 
maintenance dosage regimen given by Eq. 2.19.
PHARMACOKINETICS OF BIOLOGICAL DRUGS
The first recombinant protein drug was human insu-
lin, marketed in 1982, and there are now hundreds of 
biological drugs available, including monoclonal anti-
bodies, cytokines, growth factors and blood products. 
Such biopharmaceuticals can create special pharma-
cokinetic problems, mainly due to their protein struc-
tures, as follows:
• Absorption. pH-dependent and enzymatic break-
down of proteins in the gastrointestinal tract 
(>99%) precludes oral administration. Admin-
istration of biopharmaceuticals is by parenteral 
routes (intravenous, subcutaneous, intramuscu-
lar), including, occasionally, intranasal and inhaled 
routes. Bioavailability of protein drugs may be low 
due to local proteolysis, such as at subcutaneous 
or intramuscular injection sites. Larger molecules 
(>30 kDa) cross the capillary endothelium poorly 
and may enter the systemic circulation by the lym-
phatic system.
• Distribution. Biological drug distribution may be 
confined to the blood and extracellular tissues. Pro-
tein drugs may bind extensively to albumin and 
other plasma proteins, affecting their distribution 
and rate of metabolism.
• Elimination. Biological drugs are not excreted 
unchanged but undergo extensive proteolysis in 
the blood, liver, kidneys and other tissues to small 
peptides and amino acids, which enter the general 
pool of amino acids used in endogenous protein syn-
thesis. Degradation depends on molecular weight, 
charge and the extent of glycosylation. Recombinant 
drug molecules may be designed to lack common 
sites of proteolytic cleavage, or they may be coated 
with polyethylene glycol (pegylated) to improve 
56	
SECTION 1  General Principles
solubility and resistance to proteolysis. The elimina-
tion kinetics of biopharmaceuticals can be variable 
and complex; concentrations of monoclonal antibod-
ies in plasma fall initially as they bind tightly to their 
targets, but their terminal elimination half-life may 
be as slow as that of endogenous immunoglobulins 
(14–28 days), enabling long dose intervals.
• Toxicity and clinical use. Biopharmaceuticals are 
often highly species-specific, and their toxicity is 
usually receptor-dependent or immunogenic in ori-
gin. Immunogenicity is reduced in drugs based on 
human protein sequences, but these are more dif-
ficult to develop as they may lack efficacy in animal 
models. The complex tertiary structure of recombi-
nant proteins makes them more vulnerable to deg-
radation by heat, pH effects and shear forces during 
manufacture, storage and handling.
GENETIC VARIATION AND PHARMACOKINETICS
The effects that variation in the genes encoding 
drug targets can have on drug action are discussed 
in Chapter 1. Genetic variation may also affect drug 
responses by altering proteins involved in the absorp-
tion, distribution, metabolism and excretion of the 
drug. The earliest pharmacogenetic studies were on 
enzymes involved in drug metabolism. N-Acetyl-
transferase (NAT) was one of the first drug metabo-
lism pathways found to show genetic polymorphism 
that influenced both the plasma concentrations of a 
drug (isoniazid) and its therapeutic response. Indi-
viduals with low enzyme activity, so-called slow 
acetylators, had higher blood concentrations and a 
better response to isoniazid but a greater risk of toxic-
ity than fast acetylators.
Because N-acetylation is a minor pathway of drug 
metabolism, pharmacogenetics remained of largely aca-
demic interest until the late 1970s, when it was found 
that the cytochrome P450 isoenzyme CYP2D6, which 
is involved in the phase 1 metabolism of 20% to 25% 
of all drugs, showed functionally important genetic 
polymorphism. CYP2D6 activity can be tested pheno-
typically by monitoring a plasma metabolite of debriso-
quine, a CYP2D6 substrate, or the CYP2D6 genotype, 
identified by genetic tests. Genotyping may be useful 
in guiding the prescribing of a number of drugs to opti-
mise their efficacy and reduce adverse effects, includ-
ing tetrabenazine used in Huntington’s disease and 
the oestrogen receptor modulator tamoxifen. Develop-
ments in genotyping have allowed the identification of 
polymorphism in a number of other cytochrome P450 
isoenzymes, with consequences for the phase 1 metab-
olism and elimination of many drugs; examples are 
listed in Table 2.9. Polymorphism has also been identi-
fied in a number of phase 2 metabolic enzymes; nota-
ble among these is the *28 variant in UDP glucuronyl 
transferase (UGT1A1*28), which results in impaired 
metabolism of the topoisomerase inhibitor irinotecan 
and greater adverse effects when the drug is used for 
treatment of colon cancer. Genetic tests for the UGT1A1 
allele are available. Another example is thiopurine-S-
methyltransferase (TPMT), which detoxifies 6-mercap-
topurine used in treating inflammatory bowel disease 
and leukaemia. Genetic variation in TPMT influences 
the efficacy and toxicity of mercaptopurine, and indi-
viduals can be phenotyped for TMPT activity in blood 
or genotyped for variant TMPT alleles.
The prevalence of gene variants may differ between 
ethnic groups; people from the Indian subcontinent 
have a lower systemic clearance of nifedipine (a 
CYP3A4 substrate) compared with Europeans, and 
intolerance to alcohol ingestion associated with poly-
morphism in alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) and acet-
aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALD) is common in people 
of Chinese and Japanese origin (see Table 2.9).
Polymorphism that affects the metabolism of drugs 
may influence their efficacy and safety by altering 
plasma concentrations of the active drug, or by modi-
fying the amounts of active or toxic metabolites. It may 
also alter the enzymatic conversion of prodrugs into 
their active metabolites. Polymorphism in transporter 
molecules may affect the absorption, distribution or 
elimination of drugs by altering their transport across 
cell membranes in the gut, liver, renal tubule and 
other sites. Functional polymorphism is apparent in 
some ABC transporter proteins, including the MDR1 
gene which codes for P-gp, and in OATs in the kidney, 
although the consequences of these for drug transport 
are unclear. Genetic polymorphism is likely of great-
est clinical significance when the polymorphic protein 
is in the main or exclusive pathway affecting bioavail-
ability and/or elimination and when the drug has a 
narrow therapeutic index (see Chapter 53).
The influence of genetic variation must be set 
against environmental factors, including age, preg-
nancy, interactions with other drugs (including alco-
hol and constituents of tobacco) and concurrent 
conditions including impairment of renal or hepatic 
function, which may be of greater importance in 
predicting drug efficacy and unwanted effects (see 
Chapter 56). A number of commercial tests have been 
marketed for specific polymorphic alleles in drug-
metabolising enzymes, including some of those listed 
in Table 2.9. There are nevertheless formidable obsta-
cles to the widespread implementation of pharmaco-
genetic testing, including issues of cost and privacy. 
In most cases, individual gene variants have limited 
predictive value, and testing for haplotypes of multi-
ple variants in the same gene or in other genes within 
the same metabolic pathways may be more predictive, 
but also more costly and difficult to interpret. A major 
hurdle to genetic testing is that reliable clinical trial 
data are not often available in people with diverse 
genotypes to guide prescribers in making appropri-
ate alterations in drug regimens. Regulatory bodies in 
the UK, EU and USA (see Chapter 3) are nevertheless 
	
	
Pharmacokinetics  CHAPTER 2	
57
increasingly recommending that genetic data are 
included in drug information. About 10% of prescrip-
tion drugs currently include pharmacogenetic data 
in their product literature, but this does not always 
translate into changes in prescribing practice. A key 
challenge for the future will be the fuller implementa-
tion of pharmacogenomics into clinical practice.
SELF-ASSESSMENT
TRUE/FALSE QUESTIONS
1.	 Nonionised molecules cross phospholipid mem-
branes more readily than their ionised forms.
2.	 Weak acidic drugs are mostly ionised in acid 
solutions.
Table 2.9  Pharmacogenetic Differences in Drug-Metabolising Enzymes.
ENZYME
INCIDENCE OF DEFICIENCY 
OR SLOW-METABOLISER 
PHENOTYPE IN WHITE PEOPLE 
(AND OTHER ETHNIC GROUPS)
TYPICAL SUBSTRATES
CONSEQUENCES OF DEFICIENCY OR 
SLOW-METABOLISER STATUS
Phase 1 Reactions
Pseudocholinesterase 
(butyrylcholinesterase, 
plasma cholinesterase)
1 in 3000
Suxamethonium 
(succinylcholine)
Prolonged paralysis and apnoea for 
up to 3 hours after a dose
Alcohol dehydroge-
nase, acetaldehyde 
dehydrogenase
5%–10% (>50% in Asians)
Ethanol and acetaldehyde
Profound vasodilation on ingestion of 
alcohol
CYP1A1
About 10%
Polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons
Increased risk of low birth weight with 
maternal smoking
CYP2A6
15%
Nicotine, coumarin
Reduced nicotine metabolism
CYP2B6
3%–4% (15%–40% in 
Asians, 20% in African 
Americans)
Ifosfamide, efavirenz
Increased efavirenz toxicity
CYP2C9
About 10% (3% in Africans)
Tolbutamide, diazepam, 
warfarin
Increased response if parent drug 
is active, e.g. increased risk of 
haemorrhage with warfarin
CYP2C19
3%–6% (13%–23% in 
Asians, 40%–80% in 
Polynesians)
Clopidogrel, omeprazole, 
diazepam
Variable efficacy of diazepam, 
omeprazole; reduced conversion of 
clopidogrel to active metabolite
CYP2D6
6%–10% (higher in African 
populations, <2% in 
Asians)
Codeine, nortriptyline, 
tamoxifen, tetrabenazine
Increased response if parent drug 
is active, but reduced response if 
oxidation produces the active form, 
e.g. codeine
Dihydropyrimidine dehy-
drogenase (DPD)
2%–8%
Fluorouracil, capecitabine
Enhanced drug response
Phase 2 Reactions
N-Acetyltransferase
40%–70% (10%–20% in 
Asians, 80% in Egyptians)
Isoniazid, hydralazine, 
procainamide
Enhanced drug response and/or 
toxicity in slow acetylators
UDP glucuronyl transfer-
ase (UGT1A1)
10% (1%–4% Asians)
Irinotecan
Enhanced effect (Gilbert’s syndrome; 
increased bilirubin)
Glutathione transferase 
family
Various
Reactive compounds or 
metabolites
Increased risk of cancer from 
environmental carcinogens; 
therapeutic implications unclear
Thiopurine-S-methyl 
transferase (TPMT)
Low activity in 10%, absent 
in 0.3%
Mercaptopurine, 
azathioprine
Increased risk of toxicity (because the 
doses normally used are close to 
toxic)
Catechol-O-methyltrans-
ferase
25%
Levodopa
Slightly enhanced drug effect
Transporters
ABCB1 (P-gp)
A number of SNPs identi-
fied in MDR1 gene 
(incidences vary with 
ethnic origin)
Digoxin, anticancer drugs, 
dihydropyridine calcium 
channel blockers
Possibly higher drug levels with some 
SNPs, but lower drug levels due to 
increased activity with other SNPs
P-gp, P-glycoprotein; SNP, single nucleotide polymorphism.
58	
SECTION 1  General Principles
	 3.	 Weak acidic drugs, such as aspirin, are mostly 
absorbed in the stomach.
	 4.	 Basic drugs may bind reversibly to α1-acid glyco-
protein in the plasma.
	 5.	 The plasma clearance of a drug usually decreases 
with increases in the dose prescribed.
	 6.	 First-pass metabolism may limit the bioavailabil-
ity of oral drugs.
	 7.	 Drugs with high first-pass hepatic metabolism also 
have a high systemic clearance.
	 8.	 The half-life of many drugs is longer in babies than 
in children or adults.
	 9.	 A decrease in renal function affects oral bioavailability.
10.	 Depot injections of drugs have a prolonged half-
life because their renal clearance is reduced.
11.	 Nifedipine is eliminated more rapidly in cigarette 
smokers.
12.	 Chronic treatment with phenobarbital can increase 
the plasma concentrations of co-administered drugs.
13.	 A loading dose is not necessary for drugs that have 
short half-lives.
14.	 An obese subject is likely to require higher doses 
of drugs than a nonobese subject during chronic 
therapy.
15.	 Alcohol intolerance due to genetic polymorphism 
is common in some ethnic groups.
ONE-BEST-ANSWER (OBA) QUESTIONS
1.	 What is the clearance of a drug?
A.	The volume of drug from which plasma is re-
moved per unit of time.
B.	 The proportion of drug cleared from the plasma 
per unit of time.
C.	The rate of elimination of drug from the body by 
the liver and kidneys.
D.	The time it takes to eliminate all of the drug from 
the body.
E.	 The volume of plasma from which all of the drug 
is removed per unit of time.
2.	 Which statement about cytochrome P450 (CYP) iso-
enzymes is the most accurate?
A.	CYP isoenzymes do not catalyse drug conjuga-
tion reactions.
B.	 CYP isoenzyme activity is not affected by diet.
C.	CYP-mediated drug metabolism occurs mainly 
in the gut wall.
D.	CYP isoenzyme activity is consistent among 
individuals.
E.	 CYP isoenzymes are induced by most drugs.
3.	 Identify the most accurate statement concerning 
apparent volume of distribution (Vd).
A.	The Vd will be high if the drug is highly bound to 
plasma proteins.
B.	 The Vd can be greater than the total body volume.
C.	The Vd is proportional to the dose of drug 
administered.
D.	The Vd is the sole determinant of the elimination 
half-life of a drug.
E.	 The Vd is used to calculate the maintenance dos-
age of a drug.
DESCRIPTIVE QUESTION
Fig. 2.22 shows the changes in plasma levels of 
two drugs A and B, each given to an adult man as 
10-mg doses by the oral and intravenous routes (at 
time zero) on separate occasions. From the plasma 
Intravenous
Oral
Intravenous
Oral
Time (hour)
Plasma concentration (ng/mL)
1000
100
10
1
10
20
30
Time (hour)
Plasma concentration (ng/mL)
1000
100
10
1
10
20
30
A
B
Fig. 2.22  Plasma concentration–time curves for oral and intravenous doses of drug A (left panel) and drug B 
(right panel). This figure accompanies the descriptive question in the Self-Assessment section.
	
	
Pharmacokinetics  CHAPTER 2	
59
concentration–time curves, compare drugs A and B for 
the following properties:
1.	 Absorption from the gut
2.	 Oral bioavailability
3.	 Distribution to tissues
4.	 Elimination half-life
5.	 Extent of accumulation with once-daily administra-
tion of each drug
CASE-BASED QUESTIONS
Case 1
Meghan is a 9-year-old girl (weighing 30 kg) admitted 
to the emergency department with acute asthma. She 
is to be given aminophylline (a soluble form of theo­
phylline) by slow intravenous injection. She has not 
had oral theophylline within the previous 24 hours. 
The target plasma concentration initially is 10 µg/mL 
(therapeutic range 5–15 µg/mL), but the clearance of 
theophylline is highly variable. The apparent volume 
of distribution (Vd) of theophylline is 0.5 L/kg, and it 
comes in an injection solution containing 25 mg/mL of 
the drug.
1.	 What would be a suitable intravenous loading dose 
(in mg)? [Note Eq. 2.22: Loading dose = Vd x Css]
2.	 What volume of the injection solution should be 
administered?
3.	 The British National Formulary for Children 
(BNFC) advises following the intravenous injec-
tion by a continuous intravenous infusion at a rate 
of 1 mg/kg/hour. A day after starting the infusion, 
the steady-state plasma theophylline concentration 
was 5 µg/mL. Using Eq. 2.18, estimate the clearance 
(CL) of theophylline in this child.
4.	 The plasma concentration of 5 µg/mL was judged 
to be inadequate and it was decided to increase the 
theophylline infusion rate to achieve a plasma con-
centration of 10 µg/mL. What should be the new 
infusion rate?
Case 2
Mrs JW (body weight 70 kg) was found to have con-
gestive heart failure and atrial fibrillation. Treatment 
was started with digoxin, which has an apparent vol-
ume of distribution (Vd) of 9 L/kg and a half-life (t1/2) 
of 42 hours. The plasma concentrations for therapeutic 
effectiveness are 0.8–2 ng/mL and toxic effects occur 
above 2 ng/mL.
1.	 Approximately how long would it take to reach a 
steady-state concentration in plasma?
2.	 What dose should be given as a loading dose to 
achieve a plasma level of 0.8 ng/mL?
ANSWERS
TRUE/FALSE ANSWERS
1.	 True. Ionisation reduces lipid solubility and 
improves solubility in water.
	 2.	 False. Weak acids are least ionised in acid solu-
tions and most ionised in basic solutions.
	 3.	 False. Although low pH in the stomach renders 
aspirin into its nonionised, lipid-soluble form, the 
low surface area of the stomach wall limits the 
extent of drug absorption; the bulk of most oral 
drugs is absorbed across the much larger surface 
area of the small intestine.
	 4.	 True. Basic (or neutral) drugs may bind revers-
ibly to α1-acid glycoprotein, whereas many acidic 
drugs bind to albumin.
	 5.	 False. Provided the elimination processes are 
not saturated, clearance (like bioavailability and 
apparent volume of distribution) is independent 
of dose and is a characteristic of the drug.
	 6.	 True. This statement is true for all ‘presystemic’ 
sites of metabolism of the oral dose (e.g. gut lumen, 
intestinal wall and liver). Low bioavailability may 
also arise from poor absorption from the gut.
	 7.	 True. If the liver can clear a high proportion of the 
drug on first pass, then the drug fraction that sur-
vives to enter the general circulation will experi-
ence further rapid clearance on subsequent passes 
through the liver.
	 8.	 True. Infants under 12 months have relatively low 
hepatic metabolism and renal excretion, so many 
drugs are cleared more slowly and have longer 
half-lives than in older children and adults.
	 9.	 False. A decrease in renal function could affect sys-
temic clearance, but bioavailability is simply the 
fraction of the oral dose that reaches the general cir-
culation unaltered, and the kidneys are not part of 
the route between gut lumen and general circulation.
10.	 False. Using a depot injection of a drug prolongs 
its apparent elimination half-life due to slower, 
sustained release from the site of injection. Once 
absorbed into the blood, the circulating drug is 
handled by the kidneys as normal; the volume of 
plasma cleared of the drug per unit time (clear-
ance) is unaltered.
11.	 False. From Table 2.7, nifedipine is metabolised by 
CYP3A4, whereas smoking induces CYP1A2, so 
no interaction is likely to occur.
12.	 False. Phenobarbital is a potent inducer of sev-
eral cytochrome P450 isoenzymes (e.g. CYP2C9, 
CYP3A4), and this would reduce plasma concentra-
tions of co-administered drugs that are substrates 
for the same CYP isoenzymes.
13.	 True. Drugs with short elimination half-lives reach 
therapeutic concentrations relatively rapidly, and 
a loading dose is usually unnecessary.
14.	 False. A lipid-soluble drug would have a higher 
apparent Vd in an obese person due to greater dis-
tribution into adipose tissue. It will therefore take 
longer (or require a larger loading dose) to achieve 
the desired steady-state plasma concentration, but 
once this is achieved, the maintenance dose rate 
will be the same as in a nonobese person because it 
60	
SECTION 1  General Principles
depends on systemic clearance, which is unlikely 
to be different in obesity, and not on apparent 
Vd (see Eq. 2.21). There would consequently be 
no need to modify the maintenance drug dosage 
because of an increase in Vd in an obese person, 
although the total body load of a drug at steady 
state would be higher.
15.	 True. Genetic variations that alter the activity of 
alcohol dehydrogenase and acetaldehyde dehy-
drogenase underlie the alcohol intolerance (facial 
flushing, etc.) experienced by many people of Chi-
nese and Japanese ancestry.
OBA ANSWERS
1.	 Answer E is the best definition of clearance (CL).
A.	Incorrect. This statement is meaningless; what is 
the volume of a drug?
B.	 Incorrect. This is a characteristic of first-order 
(exponential) kinetics, in which a drug’s plasma 
concentration falls by a fixed proportion per unit 
of time, but not a definition of clearance.
C.	Incorrect. Clearance and the rate of elimination 
are not the same, but they are related: the rate of 
elimination of a drug at steady-state is propor-
tional to its clearance and its plasma concentra-
tion (rate of elimination = CL × Css). Rate of elim-
ination has units of mass of drug per time (e.g. 
mg/min).
D.	Incorrect. The time it takes to eliminate a drug 
from the body is inversely proportional to clear-
ance and is difficult to estimate as elimination is 
usually exponential. However, after maintenance 
dosing is stopped, the steady-state plasma con-
centration of the drug will typically fall by 95% 
in about four to five half-lives and can then be 
considered to have become sub-therapeutic.
E.	 Correct. Clearance is the volume of plasma from 
which the drug is eliminated per unit of time by 
each organ of elimination, so its units are volume 
per time (e.g. L/hour), and it is independent of 
dose or plasma concentration.
2.	 Answer A is the most accurate statement.
A.	Correct. CYP enzymes perform many types of 
reaction (oxidation, reduction, hydrolysis, hydra-
tion) during phase 1 drug metabolism, but phase 2 
(conjugation) reactions usually require additional 
enzymes (e.g. UDPGT or glutathione transferases).
B.	 Incorrect. CYP isoenzymes can be inhibited or 
induced by compounds in dietary items such as 
grapefruit juice or charred meat.
C.	Incorrect. The liver has higher expression of CYP 
isoenzymes than other tissues.
D.	Incorrect. Pharmacogenetic variation among in-
dividuals is particularly marked for CYP2C19 
and CYP2D9 isoenzymes.
E.	 Incorrect. Most drugs do not induce (or inhibit) 
CYP isoenzymes.
3.	 Answer B is the most accurate statement.
A.	Incorrect. Drugs confined within the circulation 
(e.g. by plasma protein binding) have a low ap-
parent Vd. (The total drug concentration in plas-
ma, both free and bound, is used when calculat-
ing Vd. Extensive binding of the drug to proteins 
in tissues outside the circulation could inflate the 
apparent Vd.)
B.	 Correct. An impossibly large apparent Vd can oc-
cur if a drug is sequestered in large amounts in 
the extravascular compartments – for example, 
tightly bound to cellular proteins in tissues or 
highly concentrated in adipose tissue.
C.	Incorrect. Apparent Vd is a characteristic of a par-
ticular drug but is independent of dose.
D.	Incorrect. The half-life is proportional to Vd and 
inversely proportional to clearance.
E.	 Incorrect. Vd is used in calculating a loading dose 
(= Css × Vd) if one is required.
DESCRIPTIVE ANSWERS
1.	 The rate of absorption is determined by the rate of 
increase after oral dosing. Drug A is absorbed rap-
idly, whereas drug B takes about 6 hours to reach a 
peak concentration.
2.	 Bioavailability (F) is determined by the ratio of 
the area under the oral and intravenous curves 
(AUCoral/AUCiv). For drug A, bioavailability (F) is 
visibly much less than 1, whereas for drug B the 
AUCoral approximately equals the AUCiv, so F is 
about 1, suggesting it is completely absorbed after 
oral dosing.
3.	 The rate of distribution is given by the steep initial 
slope of the intravenous drug curve from time zero 
to the establishment of the slower, terminal elimi-
nation phase, which is at about 1 hour for drug A 
and 3 to 4 hours for drug B, so drug A distributes 
more rapidly. Extrapolating the gentle slope of 
the terminal elimination phase back to time zero 
gives similar intercepts (apparent Vd) for both 
drugs, indicating they have a similar extent of 
distribution.
4.	 The slope of the elimination phase is greater 
for drug A than for B, so its elimination rate (k) 
is greater and its half-life is therefore shorter 
(t1/2 = 0.693/k). This must be due to a lower clear-
ance (CL) of drug B, as it was shown previously 
that the volume of distribution is similar for both 
drugs. This is also apparent from the greater AUC 
for intravenous drug B, as the doses were the same 
(10 mg).
5.	 The potential for accumulation depends on the dif-
ference between the half-life and the dose interval 
(once daily = 24 hours). It is clear that after 24 hours 
nearly all of drug A has been removed from the 
plasma, but considerable amounts of B remain, so 
drug B would show significant accumulation.
	
	
Pharmacokinetics  CHAPTER 2	
61
CASE-BASED ANSWERS
Case 1 Answer
1.	 Note that the apparent Vd of theophylline is given as 
0.5 L for each kg of the child’s bodyweight (30 kg), 
so this needs to be expressed as a total Vd in litres 
(0.5 L/kg × 30 kg = 15 L). The desired plasma con-
centration (10  µg/mL) should be expressed as 
10 mg/L for consistency in units. The loading dose 
(= Css × Vd) will then be: 10 mg/L × 15 L, which is 
150 mg.
2.	 The volume of a 25  mg/mL solution required for 
a dose of 150  mg is 150/25 = 6  mL. This is given 
slowly (over 20 minutes).
3.	 Using Eq. 2.18, the infusion rate (30 mg/hour) 
divided by the steady-state plasma concentration 
(5 µg/mL, converted to 5 mg/L) gives a theophyl-
line clearance (CL) of 6 L/hour in this child. Eq. 2.20 
has more general applicability and could be used 
in this case bearing in mind that in an intravenous 
drug the bioavailability (F) equals 1, and D/T repre-
sents the infusion rate.
4.	 If the plasma concentration achieved by the main-
tenance infusion dose (5 µg/mL) now needs to be 
doubled to 10 µg/mL, then the infusion rate should 
be doubled from 1 mg/kg/hour to 2 mg/kg/hour. 
The latter is equivalent to 60 mg/hour in this 30 kg 
child or about 2.4 mL/hour of the 25 mg/mL solu-
tion. The linear relationship that steady-state plasma 
concentration is directly proportional to the infusion 
rate (assuming that clearance is unchanged) is shown 
by Eq. 2.17. In practice, the plasma theophylline con-
centration would continue to be monitored and the 
infusion rate titrated up or down accordingly.
Case 2 Answer
1.	 It takes about four to five times the elimination half-
life for a drug to reach approximately 93% to 97% 
of its steady-state plasma concentration on repeated 
dosing. For digoxin (t1/2 = 42 hour) this is 168 to 210 
hours, or about 7 to 9 days, hence the need for a 
loading dose.
2.	 Using Eq. 2.22 and adjusting Vd (= 9 L/kg) for the 
patient’s body weight (70 kg) gives:
	
Loading dose = Css × Vd = 0.8  µg/L × (9  L/kg × 
70 kg) = 504 µg
In practice, a rounded dose of 500  µg would be 
given and the BNF indicates this could be given as two 
250 µg tablets of digoxin.
FURTHER READING
Alfirevic, A., Pirmohamed, M., 2017. Genomics of adverse drug 
reactions. Trends in Pharmacol. Sci. 38, 100–109.
Ahmed, S., Zhou, Z., Chen, S-Q., 2016. Pharmacogenomics of drug 
metabolizing enzymes and transporters: relevance to precision 
medicine. Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 14, 298–313.
Awwad, S., Angkawinitwong, U., 2018. Overview of antibody 
drug delivery. Pharmaceutics 10, 83.
Batchelor, H.K., Marriott, J.F., 2015. Paediatric pharmacokinetics: 
key considerations. Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 79, 395–404.
Feero, W.G., Guttmacher, A.E., Collins, F.S., 2010. Genomic 
medicine—an updated primer. N. Engl. J. Med. 362, 2001–2011.
Flockhart, D.A., 2007. Drug Interactions: Cytochrome P450 Drug 
Interaction Table. Indiana University School of Medicine. 
http://medicine.iupui.edu/clinpharm/ddis/clinical-table.
Gabrielsson, J., Green, A.R., 2009. Quantitative pharmacology or 
pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic integration should be a 
vital component in integrative pharmacology. J. Pharmacol. 
Exp. Ther. 331, 767–774.
Jetter, A., Kullak-Ublick, G.A., 2020. Drugs and hepatic trans-
porters: a review. Pharmacologic. Res. 154, 104234.
Koepsell, H., 2020. Organic cation transporters in health and 
disease. Pharmacol. Rev. 72, 253–319.
Nigam, S.K., 2015. What do drug transporters really do? Nat. 
Rev. Drug Discov. 14, 29–44.
Shah, R.R., Shah, D.R., 2015. Personalised medicine: is it a 
pharmacogenetic mirage? Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 74, 698–721.
Tannenbaum, C., Sheehan, N.L., 2014. Understanding and 
preventing drug–drug and drug–gene interactions. Expert. 
Rev. Clin. Pharmacol. 7, 533–744.
Verkman, A.S., Anderson, M.O., Papadopoulos, M.C., 2014. 
Aquaporins: important but elusive drug targets. Nat. Rev. 
Drug Discov. 13 (4), 259–277.
Wang, L., McLeod, H.L., Weinshilboum, R.M., 2011. Genomics 
and drug response. N. Engl. J. Med. 364, 1144–1153.
62
Drug Discovery, Safety and Efficacy
3
Chapter Outline
Drug Discovery  63
Drug Approval  64
Safety  65
Quality  65
Efficacy  65
Establishing Safety and Efficacy  65
Preclinical Studies  65
Toxicity Testing  66
Clinical Trials: Phases I–III  67
Self-Assessment  70
Answers  70
Further Reading  70
Through most of human history most medicines were 
of botanical or zoological origin and most had dubi-
ous therapeutic value. A handful of medicines with 
potential therapeutic efficacy have been known for 
centuries, such as preparations of opium used more 
or less successfully for the treatment of pain and diar-
rhoea (i.e. dysentery) for thousands of years, but others 
were often worthless or misused, such as the antima-
larial drug quinine being prescribed for fevers of non-
malarial origin.
Early medicines consisting of crude extracts of plants 
or animal tissues usually contained a mixture of many 
organic compounds, of which one, more than one or 
none may have had useful biological applications. 
The active constituents of some plant-derived prepa-
rations are bitter-tasting organic molecules known as 
alkaloids. For example, opium contains high but vari-
able concentrations of analgesic alkaloids including 
morphine, codeine and other compounds. Foxglove 
extracts (which contain cardiac glycosides) were used 
successfully for the treatment of ‘dropsy’ (fluid reten-
tion); however, there was also considerable toxicity 
because the plant preparations contained highly vari-
able amounts of the active glycoside, as well as other 
compounds that may produce harmful effects. Simi-
larly, extracts of white willow bark were sometimes 
used to ease joint pain and reduce fever, although their 
active ingredient, salicylic acid, also carries substantial 
toxicity and the extracts contained a range of unrelated 
compounds with biological activity, such as flavonoids 
and plant oestrogens.
During the 19th and 20th centuries there were major 
advances in inorganic and organic chemistry, allowing 
the synthesis of wide arrays of small organic molecules 
to be screened systematically for pharmacological 
activity, and improved laboratory techniques allowed 
the generation of libraries of compounds purified from 
bacterial, fungal and botanical materials, which were 
prolific sources of novel molecules with biological 
activity. A major advance in the safety of plant-derived 
medicines was the isolation, purification and chemi-
cal characterisation of the active components of such 
medicines (if any), as exemplified by the isolation of 
morphine from opium by Friedrich Sertuerner around 
1805. The use of purified compounds in pharmaceuti-
cal research and testing has three main advantages:
• The administration of controlled amounts of the 
purified active compound removed biological vari-
ability in the potency of the crude plant preparation.
• The administration of the active component removed 
the unwanted and potentially toxic effects of con-
taminating substances in the crude preparations.
• The identification and isolation of the active compo-
nent allowed the mechanism of action to be defined, 
leading to the synthesis and development of chemi-
cally related compounds based on the structure 
of the active component but with greater potency, 
higher selectivity, fewer unwanted effects, altered 
duration of action and better bioavailability. For 
example, chemical modification of salicylic acid 
by acetylation produced acetylsalicylic acid, first 
marketed as aspirin in 1899, with greater analgesic 
and antipyretic activity and lower toxicity than the 
parent compound. Identifying structure-activity 
relationships (SAR) remains at the heart of drug 
development.
Advances in drug development for the treatment 
of disease are illustrated most dramatically with anti-
microbial chemotherapy, which revolutionised the 
chances of people surviving severe infections such as 
lobar pneumonia, the mortality from which was 27% 
in the pre-antimicrobial era, but fell to 8% (and sub-
sequently lower) following the introduction of sulfon-
amides and then penicillins in the 1930s and 1940s. 
	
	
Drug Discovery, Safety and Efficacy  CHAPTER 3	
63
Latterly, advances in molecular biology have enabled 
the development of a growing number of ‘biological’ 
drugs (biopharmaceuticals) based on the structures 
of antibodies, receptors and other human proteins. 
Meanwhile, the Human Genome Project, and the 
growth of technologies that allow the systematic study 
of the entire range of cellular RNAs, proteins, lipids 
and other small molecules (known respectively as 
transcriptomics, proteomics, lipidomics and metabolo-
mics), have expanded knowledge of the range of gene 
products and processes that might present targets for 
novel drugs. Increasingly, pharmacogenomic research 
is describing the genetic factors that predict variations 
in drug efficacy and safety in individual patients, hold-
ing out the promise of personalised medicine.
Thus, although drug therapy has natural and hum-
ble origins, it is the application of scientific principles, 
particularly the use of controlled experiments and clin-
ical trials of known quantities of pure compounds to 
generate reliable knowledge of drug actions, that has 
given rise to the clinical safety and efficacy of modern 
medicines. In an age of scientific reason, it is surpris-
ing that many people believe that natural medicinal 
products, sometimes diluted beyond the point of dis-
appearance of the last molecule of the product, offer 
equivalent therapeutic effectiveness and inherently 
can carry no risk of unwanted effects.
A major advantage of modern drugs is their abil-
ity to act selectively – that is, to affect only certain 
body systems or processes. For example, a drug that 
both lowers blood glucose and reduces blood pressure 
may not be suitable for the treatment of someone with 
only diabetes mellitus (because of unwanted hypo-
tensive effects) or a person with only hypertension 
(because of unwanted hypoglycaemic effects), or even 
of those with both conditions (because different doses 
may be needed for each effect).
DRUG DISCOVERY
The discovery of a new drug can be achieved in sev-
eral different ways (Fig. 3.1). For many decades, this 
has involved subjecting new chemical entities (novel, 
small-molecule compounds not previously synthe-
sised) to a battery of screening assays designed to 
detect different types of biological activity. These 
include in vitro studies on isolated tissues, as well as in 
vivo studies of complex and integrated systems, such 
as animal health and behaviour. Novel compounds for 
screening may be produced by direct chemical syn-
thesis or isolated from biological sources, then puri-
fied and characterised in relevant assays. The process 
of screening was revolutionised by developments in 
high-throughput screening (HTS), which takes advan-
tage of laboratory robotics for liquid handling of tiny 
(microlitre) reaction volumes in microplates contain-
ing hundreds or thousands of reaction wells. These are 
used for biochemical assays or with cell lines express-
ing cloned target proteins. Active compounds, which 
may be derived from small-molecule libraries of bacte-
rial or fungal origin, or proteins derived from solid-
phase peptide synthesis, can then be selected based 
on interactions with molecules and cells that express 
a range of possible sites of action, such as G-protein–
coupled or nuclear receptors or enzymes important in 
drug metabolism. HTS methods allow the screening 
in some cases of hundreds of thousands of microplate 
wells each week: a positive result (‘hit’) in more than 
one HTS assay may define a lead candidate, which is 
subjected to more labour-intensive and detailed inves-
tigation, including preclinical tests in laboratory ani-
mals (usually rodents).
A second, but not mutually exclusive, approach 
involves the synthesis and testing of chemical ana-
logues and modifications of existing pharmaceuticals. 
Generally, the products of this approach show incre-
mental advances in potency, selectivity and bioavail-
ability. However, additional or even new properties 
may become evident when the compound is tested 
in animals or trialled in humans; for example, minor 
modifications of the sulfanilamide antimicrobial mol-
ecule gave rise to the thiazide diuretics and the sulfo-
nylurea hypoglycaemics.
Drug development programmes usually attempt 
to identify substances to target a particular biological 
or pathological mechanism. This may entail the puri-
fication, adaptation or synthesis of a relevant endog-
enous substance, or a structural analogue, precursor 
or antagonist of it. Examples of targeted drug devel-
opment include levodopa, used in the treatment of 
Parkinson’s disease; the histamine H2 receptor antago-
nists; and omeprazole, the first proton pump inhibitor. 
Logical drug development of this type depends on a 
detailed understanding of human physiology both in 
health and disease. Identification of putative drug tar-
gets may begin with a bioinformatics approach to mine 
existing data in scientific publications and patents. 
Genetic polymorphism associated with human disease 
may provide clues as to pathological mechanisms. The 
validation of putative drug targets requires techniques 
ranging from in vitro biochemical, cell or tissue culture 
models up to whole animal models. Antisense oligonu-
cleotides can be used to observe the effects of blocking 
the synthesis of individual proteins in cells and tissues, 
Synthesis and screening
of new chemical entities
Testing of analogues
of existing medicines
Design of compounds
for a particular
biological function
Drug
discovery
Fig. 3.1  Approaches to drug discovery.
64	
SECTION 1  General Principles
and transgenic technology that inserts or deletes spe-
cific genes can be used similarly at the whole animal 
level. Appropriate assays to identify molecules with 
the required action at the designated target may arise 
naturally from these models or require the develop-
ment of specialist assays to which HTS can be applied.
A limiting factor in rational drug design is often the 
lack of detailed knowledge of the three-dimensional 
structure of the putative binding site on a specific 
enzyme, receptor or other protein target, which usually 
requires complex analyses by X-ray crystallography or 
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. The 
modelling of ligand–receptor interactions may also be 
attempted by homology with the known structures of 
related proteins. In silico (computer-aided) approaches 
to the virtual modelling of drug binding to receptor 
sites (molecular docking studies) have facilitated the 
development of ligands with high binding affinities 
and, often, high selectivity.
Advances in molecular biology have led to the 
increasing use of genomic techniques to identify genes 
associated with pathological conditions. An example 
of drug development arising from this approach is the 
drug imatinib (see Chapter 52) developed to inhibit 
Bcr-Abl tyrosine kinase, which was implicated in 
chronic myeloid leukaemia cells by molecular biologi-
cal methods. Imatinib is a nonprotein organic molecule 
with a high oral bioavailability. A growing number of 
new drugs described in many chapters in this book are 
themselves proteins that directly mimic or otherwise 
interfere with the activity of the target gene product. 
They include recombinant antibodies or antibody 
fragments which block either cell-surface receptors 
or humoral proteins, and soluble receptors which can 
neutralise cytokines. Being proteins, such biopharma-
ceuticals present particular problems of drug delivery 
to the relevant tissue and to the site of action (which 
may be intracellular; see Chapter 2), and also issues 
related to safety testing (discussed later).
Drug development is a long and expensive process, 
with estimates of 14 to 16 years in development and 
a median cost of US $985 million (approx. GB £755 
million) to bring a new drug to market. Much of this 
cost lies in gaining the preclinical and clinical evidence 
required for approval of a new drug by regulatory 
bodies.
DRUG APPROVAL
Each year, many thousands of new chemical entities 
and compounds purified from plant and microbial 
sources are screened for useful and novel pharmaco-
logical activities. Potentially valuable compounds are 
then subjected to a sequence of in vitro studies, in vivo 
animal testing and clinical trials in humans, which pro-
vide essential information on safety and therapeutic 
benefits (Fig. 3.2).
All drugs and formulations licensed for sale in the 
UK have to pass a rigorous evaluation of:
• safety,
• quality, and
• efficacy.
In the European Union (EU), new drugs are 
approved under a harmonised procedure of drug reg-
ulation. The European Medicines Agency (EMA; www 
.ema.europa.eu/ema) is a decentralised body of the EU 
responsible for the regulation of medicines within the 
EU, broadly comparable to the Food and Drug Admin-
istration (FDA; www.fda.gov) in the United States. The 
EMA receives advice from the Committee for Medici-
nal Products for Human Use (CHMP), which is a body 
of international experts who evaluate data on the med-
icine’s safety. Other EMA committees are involved in 
evaluating paediatric medicines, herbal medicines and 
0
15
10
10–20
2–3
1
in vitro + short-term
long-term
Phase I
Phase II
Phase III
during clinical trials
<100
<500
3000+
Approx.
£500m
£0
000
Time
in years
Number of
compounds
Animal
pharmacology
(actions/kinetics)
Preclinical
toxicity testing
Human
pharmacology
(actions/kinetics)
Clinical trials
(safety/efficacy)
Number of
humans studied
Cost
Fig. 3.2  The development of a new drug to the point at which a licence is approved. Postmarketing surveillance 
will continue to add data on safety and efficacy.
	
	
Drug Discovery, Safety and Efficacy  CHAPTER 3	
65
advanced therapies such as gene therapy. Under the 
current EU system, new drugs are evaluated by the 
CHMP, and national advisory bodies have an opportu-
nity to assess the data before a final CHMP conclusion 
is reached.
The UK Commission on Human Medicines (CHM) 
was established in 2005 to replace both the Medicines 
Commission (MC) and the Committee on Safety of 
Medicines (CSM), which previously had evaluated 
medicines regulated in the UK under the Medicines 
Act (1968). The CHM is one of a number of committees 
established under the Medicines and Healthcare prod-
ucts Regulatory Agency (MHRA; www.mhra.gov.uk). 
The CHM provides advice on human medicines to the 
UK Secretary of State for Health and other government 
ministers.
The EMA headquarters in London moved to Amster-
dam in 2020 during the Brexit transition period and the 
MHRA has published online guidance on how it will 
operate as the independent regulator for medicines and 
medical devices in the UK after the transition ended 
on 31st December 2020 (www.gov.uk/government/
collections/mhra-post-transition-period-information).
SAFETY
Historically, the introduction of some new drugs 
has been bought at a price of significant toxicity, and 
regulatory systems have arisen as much to protect 
patients from drug toxicity as to ensure benefit. In the 
United States, the FDA was established in 1937, fol-
lowing a dramatic incident in which 76 people died 
of renal failure after taking an elixir of sulfanilamide 
containing the solvent diethylene glycol. Similarly, 
some 25 years later, the occurrence of limb malforma-
tions (phocomelia) and cardiac defects in infants born 
to mothers who had taken thalidomide for the treat-
ment of nausea in the first trimester of pregnancy led 
to the establishment of the precursor of the CHM in 
the UK.
Today, major tragedies are avoided by a combina-
tion of in vitro studies and animal toxicity tests (pre-
clinical testing) and by careful observation during 
clinical studies on new drugs (discussed later). The 
development and continuing refinement of preclinical 
toxicity testing has increased the likelihood of identify-
ing chemicals with direct organ toxicity. During clini-
cal trials, immunologically mediated effects are likely 
to be seen at the lower end of the dose ranges that are 
used in such trials (see Chapter 53).
QUALITY
An important function of regulatory bodies is to 
ensure the consistency of prescribed medicines and 
their manufacturing processes. Drugs have to com-
ply with defined criteria for purity, and limits are 
set on the content of any potentially toxic impuri-
ties. The stability and, if necessary, sterility of the 
drug also have to be established. Similarly, licensed 
formulations must contain a defined and approved 
amount of the active drug, released at a specified 
rate. There have been many cases in the past in 
which a simple change to the manufactured formu-
lation affected tablet disintegration, the release of 
drug and the therapeutic response. The quality of 
drugs for human use is defined by the specifications 
in the European Pharmacopoeia (Ph.Eur.) and the 
British Pharmacopoeia (BP).
EFFICACY
All medicines, apart from homeopathic products, must 
have evidence of efficacy for their licensed indications. 
Efficacy (i.e. the ability to produce a predefined level 
of clinical response) can be established only by trials 
in people with the disease for whom the medicine is 
intended, and therefore the demonstration of efficacy 
is a major aim of the later phases of clinical research 
(see Fig. 3.2).
ESTABLISHING SAFETY AND EFFICACY
Regulatory bodies such as the CHMP and CHM 
require supporting data from in vitro studies, animal 
studies and clinical investigations before a new drug 
is approved for use in a specific clinical indication. 
Although there is some overlap, the basic aims and 
goals are as follows:
• Preclinical studies. Establish the basic pharmacology, 
pharmacokinetics and toxicological profile of the 
drug and its metabolites, using animals and in vitro 
systems.
• Phase I clinical studies. Establish the human pharma-
cology and pharmacokinetics, together with a sim-
ple safety profile.
• Phase II clinical studies. Establish the dose–response 
relationship and develop the dosage protocol for 
clinical use, together with more extensive safety 
data.
• Phase III clinical studies. Establish the efficacy and 
safety profile of the drug in people with the pro-
posed disease for which the drug will be indicated.
• Phase IV (pharmacovigilance or postmarketing sur-
veillance). Monitoring of adverse events following 
approval and marketing of the drug, largely per-
formed by healthcare professionals.
PRECLINICAL STUDIES
Preclinical studies must be carried out before a com-
pound can be administered to humans. These studies 
investigate three areas:
• Pharmacological effects. In vitro effects using isolated 
cells, tissues or organs; receptor-binding charac-
teristics; in vivo effects in animals and/or animal 
models of human diseases; prediction of potential 
therapeutic use;
• Pharmacokinetics. Identification of metabolites (as 
these may be the active form of the compound); 
66	
SECTION 1  General Principles
evidence of bioavailability (to assist with the design 
of both clinical trials and in vivo animal toxicity 
studies); and establishment of a principal route and 
rate of elimination;
• Toxicological effects. A battery of in vitro and in vivo 
studies undertaken with the aim of identifying tox-
icity as early as possible, and before there is exten-
sive in vivo exposure of animals or subsequently 
humans.
TOXICITY TESTING
Toxicity testing has two primary goals: identification 
of hazards and prediction of the likely risk of that haz-
ard occurring in humans receiving therapeutic doses 
of the new medicine. A wide range of doses is studied: 
high doses are required to increase the ability to detect 
hazards, and lower doses are needed to analyse dose–
response relationships to predict the risk at doses pro-
ducing the anticipated therapeutic effect. Toxicity tests 
include the following:
• Mutagenicity. A variety of in vitro tests using bacte-
rial cells (such as the Ames test) and cell lines from 
rodents are employed at an early stage to define any 
damage to DNA or chromosomal structures that 
may be linked to carcinogenicity or teratogenicity; 
in vivo studies may be undertaken to investigate the 
mechanism of genotoxicity.
• Acute toxicity. A single dose is given to animals by 
the route proposed for human use; this may reveal 
a likely site for toxicity and is essential in defining 
the initial dose for human studies. Acute toxicity 
data, including information on the doses causing 
lethality, are essential for safe manufacture; the LD50 
(a precise estimate of the dose required to kill 50% 
of an animal population) has been replaced by sim-
pler and more humane methods that define the dose 
range associated with acute toxicity.
• Subacute toxicity. Repeated doses are given to animals 
for 14 or 28 days; this will usually reveal the target 
for toxic effects, and comparison with single-dose 
data may indicate the potential for accumulation.
• Chronic toxicity. Repeated doses are given to animals 
for up to 6 months; this reveals the target for toxicity 
(except cancer). The aim is to define dose regimens 
associated with adverse effects and a ‘no observed 
adverse effect level’ (NOAEL; the ‘safe’ dose).
• Carcinogenicity. Repeated doses are given through-
out the lifetime of the animal (usually 2 years in a 
rodent).
• Reproductive toxicity. Repeated doses are given to 
animals from before mating and throughout gesta-
tion to assess any effect on fertility, implantation, 
fetal growth, the production of fetal abnormalities 
(teratogenicity) or neonatal growth.
The extent of animal toxicity testing required prior 
to the first administration to humans is related to the 
proposed duration of human exposure and the popu-
lation to be treated. All drugs are subjected to an initial 
in vitro screen for mutagenic potential. If satisfactory, 
this is followed by acute and subacute studies for up to 
14 days of administration to two animal species. Doses 
studied are usually a low dose sufficient to cause the 
pharmacological/therapeutic effect, a high dose suf-
ficient to cause target organ toxicity and an interme-
diate dose, together with a control group of untreated 
animals. Teratogenicity and reproductive toxicity stud-
ies are required if the drug is to be given to women of 
childbearing age – since the thalidomide tragedy, rab-
bits have been used for teratogenicity studies because, 
unlike rodents, they show fetal abnormalities when 
treated with thalidomide. Carcinogenicity testing is 
necessary for drugs that may be used for long periods 
(e.g. longer than 1 year).
An international review of the extent of in vivo 
animal testing necessary prior to phase I and phase 
II clinical trials concluded that the duration of animal 
toxicity tests should be the same as proposed human 
exposure (Table 3.1). In Japan and the United States, 
the same advice applies for phase III studies, but the 
EU recommends more extensive animal toxicity stud-
ies to support phase III trials. Dogs are the ‘non-rodent 
species’ usually studied.
The use of animals for the establishment of chemi-
cal safety is an emotive issue, and there is extensive 
current research to replace animal studies with in vitro 
tests based on known mechanisms of toxicity. The UK 
government published a delivery plan in February 
2014 for the replacement, reduction and refinement 
of the use of animals in research (the ‘3Rs’). However, 
toxicology as a predictive science is still in its infancy 
and at present it is impossible to replicate the complex-
ity of mammalian physiology and biochemistry by in 
vitro systems. In vivo studies remain essential to inves-
tigate interference with either integrative functions 
or complex homeostatic mechanisms. Carefully con-
trolled safety studies in animals are an essential part 
of the current procedures adopted to prevent extensive 
human toxicity, which would inevitably result from 
the use of untested compounds. Although toxicology 
Table 3.1
  European Medicines Agency Guidelines 
for the Length of Animal Toxicity Studies 
Necessary to Support Phase I and Phase II 
Studies in Humans.
DURATION OF PROPOSED 
PHASE I OR II CLINICAL 
TRIALS
MINIMUM RECOMMENDED 
DURATION OF REPEAT-DOSE 
ANIMAL TOXICITY STUDIES
RODENTS
NON-RODENTS
Single dose
2–4 weeks
2 weeks
Up to 2 weeks
2–4 weeks
2 weeks
Up to 1 month
1 month
1 month
Up to 3 months
3 months
3 months
More than 3 months
6 months
9 months
Support of phase III clinical studies may require longer animal toxicity studies 
than shown here.
	
	
Drug Discovery, Safety and Efficacy  CHAPTER 3	
67
has failed in the past to prevent some tragedies (as dis-
cussed previously), these have led to improvements in 
methods and current tests provide an effective predic-
tive screen. Nevertheless, there have been examples of 
approved drugs being withdrawn because of reactions 
that were not detected in preclinical studies (e.g. the 
high rate of rhabdomyolysis produced by cerivastatin, 
which was withdrawn worldwide in 2001). This may 
be increasingly important in the future because drugs 
developed using molecular biological methods to act 
specifically at human proteins may show limited or no 
activity at the analogous rodent receptors; however, 
animal studies will still provide a useful screen for 
nonspecific, non-receptor-mediated effects.
It is important to recognise that not all hazards 
detected at high doses in experimental animals are of 
relevance to human health. An important function of 
expert advisory bodies such as the CHMP is to assess 
the relevance to human health of effects detected in 
experimental animals at doses that may be two orders 
of magnitude (or more) above human exposures. Many 
drug ‘scare stories’ in the media are based on a haz-
ard detected at experimental doses in animals much 
higher than the relevant doses for humans.
CLINICAL TRIALS: PHASES I–III
The purposes of premarketing clinical studies are:
• to establish that the drug has a useful action in 
humans,
• to define any toxicity at therapeutic doses in 
humans, and
• to establish the nature of common (type A) unwanted 
effects (see Chapter 53).
Subjects in clinical studies give informed consent to 
participate, and the trials are approved by ethics com-
mittees and regulatory agencies. Traditionally, pre-
marketing clinical studies have been subdivided into 
three phases. Although the distinction between these 
is blurred, the following classification system provides 
a useful framework.
Phase I Studies
Phase I is the term used to describe the first trials of a 
new drug in humans, with typically between 20 and 
100 volunteers. A principal aim of these studies is to 
define basic properties, such as route of administra-
tion, pharmacokinetics and tolerability. The studies are 
usually carried out by the pharmaceutical company, 
often using a specialised contract research organisa-
tion. Subjects taking part in phase I studies are usually 
healthy volunteers recruited by open advertisement, 
especially when the compound is of low predicted tox-
icity and has wide potential use (e.g. an antihistamine). 
In some cases, people who have the condition in which 
the drug will be used may be studied, such as cytotoxic 
agents used for cancer chemotherapy.
The first few administrations are usually in a very 
small number of subjects (n < 10) who receive an 
oral dose that may be as low as one-fiftieth or one-
hundredth of the minimum required to produce a 
pharmacological effect in animals (after scaling for dif-
ferences in body weight). Such a ‘microdose’ study may 
be termed a phase 0 trial. The dose may then be built 
up incrementally in larger subject groups until a phar-
macological effect is observed or an unwanted action 
occurs. During these studies, toxic effects are sought by 
routine haematology and biochemical investigations of 
liver and kidney function; other tests, including an elec-
trocardiogram, will be performed as appropriate.
It is also usual to study the disposition, metabolism 
and main pathways of elimination of the proposed new 
drug in humans at this stage. Such studies help identify 
the most suitable dose and route of administration for 
future clinical studies. Investigations of drug metabo-
lism and pharmacokinetics often necessitate the use 
of radioactively labelled compounds containing car-
bon-14 or tritium (3H) as part of the drug molecule.
Peptide drugs have to be given intravenously in 
clinical trials to mimic the route of proposed clinical 
use. Very low doses are studied in the first instance, 
especially with peptides that are designed to interact 
specifically with human homeostatic or signalling sys-
tems, because studies in animals may not reveal the 
full biological activities. Despite these safeguards, TGN 
1412, a monoclonal antibody directed against CD28, 
a co-stimulatory molecule for T-cell receptors, caused 
multiple organ dysfunction in its first phase I trial in six 
human volunteers in March 2006. The severe toxicity 
occurred at a dose 500 times lower than the dose found 
to be safe in animals, including nonhuman primates.
Phase II Studies
During phase II studies, the detailed clinical pharma-
cology of the new compound is determined, typically 
in groups of 100 to 300 individuals with the intended 
clinical condition. A principal aim of these studies is to 
define the relationship between dose and pharmaco-
logical/therapeutic response in humans. Evidence of 
a beneficial effect may emerge during phase II studies, 
although a placebo control is not always used. Addi-
tional studies may be undertaken at this stage in spe-
cial groups such as elderly people, if it is intended that 
the drug will be used in that population. Other studies 
may investigate the mechanism of action, or test for 
interactions with other drugs. Phase II studies nor-
mally define the optimum dosage regimen, and this 
is then used in large clinical trials to demonstrate the 
efficacy and safety of the drug.
Phase III Studies
Phase III studies are the main clinical trials, usually per-
formed in 300 to 3000 people with the condition that 
the drug is intended to treat, in multiple centres, in 
comparison with a placebo that looks (and tastes) the 
same as the active compound. The allocation to active 
compound or placebo requires randomisation, which 
68	
SECTION 1  General Principles
avoids selection bias in the assignment of treatments 
and facilitates the blinding (masking) of the identity of 
treatments from the investigators. The advantages and 
disadvantages of the new compound may also be com-
pared with the best available treatment or the leading 
drug in the class. It may be ethically impossible to jus-
tify the use of a placebo if an effective form of treatment 
has been established for the condition being studied, 
as substituting the novel drug for the established treat-
ment in the trial could result in significant risk to those 
participating in both the placebo and treatment groups. 
The drug under evaluation may therefore be used in 
addition to the established treatment and compared 
with the established treatment plus a placebo.
Clinical trials are of two main types: within-subject 
and between-subject comparisons (Fig. 3.3). In within-
subject trials, an individual is randomly allocated to 
commence treatment either with the new compound 
or with a placebo (or comparator drug) before crossing 
over to the alternative therapy, usually with a washout 
period in between. In contrast, between-subject com-
parisons involve randomisation of subjects to receive 
only one of two (or more) treatments for the duration 
of the study.
Within-subject comparisons (also called crossover 
trials) can usually be performed on a smaller number 
of subjects because the individuals act as their own 
controls and most non–treatment-related variables are 
eliminated. However, such studies often require a lon-
ger involvement of each individual. Also, there may 
be carry-over effects from one treatment that affect the 
apparent efficacy of the second treatment, although 
statistical analysis should be able to deal with this 
problem. Studies of this type may be difficult to inter-
pret when there is a pronounced seasonal variation 
in the severity of a condition, such as Raynaud’s phe-
nomenon or hay fever. Crossover studies (see Fig. 3.3) 
cannot be used if the treatment is curative (e.g. an anti-
microbial for treating acute infections).
Between-subject comparisons (also called parallel-
group studies) require roughly twice as many partici-
pants as within-subject trials but have the advantage 
that each subject will usually be studied for a shorter 
period and carry-over effects are avoided. Although 
it is not possible to provide a perfect match between 
subjects entering the two (or more) different treatment 
groups, this approach to the evaluation of new drugs is 
preferred by many drug regulatory authorities.
Subject recruitment
Baseline assessment
Randomisation
A
B
B
A
A
B
Comparison of changes due to drug 1
with changes due to drug 2 or
placebo: paired data
Within-subject trial
Washout period
Subject recruitment
Baseline assessment
Randomisation
A
B
Assessment
of effect
Assessment
of effect
Assessment
of effect
Assessment
of effect
Assessment
of effect
Assessment
of effect
Treatment
with drug 1
Treatment
with drug 2
or placebo
Treatment
with drug 1
Treatment
with drug 2
or placebo
Treatment
with drug 1
Treatment
with drug 2
or placebo
A
B
Comparison of changes in groups
 A and B: unpaired data
Between-subject trial
Fig. 3.3  The design of clinical trials. Subjects are randomly allocated to group A or group B.
	
	
Drug Discovery, Safety and Efficacy  CHAPTER 3	
69
Whichever form of comparison is made, measure-
ments of benefits (and adverse effects) are made at 
regular intervals using a combination of objective 
and subjective techniques (Table 3.2). Throughout 
these studies, careful attention is paid to detecting 
and reporting both unwanted effects (type A reac-
tions) and unpredictable (type B) reactions (see 
Chapter 53). Rare type B reactions are not usually 
seen prior to the marketing of a new drug because 
they may occur only once in every 1000 to 10,000 or 
more individuals treated with the drug. It is salutary 
to note that by the time a new medicine is marketed, 
only 2000 to 3000 people may have taken the drug, 
often for relatively short periods such as 6 months, 
amounting to only a few hundred patient-years of 
drug exposure.
Postmarketing Surveillance: Phase IV 
(Pharmacovigilance)
The full spectrum of benefits and risks of medicines 
may not become clear until after they are marketed. 
Reasons for this include the low frequency of cer-
tain adverse drug reactions, and the tendency to 
avoid the inclusion of children, older people and 
women of childbearing age in premarketing clinical 
trials. Another factor is the widespread use of other 
medicines in normal clinical practice, which could 
produce an unexpected interaction with the new drug. 
Phase IV studies involve postmarketing surveillance 
of efficacy and adverse reactions, sometimes in clinical 
indications additional to those licensed. Pharmaco-
vigilance is the identification of risk/benefit issues for 
authorised medicines arising from their use in clini-
cal practice and includes the effective dissemination 
of information to optimise the safe and effective use 
of medicines.
Pharmacovigilance reports across the EU are coor-
dinated by the EudraVigilance network, part of the 
EMA (www.ema.europa.eu/en). Within the UK, a 
number of systems of postmarketing surveillance are 
in use. The most important is the Yellow Card system; 
it depends on healthcare professionals and members 
of the public reporting suspected serious adverse reac-
tions to the MHRA, originally using a tear-out card 
printed in the British National Formulary (BNF), but 
now usually online (see the Yellow Card website, 
https://yellowcard.mhra.gov.uk/). In addition to 
reporting suspected serious adverse effects of estab-
lished drugs, doctors and others are asked to supply 
information about unwanted effects of medicines that 
have been marketed recently (‘black triangle’ products 
typically within 5 years of marketing) and those noted 
in vulnerable groups of those treated. Each year, the 
MHRA receives some 20,000 yellow card reports, of 
which about 10% come from members of the public. 
In return, doctors are supplied regularly with informa-
tion about current drug-related problems.
A second form of pharmacovigilance involves 
systematic postmarketing surveillance of recently 
marketed medicines. This may be organised by the phar-
maceutical company responsible for the manufacture 
of the new drug. Companies also receive information 
via their sales representatives. The MHRA administers 
the Clinical Practice Research Datalink (CPRD; www 
.cprd.com), formed in 2012 from the General Practice 
Research Database, which collects anonymised, longi-
tudinal patient records from participating UK general 
practices. It is used in conjunction with the Yellow Card 
scheme to provide a warning system for approved 
medicines.
Prescription event monitoring (PEM) provides a 
further method for detailed study of possible associa-
tions provided by pharmacovigilance programmes. 
This involves:
• identification of a possible health problem associ-
ated with an approved medicine;
• identification by the UK Prescription Pricing 
Authority of individuals for whom a drug of inter-
est has been prescribed; and
• the subsequent distribution of ‘green cards’ to 
those individuals’ GPs, with a request that they 
complete all details about the person and events 
that occurred.
The cards are returned to the Drug Safety Research 
Unit (DSRU; www.dsru.org), which collates and analy-
ses the data. PEM has the advantage that it does not 
require doctors to make a judgement concerning a pos-
sible link between the prescription of a drug and any 
medical event that occurs while the person is taking 
the drug. At first sight, a broken leg may be thought 
an unlikely drug-related adverse effect, but it could 
be the result of drug-induced hypotension, ataxia or 
metabolic bone disease.
Finally, detailed monitoring of adverse reactions to 
drug therapy takes place in some hospitals. These data 
contribute further to our overall knowledge.
When assessing efficacy and associated toxicity, 
combining the data from a number of clinical trials 
(metaanalysis) can provide an overview of the valid-
ity and reproducibility of clinical findings. Metaanalysis 
Table 3.2  Examples of Response Measurements 
During Clinical Trials.
NEW DRUG 
TYPE
MEASUREMENT TECHNIQUES
OBJECTIVE
SUBJECTIVEa
Antianginal
Exercise tolerance
Fatigue
Blood pressure 
Heart rate
Frequency of 
anginal attacks
Glyceryl trinitrate use
Pain intensity
Antiarthritic
Grip strength
Duration of 
morning stiffness
Joint size
—
Paracetamol use
Pain intensity
aSubjective effects are often scored on a numerical scale, e.g. 0 = no pain at all, 
10 = the worst imaginable pain.
70	
SECTION 1  General Principles
is complex, and only well-designed trials should be 
combined. The Cochrane Library (www.thecochrane 
library.com) provides a regularly updated collection of 
evidence-based metaanalyses.
The National Institute for Clinical Excellence was 
established in 1999 and became the National Institute 
for Health and Care Excellence (NICE; www.nice 
.org.uk) in 2005, following its merger with the 
Health Development Agency. Since 2013, NICE has 
been a non-departmental public body under the 
Health and Social Care Act 2012, providing guid-
ance for people using the National Health Service 
(NHS) in England, with decisions on implementa-
tion in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland deter-
mined by the devolved administrations. It provides 
advice on the clinical value and cost-effectiveness 
of new treatments, but also on existing treatments if 
there is uncertainty about their use. NICE produces 
guidance on:
• Health technology – specific medicines, treatments 
and procedures;
• Clinical practice – how health professionals should 
treat diseases and conditions;
• Public health – preventing illness and health 
promotion;
• Social care – services to help people with daily life at 
home, in care homes or day centres; and
• Quality standards – statements designed to drive 
quality improvements within a particular area of 
care.
SELF-ASSESSMENT
ONE-BEST-ANSWER (OBA) QUESTIONS
1.	 In which phase of drug development is a placebo 
comparator most likely to be used?
A.	Phase 0
B.	 Phase I
C.	Phase II
D.	Phase III
E.	 Phase IV
2.	 Which is the best description of a phase III crossover 
trial?
A.	Randomisation is not required in a crossover trial.
B.	 People with the most severe disease are allocated 
to receive the active drug first.
C.	The second treatment period starts as soon as the 
first treatment period ends.
D.	Crossover trials are preferred for trials of cura-
tive drugs.
E.	 Participants receive two or more treatments in a 
random sequence.
3.	 Which organisation is directly responsible for advis-
ing UK government ministers on human medicines?
A.	CHM
B.	 CPRD
C.	DSRU
D.	MHRA
E.	 NICE
ANSWERS
OBA ANSWERS
1.	 Answer D is correct. A drug is most likely to be 
compared with a placebo in large-scale (phase III) 
trials, although a placebo may also be used in phase 
II trials. The drug (and placebo) may be added to the 
existing best treatment or compared with a leading 
drug for the same condition.
2.	 Answer E is correct. Randomisation is designed to 
produce treatment groups that match in all impor-
tant characteristics, including disease severity. In a 
within-subject (or crossover) trial, randomisation of 
the sequence of treatments that each subject receives 
reduces the probability of confounding by an effect 
of one treatment persisting into the second treat-
ment period; an interval between treatments (wash-
out period) helps ensure this. Crossover trials are 
generally not used to test curative drugs for acute 
conditions (e.g. antimicrobials), as the condition 
may not persist through both treatment periods.
3.	 Answer A is correct. The CHM (Commission on 
Human Medicines) advises UK government minis-
ters on the safety, efficacy and quality of medicinal 
products.
FURTHER READING
Hughes, J.P., Rees, S., Kalindjian, S.B., et al., 2011. Principles of 
early drug discovery. Br. J. Pharmacol. 162, 1239–1249.
Kerwin, R., 2004. The National Institute for Clinical Excellence 
and its relevance to pharmacology. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 25, 
346–348.
Krewski, D., Andersen, M.E., Tyshenko, M.G., et  al., 2020. 
Toxicity testing in the 21st century: progress in the past 
decade and future perspectives. Arch. Toxicol. 94, 1–58.
Layton, D., Hazell, L., Shakir, S.A., 2011. Modified prescription-
event monitoring studies: a tool for pharmacovigilance and 
risk management. Drug Saf 34 (12), e1–e9.
Relling, M.V., Evans, W.E., 2015. Pharmacogenomics in the clinic. 
Nature 526, 343–350.
Schneider, G., Fechner, U., 2005. Computer-based de novo design 
of drug-like molecules. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 4, 649–663.
Wagner, B.K., 2016. The resurgence of phenotypic screening in 
drug discovery and development. Exp. Opin. Drug. Discov. 
11, 121–125.
Wouters, O.J, McKee, M, Luyten, J., 2020. Estimated research and 
development investment needed to bring a new medicine to 
market, 2009-2018. JAMA 323, 844–853.
71
Neurotransmission and the Peripheral 
Autonomic Nervous System
4
Chapter Outline
The Central and Peripheral Nervous Systems  71
Principles of Neurotransmission  71
Presynaptic Receptors and Modulation of 
Transmitter Release  72
The Peripheral Autonomic Nervous System  73
The Sympathetic Nervous System and 
Noradrenergic Transmission  76
Synthesis and Storage of Catecholamines: 
Noradrenaline, Adrenaline and Dopamine  76
Noradrenaline Release  76
Uptake and Metabolism of Released  
Noradrenaline  76
Sympathetic Nervous System Receptors  78
The Parasympathetic Nervous System and 
Cholinergic Transmission  79
Synthesis of Acetylcholine  79
Storage of Acetylcholine  80
Release of Acetylcholine  80
Metabolism and Inactivation of Released 
Acetylcholine  80
Cholinergic Receptors  81
Other Transmitters in the Peripheral Nervous 
System  82
Amines  82
Amino Acids  84
Peptides  86
Purines  86
Self-Assessment  86
Answers  87
Further Reading  88
THE CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS 
SYSTEMS
There are two principal neuronal control systems in 
the body. Functionally they are highly integrated and 
should be considered holistically, but for clarity they 
are introduced separately:
• The central nervous system (CNS) comprises neuro-
nal networks of the brain, brainstem and spinal cord 
(see Section 5). The CNS integrates, processes and 
responds to sensory messages. It receives sensory 
information from all parts of the body, including 
visceral sensory afferent nerves (e.g. from viscera, 
smooth muscle and cardiac muscle) and somatic 
sensory afferents (e.g. from skeletal muscle). It then 
responds by sending instructions via the autonomic 
efferent nerves of the sympathetic and parasympa-
thetic systems (e.g. to glands, smooth muscle and 
cardiac muscle) and via somatic motor efferents to 
skeletal muscle.
• The peripheral nervous systems interconnect the CNS 
to the organs of the body; these include:
• the somatic (voluntary) nervous system, which 
innervates skeletal muscle (see Chapter 27).
• the autonomic (automatic or involuntary) ner-
vous system, which comprises the sympathetic 
and parasympathetic nervous systems, and also 
includes the nervous system of the gut (enteric 
system). The autonomic nervous system is the 
focus of this chapter.
PRINCIPLES OF NEUROTRANSMISSION
Action potentials (APs) passing along neuronal axons 
signal to other neurons or nonneuronal cells (e.g. 
smooth muscle cells). Signals are transferred by the 
release of chemical neurotransmitters from the presyn-
aptic endings of the neuron, which diffuse across the 
synaptic cleft and stimulate the receiving (postsynap-
tic) cells via receptor proteins (Fig. 4.1). The binding of 
the transmitter to the receptors may instruct the receiv-
ing cells to increase or reduce their activity.
Neurotransmitters can be either synthesised within 
the presynaptic axon terminal (e.g. noradrenaline) or 
transported from the cell body to the synaptic region 
(e.g. peptides). The neurotransmitter is taken up from 
the cytosol by specific vesicular transporters within the 
nerve ending and stored within membrane vesicles. 
The release of the neurotransmitter can be ‘fine-tuned’ 
by axo-axonic connections and by presynaptic recep-
tors (discussed later). A generalised scheme for neuro-
transmission is as follows (see Fig. 4.1):
1.	 The cell body (or soma) responds to an appropriate 
stimulus by generating an AP.
2.	 The AP is conducted along the axon by the opening 
of voltage-gated Na+ channels and the influx of Na+; 
when the AP reaches the presynaptic nerve termi-
nal, it results in an influx of Ca2+ through voltage-
dependent channels.
3.	 Ca2+-dependent processes result in fusion of neuro­
transmitter-containing vesicles with the presynaptic 
72	
SECTION 1  General Principles
PRESYNAPTIC RECEPTORS AND MODULATION 
OF TRANSMITTER RELEASE
An important characteristic of neurons is the presence 
of presynaptic receptors (see Fig. 4.1 and Table 4.1). 
Presynaptic receptors may increase or, more typically, 
decrease the release of the neurotransmitter, and are 
described as facilitatory and inhibitory respectively. 
Inhibition of transmitter release is usually achieved by 
limiting Ca2+ entry through voltage-gated ion channels 
into the neuron. There are two functional categories of 
presynaptic receptors:
• autoreceptors respond to neurotransmitter released 
from the neurons upon which the receptor sits, and
• heteroceptors respond to neurotransmitters released 
from other neurons, usually by axo-axonal synapses 
(see Fig. 4.1).
The first recognition of a clinically important pre-
synaptic receptor came with the discovery that the 
membrane and the release of stored neurotransmitter 
into the synaptic cleft.
4.	 The released neurotransmitter binds to the appro-
priate receptors in the postsynaptic membranes and 
generates biochemical changes in the recipient cells; 
these may be functional changes (e.g. smooth mus-
cle contraction) or excitation or inhibition of another 
neuron (e.g. transmission of the AP to postsynaptic 
nerve fibres).
5.	 The released neurotransmitter may also stimulate auto-
receptors in the presynaptic membranes and thereby 
modulate the further release of the neurotransmitter.
6.	 The transmitter is degraded by enzymes or taken 
back into the presynaptic neuron for reuse.
Neurons may release a single transmitter, but often 
more than one transmitter is released. There are many 
examples of co-transmission, which are described later 
in this book.
Met
aboli
sm of
 tran
smit
ter
CELL BODY
Neurotransmitter
synthesis in
cell body
Axo-axonic
modulation
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
– or +
Presynaptic
autoreceptor
inhibits or
stimulates
transmitter
release
Single or
co-transmitter
release
Postsynaptic
receptors
SYNAPSE
Uptake of transmitter
PRESYNAPTIC
NEURON
Neurotransmitter
transport from
cell body
Neurotransmitter
synthesis in
presynaptic region
Vesicle
Action 
potential
Na+
Axon
+
Fig. 4.1  Principles of neurotransmission at a synapse. Basic pathways of synthesis, storage, release, action and 
inactivation of a typical neurotransmitter are shown, as described in the text. At many synapses, co-transmission of 
different neurotransmitters occurs.
	
	
Neurotransmission and the Peripheral Autonomic Nervous System  CHAPTER 4	
73
antihypertensive agent clonidine lowers blood pres-
sure via stimulation of presynaptic α2-adrenoceptors, 
with subsequent inhibition of the release of the vaso-
constrictor noradrenaline. Presynaptic receptors (see 
Table 4.1) are increasingly recognised as playing impor-
tant roles in the clinical effects produced by many 
drugs.
THE PERIPHERAL AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM
The peripheral autonomic nervous system is an impor-
tant site for the action of many drugs because:
• it either controls or contributes to the control of the 
functioning of nearly all of the major organ systems 
of the body;
• its dysfunction is present in many diseases, and can 
also occur as an unwanted effect of drug treatment;
• it utilises two major different neurotransmitters and 
a number of receptor subtypes; these provide a vari-
ety of sites for drug action (Box 4.1), which allows 
modification of particular body functions with some 
degree of selectivity.
The peripheral autonomic nervous system is subdi-
vided into two main branches (Fig. 4.2, Box 4.2):
• the parasympathetic nervous system, which utilises 
acetylcholine (ACh) as the final transmitter at 
muscarinic receptors on the cells being stimulated 
(called the innervated or effector cells or organs);
• the sympathetic nervous system, which utilises nor-
adrenaline as the transmitter at adrenoceptors on 
most, but not all, effector organs. The release of adren-
aline and noradrenaline from the adrenal medulla 
into the blood during sympathetic stimulation is also 
an important and integral part of the sympathetic 
response.
Anatomically, in both branches of the autonomic 
nervous system, the efferent neurons innervating 
effector organs are linked to neurons in the CNS via 
ganglia, but the distribution and neuronal interconnec-
tions differ between the two branches (see Fig. 4.2):
• The parasympathetic efferents give more discrete 
innervation of organs; the ganglia are close to the 
innervated organs and they therefore have long pre-
ganglionic fibres and short postganglionic fibres; there 
are few or no interconnections between ganglia, so 
that innervated organs can be controlled indepen-
dently. The parasympathetic nervous system is often 
described as promoting ‘rest and digest’ processes.
Table 4.1  The Control of Transmitter Release by Presynaptic Receptor Mechanisms.
NEUROTRANSMITTER
PRESYNAPTIC RECEPTORS  
INHIBITING RELEASE
PRESYNAPTIC RECEPTORS  
FACILITATING RELEASE
ACh
M2, α2, D2/D3, 5-HT3
N1, NMDA
Dopamine
D2/D3, M2
N1, NMDA
GABA
GABAb
—
Histamine
H3
—
5-HT
5-HT1D, α2
5-HT3
Noradrenaline
α2, H3, M2, D2, opioid
β2, N1, angiotensin II
5-HT, Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine), ACh, acetylcholine; GABA, γ-aminobutyric acid; NMDA, N-methyl-d-aspartate.
Box 4.1  Targets for Drug Action Within the Autonomic 
Nervous System.
•	Muscarinic receptors at postganglionic nerve endings 
in the parasympathetic nervous system (M1, M2 and M3 
receptor subtypes).
•	Adrenoceptors in the sympathetic nervous system (α1-, 
α2-, β1-, β2- and β3-adrenoceptor subtypes).
•	Presynaptic receptors in the parasympathetic and 
sympathetic nervous systems.
•	Modification of the synthesis, storage, release and 
inactivation of acetylcholine and noradrenaline.
Box 4.2  Organisation of the Autonomic Nervous 
System (see also Figs. 4.2 and 4.7).
•	 ACh and NA are the principal neurotransmitters in the 
autonomic nervous system, but other substances also 
have neurotransmitter roles.
•	 The neurotransmitters are released into synapses in 
response to depolarisation and Ca2+ influx caused by 
an action potential.
•	 Parasympathetic and sympathetic efferent nerves 
from the spinal cord synapse at intermediate ganglia, 
where the transmitter is ACh acting on nicotinic N1 (NG) 
receptors to elicit action potentials in the postganglionic 
fibres.
•	 Stimulation of the sympathetic nervous system has 
a widespread effect in the body because of paraver-
tebral chain connections between efferent pathways, 
whereas the parasympathetic nervous system is more 
organ-specific.
•	 Parasympathetic postganglionic fibres release ACh 
that acts at muscarinic receptors on the end-organs.
•	 Sympathetic postganglionic fibres release NA that acts on 
α- and β-adrenoceptors on the end-organs, except for 
sympathetic cholinergic innervation of sweat glands and 
hair follicles.
•	 Adrenaline and NA are synthesised and released in the 
adrenal medulla in response to sympathetic stimulation 
and enhance the effects of local NA release.
ACh, Acetylcholine; NA, noradrenaline.
74	
SECTION 1  General Principles
• The sympathetic efferents, in contrast, are clas-
sically described as controlling the coordinated 
‘fight-or-flight’ response and they affect many 
body systems simultaneously. Many of the gan-
glia are in the paravertebral sympathetic ganglion 
chain that lies close along each side of the spinal 
column, so these nerves have short preganglionic 
fibres and long postganglionic fibres. All neurons 
in the sympathetic nervous system can be activated 
simultaneously because of numerous neuronal 
interconnections within the paravertebral chain; 
also, axons passing through the chain without syn-
apsing can interconnect with ganglia such as the 
inferior mesenteric ganglion and then diversify to 
innervate several organs (see Fig. 4.2).
Many organs are innervated by both the sympa-
thetic and parasympathetic nervous systems, which 
act in concert and may have opposite effects on the 
organ function. Physiological functions therefore 
often require inverse coordination of sympathetic and 
parasympathetic activities; for example, urination is 
brought about by a decreased sympathetic activity on 
the sphincter muscle and increased parasympathetic 
activity on the bladder wall (detrusor) muscle (see 
urinary bladder, Tables 4.2 and 4.3, and Chapter 15). 
Other organs, however, may be innervated by only one 
autonomic branch, such as the lens of the eye, which 
has only parasympathetic innervation.
The concept of opposing actions, although imperfect, 
can be useful in remembering the effects that each branch 
Midbrain
medulla
Thoracic
Lumbar
Sacral
SYMPATHETIC
Heart
Airways
Sweat
glands
GI tract 
Adrenal
medulla
Colon
NA
ACh
NA
ACh
ACh
NA
NA
ACh
ACh
A
NA
Paravertebral
sympathetic 
chain
Paravertebral
ganglion
NA
Urinary
bladder
(detrusor
sphincter)
PARASYMPATHETIC
Salivary
gland
Heart
Airways
GI tract
Urinary
bladder
(detrusor)
ACh ACh
ACh ACh
ACh ACh
ACh ACh
ACh ACh
ACh ACh
ACh ACh
Inferior
mesenteric
ganglion
Superior
mesenteric
ganglion
Eye 
(pupil)
Eye 
(pupil,
ciliary 
muscle)
Fig. 4.2  Organisation of the parasympathetic and sympathetic autonomic nervous systems. Activation of the 
sympathetic nervous system leads to widespread neuronal release of noradrenaline, supplemented by release into 
the circulation of adrenaline (and some noradrenaline) from the adrenal medulla; these act at α- and β-adrenoceptors 
(see Table 4.2). Stimulation of the parasympathetic nervous system produces more localised effects at particular organs, 
mediated by acetylcholine acting at muscarinic receptors (see Table 4.3). Some tissues, such as airways, have sparse 
sympathetic innervations and sympathetic effects are mainly a result of circulating adrenaline. Sympathetic innervation of 
sweat glands is mediated, unusually, by acetylcholine. The ganglia innervating some organs are not part of the paraver-
tebral chain but grouped together to form the coeliac, superior mesenteric or inferior mesenteric ganglia; the transmitter 
at all ganglia is acetylcholine acting at nicotinic N1 (ganglion-type, NG) receptors. A, Adrenaline; ACh, acetylcholine; GI, 
gastrointestinal; NA, noradrenaline.
	
	
Neurotransmission and the Peripheral Autonomic Nervous System  CHAPTER 4	
75
Table 4.3  Effect of Stimulation of Parasympathetic Nerves (Via Muscarinic M1–M3 Receptor Subtypes) in Major Tissues.a
TISSUE
EFFECT
MAIN RECEPTOR TYPE
Heart rate
Decrease
M2
Contractility of atria
Decrease
M2
Atrioventricular conduction velocity
Decrease
M2
Vascular smooth muscle
Constriction
M3
Vascular endothelium
Nitric oxide release (vasodilator)
M3, M1
Bronchial smooth muscle
Constriction
M3, M2
Gut motility
Contraction, relaxation
M3, M2
Gut sphincter tone
Increased
M3
Gut secretions
Increased
M3, M1
Bladder detrusor
Contraction
M3
Bladder sphincter
Relaxation
M3
Penis
Erection
M3
Eye pupil circular muscle
Contraction (miosis)
M3
Eye: Ciliary muscle
Contraction (lens accommodates for near vision)
M3
Pancreatic insulin secretion
Increased
M1, M3
Salivary glands
Secretion
M3, M1
Emesis
Increased
M3
aMuscarinic M1 and M3 receptors are typically excitatory on smooth muscle and glandular tissues. M2 receptors are typically inhibitory, notably in the heart, and also as 
inhibitory autoreceptors in many tissues. M4 and M5 receptor subtypes occur predominantly in the central nervous system.
Table 4.2  Effects of Sympathetic Nervous System Activity Via Adrenoceptor Subtypes in Major Tissues.
TISSUE
EFFECT
MAIN RECEPTOR TYPE
Heart rate
Increase
β1 (β2 in heart disease)
Contractility
Increase
β1 (β2 in heart disease)
Atrioventricular conduction
Increase
β1
Blood vessels in skin/gut
Constriction
α1
Blood vessels in skeletal muscle
Dilationa
β2
Bronchial smooth muscle
Dilationa
β2
Gastrointestinal motility
Relaxation
α1, β2
Gastrointestinal sphincter tone
Contraction
α1
Uterine smooth muscle
Contraction
α1
Relaxation
β2
Bladder detrusor
Relaxation
β2, β3
Bladder sphincter
Constriction
α1
Penis
Ejaculation
α1
Pilomotor muscles
Constriction
α1
Sweat glands
Secretion
Muscarinic
Pupil (radial muscle)
Contraction dilates pupil
α1
Hepatic glycogenolysis
Increase
β2, α
Skeletal muscle glycogenolysis
Increasea
β2
Fat cell lipolysis
Increasea
β1, α, β3
Pancreas insulin secretion
Decrease
α2
Platelets
Aggregation
α2
Presynaptic nerve terminal (noradrenergic)
Inhibition of NA release
α2
Increased NA release
β2
Presynaptic nerve terminal (muscarinic)
Inhibition of ACh release
α2
Kidney (juxtaglomerular) renin release
Increase
β1
aRespond to circulating adrenaline; little noradrenergic innervation.
ACh, Acetylcholine; NA, noradrenaline.
76	
SECTION 1  General Principles
of the autonomic nervous system has on organ function 
and hence the effects of drugs that modulate sympa-
thetic and parasympathetic activity. Tables 4.2 and 4.3 
show the effects that stimulation of the sympathetic or 
parasympathetic nervous systems have on major tissues 
and the primary receptors that are involved. Under rest-
ing conditions, the predominant drive to many organs 
is from the parasympathetic nervous system, with the 
sympathetic nervous system producing more transient 
but highly coordinated responses.
THE SYMPATHETIC NERVOUS SYSTEM AND 
NORADRENERGIC TRANSMISSION
Noradrenaline and adrenaline are members of the cat-
echolamine family of amine transmitters (Fig. 4.3A). 
Both the catechol ring and the amino group are impor-
tant for receptor binding. Noradrenaline and adrena-
line stimulate adrenoceptors, and their effects at these 
receptors are described as noradrenergic and adrener-
gic, respectively.
The approved European names of noradrenaline 
and adrenaline when formulated as medicines are 
norepinephrine and epinephrine, respectively; however, 
when their physiological actions are being described, 
the terms noradrenaline and adrenaline are retained. 
Most preparations in Europe are dual-labelled with 
both terms, but in the USA the terms epinephrine 
and norepinephrine are used for both therapeutic and 
physiological descriptions.
SYNTHESIS AND STORAGE OF 
CATECHOLAMINES: NORADRENALINE, 
ADRENALINE AND DOPAMINE
Catecholamine neurotransmitters are synthesised 
from phenylalanine or tyrosine, which are aromatic 
amino acids derived from the diet (see Fig. 4.3B). The 
sequence of synthesis of adrenaline (via dopamine 
and noradrenaline) is shown in Fig. 4.3B. The oxida-
tion of tyrosine to levodopa by tyrosine hydroxylase, 
which occurs within the neuron, commits the molecule 
to become a neurotransmitter. This step is subject to 
negative feedback by the catecholamines that are sub-
sequently produced, thereby regulating supply. The 
conversion of levodopa to dopamine is catalysed by a 
cytosolic enzyme, aromatic l-amino acid decarboxyl-
ase, also known as dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA) 
decarboxylase. The amine product, dopamine, is taken 
up into vesicles by a specific transporter termed the 
vesicular monoamine transporter 2 (VMAT2). In neu-
rons that use dopamine as their primary transmitter, 
this is the end of the synthetic pathway. Dopamine is 
a neurotransmitter in important pathways in the CNS 
and also in some parts of the peripheral nervous sys-
tem (see Chapters 7, 21 and 24).
The vesicles in noradrenergic neurons contain 
dopamine β-hydroxylase, largely within the vesicle 
membrane, and this enzyme generates noradrenaline. 
Noradrenaline and its precursor dopamine are stored 
in the vesicles complexed with adenosine triphosphate 
(ATP) and proteoglycans.
The chromaffin cells of the adrenal medulla contain 
an additional cytosolic enzyme (phenylethanolamine 
N-methyltransferase), which converts noradrenaline 
to adrenaline by the addition of a methyl group (see 
Fig. 4.3B). Adrenaline is then transferred by vesicular 
monoamine transporter 1 (VMAT1) into chromaffin 
cell granules, where it is stored ready for release.
NORADRENALINE RELEASE
Release in response to a nerve impulse occurs follow-
ing Ca2+ influx and Ca2+-mediated fusion of the nor-
adrenaline-containing vesicle with the cytoplasmic 
membrane.
Noradrenaline in the presynaptic neuron may also 
be released by so-called indirectly acting sympatho-
mimetic amines, which are low-molecular-weight 
basic compounds, including food constituents (such 
as tyramine), therapeutic drugs (such as ephedrine) 
and some drugs of abuse (such as amfetamine and 
metamfetamine). These compounds are taken into the 
presynaptic cytosol, where they interact with vesicu-
lar monoamine transporters to cause displacement of 
noradrenaline from the vesicles into the cytosol and 
thence into the synaptic cleft, leading to biological 
effects at postsynaptic adrenoceptors.
UPTAKE AND METABOLISM OF RELEASED 
NORADRENALINE
The principal mechanism for the removal of noradrena-
line from the synapse is uptake (approximately 70%–90%) 
into the presynaptic neuron via a specific high-affinity 
carrier called uptake 1 or the norepinephrine transporter 
(NET); it also takes up dopamine but not adrenaline 
(Fig. 4.4). Both noradrenaline and dopamine can then be 
transferred from the cytosol into the vesicles by VMAT2. 
Some of the noradrenaline remaining in the synapse is 
taken up into nonneuronal tissues by a low-affinity car-
rier called uptake 2 (or the extraneuronal monoamine 
transporter), which can also transport adrenaline. The 
rest of the remaining noradrenaline and the majority 
of any adrenaline released into the circulation as a co-
transmitter is metabolised. Separate transporters exist 
for reuptake of serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) 
and dopamine from their respective neurons, termed 
the serotonin transporter (SERT) and dopamine trans-
porter (DAT), respectively. Therapeutic agents that block 
NET, SERT, DAT or permutations of these transporters 
increase the amount of monoamine neurotransmitters in 
the synaptic cleft and are used in treating depression (see 
Chapter 22). The uptake of noradrenaline by NET is also 
blocked by cocaine and amfetamine.
There are two main enzymes involved in the initial 
steps in the catabolism of noradrenaline: monoamine 
oxidase (MAO) and catechol-O-methyltransferase 
(COMT).
	
	
Neurotransmission and the Peripheral Autonomic Nervous System  CHAPTER 4	
77
Monoamine Oxidase
MAO is present on the surface of the mitochondria of 
the presynaptic neuron, where it oxidises free cytoplas-
mic noradrenaline, and also in many other sites, such 
as the gastrointestinal (GI) epithelium and liver. There 
are two main MAO isoenzymes, MAO-A and MAO-B, 
which differ in their organ distribution and substrate 
affinities. MAO-A has greater affinity for noradrena-
line and serotonin, whilst both isoenzymes have affin-
ity for dopamine, adrenaline and tyramine (Table 4.4). 
Oxidative removal of the amino group by MAO is the 
major pathway of catabolism of noradrenaline and 
CH2
NH2
HO
HO
CH
COOH
CH2
NH2
HO
CH
COOH
CH2
NH2
CH
COOH
CH
HO
HO
CH2
NH2
OH
CH2
HO
HO
CH2
NH2
Phenylalanine hydroxylase
Tyrosine hydroxylase
(in cytosol of neuron)
L-aromatic amino acid
decarboxylase (dopa decarboxylase)
(in cytosol)
Dopamine-β-hydroxylase
(in vesicles)
CH
HO
HO
CH2
NHCH3
OH
Methyl transferase
(in adrenal)
Phenylalanine
Adrenaline
Levodopa
Dopamine
Noradrenaline
Rate-limiting step
–
X
Dopamine
H
H
Noradrenaline OH
H
Adrenaline
OH
CH3
Y
HO
HO
CH
X
Tyrosine
CH2 NHY
A
B
Fig. 4.3  The structure of the main physiological catecholamines (A) and their synthesis from amino acid 
precursors (B). The catecholamine synthetic pathway is described in the text.
78	
SECTION 1  General Principles
other amine neurotransmitters. Loss of the amino 
group prevents binding to the postsynaptic receptor 
and therefore inactivates the transmitter. Metabolism 
of noradrenaline by MAO and COMT results in the 
formation of vanillylmandelic acid, which is the main 
urinary metabolite. The use of inhibitors of MAO-A 
and/or MAO-B isoenzymes in depression and Parkin-
son’s disease is discussed in Chapters 22 and 24.
Catechol-O-Methyltransferase
COMT occurs only at low levels in noradrenergic 
neurons, but is present in many other tissues, includ-
ing the brain, GI tract, liver and spleen. It occurs in a 
soluble form and a membrane-bound form but both 
catalyse the transfer of a methyl group onto the cat-
echolamine aromatic ring, which prevents binding 
to the postsynaptic receptor. COMT is a minor route 
of inactivation of both dopamine and noradrenaline. 
Inhibitors of COMT such as entacapone are used as an 
adjunct to levodopa therapy for Parkinson’s disease 
(see Chapter 24).
SYMPATHETIC NERVOUS SYSTEM RECEPTORS
All autonomic ganglia utilise ACh as a neurotransmit-
ter, acting predominantly on nicotinic type 1 (N1) recep-
tors (also known as ‘ganglion-type’ nicotinic receptors) 
to elicit an AP in the postganglionic axon. In the sym-
pathetic nervous system, the receptors at most, but not 
all, postganglionic nerve endings are adrenoceptors.
Based on the effects of a number of agonists and antag-
onists, adrenoceptors are divided into two types, α and 
β, and further into α-subtypes (α1 and α2) and β-subtypes 
Table 4.4  Monoamine Oxidase and Its Inhibitors.
ISOENZYME
LOCATION IN HUMAN TISSUESa
MAIN SUBSTRATES
EXAMPLES OF DRUG INHIBITORS
IRREVERSIBLE
REVERSIBLE
MAO-A
Brain (cerebral cortex), lung, 
pancreas, placenta, small 
intestine
Serotonin, 
noradrenaline
Moclobemide
MAO-B
Brain (striatum), platelets, 
lymphocytes
Phenylethylamine
Selegiline, rasagiline
Safinamide
MAO-A and MAO-B
Aorta, brain, colon, heart, 
kidney, liver, skeletal muscle
Adrenaline, dopamine, 
tyramine
Isocarboxazid, phenel-
zine, tranylcypromine
aBoth isoenzymes are present in most tissues listed, with differential expression in some tissues as shown.
MAO, Monoamine oxidase.
Tyrosine
Synthesis cascade
(Fig. 4.3)
NA
MAO
Metabolites
NA
NA
α2
α1
β1 β2 β3
Uptake 1 (NET)
Uptake 2
Adrenal medulla
Adrenaline
Degradation
products
(see text)
COMT
Liver
Metabolites
Fig. 4.4  A noradrenergic nerve terminal (varicosity) showing the synthesis and sites of action of noradrenaline 
and adrenaline. Dashed lines show how the actions of the catecholamines are curtailed. COMT, Catechol-O-methyl-
transferase; MAO, monoamine oxidase; NA, noradrenaline; NET, norepinephrine transporter (uptake 1).
	
	
Neurotransmission and the Peripheral Autonomic Nervous System  CHAPTER 4	
79
(β1, β2 and β3; see Table 4.2 and the drug receptor list at 
the end of Chapter 1). The endogenous catecholamines, 
noradrenaline and adrenaline, show modestly different 
affinities for the adrenoceptor subtypes:
α1: noradrenaline ≥ adrenaline
α2: adrenaline ≥ noradrenaline
β1: noradrenaline ≥ adrenaline
β2: adrenaline > noradrenaline
β3: adrenaline = noradrenaline
Selective stimulation or blockade of individual 
adrenoceptor subtypes forms the basis of signifi-
cant areas of pharmacology and therapeutics and 
is discussed in later chapters. It is further under-
stood that there are multiple forms of the α1- and α2-
adrenoceptor subtypes (namely α1A, α1B and α1D, and 
α2A, α2B and α2C), and these are also discussed where 
clinically relevant.
THE PARASYMPATHETIC NERVOUS SYSTEM AND 
CHOLINERGIC TRANSMISSION
SYNTHESIS OF ACETYLCHOLINE
ACh is synthesised within the cytosol of the cholin-
ergic neuron from choline and acetyl-CoA (Fig. 4.5). 
Choline is a highly polar, quaternary amino com-
pound that is also present in phosphatidylcholine; it is 
obtained largely from the diet. Because of its fixed pos-
itive charge, it does not readily cross cell membranes; 
there are specific transporters to allow uptake into the 
presynaptic neuron (see Fig. 4.5) and from the GI tract 
AcCoA
CoA
CAT
Choline
ACh
ACh
Choline uptake
Choline + acetate
Presynaptic
N1 receptor
Muscarinic
receptor
Nicotinic type 2
receptor
Acetylcholinesterase
(AChE)
Depolarising
muscle
relaxant (Ch. 27)
Competitive
muscle
relaxant (Ch. 27)
Glaucoma (Ch. 50)
Dementias (Ch. 9)
Glaucoma (Ch. 50) Dilate pupil (Ch. 50)
Dilate airway (Ch. 12)
Stabilise bladder (Ch. 15)
Reduce gut motility (Ch. 35)
Prevent bradycardia (Ch. 8)
Antiemetic (Ch. 32)
Antiparkinsonian (Ch. 24)
Antagonists
Agonists
Antagonists
Agonists
Inhibitors
+
ACh
Fig. 4.5  The mechanisms involved in the synthesis, release and inactivation of acetylcholine. The actions of agonists 
and antagonists of muscarinic and nicotinic N2 (or NM) receptors and inhibitors of acetylcholinesterase are shown with the 
relevant chapters dealing with their pharmacology. AcCoA, Acetyl-CoA; ACh, acetylcholine; CAT, choline acetyltransferase.
80	
SECTION 1  General Principles
Choline diffuses
away (uptake
into neuron – Fig. 4.5)
OH
Free enzyme
active site
ANIONIC
SITE
ANIONIC
SITE
Acetylcholine binds
to anionic site
1
3
2
Hydrolysis of bound
acetyl group with
release of acetate
+
O
OH
(CH3)3N-CH2CH2OCCH3
O
C-CH3
O
Serine-
containing
hydrolytic
site
Choline    Acetyl
Transfer of 
acetyl group 
to serine-OH
ANIONIC
SITE
Fig. 4.6  The mechanism of hydrolysis of acetylcholine by acetylcholinesterase. The choline moiety of acetylcholine 
binds to the anionic site of the acetylcholinesterase active site, allowing transfer of the acetyl group to the serine hydroxyl 
moiety at the enzyme’s hydrolytic site, with subsequent release of choline and acetate.
and across the blood–brain barrier (see Chapter 2). 
Acetylation of choline to form ACh is catalysed by 
choline acetyltransferase. The rate of synthesis of ACh 
is closely controlled and related to ACh turnover, so 
that rapid release of ACh stores is associated with 
enhanced synthesis.
STORAGE OF ACETYLCHOLINE
Cytosolic ACh is taken up into membrane vesicles by 
a specific transmembrane transporter (the vesicular 
ACh transporter, VAChT) and stored in the vesicles in 
association with ATP and acidic proteoglycans. Each 
vesicle contains 1000 to 50,000  ACh molecules, and 
neuromuscular junctions (see Chapter 27) contain 
about 300,000 vesicles.
RELEASE OF ACETYLCHOLINE
Release of ACh occurs by Ca2+-mediated fusion of the 
vesicle membrane with the cytoplasmic membrane 
and exocytosis (see Fig. 4.5). This process can be inhib-
ited by botulinus toxin from Clostridium botulinum 
bacteria and stimulated by latrotoxin from the black 
widow spider (Latrodectus spp.). The number of vesi-
cles released depends on the site of the synapse, with 
between 30 and 300 vesicles undergoing exocytosis, 
releasing from 30,000 to over 3 million ACh molecules 
into the synaptic cleft. Neurons within the CNS are 
more sensitive to ACh release and require fewer ACh 
molecules to be released to stimulate a recipient axon 
compared with the neuromuscular junction, which 
requires millions of ACh molecules for skeletal muscle 
contractility to occur.
METABOLISM AND INACTIVATION OF RELEASED 
ACETYLCHOLINE
Both presynaptic and postsynaptic membranes are 
rich in acetylcholinesterase (AChE); hence the released 
ACh is hydrolysed very rapidly (usually <1  ms) to 
give choline and acetate. This rapid hydrolysis, and 
the rapid equilibration between ACh bound to the 
receptor and free in the synapse, means that the ‘recep-
tor phase’ of the transmission process only lasts for 1 
to 2 ms (the postsynaptic changes may be more pro-
longed, as discussed later).
AChE is an important target for drug action and 
also for the toxic effects of some chemicals; the active 
site of the esterase has two critical features involved in 
the metabolism of ACh (Fig. 4.6):
• an anionic site, which forms an ionic bond with the 
quaternary nitrogen of the choline part of ACh;
• a hydrolytic site, which contains a serine moiety; 
the hydroxyl group of the serine accepts the acetyl 
group from ACh and very rapidly transfers it to 
water to complete the hydrolysis reaction.
	
	
Neurotransmission and the Peripheral Autonomic Nervous System  CHAPTER 4	
81
Inhibition of AChE will prevent the breakdown of 
ACh and lead to prolonged receptor occupancy, the 
consequences of which depend on the nature of the 
receptor and the innervated cell/tissue. AChE inhibi-
tors can be divided into three types:
• AChE inhibitors that bind reversibly to the anionic 
site (e.g. edrophonium; see Chapter 28).
• AChE inhibitors that carbamylate the serine group. 
These bind to the anionic site and transfer a carbam-
oyl group (instead of an acetyl group) to the serine 
hydroxyl group at the enzyme hydrolytic site. The 
carbamoyl group is hydrolysed more slowly from 
the serine than an acetyl group, resulting in pro-
longed and profound (but slowly reversible) inhibi-
tion of the enzyme; examples include neostigmine 
and pyridostigmine, which are used for reversal of 
neuromuscular block (see Chapter 27) and in the 
treatment of myasthenia gravis (see Chapter 28). 
Reversible AChE inhibitors such as donepezil and 
rivastigmine are used in the treatment of Alzheimer’s 
disease (see Chapter 9).
• AChE inhibitors that phosphorylate the serine group. 
Inhibitors such as the organophosphates react 
with the serine hydroxyl group at the hydrolytic 
site (with or without binding to the anionic site) to 
produce a phosphorylated enzyme, which is resis-
tant to hydrolysis. These inhibitors therefore cause 
inhibition, which is irreversible (or very slowly and 
partially reversible). Such changes in enzyme activ-
ity are of limited clinical use, although ecothiopate 
irreversibly phosphorylates AChE and is used in 
ophthalmology. Irreversible AChE inhibition may 
also be encountered clinically in people suffering 
accidental poisoning with organophosphate com-
pounds, such as some agricultural pesticides (e.g. 
malathion), or even after exposure to some nerve 
gases used for chemical warfare (e.g. novichok 
agents). The active serine hydroxyl group of AChE 
may be reactivated soon after organophosphate 
exposure by administration of pralidoxime (2-PAM), 
although its efficacy as an antidote is contentious. 
A few hours after organophosphate exposure, the 
phosphorylated enzyme undergoes changes known 
as ageing, and pralidoxime cannot then reactivate 
the enzyme.
Unlike many other neurotransmitters, there is no 
reuptake process for ACh, but after it is hydrolysed 
into choline and acetate by AChE, there is a specific 
reuptake of choline into the presynaptic neuron. Cho-
line is a limited resource and reuptake allows its rein-
corporation into ACh, whereas no reuptake occurs for 
acetate because it is readily available from interme-
diary metabolism. Presynaptic uptake of choline can 
be inhibited by structural analogues, such as hemi-
cholinium, but such drugs are not useful clinically 
because of the widespread and nonspecific conse-
quences of impairment of ACh uptake, synthesis and 
release.
CHOLINERGIC RECEPTORS
The cholinergic receptors can be divided into nico-
tinic receptor types, all of which are coupled to cation 
channels, and muscarinic receptor types, which are 
G-protein–coupled receptors (GPCRs; see the drug 
receptor table at the end of Chapter 1). The receptors 
were originally named after nitrogen-containing basic 
compounds (alkaloids) present in plants (nicotine) or 
fungi (muscarine) that act as selective agonists at these 
receptors. Fig. 4.5 outlines the effects of agonists and 
antagonists at muscarinic and nicotinic receptors, and 
also of AChE inhibitors, listing key chapters covering 
the clinical relevance of these drugs.
Various subtypes of neuronal nicotinic receptors 
(NN) are found in the CNS, where they are often presyn-
aptic and modulate release of neurotransmitters such as 
dopamine. In the autonomic nervous system, two nico-
tinic receptor types are distinguished: N1 (also known 
as ‘ganglion-type’ or NG receptors) and N2 receptors 
(also known as ‘muscle-type’ or NM receptors).
Nicotinic N1 (or NG) Receptors
Nicotinic N1 receptors occur on the postsynaptic mem-
branes of all ganglia of both the sympathetic and para-
sympathetic nervous systems and are activated by 
ACh released from preganglionic fibres. N1 receptors 
are also responsible for the cholinergic stimulation of 
adrenaline release from adrenal glands.
Nicotinic N2 (or NM) Receptors
Nicotinic N2 receptors occur at the junction between 
the somatic motor nerves and skeletal muscles (the 
neuromuscular junction; see Chapter 27).
All nicotinic receptors are ligand-gated ion channels 
of five subunits (see Fig. 1.1), with disulfide cross-link-
ing between adjacent subunits; there are different types 
of subunits, classified into α, β, γ, δ and ε subfamilies, 
and different permutations of subunits give rise to the 
different nicotinic receptor types and subtypes in the 
CNS, autonomic ganglia and neuromuscular junction. 
The differences between nicotinic N1 and N2 receptors 
in their agonist/antagonist binding characteristics are 
clinically very important because they allow neuro-
muscular blockade (paralysis) without major effects 
on the autonomic nervous system.
Muscarinic Receptors
These are GPCRs widely distributed in the CNS and 
in pre- and postganglionic fibre/effector organ junc-
tions of the parasympathetic branch of the autonomic 
nervous system. They are also present on most sweat 
glands (other than the palms of the hands), which are, 
however, innervated by the sympathetic branch of the 
autonomic nervous system. Table 4.3 shows the effect 
of stimulation of the muscarinic (M) receptors in major 
tissues and the principal muscarinic receptor subtype 
that is involved. There are five subtypes of muscarinic 
receptor (M1–M5; see the drug receptor table at the end 
82	
SECTION 1  General Principles
of Chapter 1). All five subtypes are found in the CNS; 
the distribution and functions of M1, M2 and M3 recep-
tors have also been well characterised at parasympa-
thetic effector sites (see Table 4.3). M2 receptors are 
particularly associated with inhibition of cardiac activ-
ity, and M3 receptors with stimulating smooth muscle 
and glandular tissues.
It should be appreciated that AChE inhibitors 
increase the concentrations of ACh at all cholinergic 
sites and therefore produce a diverse array of nicotinic 
and muscarinic receptor effects. For example, when an 
AChE inhibitor is used to overcome reversible neuro-
muscular blockade (see Chapter 27), it also increases 
ACh-mediated effects produced via the parasympa-
thetic nervous system, such as on the GI tract and 
heart. These unwanted effects of ACh can be blocked 
by co-administration of an antimuscarinic agent (see 
the drug receptor list at the end of Chapter 1).
The distribution of the key neurotransmitters and 
receptors of the somatic and autonomic nervous sys-
tems is summarised in Fig. 4.7, which should be 
understood in association with the activities of the 
sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems on 
specific tissues shown in Tables 4.2 and 4.3.
OTHER TRANSMITTERS IN THE PERIPHERAL 
NERVOUS SYSTEM
In addition to ACh and noradrenaline, other transmit-
ters have roles in neurotransmission and functions in 
the peripheral nervous system. Many of these are also 
of considerable importance in the CNS. The different 
transmitters are dealt with in the chapters that describe 
their clinical importance, and include:
• amines (e.g. dopamine, histamine, serotonin),
• amino acids (e.g. glutamate, glycine, γ-aminobutyric 
acid (GABA)),
• peptides (e.g. opioids, substance P),
• purines (e.g. adenosine, ATP).
Nitric oxide (NO), calcitonin gene-related peptide 
(CGRP), vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), neuropep-
tide Y (NPY), ghrelin and others are described later in 
this book.
AMINES
Dopamine
Dopamine is an important neurotransmitter in both 
the CNS and the periphery, and subsequent chapters 
cover its actions (see Chapters 7, 21, 24 and 32).
Synthesis and storage of dopamine
The synthesis and storage of dopamine have been 
described previously in the section on noradrenaline.
Release of dopamine
Nerve stimulation causes the release of preformed 
dopamine present in vesicles (see the section on nor-
adrenaline). Dopaminergic neurons are not important 
in the clinical responses to indirectly acting sympatho-
mimetics, although certain behavioural responses to 
amfetamines are linked to dopamine D2 receptor activ-
ity. The antiviral drug amantadine, which is of some 
Sweat
gland 
Adrenal
gland 
Somatic
nervous
system
Parasympathetic
nervous
system
Sympathetic
nervous
system
Ganglia
ACh
ACh
ACh
ACh
ACh
ACh
N1
N2
N1
N1
M
M
NA
Adr
α, β
β, α
NMJ
Ganglion
ACh
N1
Fig. 4.7  Schematic diagram of the distribution of the main neurotransmitters and receptors of the somatic, para-
sympathetic and sympathetic nervous systems. ACh, Acetylcholine; Adr, adrenaline; M, muscarinic receptor; N1, N2, 
nicotinic receptors; NA, noradrenaline; NMJ, neuromuscular junction; α, β, adrenoceptors.
	
	
Neurotransmission and the Peripheral Autonomic Nervous System  CHAPTER 4	
83
value in Parkinson’s disease, causes release of dopa-
mine among other actions (see Chapter 24).
Removal of activity of released dopamine
Dopamine is removed by similar mechanisms to those 
described previously for noradrenaline, with reuptake 
by the DAT representing the major pathway.
Dopamine receptors
There are five main types of dopamine receptors and 
relatively selective therapeutic agents are available 
for some of these (see the drug receptor list at the end 
of Chapter 1). Dopamine receptors are grouped into 
those that increase cyclic adenosine monophosphate 
(cAMP) (D1 and D5) and those that decrease cAMP 
(D2, D3 and D4). The D4 receptor shows polymorphic 
expression. Dopamine receptor subtypes D2 and D4 are 
associated with schizophrenia, and relatively selective 
antagonists of each are valuable antipsychotic drugs 
(see Chapter 21).
Serotonin (5-Hydroxytryptamine)
Serotonin (or 5-HT; Fig. 4.8A) is a neurotransmitter in 
the CNS and periphery that has properties similar to 
the catecholamines.
Synthesis of serotonin
Serotonin is synthesised from the amino acid trypto-
phan by two reactions similar to those involved in the 
conversion of tyrosine to dopamine. The first reaction 
is catalysed by tryptophan hydroxylase and forms 
5-hydroxytryptophan; this is the rate-limiting step and 
only found in serotonin-producing cells. Conversion to 
serotonin is catalysed by aromatic l-amino acid decar-
boxylase (see the previous discussion of noradrenaline 
synthesis).
Serotonin is present in the diet but undergoes essen-
tially complete first-pass metabolism by MAO-A in 
the gut wall and liver. Serotonin is not synthesised by 
blood platelets, but they accumulate high concentra-
tions of serotonin from the circulation which can be 
released when platelets aggregate and during migraine 
episodes.
Storage of serotonin
The site of storage of more than 90% of the serotonin 
in the body is the enterochromaffin cells of the GI tract. 
Platelets accumulate serotonin and neurons utilising 
serotonin are widely distributed in the brain. In pre-
synaptic neurons, serotonin is stored in vesicles as a 
complex with ATP, and there is an active uptake pro-
cess which transfers cytoplasmic serotonin into the 
storage vesicle.
Release of serotonin
The release of serotonin vesicles is by Ca2+-mediated 
exocytosis. A rise in intraluminal pressure in the GI 
tract stimulates the release of serotonin from the 
chromaffin cells. Release of serotonin from chromaf-
fin cells contributes to nausea following cancer che-
motherapy with cytotoxic drugs by stimulation of the 
chemoreceptor trigger zone (see Chapter 32) and of 
sensory receptors within the GI tract. There is a sig-
nificant release of platelet serotonin in migraine (see 
Chapter 26).
Metabolism and removal of serotonin activity
The principal mechanism of inactivation of released 
serotonin is via its reuptake into the presynaptic 
nerve by the SERT, which shows a high affinity for 
serotonin and is distinct from the NET. Dual inhibi-
tors of serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake (SNRIs) 
and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are 
important antidepressants (see Chapter 22). Serotonin 
reuptake is also carried out by a low-affinity plasma 
membrane monoamine transporter (PMAT), which is 
not inhibited by SSRIs and also transports noradrena-
line and dopamine.
Metabolism of serotonin within the neuron is 
by MAO, which generates the excretory product 
N
H
HO
CH2CH2NH2
CH2CH2NH2
HN
N
Glutamate
Glycine
Histamine
γ-Aminobutyric acid
(GABA)
5-HT
C         CH2CH2CH2
NH2
HO
O
HOOC CH2CH2CH
NH2
COOH
CH2
NH2
COOH
A
B
C
D
E
Fig. 4.8  Diverse structures of important amine and amino acid neu-
rotransmitters. (A) 5-HT (serotonin); (B) histamine; (C) γ-aminobutyric 
acid (GABA); (D) glutamate; (E) glycine.
84	
SECTION 1  General Principles
5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA). There is a con-
siderable turnover of serotonin in the chromaffin and 
nerve cells, and 5-HIAA is a normal constituent of 
human urine.
Serotonin receptors
There is a large family of serotonin receptors (see the 
drug receptor list at the end of Chapter 1), with 14 
different G-protein–coupled seven-transmembrane 
(7TM) receptors and one ligand-gated ion channel 
(5-HT3) so far identified. These are divided into seven 
classes (5-HT1 to 5-HT7) on the basis of their structural 
and functional characteristics. Not all of the subtypes 
of receptors have recognised physiological roles. 
Receptors in the 5-HT1 and 5-HT5 groups inhibit ade-
nylyl cyclase, whereas those in the 5-HT2 group acti-
vate phospholipase C. Receptors in the 5-HT4, 5-HT6 
and 5-HT7 groups stimulate adenylyl cyclase, whereas 
5-HT3 receptors are ligand-gated ion channels that 
depolarize the cell membrane. Identification of recep-
tor subtype functions and development of selective 
inhibitors or stimulants have facilitated progress in 
the treatment of diseases including depression (see 
Chapter 22) and migraine (see Chapter 26).
Histamine
Histamine (see Fig. 4.8B) is an important transmit-
ter both in the CNS and in the periphery, as well as 
being an allergic mediator released from mast cells and 
basophils.
Synthesis of histamine
The amino acid histidine is decarboxylated to his-
tamine by histidine decarboxylase. In addition to 
the synthesis and storage of histamine by mast cells 
and basophils, there is continual synthesis, release 
and metabolic inactivation by growing tissues and in 
wound healing.
Storage of histamine
Most attention has focused on the storage of hista-
mine in mediator-releasing cells such as mast cells and 
basophils (see Chapter 12). In these cells, it is present 
in granules associated with heparin. The presence of 
histidine decarboxylase and the synthesis of histamine 
in neurons in the CNS are highly associated with the 
tuberomammillary nucleus (TMN) in the hypothala-
mus, from where histaminergic neurons project to 
many parts of the brain. Histamine is synthesized in 
axonal varicosities in these neurons, then transported 
into vesicles by VMAT2 for storage. Histamine plays a 
role in wakefulness, memory, appetite and many other 
functions.
Release of histamine
The release of histamine from mast cell and baso-
phil granules has been studied extensively in rela-
tion to allergic reactions (see Chapters 12 and 39). In 
chromaffin cells in the gut and enterochromaffin-like 
(ECL) cells in the gastric mucosa, histamine is syn-
thesised rapidly when required (see Chapter 33). In 
the hypothalamus, the release of histamine from neu-
ronal vesicles is triggered by action potentials and 
the amount of histamine released shows a circadian 
rhythm aligned with sleep-wake cycles.
Removal of histamine activity
Histamine is rapidly inactivated by oxidation to imid-
azole acetic acid. Histamine is not a substrate for MAO, 
and the oxidation is catalysed by diamine oxidase (or 
histaminase). A second, minor route of metabolism is 
methylation by histamine-N-methyltransferase, par-
ticularly in the CNS, and the product is then a substrate 
for MAO. Histamine is also eliminated as an N-acetyl 
conjugate.
Histamine receptors
There are four GPCRs for histamine (H1 to H4; see the 
drug receptor list at the end of Chapter 1), and an intra-
cellular receptor H(ic) is also postulated. H1 receptors 
have been studied extensively in relation to inflamma-
tion and allergy (see Chapters 12 and 39). Histaminer-
gic neurons in the hypothalamus and their projecting 
pathways promote wakefulness via H1 receptors and 
sedation is a serious problem with those H1 receptor 
antagonists able to cross the blood–brain barrier (see 
Chapter 2). Later generations of H1 antihistamines pro-
duce less sedation. H1 receptors are also involved in 
emesis (see Chapter 32).
The discovery of H2 receptors affecting the release 
of gastric acid led to the development of important 
H2-selective antagonists that reduce acid secretion 
and contribute to the treatment of dyspepsia and to 
ulcer healing (see Chapter 33). H2 receptors are also 
present in the brain and are probably responsible for 
the confusional state associated with the use of the 
H2 receptor antagonist cimetidine. H3 receptors are 
found in the CNS and other sites, where they may act 
as inhibitory autoreceptors and heteroceptors regu-
lating histamine storage. H4 receptors are localised 
mainly to leucocytes, but their functions are poorly 
understood.
AMINO ACIDS
γ-Aminobutyric Acid
GABA is an important inhibitory neurotransmitter 
responsible for about 40% of all inhibitory activity in 
the CNS (see Fig. 4.8C).
Synthesis and storage of γ-aminobutyric acid
GABA is formed by the decarboxylation of glutamate 
by glutamate decarboxylase in GABAergic neurons. 
GABA is stored in membrane vesicles in the brain and 
in interneurons in the spinal cord (particularly laminae 
II and III).
	
	
Neurotransmission and the Peripheral Autonomic Nervous System  CHAPTER 4	
85
Release of γ-aminobutyric acid
GABA is released by Ca2+-mediated exocytosis. Co-
transmitters such as glycine, metenkephalin and neu-
ropeptide Y are stored in GABA vesicles and released 
with GABA.
Removal of γ-aminobutyric acid activity
Uptake by the GABA transporter (GAT) family of trans-
porters is the principal mechanism for the removal of 
GABA from the synaptic cleft. The antiepileptic drug 
tiagabine acts as an inhibitor of GABA uptake by 
GABA transporter-1 (GAT-1) (see Chapter 23).
GABA is metabolised by transamination with 
α-ketoglutarate, which forms the corresponding alde-
hyde (succinic semialdehyde) and amino acid (glu-
tamic acid). The antiepileptic drug vigabatrin may 
inhibit GABA transamination.
γ-Aminobutyric acid receptors
There are two main types of GABA receptor, with 
different mechanisms of action (see the drug recep-
tor list at the end of Chapter 1). Stimulation of either 
type of receptor produces hyperpolarisation of the 
cell membrane, with GABAA causing rapid inhibition 
and GABAB producing a slower and more prolonged 
response. The GABAA receptor comprises a number 
of subunits. There are multiple forms of each subunit 
and numerous possible combinations (see Fig. 20.1); 
consequently, the GABAA receptor should be regarded 
as a family of receptors. Hyperpolarisation following 
GABAA receptor stimulation results from the opening 
of Cl− channels and influx of Cl− ions. GABAB receptors 
are G-protein–linked receptors that hyperpolarise the 
cell indirectly by closing Ca2+ channels and opening 
K+ channels. A subtype of GABAA receptor (GABAA-ρ) 
is found in the retina, where its significance remains 
unclear. Both GABAA and GABAB receptors are found 
presynaptically and inhibit neurotransmitter release 
by hyperpolarising the cell (by opening Cl− or K+ chan-
nels) and reducing release of the vesicles of the inner-
vating cell (by closing Ca2+ channels). Many important 
drugs act by altering GABA synthesis or breakdown, 
or by enhancing GABA activity at its receptors, includ-
ing drugs used for anxiety (see Chapter 20) and epi-
lepsy (see Chapter 23).
Glutamate
Glutamate (see Fig. 4.8D) is an important excitatory 
amino acid neurotransmitter with wide-reaching 
actions in physiological and pathological conditions. 
The functions of glutamate are described in later 
chapters. Aspartate is similar to glutamate and acts 
at the same receptors. Administration of glutamate or 
aspartate causes CNS excitation, tachycardia, nausea 
and headache, and convulsions at very high doses. 
Hyperactivity at glutamate receptors has been pro-
posed as a factor in the generation of epilepsy (see 
Chapter 23).
Synthesis and storage of glutamate
Glutamate (glutamic acid) is found in most cells and 
is widely distributed within the CNS. Glutamate is 
stored in presynaptic vesicles in the neurons.
Release of glutamate
Exocytosis of vesicles is mediated via the influx of 
Ca2+ into the presynaptic nerve terminal, as occurs for 
other neurotransmitters. Some antiepileptic drugs (e.g. 
lamotrigine and valproate; see Chapter 23) inhibit glu-
tamate release.
Removal of glutamate activity
The action of glutamate (or aspartate) in the synapse 
is terminated by excitatory amino acid transporters 
(EAATs), which take them up into the neuron and sur-
rounding glial cells.
Glutamate receptors
There are two major types of glutamate receptor, 
the ionotropic family, comprising AMPA (α-amino-
3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole 
propionic 
acid) 
receptors, kainate receptors and NMDA (N-methyl-
d-aspartate) receptors, and the metabotropic glu-
tamate receptor (mGluR) family, which have a 
range of biological actions (see the drug receptor 
list at the end of Chapter 1). The glutamate NMDA 
receptor antagonist memantine is used in treating 
Alzheimer’s disease (see Chapter 9), and the AMPA 
receptor antagonist perampanel is used in epilepsy 
(see Chapter 23).
Glycine
Glycine (see Fig. 4.8E) is a widely available amino 
acid that acts as an inhibitory neurotransmitter. It is 
released in response to nerve stimulation and acts in 
the spine, lower brainstem and retina.
Synthesis and storage of glycine
Glycine is present in all cells and is accumulated within 
vesicles by neurons.
Release of glycine
Vesicle release accompanies an action potential as 
described previously for other neurotransmitters. The 
tetanus toxin prevents glycine release and the decrease 
in glycine-mediated inhibition results in reflex 
hyperexcitability.
Removal of glycine activity
Released glycine undergoes cellular uptake via the 
high-affinity glycine transporters GLYT-1 and GLYT-2 
in glial and neuronal cells.
Glycine receptors
Glycine receptors (GlyR) are ligand-gated Cl− chan-
nels similar in structure to GABAA channels; they are 
present mainly on interneurons in the spinal cord. 
86	
SECTION 1  General Principles
Strychnine produces convulsions through the block-
ade of GlyR. Glycine is important for the activity of 
NMDA receptors (see the drug receptor table at the 
end of Chapter 1).
Imidazoline receptor ligands
Studies of the centrally acting α2-adrenoceptor ago-
nists clonidine, moxonidine and rilmenidine showed 
that their antihypertensive effects could not be inter-
preted wholly by actions on the α2-adrenoceptor. 
These imidazoline compounds are thought to act at 
least partly at imidazoline (I)-binding sites, of which 
there are three main types (I1, I2, I3), with the I1 site 
mediating the sympatho-inhibitory actions on blood 
pressure in the brainstem. The putative natural ligand 
for I receptors, agmatine, is a decarboxylated deriva-
tive of arginine; it also binds to α2-adrenoceptors and 
activates nitric oxide synthase, but its role in disease 
is unclear.
PEPTIDES
The importance of peptides as neurotransmitters has 
been highlighted in recent years, largely because of 
the development of sensitive immunohistochemi-
cal probes, which have enabled their detection and 
measurement in tissues. Unlike other classes of neu-
rotransmitter, peptides are synthesised in the cell body 
as precursors, which are then transported along the 
axon to the site of storage. There are specific receptors 
for different peptides (see the drug receptor table at 
the end of Chapter 1). An AP causes the release of the 
peptide from its precursor; inactivation is probably via 
hydrolysis by a local peptidase.
Peptide neurotransmitters are often found stored 
in the same nerve endings as other transmitters 
(described previously) and undergo simultaneous 
release (co-transmission).
Peptides do not cross the blood–brain barrier readily. 
A major problem for exploiting the increasing knowl-
edge of the importance of peptides is devising ways 
to deliver the novel products derived from molecular 
biology to the sites within the brain where they can 
have an effect.
Substance P is released from C-fibres (see Chapter 19) 
by a Ca2+-linked mechanism and is an important neu-
rotransmitter for sensory afferents in the dorsal horn. It 
is also present in the substantia nigra associated with 
dopaminergic neurons and may be involved in the 
control of movement.
Opioid peptides are a range of endogenous peptides 
that are the natural ligands for opioid receptors; opioid 
receptors were recognised in the brain and GI tract for 
many years before the natural ligands were identified. 
These are discussed in Chapter 19.
A number of other peptides are detectable in the 
CNS particularly in the hypothalamus and/or pitu-
itary gland (e.g. neurotensin, oxytocin, somatosta-
tin, vasopressin; see Chapters 43 and 45) or in the GI 
tract (e.g. cholecystokinin and vasoactive intestinal 
peptide).
PURINES
Adenosine and guanosine are endogenous purines 
and exist in the body in the free form, attached as 
nucleosides to ribose or deoxyribose, or as mono-, bi- 
or triphosphorylated nucleotides. Purines within cells 
are usually incorporated into nucleotides, which are 
involved in the energetics of biochemical processes 
(e.g. ATP), act as intracellular signals (e.g. cAMP and 
cGMP; see Chapter 1) and are involved in the synthe-
sis of RNA and DNA. ATP is present in the presyn-
aptic vesicles of some other neurotransmitters and 
is released along with the primary neurotransmitter, 
after which it may act on postsynaptic receptors (co-
transmission). Extracellular ATP is rapidly hydro-
lysed via adenosine diphosphate (ADP) to adenosine. 
Adenosine itself is very rapidly metabolised and 
inactivated.
There is a family of purine receptors that show indi-
vidual selectivity for different purines and give differ-
ent responses (see the drug receptor list at the end of 
Chapter 1). G-protein–coupled purinergic receptors 
(P2Y) are specific for the adenosine and uridine phos-
phates, and ADP causes platelet aggregation via P2Y12-
type receptors. This effect of ADP can be inhibited 
with clopidogrel and ticagrelor, which have important 
antiaggregatory actions (see Chapter 11). Ligand-gated 
P2X receptors for ATP are widely distributed in the 
brain. The adenosine receptors A1–A3, formerly called 
P1 receptors, show very high selectivity for adenosine 
itself. Adenosine is used therapeutically to terminate 
supraventricular tachycardia.
SELF-ASSESSMENT
TRUE/FALSE QUESTIONS
1.	 The sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous 
system utilises adrenaline as its primary transmitter 
substance.
2.	 The parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous sys-
tems have opposite effects in every organ.
3.	 Sympathetic nervous stimulation to the gut inhibits 
gut motility and sphincter tone.
4.	 Acetylcholine is metabolised by plasma cholinester-
ase in the synaptic cleft.
5.	 Dopamine and noradrenaline are synthesised from 
levodopa.
6.	 Dopamine is a transmitter in the peripheral auto-
nomic nervous system.
7.	 Tyramine is metabolised by both isoenzymes of 
neurotransmitter oxidase (MAO-A and MAO-B).
8.	 Both α1- and α2-adrenoceptor antagonists can be 
used to lower blood pressure.
9.	 Botulism is caused by poisoning with a bacterial 
toxin.
	
	
Neurotransmission and the Peripheral Autonomic Nervous System  CHAPTER 4	
87
10.	 Botulinum toxin enhances acetylcholine release 
from all cholinergic neurons.
11.	 There are two subtypes of β-adrenoceptor.
12.	 Drugs that alter GABA activity are important in 
treating epilepsy.
13.	 The actions of synaptic serotonin and noradrena-
line are curtailed mainly by metabolism by MAO 
and COMT.
14.	 The synaptic uptake of noradrenaline and sero-
tonin can be inhibited selectively.
15.	 The vagal cranial nerve to the eye decreases pupil size.
16.	 Blockade of H1 histamine receptors reduces gastric 
acid secretion.
17.	 Glutamate and glycine are inhibitory amino acid 
transmitters.
18.	 Substance P is a transmitter in the dorsal horn of 
the spinal cord.
ONE-BEST-ANSWER (OBA) QUESTIONS
1.	 Which neurotransmitter is an amino acid?
A.	Adenosine
B.	 Adrenaline
C.	Dopamine
D.	Glycine
E.	 Histamine
2.	 What is the most accurate statement about 
neurotransmission?
A.	Peptide neurotransmitters are synthesised in the 
presynaptic nerve terminal.
B.	 Monoamine transmitters are taken up into the 
presynaptic neuron by passive diffusion.
C.	Acetylcholine release is modified by receptors on 
the presynaptic membrane.
D.	Each postganglionic sympathetic neuron releases 
a single neurotransmitter.
E.	 K+ influx following an AP triggers the fusion of 
vesicles with the presynaptic membrane.
ANSWERS
TRUE/FALSE ANSWERS
1.	 False. Noradrenaline is the main transmitter sub-
stance at postganglionic nerve endings. Adrenaline 
is released only from the adrenal medulla, whilst 
acetylcholine is the transmitter in sympathetic gan-
glia and in sympathetically innervated sweat glands 
and hair follicles.
2.	 False. Although the two autonomic systems have 
broadly opposing actions on many organs, other 
organs may be controlled by only one system (e.g. the 
lens of the eye). The kinetics of the two systems also 
vary, with the parasympathetic nervous system fine-
tuning organ activity at rest, whereas the sympathetic 
nervous system produces rapid coordinated responses 
of many organs in a physiological emergency.
3.	 False. Sympathetic nervous stimulation releases 
noradrenaline and inhibits gut motility but increases 
the tone of the sphincters.
	 4.	 False. Within the synaptic cleft, acetylcholine is 
mainly broken down by acetylcholinesterase.
	 5.	 True. Levodopa is converted into dopamine by 
DOPA decarboxylase and then to noradrenaline 
by dopamine β-hydroxylase.
	 6.	 True. Dopamine is predominantly an important 
transmitter in the CNS but also in some peripheral 
sites (e.g. the renal vascular smooth muscle).
	 7.	 True. This is important, as selective inhibitors of 
MAO-A used in the treatment of depression leave 
MAO-B unaffected, so it remains available to 
metabolise tyramine in food, thereby avoiding the 
‘cheese reaction’.
	 8.	 False. Antagonism of α1-adrenoceptors on periph-
eral resistance vessels causes relaxation and lowers 
blood pressure, but presynaptic α2-adrenoceptors 
are autoreceptors that reduce noradrenaline 
release; blockade of these autoreceptors would 
increase noradrenaline release and tend to raise 
vascular resistance.
	 9.	 True. Botulinum toxin from the anaerobic bacte-
rium C. botulinum can cause fatal poisoning.
10.	 False. Botulinum toxin inhibits acetylcholine 
release and causes skeletal muscle paralysis; it can 
be used locally where there is muscle spasm or 
excessive sweating.
11.	 False. A third type, the β3-adrenoceptor, is found 
in adipocytes, the heart, colon, bladder and some 
other tissues, but is less widespread than the β1- 
and β2-adrenoceptors.
12.	 True. As well as drugs that act at GABAA receptors, 
such as benzodiazepines, others that alter GABA 
uptake or breakdown are of growing importance 
in epilepsy treatment.
13.	 False. The actions of serotonin and noradrenaline 
are curtailed mainly by reuptake into the presyn-
aptic neuron by their respective transporters, SERT 
and NET.
14.	 True. The SERT and NET uptake transporters can 
be inhibited by SSRIs and other selective antide-
pressant drugs.
15.	 True. Vagal (parasympathetic) stimulation causes 
constriction of the pupil (miosis) and also accom-
modates the lens for near vision.
16.	 False. Gastric acid secretion is promoted by hista-
mine released from enterochromaffin-like (ECL) 
cells acting at H2 receptors and is reduced by H2 
antihistamines such as ranitidine.
17.	 False. Glycine is an inhibitory transmitter, but glu-
tamate is excitatory.
18.	 True. Substance P in the dorsal horn is an impor-
tant transmitter in sensory afferents.
OBA ANSWERS
1.	 Answer D is correct. Glycine is a simple amino 
acid and an inhibitory neurotransmitter. Adenosine 
(answer A) is a purine; adrenaline (B) and dopa-
mine (C) are catecholamines, and histamine (E) is 
88	
SECTION 1  General Principles
an amine derived from an amino acid by decarbox-
ylation (removal of the acid group).
2.	 Answer C is correct.
A.	Incorrect. Peptide neurotransmitters are synthe-
sised in the cell body and transported to the post-
ganglionic nerve ending.
B.	 Incorrect. Active transporters such as NET, SERT 
and DAT transfer monoamine neurotransmitters 
back into the presynaptic neuron.
C.	Correct. On parasympathetic nerve endings, 
stimulation of presynaptic N1 autoreceptors in-
creases acetylcholine release, whereas stimula-
tion of presynaptic M2 receptors decreases ace-
tylcholine release.
D.	Incorrect. Co-transmission is common, such as 
noradrenaline and vasoactive intestinal polypep-
tide (VIP) released from sympathetic nerve end-
ings to the gut.
E.	 Incorrect. Neurotransmitter release after an AP is 
associated with an influx of Ca2+ ions.
FURTHER READING
Abrams, P., Andersson, K.E., Buccafusco, J., et  al., 2006. 
Muscarinic receptors: their distribution and function in body 
systems, and the implications for treating overactive bladder. 
Br. J. Pharmacol. 48, 565–578.
Alexander, S.P.H., Christopoulos, A., Davenport, A.P., et  al., 
2019. The concise guide to pharmacology 2019/20: G protein-
coupled receptors. Br. J. Pharmacol. 176 (S1), S21–S141.
Baker, J.G., Hill, S.J., Summers, R.J., 2011. Evolution of β-blockers: 
from anti-anginal drugs to ligand-directed signalling. Trends 
Pharmacol. Sci. 32, 227–234.
Beaulieu, J.M., Gainetdinov, R.R., 2011. The physiology, signaling, 
and pharmacology of dopamine receptors. Pharmacol. Rev. 
63, 182–217.
Berger, M., Gray, J., Roth, B.L., 2009. The expanded biology of 
serotonin. Annu. Rev. Med. 60, 355–366.
Burnstock, G., 2007. Purine and pyrimidine receptors. Cell. Mol. 
Life Sci. 64, 1471–1483.
Cazzola, M., Calzetta, L., Matera, M.G., 2011. β2-Adrenoceptor 
agonists: current and future direction. Br. J. Pharmacol. 163, 4–17.
Filip, M., Bader, M., 2009. Overview on 5-HT receptors and 
their role in physiology and pathology of the central nervous 
system. Pharmacol. Rep. 61, 761–777.
Foster, A.C., Kemp, J.A., 2006. Glutamate- and GABA-based 
CNS therapeutics. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 6, 7–17.
Gether, U., Andersen, P.H., Larsson, O.M., et  al., 2006. 
Neurotransmitter 
transporters: 
molecular 
function 
of 
important drug targets. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 27, 375–383.
Kruse, A.C., Kobilka, B.K., Gautam, D., et al., 2014. Muscarinic 
acetylcholine receptors: novel opportunities for drug 
development. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 13, 549–560.
Leurs, R., Vischer, H.F., Wijtmans, M., et al., 2011. En route to 
new blockbuster anti-histamines: surveying the offspring of 
the expanding histamine receptor family. Trends Pharmacol. 
Sci. 32, 250–257.
Ogden, K.K., Traynelis, S.F., 2011. New advances in NMDA 
receptor pharmacology. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 32, 726–733.
Olsen, R.W., Sieghart, W., 2008. GABAA receptors: subtypes 
provide diversity of function and pharmacology. Neuro­
pharmacology 56, 141–148.
Piletz, J.E., Aricioglu, F., Cheng, J.T., et  al., 2013. Agmatine: 
clinical applications after 100 years in translation. Drug 
Discov. Today 18, 880–893.
Salio, C., Lossi, L., Ferrini, F., et  al., 2006. Neuropeptides as 
synaptic transmitters. Cell Tissue Res 326, 583–598.
Yoshikawa, T., Nakamura, T., Kazuhiko, Y., 2021. Histaminergic 
neurons in the tuberomammillary nucleus as a control centre 
for wakefulness. Br. J. Pharmacol. 178, 750–769.
Youdim, M.B.H., Edmondson, D., Tipton, K., 2006. The 
therapeutic potential of monoamine oxidase inhibitors. Nat. 
Rev. Neurosci. 7, 295–309.
Zoli, M., Pucci, S., Vilella, A., Gotti, C., 2018. Neuronal and 
extraneuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. Curr. Neuro­
pharmacol. 16, 338–349.
89
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
Ischaemic Heart Disease
5
Chapter Outline
Myocardial Perfusion  89
Clinical Manifestations of Myocardial Ischaemia  91
Stable Angina Pectoris  91
Acute Coronary Syndromes (Unstable Angina, 
Myocardial Infarction and Sudden Cardiac Death)  91
Drugs for Treating Angina  92
Organic Nitrates  92
Beta-Adrenoceptor Antagonists (β-Blockers)  94
Calcium Channel Blockers  95
Potassium Channel Openers  98
Specific Sinus Node Inhibitors  99
Late Sodium Current Inhibitors  99
Management of Stable Angina  100
Management of Acute Coronary Syndromes  101
Early Management of Non-ST Elevation Acute Coronary 
Syndromes (NSTE-ACS)  101
Early Management of ST-Segment Elevation 
Myocardial Infarction  102
Secondary Prophylaxis After Myocardial Infarction  102
Self-Assessment  103
Answers  104
Further Reading  106
Compendium of Drugs Used to Treat Ischaemic 
Heart Disease  106
MYOCARDIAL PERFUSION
The coronary arteries receive about 5% of the cardiac 
output at rest and the myocardium extracts about 75% 
of the oxygen from the perfusing blood. When meta-
bolic demand from the myocardium increases (e.g. 
with exercise), there is little additional oxygen avail-
able to be extracted from the perfusing blood and 
coronary artery blood flow must increase to supply 
the necessary oxygen. Up to a three- to fourfold rise in 
coronary blood flow is achieved at maximum exercise. 
Myocardial perfusion occurs largely during diastole, 
when the muscle of the heart is relaxed and not com-
pressing the intramyocardial vessels. Therefore, unlike 
other organs that are perfused during systole, myocar-
dial perfusion is reliant on diastolic blood pressure.
Myocardial ischaemia arises when blood flow to 
the cardiac muscle is inadequate to meet its metabolic 
needs. Ischaemia due to reduced blood flow in the 
coronary circulation is usually a result of atheroma-
tous plaques in the large epicardial coronary arter-
ies (Fig. 5.1). Atheromatous plaques most often form 
in areas where linear blood flow is disturbed, such 
as bends in the vessel or near branching vessels. Less 
commonly, blood flow is reduced despite structurally 
normal epicardial coronary arteries and normal cardiac 
output. In this situation it arises either from abnormal 
regulation of the microvascular circulation within the 
myocardium, from intense vasoconstriction of an epi-
cardial artery (coronary vasospasm) or from coronary 
artery embolism. Other causes of inadequate coronary 
perfusion include aortic stenosis and hypertrophic car-
diomyopathy. In critical illness, such as sepsis, myocar-
dial ischaemia may arise in the absence of significant 
coronary artery disease, due to an overall reduction in 
cardiac output in the context of increased myocardial 
oxygen demand (so-called ‘demand ischaemia’).
The major risk factors for atheromatous coronary 
artery disease (similar to atheroma in other parts of 
the vascular tree) are male sex, smoking, hyperten-
sion, hypercholesterolaemia and diabetes mellitus. 
The effects of these risk factors are additive, and when 
several are present, coronary atheroma occurs more 
extensively and at a younger age.
Atheromatous plaques initially enlarge by stretch-
ing the medial smooth muscle (vascular remodelling) 
and do not begin to narrow the lumen of the vessel 
until 40% to 50% of the circumference of the vessel is 
diseased. Even when luminal narrowing is present, 
there is initially sufficient coronary blood flow reserve 
so that symptoms only arise in most people when 
about 75% of the cross-sectional area of the vessel 
lumen is occluded.
Coronary artery atheroma can diffusely involve a 
long segment of the vessel, but plaques are often con-
fined to a small segment of the artery. Localised plaques 
frequently involve only part of the circumference of the 
arterial wall, leaving the rest free of significant disease 
and still able to respond to vasoconstrictor and vasodi-
lator influences. At the site of an atheromatous plaque 
90	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
there is turbulent blood flow. The consequent changes 
in shear stress at the endothelial surface impair endo-
thelial function and reduce local generation of vaso-
dilator substances such as nitric oxide (NO; see the 
discussion of organic nitrates that follows). Diseased 
segments of a coronary artery are therefore particu-
larly prone to vasospasm, which produces dynamic 
flow limitation superimposed on the fixed atheroma-
tous narrowing. Well-developed collateral coronary 
arteries are found in up to one-third of people. When 
these open, they can deliver blood to ischaemic tis-
sues by bypassing the atheromatous narrowing or by 
retrograde filling of the distal part of the diseased ves-
sel from another part of the coronary circulation. This 
improves perfusion distal to the diseased segment of 
the artery.
There are two morphological types of atheromatous 
plaque. Some have a lipid-rich core with a substantial 
infiltration of inflammatory cells and a thin fibrous 
cap. Such plaques are relatively unstable (‘vulner-
able’ plaques) and are more prone to plaque disrup-
tion by ulceration or rupture of the cap, leading to 
thrombus formation (discussed later). Other plaques 
have a fibrotic core with a thick fibrous cap. These 
Fig. 5.1  Aspects of inflammatory processes that contribute to coronary heart disease. Many factors contribute to 
coronary heart disease: vascular endothelium is damaged and activated by haemodynamic stress; platelets adhere and 
promote leucocyte infiltration and thrombus formation; low-density lipoprotein (LDL) is oxidised and taken up via scav-
enger receptors into monocyte-macrophages, subsequently forming foam cells. Dysfunctional expression of a host of 
cytokines, lipid mediators, free radicals and proteases exacerbates inflammation, endothelial damage, atheroma forma-
tion, plaque rupture and thrombus formation. These processes are influenced by risk factors such as smoking, heredity, 
hypercholesterolaemia, hypertension, obesity, diabetes, age and gender. IFN-γ, Interferon-γ; IL-10, interleukin-10; MMPs, 
matrix metalloproteases; TGF-β, tumour growth factor β; Th, T-helper cell; VCAM-1, vascular cell adhesion molecule 1.
LDL
LDL is oxidised/
enzymatically
modiﬁed
Inﬂammatory
lipids
Expression and
activation of 
leucocyte adhesion
molecules (e.g. VCAM-1) 
and other inﬂammatory
genes
Leucocytes and monocytes
adhere to VCAM-1-producing
sites and migrate through
endothelial cells
Platelet
Macrophages and dendritic
cells act as antigen-presenting
molecules to T-cells
Expression of
IFN-γ and many
other cytokines
Th1
and smaller
populations of 
Th2 and CD8+
T-cells
IL-10
TGF-β
Inﬂammation
Tissue damage
Atherosclerosis
Plaque rupture
Thrombosis 
formation
Uptake into macrophages
via scavenger receptors
Diapedesis and
diﬀerentiation
into macrophages
Platelets adhere to damaged
endothelium, promoting
leucocyte inﬁltration 
and thrombus formation 
after plaque rupture
Activated and
damaged
endothelial
cells at sites of
haemodynamic
stress 
Intima
Develops into
foam cell
Expression of
inﬂammatory and 
chemoattractant 
cytokines,
free radicals,
lipid mediators,
proteases 
(MMPs, cysteine proteases)
Mast cells
Regulatory
T-cells
	
	
Ischaemic Heart Disease  CHAPTER 5	
91
plaques are more stable and resistant to erosion. Both 
stable and unstable plaques can coexist in the coronary 
circulation.
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS OF MYOCARDIAL 
ISCHAEMIA
STABLE ANGINA PECTORIS
Reversible myocardial ischaemia is the consequence 
of an imbalance between oxygen supply and oxygen 
demand in a part of the myocardium (Fig. 5.2) due to 
an inability to increase local coronary blood flow suffi-
ciently to meet the metabolic demands. Angina pecto-
ris is pain arising from heart muscle after it switches to 
anaerobic metabolism and is a symptom of reversible 
myocardial ischaemia. Stable angina is relatively pre-
dictable ischaemic chest pain that is most frequently 
experienced on exertion or with emotional stress and 
is rapidly relieved by rest. Reversible myocardial isch-
aemia can also present with shortness of breath (due to 
diastolic stiffening of the left ventricle, when a reduced 
cellular energy supply impairs the uptake of Ca2+ by 
the sarcoplasmic reticulum; see also heart failure with 
preserved ejection fraction (Chapter 7)), or it can occur 
without symptoms (silent ischaemia). Vasospasm at 
the site of an atheromatous plaque accentuates the 
reduction in flow produced by a fixed atheromatous 
obstruction, and when it is present, angina occurs at 
a lower myocardial workload. Angina will often be 
worse if there is coexisting anaemia, uncontrolled 
hypertension, tachyarrhythmias, or thyrotoxicosis, all 
of which increase myocardial oxygen demand.
People with stable angina have an increased risk of 
subsequent myocardial infarction or sudden cardiac 
death due to rupture of an unstable atheromatous 
plaque (discussed later). On average the annual rate of 
such events is between 1.2% and 4%. Rates are higher if 
there is comorbid diabetes mellitus or peripheral vas-
cular disease.
ACUTE CORONARY SYNDROMES (UNSTABLE 
ANGINA, MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION AND 
SUDDEN CARDIAC DEATH)
Acute coronary syndrome (ACS) usually arises from 
disruption of an unstable atheromatous plaque (vul-
nerable plaque) in a coronary artery. Plaque disrup-
tion can be precipitated by sudden stresses on the cap 
produced by pulsatile blood flow across the plaque, by 
elastic recoil of the vessel in diastole or by vasospasm. 
As a consequence of these stresses the thin cap over 
the unstable plaque fissures or ulcerates, leading to 
plaque rupture and exposure of the core of the plaque 
to circulating blood. Plaque rupture initiates platelet 
adhesion and then aggregation (see Chapter 11), fol-
lowed by thrombus formation and local vasospasm. 
These processes result in a sudden reduction in blood 
flow. Platelet–thrombin microemboli can break off 
from the thrombus and become lodged in small arte-
rioles downstream from the thrombus, contributing to 
ischaemia.
Unstable Angina
Unstable angina occurs if there is incomplete occlusion 
of the coronary artery following plaque rupture, but 
with critical reduction in blood flow so that oxygen 
supply is either inadequate at rest or with a minimal 
increase in oxygen demand. Angina may then occur 
at rest or with very little exertion. Unstable angina is 
distinguished pathologically from other acute coro-
nary syndromes because perfusion of the ischaemic 
tissue remains sufficient to prevent necrosis of myo-
cytes, so serum markers of myocardial damage do not 
increase. Unlike myocardial infarction, symptoms of 
unstable angina are usually relieved by glyceryl trini-
trate (GTN) (discussed later) or resolve spontaneously 
within 30 minutes.
Following an episode of unstable angina, the throm-
bus may become incorporated into the ruptured plaque 
so that after healing, the plaque is substantially larger, 
leading to greater long-term luminal narrowing.
Myocardial Infarction and Sudden Cardiac Death
Myocardial infarction most commonly arises from 
complete coronary artery occlusion following disrup-
tion of an unstable atheromatous plaque. Under the 
fourth Universal Definition of Myocardial Infarction, 
this is a type 1 myocardial infarction (Box 5.1). Occlu-
sion often occurs at the site of an atheromatous lesion 
that previously was only producing minor or moder-
ate stenosis of the artery, and, in the majority of cases, 
Fig. 5.2  Factors increasing myocardial oxygen demand and 
decreasing myocardial oxygen supply in angina. Antianginal drugs 
act at many different sites to reduce myocardial oxygen demand and 
increase oxygen supply.
↓Coronary blood ﬂow
↓Vessel calibre
Heart rate
(↓diastolic ﬁlling time)
↓Perfusion pressure
Ventricular wall
tension (compression
of intramyocardial
vessels)
Heart rate
Myocardial contractility
Ventricular wall tension
Filling pressure (preload)
Resistance to ejection
(afterload)
Decreased
oxygen supply
Increased 
oxygen demand
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
92	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
it did not cause symptoms prior to disruption. Muscle 
necrosis begins if the occlusion lasts for longer than 20 
to 30 minutes.
Myocardial infarction is usually associated with 
intense, prolonged chest pain and sympathetic ner-
vous stimulation which increases cardiac work. How-
ever, about 15% of myocardial infarctions do not 
present with pain, and may go unrecognised (silent 
infarction). The diagnosis of acute myocardial infarc-
tion requires a rise in the plasma concentrations of 
sensitive biochemical markers (biomarkers), such as 
cardiac-specific myoglobin or troponin, which are 
released from necrotic myocytes. Cell death begins in 
the subendocardial muscle, which is furthest from the 
epicardial blood supply (the endocardium receives its 
oxygen from the ventricular cavity), and unless per-
fusion is restored, it progressively extends across the 
full thickness of the myocardium (transmurally) over 
the next few hours. Activation of endogenous fibrino-
lysis (see Chapter 11) and the presence of a good col-
lateral circulation are factors that favour reperfusion of 
the ischaemic area and naturally limit the size of the 
infarct. If early reperfusion occurs, the damage is usu-
ally confined to the subendocardial myocardium.
A full-thickness (or transmural) myocardial infarc-
tion usually produces characteristic changes on the 
electrocardiograph (ECG), with early ST-segment ele-
vation and eventually pathological Q waves. This pre-
sentation is referred to as an ST-elevation myocardial 
infarction (STEMI). A subendocardial infarction often 
presents without diagnostic ECG changes. In these 
cases, the ECG may show ST-segment depression or 
T-wave inversion, or even be normal. The resulting 
infarction is classified as a non–ST-elevation myocar-
dial infarction (NSTEMI), because of the absence of the 
characteristic ST-segment changes usually found with 
more extensive myocardial damage.
Myocardial infarction principally affects the left 
ventricular muscle, and the amount of muscle lost and 
the resulting effect on left ventricular function corre-
late well with both early and late survival. Infarction 
of the anterior muscle of the left ventricle (usually 
resulting from an occlusion in the left coronary artery 
system) causes greater myocardial loss than does infe-
rior infarction of the ventricle (usually from right coro-
nary artery occlusion). The amount of muscle loss also 
determines the extent of left ventricular remodelling 
(a geometrical change in the left ventricle that begins 
with healing of the infarct), which determines the risk 
of subsequent heart failure.
In addition to arising from an ACS, myocardial 
infarction can result less commonly from other patho-
logical mechanisms. Five types of myocardial infarc-
tion are now recognised, of which the most common 
remains type 1 (see Box 5.1). Myocardial infarction due 
to increased demand in the absence of unstable coro-
nary artery disease (type 2 myocardial infarction), for 
example in hypotension due to sepsis, is commonly 
seen in patients with severe acute illness.
Sudden cardiac death results when fatal ventricu-
lar arrhythmias arise from ischaemic tissue, or from 
ventricular rupture. It is a presentation associated with 
typical myocardial infarction, but death occurs before 
a raised serum biomarker can be detected (type 3 myo-
cardial infarction).
DRUGS FOR TREATING ANGINA
Drug treatment for angina is directed either:
• to reduce oxygen demand by decreasing cardiac 
work, and/or
• to increase oxygen supply by improving coronary 
blood flow.
Drugs can be taken to relieve the ischaemia rapidly 
during an acute attack of angina or as regular prophy-
laxis to reduce the risk of subsequent episodes. Several 
classes of drug are used to treat angina.
ORGANIC NITRATES
  Examples
glyceryl trinitrate, isosorbide mononitrate
Mechanism of Action and Effects
The organic nitrates relax vascular smooth muscle by 
mimicking the vasodilator effects of endogenous nitric 
oxide (NO) generated by NO synthase in vascular 
endothelial cells. The organic nitrates undergo deni-
trification to nitrites by mitochondrial aldehyde dehy-
drogenase, with thiol (sulfhydryl) groups acting as a 
reducing cofactor, to generate nitrosothiols and NO, 
which in turn stimulate guanylate cyclase to generate 
the intracellular second messenger cGMP (Fig. 5.3). 
Cyclic GMP activates protein kinase G, which reduces 
the availability of intracellular Ca2+ to the contractile 
mechanism of vascular smooth muscle, causing relax-
ation and vasodilation. Vasodilation is produced in 
three main vascular beds:
• Venous capacitance vessels. Dilation leads to 
peripheral pooling of blood and reduced venous 
Box 5.1  Types of Myocardial Infarction (MI).
Type 1: spontaneous MI related to ischaemia caused by a 
primary coronary event
Type 2: MI secondary to ischaemia resulting from an im-
balance between oxygen supply and demand (such as 
with coronary artery spasm, tachyarrhythmia, anaemia 
or hypotension)
Type 3: sudden death from cardiac disease with 
symptoms of myocardial ischaemia accompanied by 
new ST elevation or left bundle branch block or verified 
coronary thrombus at angiography and/or autopsy
Type 4: MI associated with percutaneous coronary 
intervention
Type 5: MI associated with coronary artery by-pass grafting
	
	
Ischaemic Heart Disease  CHAPTER 5	
93
return to the heart. This lowers left ventricular fill-
ing pressure (preload), decreases ventricular wall 
tension and therefore reduces myocardial oxygen 
demand. Venous dilation is a major contributor to 
the relief of angina and is produced at moderate 
plasma nitrate concentrations. However, tolerance 
to this action occurs rapidly with sustained high 
plasma nitrate concentrations.
• Arterial resistance vessels. Dilation leads to reduced 
resistance to left ventricular emptying (afterload). 
This lowers blood pressure, decreases cardiac work 
and contributes to a reduced myocardial oxygen 
demand. Arterial dilation occurs at higher plasma 
nitrate concentrations than venodilation, but toler-
ance arises less readily during long-term treatment.
• Coronary arteries. Nitrates have little effect on 
total coronary blood flow in angina; indeed, total 
flow may be reduced because of a decrease in per-
fusion pressure. However, blood flow through col-
lateral vessels may be increased, and nitrates also 
relieve coronary artery vasospasm. Therefore, blood 
supply may be improved to ischaemic areas of the 
myocardium. Coronary artery dilation occurs at low 
plasma nitrate concentrations, and tolerance is slow 
to develop.
Pharmacokinetics
Glyceryl trinitrate (GTN) is the most widely used 
organic nitrate. It is well absorbed from the gut but 
undergoes extensive first-pass metabolism in the liver 
to inactive metabolites. To increase its bioavailability, 
GTN is given by one of three routes that avoid first-
pass metabolism:
• Sublingual. When GTN is delivered under the 
tongue, it is absorbed rapidly across the buccal 
mucosa. GTN has a very short half-life (<5 minutes), 
which limits the duration of action to approximately 
30 minutes. GTN tablets lose their potency with pro-
longed storage and a metered-dose aerosol spray is 
a more stable and convenient method of sublingual 
delivery.
• Transdermal. GTN is absorbed well through the skin 
and is usually delivered from an adhesive patch via 
a rate-limiting membrane or matrix. Steady release 
of the drug maintains a stable blood concentration 
for at least 24 hours after application of the patch.
• Intravenous. When given by intravenous infusion, 
the short duration of action of GTN is an advantage 
for dose titration.
Isosorbide 5-mononitrate does not undergo first-
pass metabolism. It has a half-life of 3 to 7 hours and 
modified-release formulations are often used to pro-
long the duration of action.
Unwanted Effects
• Venodilation can produce postural hypotension, 
dizziness, syncope and reflex tachycardia. Tachy-
cardia can be reduced by concurrent use of a 
β-adrenoceptor antagonist.
• Arterial dilation causes throbbing headaches and 
flushing, but tolerance to these effects is common 
during treatment with long-acting nitrates.
Fig. 5.3  Actions of endogenous nitric oxide and exogenous nitrates. Endogenous nitric oxide (NO) generated 
by nitric oxide synthase in endothelial cells activates guanylyl cyclase to synthesise cyclic guanosine monophosphate 
(cGMP). Activation of protein kinase G by cGMP decreases Ca2+ influx into the cell, increases Ca2+ storage in the 
sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR), and increases myosin light-chain dephosphorylation, leading to vascular smooth muscle 
relaxation. Organic nitrates and nicorandil act as exogenous donors of nitrosothiols and NO to produce vasodilation.
Endothelial cell
Vascular
smooth muscle cell
Ca2+
Ca2+
NO
synthase
L-Arginine
NO
NO and
nitrosothiols
GTP
cGMP
Guanylyl
cyclase
Protein kinase G
SR
storage
Relaxation
+
+
–
Exogenous
nitrate drugs
(e.g., glyceryl trinitrate), nicorandil
Endogenous stimuli, e.g.,
bradykinin, acetylcholine,
and some β-adrenoceptor
antagonists, e.g., nebivolol
94	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
• Tolerance to the therapeutic effects of nitrates devel-
ops rapidly if there is a sustained high plasma 
nitrate concentration. Tolerance is therefore a par-
ticular problem with delivery of GTN via trans-
dermal patches or with long-acting nitrates. The 
cause is incompletely understood, but important 
mechanisms may be increased degradation of NO 
by oxygen free radicals, inactivation of mitochon-
drial aldehyde dehydrogenase, or depletion of 
thiol groups in the target cells. Reflex activation 
of the sympathetic nervous system and the renin–
angiotensin system in response to hypotension 
may also counteract the vasodilator actions of the 
nitrates. Tolerance can be avoided by a ‘nitrate-low’ 
period of several hours in each 24 hours. This is 
preferable to a ‘nitrate-free’ period, which carries 
a risk of rebound angina. A nitrate-low period is 
achieved by asymmetric dosing with conventional 
formulations of isosorbide mononitrate (e.g. twice 
daily, at 8 a.m. and 1 p.m.) or by using a once-daily 
formulation that allows plasma nitrate concentra-
tions to fall overnight. Transdermal GTN patches 
should remain on the skin for only 12 to 14 hours 
to ensure a nitrate-free period of 10 to 12 hours (e.g. 
overnight) to prevent tolerance.
• Drug interactions are most troublesome with phos-
phodiesterase inhibitors, such as sildenafil, used in 
the treatment of erectile dysfunction. These reduce 
cGMP metabolism by phosphodiesterase type V 
(see Chapter 16) and coadministration can result in 
marked hypotension.
BETA-ADRENOCEPTOR ANTAGONISTS 
(β-BLOCKERS)
  Examples
atenolol, bisoprolol, carvedilol, metoprolol, nebivolol, propranolol
Mechanism of Action and Effects in Angina
All β-adrenoceptor antagonists (often referred to sim-
ply as β-blockers) act as competitive antagonists of 
catecholamines at β-adrenoceptors. They achieve their 
therapeutic effect in angina by blockade of the cardiac 
β1-adrenoceptor with reduced generation of intracellu-
lar cAMP. As a result, they:
• Decrease heart rate by inhibition of the cardiac 
If pacemaker current in the sinoatrial node (see 
Chapter 8). This is most marked during exercise, 
when the rate of rise in heart rate is blunted;
• Reduce the force of cardiac contraction (see Chapter 7).
Blood pressure therefore falls as a result of 
reduced cardiac output (a consequence of both 
the decreased heart rate and force of myocardial 
contraction). The overall effect is to reduce myo-
cardial oxygen demand. The slower heart rate also 
lengthens diastole and gives more time for coronary 
perfusion, which effectively improves myocardial 
oxygen supply.
Some β-adrenoceptor antagonists have additional 
properties, which might reduce the incidence of 
unwanted effects or enhance their blood pressure-low-
ering actions. These include:
• Cardioselectivity. Some β-adrenoceptor antago-
nists (e.g. atenolol, bisoprolol and metoprolol) are 
selective antagonists at the β1-adrenoceptor. They 
are usually called ‘cardioselective’ β-adrenoceptor 
antagonists as the most important site of action on 
β1-adrenoceptors is the heart. Other β-adrenoceptor 
antagonists (e.g. propranolol) have equal or greater 
antagonist activity at β2-adrenoceptors; these drugs 
are referred to as ‘nonselective’ β-adrenoceptor antag-
onists. The cardioselectivity of all β-adrenoceptor 
antagonists is dose-related, with progressively more 
β2-adrenoceptor blockade at higher doses.
• Partial agonist activity (PAA) or intrinsic sympa-
thomimetic activity (ISA). Some β-adrenoceptor 
antagonists are partial agonists at either β1- or 
β2-adrenoceptors. For example, pindolol is a β1-
adrenoceptor antagonist that also has weak agonist 
activity at β2-adrenoceptors which produces vaso-
dilation in some vascular beds (see Fig. 6.6). Drugs 
with PAA at the β1-adrenoceptor have less inhibi-
tory effect on heart rate and force of contraction, 
and may be less effective than full antagonists in 
the treatment of severe angina. However, their PAA 
means they are less likely to cause a resting brady-
cardia. β-Adrenoceptor antagonists with PAA are 
not widely used.
• Vasodilator activity. Pure β1-adrenoceptor antago-
nists do not cause vasodilation. In fact, reflex sympa-
thetic nervous system stimulation of α1-adrenoceptors 
in response to the fall in cardiac output produces 
vasoconstriction. However, some β-adrenoceptor 
antagonists have additional properties that over-
ride this and produce arterial vasodilation. Mecha-
nisms of vasodilation include β2-adrenoceptor PAA 
(e.g. pindolol; discussed earlier), α1-adrenoceptor 
antagonist action (e.g. carvedilol, labetalol) or an 
increase in endothelial NO synthesis (e.g. nebivolol; 
see Fig. 6.6). Vasodilation has no proven advantage 
for the treatment of angina, but may be useful when 
β-adrenoceptor antagonists are given for the treat-
ment of hypertension (see Chapter 6) or heart failure 
(see Chapter 7).
Pharmacokinetics
Highly lipophilic β-adrenoceptor antagonists such as 
propranolol and metoprolol are well absorbed from 
the gut but undergo extensive first-pass metabolism 
in the liver, which shows considerable variability 
among individuals. Plasma drug concentrations are 
therefore unpredictable from a fixed dose. As reduc-
tion in heart rate during exercise is closely related to 
the plasma concentration of the drug, dose titration of 
	
	
Ischaemic Heart Disease  CHAPTER 5	
95
lipophilic β-adrenoceptor antagonists is usually neces-
sary to achieve an optimal clinical response. Lipophilic 
β-adrenoceptor antagonists generally have short half-
lives and are often used in modified-release formula-
tions to prolong their duration of action.
Hydrophilic β-adrenoceptor antagonists such as 
atenolol are incompletely absorbed from the gut and 
are eliminated unchanged in the urine. The dose 
range to maintain effective plasma concentrations is 
narrower than for those drugs that undergo metabo-
lism. The half-lives of hydrophilic β-adrenoceptor 
antagonists are usually longer than those of lipophilic 
drugs.
Bisoprolol is eliminated almost equally by metabo-
lism and renal excretion.
Unwanted Effects
• Arising from blockade of β1-adrenoceptors. 
Excessive bradycardia occasionally occurs with 
β-adrenoceptor antagonists and they should be 
used with caution or avoided in the presence of 
advanced atrioventricular conduction defect (heart 
block). Drugs with PAA at β1-adrenoceptors pro-
duce less resting bradycardia. A reduction in car-
diac output can impair blood supply to peripheral 
tissues, which can be detrimental in critical leg 
ischaemia or can provoke Raynaud’s phenomenon 
(see Chapter 10). A large dose of a β-adrenoceptor 
antagonist can precipitate acute pulmonary oedema 
if there is pre-existing poor left ventricular function, 
when high sympathetic nervous activity is neces-
sary to maintain cardiac output. However, there is a 
paradox that when used at low doses with gradual-
dose titration, a β-adrenoceptor antagonist is part of 
the core therapy of heart failure (see Chapter 7).
• Arising from blockade of β2-adrenoceptors. 
Bronchospasm can be precipitated in people with 
asthma or asthma-COPD overlap syndrome due to 
antagonist activity at β2-adrenoceptors in bronchial 
smooth muscle. Bronchospasm can arise even with 
cardioselective drugs. Nonselective β-adrenoceptor 
antagonists can prolong hypoglycaemia, which 
may be a problem in people with diabetes mellitus 
treated with insulin (see Chapter 40). Gluconeo-
genesis, a component of the metabolic response to 
hypoglycaemia, is dependent upon β2-adrenoceptor 
stimulation in the liver. β-Adrenoceptor antagonists 
also blunt the autonomic response that alerts the 
person to the onset of hypoglycaemia.
• Central nervous system effects. These include 
sleep disturbance, vivid dreams and hallucinations, 
fatigue and subtle psychomotor effects (e.g. lack of 
concentration and sexual dysfunction). All are more 
common with lipophilic drugs, which readily cross 
the blood–brain barrier.
• Effects on blood lipid levels. Most β-adrenoceptor 
antagonists raise the plasma concentration of 
triglycerides and lower the concentration of 
high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (see Chapter 48). 
These changes are modest but potentially athero-
genic. They are most marked with nonselective 
β-adrenoceptor antagonists, but less so if the drug 
has PAA.
• Sudden withdrawal syndrome. Upregulation of 
β-adrenoceptors during long-term treatment with 
a β-adrenoceptor antagonist makes the heart more 
sensitive to catecholamines when the drug is with-
drawn. Sudden withdrawal may give rise to pal-
pitation due to an increase in heart rate and force 
of cardiac contraction. β-Adrenoceptor antagonists 
should be withdrawn gradually in people with isch-
aemic heart disease, to avoid precipitating an acute 
coronary syndrome.
• Drug interactions. The calcium channel blocker 
verapamil and, to a lesser extent, diltiazem (dis-
cussed later) have potentially hazardous additive 
effects with β-adrenoceptor antagonists as both 
reduce the force of cardiac contraction and slow 
heart rate.
CALCIUM CHANNEL BLOCKERS
  Examples
dihydropyridines: amlodipine, nifedipine  
non-dihydropyridines: diltiazem, verapamil
Mechanism of Action and Effects
Calcium is essential for excitation–contraction cou-
pling in muscle cells. The following mechanisms of 
regulating intracellular free Ca2+ concentration are 
important pharmacologically (Figs. 5.4 and 5.5):
• In smooth muscle cells, Ca2+ enters the cell through 
transmembrane L-type and T-type voltage-gated 
ion channels, and also ligand-gated channels, 
which respond to agonists such as endothelin and 
noradrenaline (see Figs. 5.4 and 5.5). Activation of 
ligand-gated channels and consequent Ca2+ influx 
depolarises the cell and opens the voltage-gated 
Ca2+ channels. The ligand-gated channels in smooth 
muscle cells allow them to depolarise without an 
action potential, unlike striated (cardiac and skel-
etal) muscle cells. As there are no voltage-gated Na+ 
channels in smooth muscle, their depolarisation is 
slow and Ca2+ dependent. A small amount of Ca2+ is 
released from the sarcoplasmic reticulum, but sus-
tained smooth muscle contraction is dependent on 
external Ca2+.
• In cardiac muscle cells, depolarisation of the cell 
opens L-type Ca2+ channels allowing a small amount 
of Ca2+ into the cell. This results in a large increase 
in Ca2+ in the dyadic space between the t-tubule 
and sarcoplasmic reticulum. The increase in dyadic 
space Ca2+ opens the Ca2+ release channels in the sar-
coplasmic reticulum (ryanodine receptors; RyR2), 
leading to Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release.
96	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
• In skeletal muscle cells, sarcoplasmal Ca2+ is kept 
low by the action of Ca2+-ATPases which sequester 
it in the sarcoplasmic reticulum. When an action 
potential depolarises the cell membrane, it opens 
L-type Ca2+ channels that are directly bound to the 
ryanodine receptor (RyR1) in the sarcoplasmic retic-
ulum. RyR1 functions as a Ca2+ release channel and 
cell depolarisation releases Ca2+ from the sarcoplas-
mic reticulum to be available for muscle contraction 
(see Figs. 5.4 and 5.5). Unlike smooth muscle L-type 
Ca2+ channels, these channels in skeletal muscle do 
not open to permit Ca2+ entry into the cell. They acti-
vate RyR1 by a conformational change when the cell 
depolarises, and skeletal muscle will therefore con-
tract without external Ca2+.
During muscle relaxation, Ca2+ is removed from the 
sarcoplasm into the sarcoplasmic reticulum through 
the action of Ca2+-ATPases. In smooth and cardiac 
muscle, it also leaves the cell in exchange for Na+ via 
the Na+/Ca2+ exchanger (see Fig. 5.4).
There are at least five different types of transmem-
brane Ca2+ channels. Two types of voltage-gated 
channels are found in myocytes and smooth muscle 
cells:
• Voltage-gated L-type Ca2+ channels (long-acting, 
high-threshold-activated, slowly inactivated) are 
found in the cell membranes of a large number of 
excitable cells, including skeletal, cardiac and vas-
cular smooth muscle. In cardiac and smooth muscle 
cells, Ca2+ enters the cell through these channels 
when the cell membrane is depolarised. The skele-
tal, cardiac and vascular smooth muscle L-type Ca2+ 
channels have different subunit structures.
• Voltage-gated T-type Ca2+ channels (transient, low 
threshold-activated, fast inactivated) are found in 
pacemaker cells of the sinoatrial and atrioventricu-
lar nodes, and are also present in vascular smooth 
muscle.
Calcium channel blockers have different chemical 
structures, but their common action is to reduce Ca2+ 
influx through voltage-gated L-type Ca2+ channels 
in smooth and cardiac muscle. None of the currently 
available calcium channel blockers affects T-type chan-
nels to any important extent, or influence ligand-gated 
Ca2+ channels (see Fig. 5.5).
The different types of calcium channel blockers bind 
to distinct receptors on the L-type Ca2+ channel, pro-
ducing clinically important differences in their actions. 
Fig. 5.4  The control of calcium regulation and actions of potassium channel openers in cardiac myocytes and 
blood vessels. Calcium concentrations in cardiac cells and in vascular smooth muscle are under the influence of a num-
ber of different mechanisms. Calcium entry through voltage-gated L-type Ca2+ channels stimulates ryanodine receptors 
(RyR) in the sarcoplasmic reticulum, releasing stored Ca2+ (a process known as Ca2+-induced calcium release, CICR). 
Intracellular Ca2+ is also regulated by exchange with Na+ via the Na+/Ca2+ exchangers (NCX) in the cell membrane. Vascu-
lar smooth muscle cells have ATP-sensitive inward rectifier K+ channels (KIR) which combine with sulfonylurea receptors 
to form ATP-sensitive K+ channels (KATP). Hyperpolarisation of the cell by drugs which open KATP channels, such as 
nicorandil, closes voltage-gated L-type Ca2+ channels and causes muscle relaxation.
Na+/Ca2+
exchanger (NCX)
Systole
Diastole
3Na+
Ca2+
reverse
mode
Voltage-gated
L-type Ca2+
channels
Ca2+
KATP channels
K+
KATP channel
opener
K+ eﬄux
Hyperpolarises
cell
Protection of cells
against ischaemic
injury
Closes Ca2+ channel
Promotes
stored Ca2+
release via
RyR
Ryanodine
receptor (RyR)
Ca2+
storage
Ca2+
ATPase
(storage)
Sarcoplasmic
reticulum
,QVLGH
2XWVLGH
Contractile
mechanism
forward
mode
3Na+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Nicorandil
	
	
Ischaemic Heart Disease  CHAPTER 5	
97
The receptor for verapamil is intracellular, whereas 
diltiazem and the dihydropyridines (e.g. nifedipine, 
amlodipine) have extracellular binding sites; however, 
the receptor domains for verapamil and diltiazem 
overlap. Verapamil and diltiazem exhibit frequency-
dependent receptor binding and gain access to the Ca2+ 
channel when it is in the open state. In contrast, the 
dihydropyridines preferentially bind to the channel in 
its inactivated state. As more Ca2+ channels are in the 
inactive state in relaxed vascular smooth muscle than 
in cardiac muscle, dihydropyridines selectively bind to 
Ca2+ channels in vascular smooth muscle. These recep-
tor binding characteristics account for the relative vas-
cular selectivity of the dihydropyridines and for the 
antiarrhythmic properties of verapamil and diltiazem 
(see Chapter 8).
Calcium channel blockers produce a number of 
effects that are important in the treatment of angina:
• Peripheral arterial dilation. Although all calcium 
channel blockers are vasodilators, dihydropyridine 
derivatives such as nifedipine and amlodipine are 
the most potent and have the greatest vascular selec-
tivity. Arterial dilation reduces peripheral resistance 
and lowers blood pressure. This reduces the work 
of the left ventricle and therefore reduces myocar-
dial oxygen demand. Most dihydropyridines have 
a rapid onset of action. A rapid reduction in blood 
pressure can lead to reflex sympathetic nervous sys-
tem activation and tachycardia (Fig. 5.6). Amlodip-
ine or modified-release formulations of short-acting 
dihydropyridines are more slowly absorbed and 
gradually reduce blood pressure with little reflex 
tachycardia.
• Coronary artery dilation. Prevention or relief of 
coronary vasospasm improves myocardial blood 
flow.
• Reduced heart rate (negative chronotropic effect). 
Verapamil and diltiazem (but not the dihydropyri-
dines) slow the rate of firing of the sinoatrial node and 
slow the conduction of the electrical impulse through 
the atrioventricular node (see also Chapter 8). Reflex 
tachycardia does not occur with these drugs, and 
they also slow the rate of rise in heart rate during 
exercise.
• Reduced cardiac contractility (negative inotropic 
effect). Most calcium channel blockers (but par-
ticularly verapamil) have some negative inotropic 
effect. Amlodipine does not impair myocardial 
contractility.
Pharmacokinetics
Most calcium channel blockers are lipophilic com-
pounds with similar pharmacokinetic properties. They 
are almost completely absorbed from the gut lumen, 
but variable first-pass metabolism can limit bioavail-
ability. Their half-lives are mostly in the range of 2 to 
12 hours and modified-release formulations are com-
monly used to prolong their duration of action. In 
contrast, amlodipine is slowly absorbed and does not 
undergo first-pass metabolism. It is metabolised, but 
due to high protein binding it has a very long half-life 
of about 1 to 2 days.
Fig. 5.5  Contraction of the cardiac myocyte by voltage-gated and receptor-operated channels. Depolarisation 
during the action potential activates the voltage-gated L-type Ca2+ channels and the influx of Ca2+ into the cell results 
in myosin phosphorylation and muscle contraction. It also promotes further Ca2+ release from the sarcoplasmic reticu-
lum (SR) by stimulation of ryanodine receptors (RyR). Stimulation of the β1-adrenoceptors by catecholamines activates 
adenylyl cyclase, and the generated cAMP binds to subunits of protein kinase A (PKA), which phosphorylates the L-type 
Ca2+ channels, increasing their opening time and facilitating Ca2+ entry. The L-type Ca2+ channels can also be activated 
by other pathways, such as phospholipase C-dependent signalling triggered by agonism of α1-adrenoceptors (not 
shown). The activity of the voltage-gated L-type Ca2+ channels can therefore be reduced directly by calcium channel 
blockers or indirectly by antagonists of β1-adrenoceptors or other receptors. +, Stimulates activity; –, inhibits activity; 
ATP, adenosine triphosphate; cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate.
Depolarisation
Ca2+
+
–
–
Contractile
mechanisms
cAMP
SR
ATP
Ca2+
Cardiac
myocyte
store
+
Calcium     
channel
blockers
RyR
+
Ca2+
+
PKA
+
+
L-type voltage-
gated channel
-Adrenoceptor
β1-Adrenoceptor 
antagonists
β1-
Adrenoceptor
agonists
98	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
Verapamil can also be given by intravenous injec-
tion, usually for the treatment of supraventricular 
arrhythmias (see Chapter 8).
Unwanted Effects
• Arterial dilation can produce headache, flushing 
and dizziness, although tolerance often occurs with 
continued use. Ankle oedema, which is frequently 
resistant to diuretics, probably arises from increased 
transcapillary hydrostatic pressure. Tolerance to 
oedema does not occur. Vasodilatory unwanted 
effects are most common with the dihydropyridines 
and least troublesome with verapamil.
• Reduced cardiac contractility can precipitate heart 
failure in people with pre-existing poor left ventric-
ular function, particularly with verapamil. Amlo-
dipine does not depress cardiac contractility.
• Tachycardia and palpitations can arise with dihy-
dropyridines, especially with immediate-release 
formulations.
• Bradycardia and heart block can occur with vera-
pamil and diltiazem.
• Altered gut motility can occur. Constipation is most 
common with verapamil and less so with diltia-
zem. Amlodipine and other dihydropyridines can 
cause heartburn by relaxing the lower oesophageal 
sphincter.
• Gum hyperplasia.
• Drug interactions: verapamil and diltiazem can slow 
the heart rate excessively if they are used in combi-
nation with other drugs that have similar effects on 
atrioventricular nodal conduction, such as digoxin 
(see Chapter 8) or β-adrenoceptor antagonists. The 
metabolism of many calcium channel blockers can 
be inhibited or accelerated by drugs that affect the 
hepatic cytochrome P450 enzymes.
POTASSIUM CHANNEL OPENERS
  Example
nicorandil
Mechanism of Action
There are many different K+ channels in cell membranes 
(see Chapter 8, Table 8.1). Of these, the adenosine tri-
phosphate (ATP)-inhibited KATP channels are the target 
for nicorandil (see Fig. 5.4). KATP channels are found in 
many tissues but have a variety of tissue-specific sub-
unit configurations, making targeted drug action on 
Fig. 5.6  The major sites of action of antianginal drugs. The antianginal drugs reduce cardiac work and myocardial 
oxygen demand either by peripheral vasodilation (which reduces afterload and preload) or by reducing heart rate and/
or myocardial contractility. Myocardial oxygen supply may also be enhanced, either by coronary artery dilation or due to 
increased diastolic filling time. Nitrates, the dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker nifedipine, and the potassium chan-
nel opener nicorandil can cause reflex tachycardia due to a rapid fall in blood pressure. This is not a problem with the 
non-dihydropyridines diltiazem and verapamil, which concomitantly slow the heart rate. Reflex tachycardia to nifedipine 
can be minimised with a modified-release formulation, or a more slowly acting dihydropyridine such as amlodipine can 
be used.
Arterial resistance
ex
tachycardia
r
–
–
–
–
–
β-Adrenoceptor
antagonists
Diltiazem, verapamil,
ivabradine,
ranolazine
Reduced heart
rate and/or 
contractility
Dilate
venous
capacitance
vessels
Reﬂex
tachycardia
Nitrates
Nifedipine,
nitrates, nicorandil
decreases: reﬂ
Diltiazem, verapamil
D
ec
ea
se
d
aft
erl
oa
d
Arterial resistance
decreases: no reﬂex
tachycardia due to
concomitant eﬀect on
heart rate
Venous return
(preload)
decreases
	
	
Ischaemic Heart Disease  CHAPTER 5	
99
the channels possible. Nicorandil opens KATP channels 
in vascular smooth muscle cells so that K+ leaves the 
cell, increasing the negative potential inside the cell 
(hyperpolarisation). This means that the cell becomes 
more difficult to depolarise and the membrane voltage-
gated L-type Ca2+ channels are less likely to open (see 
the previous discussion of calcium channel blockers). 
As less Ca2+ is available to the muscle contractile mech-
anism, vasodilation occurs in peripheral and coronary 
arteries (see Fig. 5.4). The fall in blood pressure aris-
ing from peripheral vasodilation reduces myocardial 
oxygen demand, and preventing coronary vasospasm 
can improve myocardial perfusion. The enhanced KATP 
channel activity may also protect myocardial cells 
against ischaemic injury.
Nicorandil also has a nitrate moiety and part of its 
vasodilator action is via generation of NO in vascular 
smooth muscle (see organic nitrates, noted previously). 
This may account for the venodilation produced by 
the drug, which reduces venous return and further 
reduces myocardial oxygen demand.
Pharmacokinetics
Nicorandil is eliminated by hepatic metabolism and 
has a short half-life of 1 hour. However, the tissue 
effects correlate poorly with the plasma concentration 
and the biological effect lasts up to 12 hours.
Unwanted Effects
• Arterial dilation causes headache in 25% to 50% of 
people, but tolerance usually occurs with continued 
use. Palpitation (caused by reflex activation of the 
sympathetic nervous system in response to a fall in 
blood pressure) and flushing are less common than 
headache.
• Dizziness.
• Nausea and vomiting.
• Skin, eye and mucosal (oral and anal) ulceration, 
including gastrointestinal ulcers. Nicorandil should 
be stopped if ulceration occurs.
SPECIFIC SINUS NODE INHIBITORS
  Example
ivabradine
Mechanism of Action
In cardiac pacemaker cells (especially the sinoatrial 
node), the pacemaker If current is responsible for 
spontaneous depolarisation (see Chapter 8). This is an 
inward current of positive ions through HCN channels 
that carry both Na+ and K+, which are activated by the 
negative intracellular potential in diastole or by cyclic 
nucleotides. Ivabradine is a specific inhibitor of the If 
pacemaker current and its major effect is to slow the 
rate of firing of the sinus node. The degree of channel 
inhibition is use-dependent, as ivabradine binds to the 
open channel from the internal side of the cell mem-
brane. As a result, the efficacy of ivabradine increases 
with the frequency of channel opening and is greatest 
at higher heart rates. Because it acts mainly by slow-
ing the rate of firing of the sinus node, ivabradine is 
ineffective in atrial fibrillation. Unlike β-adrenoceptor 
antagonists, ivabradine has no effect on myocardial 
contractility.
Pharmacokinetics
Ivabradine undergoes extensive first-pass metabolism 
in the gut wall and liver to an active metabolite. It has 
a short half-life of 2 hours.
Unwanted Effects
• Bradycardia; first-degree heart block. It is recom-
mended that the resting heart rate should not be 
allowed to fall below 50 beats/minute.
• Ventricular ectopics.
• Headache and dizziness.
• Dose-related ocular symptoms, including phos-
phenes (flashes of light), stroboscopic effects and 
blurred vision from inhibition of the If in the eye.
LATE SODIUM CURRENT INHIBITORS
  Example
ranolazine
Mechanism of Action
Transmembrane Na+ channels are activated during the 
initial electrical excitation of myocardial cells, and most 
are inactivated during the plateau phase of the action 
potential. However, a small proportion of the Na+ chan-
nels remain open, giving rise to a late Na+ current. In 
hypoxic tissues this current is increased and the conse-
quent rise in intracellular Na+ concentration activates 
the reverse mode of the Na+/Ca2+ exchanger in the cell 
membrane, leading to removal of Na+ from the cell. This 
promotes intracellular Ca2+ accumulation and increased 
diastolic myocardial tension (see Fig. 5.4). Ranolazine 
attenuates the late transcellular Na+ current in ischaemic 
myocardial cells and reduces Ca2+ accumulation. There 
are two potentially beneficial consequences of this 
effect: the lower wall tension in the ventricles reduces 
myocardial oxygen demand and it will also reduce com-
pression of small intramyocardial coronary vessels, thus 
improving myocardial perfusion in diastole.
Pharmacokinetics
Ranolazine is extensively metabolised in the liver. It 
has a short elimination half-life of about 2 hours, and a 
modified-release formulation is used.
Unwanted Effects
• Nausea, dyspepsia and constipation.
• Headache, dizziness and lethargy.
100	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
• Prolongation of the QT interval on the ECG (see 
Chapter 8), with the potential to provoke cardiac 
arrhythmias if used with other drugs that have the 
same effect.
MANAGEMENT OF STABLE ANGINA
The principal aims of treatment for stable angina are to 
relieve symptoms and to improve prognosis. Angina 
has a pronounced circadian rhythm and occurs most 
frequently in the hours after waking, so a drug given 
for prevention of symptoms should ideally be effec-
tive at this time. There is no evidence that control of 
symptoms will affect either survival or the risk of a 
subsequent myocardial infarction. Improvement in 
prognosis is achieved mainly by interventions that do 
not directly affect symptoms.
There are several important principles of manage-
ment of stable angina:
• Lifestyle changes. Stopping smoking reduces the 
progression of coronary atheroma and reduces the 
risk of developing an acute coronary syndrome by 
up to 50%. It also reduces coronary vasospasm and 
may improve symptoms. Weight loss in obese peo-
ple will also reduce symptoms by reducing cardiac 
work. Regular exercise improves fitness and attenu-
ates the rise in heart rate on exercise, which will 
increase exercise duration before the onset of angina.
• Reduction of high blood pressure and control of dia-
betes mellitus will reduce progression of atheroma 
and lowering blood pressure also reduces myocar-
dial work.
• Treatment of exacerbating factors for angina, such 
as anaemia, arrhythmias or thyrotoxicosis.
• Sublingual GTN remains the treatment of choice for 
an acute anginal attack. It relieves symptoms within 
minutes but gives only short-lived protection (20–
30 minutes). GTN can also be taken immediately 
before an activity that is likely to produce angina.
• Antiischaemic therapy: prophylactic antianginal drugs 
should be used unless anginal attacks are very infre-
quent. A rise in heart rate is one of the main pre-
cipitating factors for angina, and a drug that lowers 
heart rate such as a β-adrenoceptor antagonist, or 
a rate-limiting calcium channel blocker (verapamil 
or diltiazem), is first-line treatment. Ivabradine can 
be used if other heart rate–limiting drugs are not 
tolerated. Nitrates are less suitable as first-line pro-
phylactic agents because of the risk of tolerance. If 
symptoms are not controlled by optimal doses of a 
single drug, then a combination of a β-adrenoceptor 
antagonist with a calcium channel blocker (but not 
verapamil) is recommended. Third-line treatments 
for intolerance to β-adrenoceptor antagonists or cal-
cium channel blockers include a long-acting nitrate, 
ivabradine, nicorandil or ranolazine. Ranolazine 
can be helpful when symptomatic hypotension pre-
cludes the use of other drugs.
Symptoms, and their response to treatment, are a 
poor guide to the severity of coronary artery disease; 
quantifying the amount of ischaemic myocardium 
with noninvasive myocardial perfusion imaging is 
a more accurate predictor. A large area of ischaemic 
myocardium, or failure to control symptoms with 
two prophylactic drugs in adequate dosages, should 
lead to consideration of coronary angiography, with 
a view to revascularisation. ‘Triple antianginal drug 
therapy’ (e.g. β-adrenoceptor antagonist, calcium 
channel blocker and a long-acting nitrate) has not been 
shown convincingly to be better for symptom control 
than two agents, but such combinations may provide 
symptomatic benefit and should be considered if coro-
nary revascularisation is not possible or not wanted.
• Antiplatelet therapy: low-dose aspirin reduces the 
risk of myocardial infarction by up to 35%. Clopido-
grel is an alternative if aspirin is not tolerated, but 
the combination does not have any additive benefit 
in stable coronary artery disease (see Chapter 11).
• Lipid-lowering therapy: lowering the plasma low-
density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol to less than 
1.8  mmol/L by diet and a statin (see Chapter 48) 
reduces the risk of nonfatal myocardial infarction, 
cardiac death and the need for a coronary artery 
revascularisation procedure by about 25%.
• Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors 
such as ramipril (see Chapter 6) have no antianginal 
action but reduce the risk of myocardial infarction 
and death by about 15%. They are especially use-
ful if there are comorbidities such as hypertension, 
diabetes mellitus, heart failure or left ventricular 
dysfunction.
• Revascularisation: percutaneous coronary interven-
tion (PCI) consists of angioplasty and almost always 
insertion of a stent to maintain vessel patency. PCI 
improves symptoms, but only reduces subsequent 
cardiovascular death or myocardial infarction if 
there is a large area of ischaemic myocardium. 
Insertion of a coronary artery stent is followed by 
combination antiplatelet therapy with low-dose 
aspirin and clopidogrel to minimise stent thrombo-
sis, which carries a high risk of myocardial infarc-
tion or death. Short-term use of a glycoprotein 
IIb/IIIa antagonist such as tirofiban or eptifibatide 
(see Chapter 11) at the time of angioplasty further 
improves outcome for high-risk procedures, and 
particularly in the presence of diabetes mellitus. 
Restenosis after angioplasty is due to intimal hyper-
plasia and smooth muscle proliferation encroach-
ing on the lumen of the vessel, and usually occurs 
within 6 months of the procedure. Angioplasty 
without stenting is followed by a restenosis rate of 
about 40% at 6 months, which can be reduced to 
about 20% by the use of a bare-metal stent. Drug-
eluting stents, which are coated with a polymer 
matrix containing an antiproliferative drug such as 
everolimus or zotarolimus (see Chapter 38), reduce 
	
	
Ischaemic Heart Disease  CHAPTER 5	
101
the risk of restenosis at 6 months to about 5%. The 
rate of late stent thrombosis is less than 1% at 6 years 
for the latest generation of drug-eluting stents. The 
combination of aspirin and clopidogrel is used for 
1 to 6 months after insertion of a stent for stable 
angina, after which the clopidogrel can be stopped. 
The optimal duration of dual antiplatelet therapy is 
determined by the type of stent.
• Coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) improves 
long-term prognosis compared with medical treat-
ment in people with a left mainstem coronary artery 
stenosis, and in those with ‘triple vessel disease’ 
(significant stenoses of the left anterior descend-
ing, left circumflex and right coronary arteries) 
who have impaired left ventricular function. In less 
severe disease it is used for symptom relief when 
angioplasty is not possible.
MANAGEMENT OF ACUTE CORONARY SYNDROMES
EARLY MANAGEMENT OF NON-ST ELEVATION 
ACUTE CORONARY SYNDROMES (NSTE-ACS)
Acute coronary syndromes require urgent treatment 
even if there is no ECG evidence of myocardial infarc-
tion at presentation. Unstable angina, if left untreated, 
progresses in about 10% of cases to myocardial infarc-
tion or death. Initial management of an acute coronary 
syndrome is determined by the ECG. In the absence 
of ST-segment elevation on the ECG, management is 
based on the assumption that a myocardial infarction 
has occurred, until the result of a sensitive marker of 
myocardial damage such as plasma troponin I or T is 
obtained. A rise in one of these markers will differenti-
ate NSTEMI from unstable angina. If there is no evi-
dence of myocardial damage and the ECG does not 
show ischaemic changes, then the risk of subsequent 
myocardial infarction or sudden death is lower. It is 
recommended that a risk scoring system (such as the 
GRACE risk score) is used to predict 6-month and 
3-year mortality. For all people with NSTE-ACS, rou-
tine coronary angiography with a view to revascu-
larisation is recommended if the 6-month mortality is 
predicted to be greater than 3%.
• Initial treatment is with sublingual GTN, which may 
reduce pain by relief of coronary artery vasospasm 
at the site of the arterial occlusion and increase cor-
onary blood flow. Analgesia with an intravenous 
opioid such as morphine (see Chapter 19), together 
with an antiemetic, is used to treat pain that does 
not settle with three doses of sublingual GTN. Intra-
muscular injection of morphine should be avoided, 
as a low cardiac output and poor tissue perfusion 
often delay absorption. Intravenous GTN infusion 
can be used for refractory or recurrent ischaemia. 
Supplementary oxygen may be required if the arte-
rial oxygen saturation is below 94% with the aim of 
maintaining it between 94% and 98% unless there 
is a risk of type 2 respiratory failure. If there is no 
hypoxaemia, oxygen should be avoided because it 
may increase myocardial damage.
• Antiplatelet therapy: loading doses of aspirin and 
clopidogrel (see Chapter 11) should be given. Ticagre-
lor reduces the rate of adverse vascular events more 
than clopidogrel, with no excess bleeding, but the 
reversible action on platelets means that missed 
doses can reduce the protection. Prasugrel can be 
used instead of clopidogrel if an invasive strategy 
with potential PCI is contemplated; it also produces 
a greater reduction in adverse vascular events, but 
at the expense of more bleeding. If an NSTEMI is 
confirmed, then dual antiplatelet therapy with 
clopidogrel (or prasugrel, or ticagrelor) and low-
dose aspirin is continued for 1 year, unless the pre-
dicted 6-month risk of mortality is less than 1.5%. 
Dual antiplatelet therapy reduces the risk of sub-
sequent myocardial infarction by a further 20% 
compared with aspirin alone. After a year, the clopi-
dogrel, prasugrel or ticagrelor is stopped (or earlier 
if bleeding risk is high), but aspirin is continued 
indefinitely.
• Anticoagulant therapy: full anticoagulation, usu-
ally with fondaparinux (see Chapter 11), is ini-
tially used together with dual antiplatelet therapy. 
Fondaparinux has largely replaced low-molecular-
weight heparin (which carries a higher risk of bleed-
ing), unless coronary angiography is planned within 
24 hours of admission. The risk of further myocar-
dial infarction or death within 14 days is reduced by 
about 60% using combined treatment with antiplate-
let therapy and an anticoagulant. If early PCI is car-
ried out, low-molecular-weight heparin combined 
with a glycoprotein IIb/IIIa antagonist such as tiro-
fiban or eptifibatide (see Chapter 11) can be used. 
There is a higher risk of bleeding but fewer catheter-
related thromboses compared with fondaparinux. 
There is evidence of benefit from combining an oral 
anticoagulant with dual antiplatelet therapy for up 
to 13 months after the acute phase of ACS, but the 
increased risk of bleeding means that this is not 
widely used.
• Antiischaemic therapy: a β-adrenoceptor antago-
nist is the first-choice antianginal treatment and 
can reduce ischaemic events after presentation with 
unstable angina. A heart rate-limiting calcium chan-
nel blocker, such as verapamil or diltiazem, can be 
used if a β-adrenoceptor antagonist is contraindi-
cated or not tolerated. If further treatment is needed, 
then a dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker 
such as nifedipine, or nicorandil, or a nitrate can be 
used with a β-adrenoceptor antagonist. Apart from 
β-adrenoceptor antagonists, antianginal drugs do 
not improve prognosis in unstable angina.
• Revascularisation: in the acute phase of an NSTEMI, 
early angiography followed by PCI or CABG will 
reduce the risk of reinfarction or death by about 
102	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
40%. If there is no evidence of myocardial infarction 
using serum biomarkers (unstable angina), then 
angiography should be undertaken with a view to 
revascularisation if symptoms do not settle with 
conservative treatment or if the predicted 6-month 
mortality is greater than 3%.
EARLY MANAGEMENT OF ST-SEGMENT 
ELEVATION MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION
The presence of ST-segment elevation on the ECG 
usually heralds a more extensive myocardial infarc-
tion (STEMI). Early opening of the occluded artery to 
reperfuse the myocardium limits the extent of myo-
cardial damage and improves long-term outcomes. 
Reperfusion should be considered if there is charac-
teristic ST-segment elevation in two or more contigu-
ous leads or left bundle branch block on the ECG and 
a good history of acute myocardial infarction. In the 
latter situation, an acute myocardial infarction can-
not be easily diagnosed from the ECG, but mortality 
is high. The greatest reduction in mortality is achieved 
in people at highest risk of death (i.e. anterior infarcts 
rather than inferior), older people (>65 years of age) 
and those with a presenting systolic blood pressure 
below 100 mm Hg. Reperfusion therapy significantly 
reduces mortality if undertaken within 12 hours of the 
onset of pain, but the survival advantage is greater the 
earlier treatment is undertaken.
• Analgesia and oxygen may be given as described 
previously for unstable angina/NSTEMI. An intra-
venous β-adrenoceptor antagonist can be given to 
reduce cardiac work, especially if there is hyper-
tension, but should be avoided if there are signs of 
heart failure.
• Revascularisation: ‘Primary’ PCI (coronary angio-
plasty, with insertion of a drug-eluting stent) to 
open the infarct-related artery is the treatment of 
choice for reperfusion in STEMI if angiography can 
be started within 120 minutes of presentation. There 
is a greater reduction in mortality than using throm-
bolytic therapy to achieve reperfusion. If the delay 
to primary PCI is likely to be more than 120 min-
utes, thrombolysis is recommended. ‘Rescue’ PCI 
can then be considered if there has been failure to 
reperfuse the infarct-related vessel. Anticoagulation 
with low-molecular-weight or unfractionated hepa-
rin (see Chapter 11) is given at the time of primary 
PCI, in addition to dual oral antiplatelet therapy 
(aspirin with clopidogrel, prasugrel or ticagrelor). 
Glycoprotein 11b/111a inhibitors are not routinely 
recommended but can be used if there is a high 
thrombus burden. A combination of aspirin with 
an oral ADP receptor antagonist (either prasugrel, 
ticagrelor or clopidogrel; see Chapter 11) should 
be continued for at least 12 months after a STEMI, 
especially if a drug-eluting stent has been inserted.
• Thrombolytic therapy: natural fibrinolysis can be 
enhanced by an intravenous fibrinolytic (thrombolytic) 
drug (see Chapter 11) to rapidly reperfuse the 
occluded artery and limit the size of the infarct. 
Treatment with thrombolytic therapy is now lim-
ited mainly to people who cannot be managed by 
primary PCI within 2 hours of the time a fibrino-
lytic drug could be given. The preferred agents are 
alteplase (recombinant tissue plasminogen acti-
vator, rt-PA) or a synthetic rt-PA analogue such 
as tenecteplase. Streptokinase is rarely used for 
thrombolytic therapy as it has a lower success rate 
for opening occluded arteries and produces symp-
tomatic hypotension during about 10% of admin-
istrations. Alteplase and related compounds are 
relatively short acting, and subsequent anticoagu-
lation reduces the risk of reocclusion of the artery. 
Fondaparinux (see Chapter 11) for 8 days after fibri-
nolysis reduces mortality and reinfarction by up to 
25% more than heparin.
In addition to the management discussed previ-
ously, complications of myocardial infarction may 
require specific treatment (Box 5.2). These complica-
tions are less common since the introduction of pri-
mary PCI and are most often seen in the first few days 
after the acute event.
SECONDARY PROPHYLAXIS AFTER 
MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION
The management of unstable angina after the acute 
episode is similar to that of stable angina. Secondary 
prophylaxis after myocardial infarction to reduce late 
mortality requires a broad-based approach. The fol-
lowing interventions produce independent benefits:
• Stopping smoking reduces mortality after a myocar-
dial infarction by up to 50%.
• A Mediterranean diet reduces mortality after myo-
cardial infarction. The addition of supplementary 
omega-3 fatty acids is not recommended.
• Rehabilitation programmes which include exercise 
reduce mortality by up to 25% and improve psycho-
logical recovery. Weight loss should be encouraged 
in obese people.
• Antiplatelet therapy: low-dose aspirin combined with 
clopidogrel, prasugrel or ticagrelor (see Chapter 11) 
Box 5.2  Complications After Myocardial Infarction.
Heart failure
Cardiogenic shock
Cardiac rupture
Free wall rupture
Ventricular septal defect
Arrhythmias
Ventricular fibrillation
Ventricular tachycardia
Supraventricular tachycardias
Sinus bradycardia and heart block
Pericarditis
Intracardiac thrombus
	
	
Ischaemic Heart Disease  CHAPTER 5	
103
inhibits platelet aggregation and reduces mortality 
in the first few weeks when started within 24 hours 
of the onset of pain. Overall mortality is reduced by 
at least 25%. The combination is effective following 
both STEMI and NSTEMI. Dual antiplatelet treat-
ment is continued for up to a year (depending on 
predicted event rates and bleeding risk), then low-
dose aspirin alone is continued long-term.
• Antiischaemic therapy: a β-adrenoceptor antago-
nist started orally within 24 hours after STEMI or 
NSTEMI reduces both death and reinfarction by 
about 25%. The mechanism is unknown. The great-
est benefit is seen in those at highest risk (e.g. fol-
lowing anterior infarction) and in those who have 
had serious post-infarct arrhythmias, post-infarct 
angina or heart failure. Treatment should be contin-
ued for at least 12 months, or indefinitely if there 
is left ventricular dysfunction. Heart failure should 
be stabilised before a β-adrenoceptor antagonist 
is given (see Chapter 7). Verapamil and diltiazem 
produce a small reduction in reinfarction, but do 
not reduce mortality. They may be detrimental if 
there have been symptoms or signs of heart fail-
ure. These drugs should be considered as an option 
only for those at high risk who cannot tolerate a 
β-adrenoceptor antagonist and who do not have 
significant left ventricular dysfunction. Dihydro-
pyridine calcium channel blockers have no effect on 
prognosis after myocardial infarction.
• An ACE inhibitor, such as ramipril (see Chapter 6), 
started within 24 hours of a STEMI or NSTEMI is 
of greatest benefit if there is clinical or radiologi-
cal evidence of heart failure, with a reduction in 
mortality of about 25% over the subsequent year. 
There is a smaller survival advantage if there is 
significant left ventricular dysfunction after the 
infarction (an ejection fraction of 40% or less) 
without clinical evidence of heart failure, with a 
20% reduction in mortality over 3 to 5 years. ACE 
inhibitors reduce mortality when there is well-
preserved left ventricular function, although the 
absolute risk reduction is smaller. ACE inhibitors 
also reduce nonfatal reinfarction by an unknown 
mechanism. The benefits of an ACE inhibitor are 
greatest with high doses. Angiotensin receptor 
antagonists (see Chapter 6) have similar efficacy 
to ACE inhibitors following myocardial infarction 
and should be considered if an ACE inhibitor is 
poorly tolerated.
• Lipid-lowering therapy: a ‘high intensity’ statin, 
such as high dose atorvastatin, should be started 
as soon as possible after the event and continued 
indefinitely. The target is an LDL cholesterol less 
than 1.8 mmol/L, or at least 50% reduction if the 
baseline LDL cholesterol is 3.5 mmol/L or less.
• Anticoagulant therapy: long-term anticoagula-
tion with warfarin or rivaroxaban (see Chapter 11) 
reduces mortality and reinfarction to a similar extent 
to low-dose aspirin. In combination with aspirin, 
they produce an additional reduction in both fatal 
and nonfatal events, but with an increased risk of 
bleeding.
SELF-ASSESSMENT
TRUE/FALSE QUESTIONS
	 1.	 The increased oxygen demand produced by a rise 
in cardiac workload is met by an increase in coro-
nary blood flow.
	 2.	 Nitric oxide (NO) causes vasodilation by increas-
ing cAMP in vascular smooth muscle cells.
	 3.	 In angina, glyceryl trinitrate (GTN) increases total 
coronary blood flow.
	 4.	 Topical absorption of GTN from a transdermal 
patch avoids first-pass metabolism.
	 5.	 GTN can be taken safely with a β-adrenoceptor 
antagonist.
	 6.	 All β-adrenoceptor antagonists have vasodilator 
activity.
	 7.	 Resting bradycardia is less likely with a 
β-adrenoceptor antagonist with PAA.
	 8.	 The antianginal action of amlodipine arises from 
its negative chronotropic and inotropic effects on 
the heart.
	 9.	 Enhancing the efflux of K+ ions hyperpolarises 
vascular smooth muscle cells.
10.	 Ivabradine slows the heart rate and reduces myo-
cardial contractility.
11.	 Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) reduces 
mortality after a STEMI more than thrombolytic 
therapy.
12.	 Drug-eluting stents reduce the risk of restenosis 
after angioplasty.
ONE-BEST-ANSWER (OBA) QUESTIONS
1.	 Identify the least accurate statement about angina 
and myocardial infarction.
A.	Isosorbide mononitrate does not undergo first-
pass metabolism.
B.	 Verapamil can reduce arterial blood pressure 
without causing reflex tachycardia.
C.	Antiplatelet drugs such as tirofiban can reduce 
the risk of myocardial infarction in high-risk in-
dividuals with unstable angina.
D.	Cholesterol reduction is of little benefit in reduc-
ing the risk of recurrence of myocardial infarction.
E.	 Nifedipine does not improve prognosis after 
myocardial infarction.
2.	 Which change to the treatment regimen would be 
most likely to reduce the risk of tolerance develop-
ing to isosorbide mononitrate?
A.	Switch to its longer-acting precursor, isosorbide 
dinitrate.
B.	 Give GTN in addition by the sublingual route 
when necessary.
104	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
C.	Switch to a continuously applied transdermal 
GTN patch.
D.	Schedule doses so that there is a period of low 
plasma concentration of isosorbide mononitrate 
each day.
E.	 Use isosorbide mononitrate together with a 
β-adrenoceptor antagonist.
3.	 Which drug combination is most likely to have an 
adverse effect on cardiac function in a person with 
angina?
A.	GTN with atenolol.
B.	 Verapamil with atenolol.
C.	Amlodipine with atenolol.
D.	GTN with nicorandil.
E.	 GTN with low-dose aspirin.
CASE-BASED QUESTIONS
Mr T.K., a 65-year-old man who works as a landscape 
gardener, has been having episodes of chest pain that 
he likened to indigestion. They were brought on by 
moderately strenuous exercise and relieved by rest 
but not by antacids. The symptoms had been present 
for approximately 1 year, but recently the frequency 
and intensity of the pains had become worse and were 
now occurring several times a week. He is hyper-
tensive and his serum cholesterol is 6.6 mmol/L. He 
smokes 40 cigarettes per day and is overweight. He 
drinks about 10 units of alcohol a week. He had a 
good exercise tolerance during a diagnostic exercise 
test, but his ECG showed anterolateral ST-segment 
depression at peak exercise. There is no evidence of 
heart failure. A diagnosis of angina is made and medi-
cal treatment started.
Six months later, despite continuing medication, 
Mr T.K. awoke with severe chest pains and dyspnoea 
that was not relieved by GTN. An ECG showed an 
acute STEMI.
A.	How could his acute attacks of angina be treated?
B.	The frequency of his attacks requires prophylactic 
treatment. What options are available to reduce the 
frequency of anginal attacks?
C.	What other drugs could be useful to improve his 
prognosis?
D.	Would lifestyle changes help Mr T.K.?
E.	In unstable angina, which drug treatments would 
likely reduce the progression of the episodes to 
myocardial infarction or sudden death?
F.	 What is the likely cause of the myocardial infarction?
G.	Why is it important to give reperfusion therapy as 
quickly as possible?
H.	Mr T.K. is given the fibrinolytic agent alteplase 
(recombinant tissue plasminogen activator, rt-PA) 
because of fears that he would get an allergic 
response to streptokinase. Is this justified?
I.	 He is given 150  mg aspirin orally after an initial 
loading dose. What is the mechanism of action of 
low-dose aspirin, and would it have any added ben-
efit if thrombolytic therapy is also given?
J.	 Consideration is given to giving fondaparinux to 
Mr T.K., but this is considered unnecessary because 
he had been given rt-PA. Is this decision correct?
K.	Following his myocardial infarction, long-term pro-
phylaxis was considered. Which of the following 
drugs would have been likely to be of benefit: an 
ACE inhibitor, low-dose aspirin, a β-adrenoceptor 
antagonist, diltiazem, verapamil or warfarin?
ANSWERS
TRUE/FALSE ANSWERS
1.	 True. Increased coronary blood flow meets the 
increased myocardial oxygen demand, as the pro-
portion of oxygen removed from the coronary artery 
blood is high (75%) even at rest.
2.	 False. NO vasodilates by increasing synthesis of 
cGMP, which reduces intracellular Ca2+. Organic nitrates 
and other NO donors act by the same pathway.
3.	 False. Although GTN can reduce coronary vaso-
spasm or dilate collateral blood vessels, it does not 
increase total coronary blood flow. Its main actions 
are peripheral venodilation, which reduces venous 
return (preload), and reduced peripheral resistance 
(afterload), both of which reduce cardiac work and 
oxygen demand.
4.	 True. GTN taken orally undergoes extensive first-
pass metabolism due to delivery to the liver in 
the hepatic portal circulation; this is avoided by 
transdermal or sublingual administration, from 
which the drug gains direct access to the systemic 
circulation.
5.	 True. The main antianginal action of β-adrenoceptor 
antagonists is to reduce myocardial oxygen demand 
by reducing heart rate and contractility. They thus 
reduce the reflex tachycardia that may occur with 
GTN and other nitrates.
6.	 False. Blockade of β1-adrenoceptors produces reflex 
vasoconstriction, but some β-adrenoceptor antago-
nists produce peripheral vasodilation by partial 
agonism at β2-adrenoceptors (e.g. pindolol), by α1-
adrenoceptor blockade (e.g. carvedilol) or by activa-
tion of NO synthesis (e.g. nebivolol).
7.	 True. Drugs with partial agonist (intrinsic sympa-
thomimetic) activity at β1-adrenoceptors produce 
less bradycardia at rest, but may be less effective 
than full antagonists in reducing heart rate on 
exertion.
8.	 False. Dihydropyridine calcium channel block-
ers mainly reduce myocardial oxygen demand by 
reducing peripheral arterial resistance and venous 
return; they do not reduce heart rate and amlodip-
ine does not reduce myocardial contractility.
9.	 True. Potassium channel openers such as nicorandil 
hyperpolarise vascular myocytes by enhancing K+ 
efflux; this closes voltage-gated L-type Ca2+ chan-
nels, leading to smooth muscle relaxation.
	
	
Ischaemic Heart Disease  CHAPTER 5	
105
10.	 False. Ivabradine slows the heart by a direct action 
at the sinoatrial node without effect on myocardial 
contractility, unlike β-adrenoceptor antagonists.
11.	 True. PCI with stent insertion within 120 minutes 
of a STEMI is preferred to thrombolytic therapy 
and can also be used when thrombolysis has 
failed.
12.	 True. Stents coated with polymers that elute an 
antiproliferative drug (e.g. everolimus) can reduce 
restenosis compared with bare-metal stents.
OBA ANSWERS
1.	 Answer D is the least accurate statement.
A.	Correct. Isosorbide mononitrate can therefore 
give a more predictable response of greater dura-
tion than the dinitrate.
B.	 Correct. Unlike the dihydropyridines, verapamil 
also acts on the heart and reflex tachycardia does 
not occur.
C.	Correct. Platelet inhibition with tirofiban, an in-
travenous glycoprotein IIb/IIIa antagonist, re-
duces the risk of myocardial infarction or death 
in those at high risk (see also Chapter 11). These 
agents are most effective after an NSTEMI.
D.	Incorrect. Cholesterol reduction to less than 
4.0  mmol/L should be attempted and statins 
reduce reinfarction and cardiac death by 25% to 
30% (see Chapter 48).
E.	 Correct. Dihydropyridine calcium channel block-
ers do not improve prognosis after myocardial 
infarction. Verapamil and diltiazem produce a 
small reduction in reinfarction, but do not reduce 
mortality and may be detrimental if there are 
signs of heart failure.
2.	 Answer D is correct. The only way to reduce toler-
ance is to allow daily periods with low plasma con-
centrations of organic nitrate. Tolerance will develop 
to all the organic nitrates independent of the route 
of administration if plasma concentrations remain 
high continuously; answers A–C would therefore 
increase the risk of tolerance. A β-adrenoceptor 
antagonist (answer E) will reduce reflex tachycardia 
but not the development of tolerance.
3.	 Answer B is correct.
A.	Incorrect. Atenolol prevents reflex tachycardia 
caused by the nitrate.
B.	 Correct. Verapamil and atenolol both have a 
negative inotropic effect and this could be a 
problem, particularly if there are signs of heart 
failure. They also have a negative chronotropic 
effect and the combination can cause severe bra-
dycardia and heart block.
C.	Incorrect, although amlodipine and atenolol 
might cause excessive hypotension.
D.	Incorrect. Nicorandil does not have a direct effect 
on the heart.
E.	 Incorrect. Aspirin will reduce the risk of myocar-
dial infarction.
CASE-BASED ANSWERS
A.	Sublingual GTN is the first-choice drug for rapid 
relief of Mr T.K.’s acute anginal attacks, although 
protection is only short-lived.
B.	For prophylaxis, a β-adrenoceptor antagonist is 
often the treatment of first choice, or a calcium chan-
nel blocker if a β-adrenoceptor antagonist is contra-
indicated. If symptoms are not well controlled with 
either agent alone, a combination of both drugs, or 
the addition of a long-acting nitrate could be used, 
but the benefit of triple therapy is not convincing. 
Dual therapy with atenolol and diltiazem could sig-
nificantly decrease the number of anginal attacks 
compared with either drug alone, and will also lower 
blood pressure and heart rate, which are precipitat-
ing factors for angina. The combination should be 
carefully monitored, however, because of the risk of 
compounding bradycardia or heart failure.
C.	Additional therapy to improve prognosis includes 
low-dose aspirin or a statin drug to lower plasma 
cholesterol, both of which have been shown to 
reduce the risk of subsequent myocardial infarction.
D.	Smoking, lack of exercise and obesity are all risk fac-
tors for coronary heart disease. T.K. is exposed to 
these increased risks and should address them by 
lifestyle changes.
E.	The most consistent evidence is for combined use of 
aspirin with a β-adrenoceptor antagonist.
F.	 The most likely cause is coronary artery occlusion at 
the site of a ruptured atheromatous plaque, causing 
myocardial necrosis.
G.	The benefit of reperfusion therapy is strongly depen-
dent upon the delay between symptoms and admin-
istration. The benefit is greatest within 6 hours from 
the onset of pain, but there is good evidence for 
benefit until at least 12 hours. If angiography can be 
started within 2 hours of presentation, PCI (coronary 
angioplasty with stent) produces a greater reduction 
in mortality than thrombolytic therapy. PCI may also 
be used for rescue if fibrinolysis fails.
H.	Allergic reactions to streptokinase are extremely 
rare. Mr T.K. had not had a previous myocardial 
infarction and had not previously been given strep-
tokinase, so would be unlikely to have high titres 
of streptokinase-neutralising antibodies. It would 
therefore be safe to give him streptokinase unless he 
had severe symptomatic hypotension, but alteplase 
or an rt-PA derivative is usually preferred.
I.	 Low doses of aspirin selectively reduce produc-
tion of the platelet-aggregating agent thromboxane 
A2 by platelets, while having less effect on the pro-
duction of the antiaggregating agent prostacyclin 
(prostaglandin I2) from endothelial cells. Aspirin 
(combined with clopidogrel or ticagrelor) and fibri-
nolytic therapy have an additive benefit for treating 
acute myocardial infarction, reducing subsequent 
reinfarction or death.
106	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
J.	 The decision is incorrect. Giving fondaparinux (or 
heparin) is necessary to prevent reocclusion of the 
artery, as rt-PA is short-acting.
K.	ACE inhibitors (or angiotensin II receptor antago-
nists), low-dose aspirin, β-adrenoceptor antago-
nists and warfarin all reduce mortality and the risk 
of reinfarction. The β-adrenoceptor antagonist will 
need to be given under close observation, as it car-
ries a risk of worsening heart failure. Verapamil and 
diltiazem do not reduce mortality and may be det-
rimental in people who have signs of heart failure. 
Warfarin (or rivaroxaban) reduces reinfarction and 
mortality to a similar extent as low-dose aspirin, and 
additional reductions are seen in combination with 
low-dose aspirin, but with a greater risk of bleeding.
FURTHER READING
STABLE ANGINA
Husted, S.E., Ohman, E.M., 2015. Pharma­cological and emerging 
therapies in the treatment of chronic angina. Lancet 386, 691–701.
Pavasini, R., Camici, P.G., Crea, F., et  al., 2018. Anti-anginal 
drugs: systematic review and clinical implications. Int. J. 
Cardiol. 283, 55–63.
Piccolo, R., Giustino, G., Mehran, R., et al., 2015. Stable coronary 
artery disease: revascularisation and invasive strategies. 
Lancet 386, 702–713.
ACUTE CORONARY SYNDROMES
Anderson, J.L., Morrow, D.A., 2017. Acute myocardial infarction. 
N. Engl. J. Med. 376, 2053–2064.
Dalal, F., Dala, H.M., Voukalis, C., Gandhi, M., 2017. Management 
of patients after primary percutaneous coronary intervention 
for myocardial infarction. BMJ 358, j3237.
Gershlick, A.H., Banning, A.P., Myat, A., et al., 2013. Reperfusion 
therapy for STEMI: is there still a role for thrombolysis in the 
era of primary percutaneous coronary intervention? Lancet 
382, 624–632.
Reed, G.W., Rossi, J.E., Cannon, C.P., 2016. Acute myocardial 
infarction. Lancet 389, 197–210.
Thygesen, K., Alpert, J.S., Jaffe, A.S., et al., 2019. Fourth universal 
definition of myocardial infarction (2018). Eur. Heart J. 40, 
237–269.
Timmis, A., 2015. Acute coronary syndrome. BMJ 351, h5153.
Compendium of Drugs Used to Treat Ischaemic Heart Disease.
DRUG
CHARACTERISTICS
Nitrates
Used for treatment of angina and in the management of heart failure.
Glyceryl trinitrate
Given sublingually, buccally (as aerosol spray), topically (transdermal patch) or as an intravenous 
infusion. Very short half-life (<5 min).
Isosorbide dinitrate
Short-lived prodrug of isosorbide mononitrate. Given sublingually, orally (as normal or modified-
release tablets), or by intravenous infusion.
Isosorbide mononitrate
Given orally for prophylaxis of angina, and in congestive heart failure; also available in modified-
release formulations.
Beta-Adrenoceptor Antagonists
Beta-adrenoceptor antagonists are used in a wide variety of indications in addition to ischaemic heart disease, including 
hypertension, chronic heart failure and arrhythmias, and also in anxiety, glaucoma, migraine prophylaxis and phaeochromocytoma. 
Some have partial agonist activity (PAA) or other properties such as NO donation. All are given orally unless otherwise 
indicated. Water-soluble drugs are less likely to enter the brain. For completeness, all oral or parenteral β-adrenoceptor 
antagonists are listed here irrespective of their licensed clinical uses.
Acebutolol
β1-Adrenoceptor-selective. Used for angina, hypertension (see Chapter 6), and arrhythmia 
(Chapter 8). Given orally.
Atenolol
β1-Adrenoceptor-selective. Water-soluble; long-acting drug. Given orally, or by intravenous 
injection or infusion. Combination formulations available with nifedipine, and with 
chlortalidone or other diuretics (see Chapter 14).
Betaxolol
β1-Adrenoceptor-selective. Given topically for glaucoma (see Chapter 50).
Bisoprolol fumarate
β1-Adrenoceptor-selective (but cardioselectivity less than atenolol). Long-acting drug. Given 
orally for hypertension and as an adjunct in heart failure.
Carvedilol
Nonselective (β1/β2) adrenoceptor antagonist; also vasodilates due to α1-adrenoceptor 
antagonism. Given orally for hypertension, angina and as an adjunct in heart failure.
Celiprolol
β1-Adrenoceptor-selective; also vasodilates due to partial β2-adrenoceptor agonism and weak 
α1-adrenoceptor antagonism. Water-soluble; long-acting drug. Given orally for hypertension.
Esmolol
β1-Adrenoceptor-selective. Available only for intravenous use, for termination of supraventricular 
arrhythmias. Very short half-life (9 min).
Labetalol
β1-Adrenoceptor-selective; also vasodilates due to α1-adrenoceptor antagonism. Given orally 
for hypertension, or by intravenous injection or infusion for hypertensive emergencies or for 
controlled hypotension during surgery.
Metoprolol
β1-Adrenoceptor-selective (but cardioselectivity less than atenolol). Used for hypertension, 
angina, arrhythmia and migraine. Given orally or by intravenous injection or infusion.
	
	
Ischaemic Heart Disease  CHAPTER 5	
107
DRUG
CHARACTERISTICS
Nadolol
Nonselective (β1/β2) adrenoceptor antagonist. Water-soluble; long-acting drug. Given orally for 
hypertension, angina, arrhythmia and migraine.
Nebivolol
β1-Adrenoceptor-selective; also vasodilates by generation of NO. Given orally for hypertension 
and as adjunct in chronic heart failure.
Pindolol
Nonselective (β1/β2) adrenoceptor antagonist; also vasodilates due to partial β2-adrenoceptor 
agonist activity. Used orally. Also available in combination with clopamide (diuretic).
Propranolol
Nonselective (β1/β2) adrenoceptor antagonist and lipid-soluble. Used for hypertension, angina, 
arrhythmias, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, anxiety, thyrotoxicosis, essential tremor, migraine 
prophylaxis, prevention of variceal bleeding. Given orally or by intravenous injection.
Sotalol
Nonselective (β1/β2) adrenoceptor and K+ channel antagonist. Water-soluble. Used mainly as 
Class III antiarrhythmic drug (see Chapter 8). Given orally.
Timolol
Nonselective (β1/β2) adrenoceptor antagonist; given orally, alone or in combination formulations 
with diuretics (amiloride and/or a thiazide), for hypertension. Also used in glaucoma topically 
alone, or in combination with an α2-adrenoceptor antagonist, a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor 
or a prostaglandin F2α agonist (see Chapter 50).
Calcium Channel Blockers
Indications include angina, hypertension, Raynaud’s phenomenon, arrhythmias and subarachnoid haemorrhage (see 
Chapters 6, 8, 9 and 10). All are given orally unless stated otherwise.
Dihydropyridines
Dihydropyridines have less effect on the myocardium than verapamil and have little or no detrimental effect in heart failure. They 
have no antiarrhythmic activity. Given orally unless otherwise stated. Modified-release formulations reduce fluctuations in 
blood pressure and reflex tachycardia and are preferred for the treatment of angina and hypertension.
Amlodipine
Similar to nifedipine, but longer duration of action and used once daily; no negative inotropic 
action. Given orally. Also available in formulations with valsartan, or with olmesartan, or with 
olmesartan and hydrochlorothiazide.
Felodipine
Similar to nifedipine, but longer duration of action and used once daily. Given orally. Also 
available in formulation with ramipril.
Lacidipine
Given orally, only in hypertension.
Lercanidipine
Given orally, only in hypertension. Long duration of action (24 hours).
Nicardipine
Similar to nifedipine, but probably even less effect on myocardial contractility. Modified-release 
formulation also available. Given orally for angina and mild-moderate hypertension and 
intravenously in hypertensive emergencies.
Nifedipine
Dilates peripheral and coronary arteries with little effect on myocardium and no antiarrhythmic 
activity. Given orally. Modified-release formulations available; liquid capsule has rapid onset of 
action. Also available in combination with atenolol.
Nimodipine
Increased selectivity for cerebral arteries. Used to prevent ischaemic neurological deficits 
following subarachnoid haemorrhage. Given orally or by intravenous infusion.
Nondihydropyridines
In contrast to dihydropyridines, these calcium channel blockers are also used for treatment and prevention of supraventricular 
arrhythmias but are less effective for Raynaud’s phenomenon. Modified-release formulations are available.
Diltiazem
Reduces heart rate and has some negative inotropic effect. Modified-release formulations 
available. Given orally in angina and hypertension; should be avoided in heart failure.
Verapamil
Reduces heart rate with marked negative inotropic effect. Modified-release formulations 
available. Used in angina, hypertension and arrhythmia; should be avoided in heart failure. 
Given orally or by slow intravenous injection.
Potassium Channel Activators
Nicorandil
Vasodilates by hyperpolarising vascular smooth muscle; also acts as a nitrate (NO donor). 
Given orally for angina.
Specific Sinus Node Inhibitor
Ivabradine
Used for angina, and with other drugs for chronic heart failure. Given orally.
Late Sodium Current Inhibitor
Ranolazine
Used as adjunctive treatment for patients inadequately controlled by, or intolerant to, other 
antianginal drugs. Given orally
Compendium of Drugs Used to Treat Ischaemic Heart Disease—cont’d.
108
Systemic and Pulmonary Hypertension
6
Chapter Outline
Systemic Hypertension  108
Circulatory Reflexes and the Control of Systemic Blood 
Pressure  108
Aetiology and Pathogenesis of Systemic 
Hypertension  109
Consequences of Hypertension  110
Antihypertensive Drugs  111
Drugs Affecting the Renin–Angiotensin System  112
Treatment of Systemic Hypertension  118
Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension  121
Drugs for Treating Idiopathic Pulmonary 
Hypertension  122
Management of Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension  123
Self-Assessment  123
Answers  124
Further Reading  125
Compendium of Drugs Used to Treat 
Hypertension  125
SYSTEMIC HYPERTENSION
The cause of systemic hypertension in the majority of 
people is unknown (essential hypertension), with a 
complex interplay between genetic and environmental 
influences. Abnormal regulation of the physiological 
mechanisms that normally control arterial blood pres-
sure (BP) may be an important factor. A small num-
ber of people with hypertension have an identifiable 
underlying cause (secondary hypertension).
CIRCULATORY REFLEXES AND THE CONTROL 
OF SYSTEMIC BLOOD PRESSURE
Systemic BP is determined by the cardiac output (CO) 
and total peripheral resistance (TPR).
BP = CO × TPR
BP is maintained within fairly narrow limits due to 
modulation by a series of physiological reflexes. These 
are triggered by both acute and chronic changes in BP, 
and function as both short-term and long-term control 
mechanisms. Important regulatory systems responsi-
ble for these actions include:
• the autonomic nervous system,
• the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system,
• local chemical mediators at the vascular endo­
thelium.
The autonomic nervous system regulates arterial BP 
in several ways.
• In the heart, the sympathetic nervous system acts 
mainly through β1-adrenoceptors to increase myo-
cardial contractility and heart rate, generating a 
greater CO and increasing BP (see Chapter 4). The 
parasympathetic nervous system acts through mus-
carinic receptors to reduce the heart rate and there-
fore decreases CO and BP.
• In arterial resistance vessels, sympathetic nervous 
stimulation produces arteriolar vasoconstriction 
through stimulation of postsynaptic α1-adrenoceptors. 
Arteriolar vasoconstriction raises BP, but also increases 
the afterload on the heart. CO is maintained by an 
increase in cardiac contractility via β1-adrenoceptors.
• In venous capacitance vessels, sympathetic stimu-
lation of postsynaptic α1-adrenoceptors produces 
venous constriction. This increases venous return to 
the heart (preload), raises CO and increases BP (see 
Chapter 7).
The autonomic nervous system is normally responsi-
ble for short-term modulation of BP. Change in systemic 
BP is detected by baroreceptors (stretch receptors) in 
the aorta and carotid arteries. When BP rises, stretch of 
the baroreceptors increases afferent nerve impulses to 
the nucleus tractus solitarius (NTS), a coordinating area 
in the medulla which controls the autonomic outflow 
to the cardiovascular system (Fig. 6.1). The increase in 
afferent impulses inhibits sympathetic nervous system 
activity via the rostral ventrolateral medulla (RVLM), 
and increases parasympathetic nervous system activity 
via the vagal nucleus (VN), returning the BP to normal. 
The opposite occurs when BP falls.
A slower compensatory mechanism for a reduction 
in BP is initiated by the release of renin from the jux-
taglomerular apparatus of the kidney (Fig. 6.2). The 
major stimuli leading to renin release are reduced renal 
perfusion pressure, decreased Na+ in the distal renal 
tubule and β1-adrenoceptor stimulation. Renin is a pro-
tease that acts on circulating renin substrate (angioten-
sinogen) to release the decapeptide angiotensin I. This 
is further cleaved by angiotensin-converting enzyme 
(ACE) to the octapeptide angiotensin II. There are sev-
eral additional enzymatic pathways for generating 
angiotensin II that do not involve ACE (see Fig. 6.6). 
	
	
Systemic and Pulmonary Hypertension  CHAPTER 6	
109
Angiotensin II acts on various tissues via specific angio-
tensin AT1 and AT2 receptors (see Fig. 6.2). Its action at 
the AT1 receptor produces vasoconstriction, and also 
enhances sympathetic nervous tone by facilitating pre-
synaptic neuronal release of noradrenaline (NA) and 
through stimulation of central sympathetic outflow. 
Angiotensin II has a number of additional properties 
which promote salt and water retention (Fig. 6.3), one 
of the most important being the release of aldosterone 
from the adrenal cortex. Aldosterone acts at the distal 
renal tubule to conserve salt and water at the expense 
of K+ loss (see Chapter 14). Therefore angiotensin II and 
aldosterone raise BP by a combination of vasoconstric-
tion and increasing circulating blood volume. Angio-
tensin II has additional actions at the AT2 receptor that 
oppose some of those at the AT1 receptor (see Fig. 6.2).
The integration of the fast-responding sympathetic 
nervous system and the slower-responding renin–
angiotensin–aldosterone system in response to a fall in 
BP is shown in Fig. 6.3.
Additional mechanisms involved in controlling vas-
cular tone and blood volume include circulating or local 
endothelial hormones and metabolites, such as natri-
uretic peptides, antidiuretic hormone, prostaglandins, 
bradykinin, nitric oxide (NO), endothelin and adenosine.
AETIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS OF SYSTEMIC 
HYPERTENSION
There is no absolute cut-off between normal and high 
BP. BP in all populations is normally distributed with 
a slight skew because of a small number of individuals 
with very high BP. The risk of cardiovascular events 
attributable to BP is also a continuous variable, increas-
ing as BP rises. Defining a point above which BP is 
‘high’ is therefore arbitrary, but it is usually set at val-
ues greater than 140/90 mm Hg. Using this definition, 
hypertension is a common condition found in 20% to 
30% of the population of the developed world, with 
the prevalence increasing with age.
Hypertension is usually characterised by increased 
peripheral arterial resistance, which arises from arteri-
olar smooth muscle constriction and muscle cell hyper-
trophy, leaving a smaller vessel lumen and an increase 
in the wall-to-lumen ratio (vascular remodelling). CO 
is often normal in younger people with hypertension 
but is usually reduced in the elderly.
Increased
parasympathetic
outﬂow
(slows heart)
Spinal cord
Inhibition of
sympathetic
outﬂow (results 
in reduced
vasoconstriction,
heart rate and
myocardial
contractility)
Baroreceptor
discharge from
the carotid
sinus and aortic
arch increases
with a rise in
blood pressure
RVLM
NTS
–
+
+
–
Control from higher centres
(cortex, amygdala, hypothalamus)
Medulla
+
+
VN
+
Fig. 6.1  The role of baroreceptors in regulating blood pressure.
Increased blood pressure (BP) increases neural discharge from the 
baroreceptors (stretch receptors) in the carotid sinus and aortic arch, 
resulting in a compensatory inhibition in sympathetic outflow from the 
rostral ventrolateral medulla (RVLM) and an increase in the parasympa-
thetic outflow from the cardioinhibitory vagal nucleus (VN). Both effects 
act to lower BP, which is also influenced by control from higher centres 
acting at the nucleus of the tractus solitarius (NTS). See Fig. 6.7 for 
sites of action of centrally acting antihypertensive drugs. +, Stimula-
tion; −, inhibition.
Sodium depletion
Blood pressure
Renal blood ﬂow
Sympathetic stimulation
(β1-adrenoceptor)
Na+ in distal tubule
Renin
ACE
Angiotensinogen
Angiotensin I
Angiotensin II
Salt and water retention
K+ loss
Aldosterone
release
AT1 receptor and
other mechanisms
AT1 receptor mediated
   vasoconstriction
   ROS
   sympathetic nervous
     system activity
   ADH secretion
   ventricular hypertrophy
AT2 receptor mediated
   NO (via BK stimulation)
   endothelial hypoxic
     injury
   blood pressure inhibits
     vascular growth
   Na+ excretion
Fig. 6.2  Formation and actions of angiotensin II. Angiotensin II acts on angiotensin type 1 (AT1 ) and type 2 (AT2 ) 
receptors. Current therapeutic drugs act predominantly to block AT1 receptors. The number of AT2 receptors is low 
relative to that of AT1 receptors but increases in pathological conditions. ACE, Angiotensin converting enzyme; ADH, 
antidiuretic hormone; BK, bradykinin; NO, nitric oxide; ROS, reactive oxygen species.
110	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
The cause of the inappropriately raised peripheral 
resistance is unknown in about 95% of people with 
hypertension, who are said to have ‘essential hyperten-
sion’. Essential hypertension probably has a polygenic 
inheritance, leading to several clinical subtypes with 
different underlying pathogenic mechanisms. Envi-
ronmental influences and factors such as diet, level of 
exercise, obesity and alcohol intake all interact with 
the genetic predisposition to determine the final level 
of BP. There is evidence that reduced renal Na+ excre-
tion plays a central role in the pathogenesis of essential 
hypertension, and the kidney requires a higher-than-
normal BP to maintain a normal extracellular fluid vol-
ume. However, the functional disturbance in essential 
hypertension is much more widespread than the kid-
ney, with cell membrane abnormalities found in many 
organs.
Isolated systolic hypertension (systolic BP > 160 mm 
Hg, diastolic BP < 90 mm Hg), usually found in older 
people, is the consequence of stiffening of large ‘con-
ductance’ arteries. These vessels normally expand to 
accommodate the blood expelled from the heart in 
systole, which slows the pulse wave and increases 
the time taken for it to reach the peripheral resistance 
vessels. Blood cannot pass through these resistance 
vessels as quickly as it can through conductance ves-
sels, and therefore, the pulse wave is reflected back 
from the peripheral vessels. In the healthy circulation, 
this reflected wave arrives in diastole, and supports 
the central diastolic BP and therefore coronary artery 
perfusion. If the compliance of the large conductance 
arteries is reduced, then the pulse wave reaches the 
peripheral vessels early and is reflected back in sys-
tole. This increases systolic BP and reduces diastolic 
pressure. In isolated systolic hypertension, coronary 
artery perfusion can be impaired, whereas cardiac 
work is increased.
A secondary underlying cause of high BP, which 
often has a renal or endocrine origin, can be identified 
in about 5% of people with hypertension (Table 6.1).
CONSEQUENCES OF HYPERTENSION
Hypertension does not usually cause symptoms but 
produces progressive structural changes in the heart 
and circulation. The principal clinical complications of 
hypertension are ischaemic heart disease (especially 
in middle-aged Europeans and Americans), and cere-
brovascular disease (especially in Asians and older 
people) which usually presents as thromboembolic 
stroke or, less commonly, as cerebral haemorrhage (see 
Chapter 9). Ischaemic complications of hypertension 
Cardiac 
stimulation
Cardiac output
Blood pressure
   Baroreceptor
aﬀerent input
    Sympathetic
vasomotor
centre activity
Cardiac output
Blood pressure
Venous return
Venous constriction
Renin
release
Angiotensinogen
Angiotensin I 
Angiotensin II
Aldosterone
Salt and water retention
Arterial
constriction
+
+
+
(AT1)
(AT1)
Fig. 6.3  The control of blood pressure via the sympathetic and renin–angiotensin–aldosterone systems. A fall in 
cardiac output or blood pressure (BP; yellow box) produces relatively rapid responses mediated by increased sympathetic 
activity and slower responses mediated by renin–angiotensin–aldosterone mechanisms. The outcomes are increased car-
diac stimulation, increased arterial constriction and increased venous return, restoring BP. AT1, Angiotensin II type 1 receptor.
Table 6.1  Principal Causes of Secondary 
Hypertension.
CAUSES
Renal
Renal artery stenosis, glomerulonephritis, 
interstitial nephritis, arteritis, polycystic 
disease, chronic pyelonephritis
Endocrine
Conn’s syndrome (aldosterone excess), 
Cushing’s syndrome (glucocorticoid 
excess), phaeochromocytoma (catechol-
amine excess), acromegaly
Pregnancy
Preeclampsia and eclampsia
Drugs
Oestrogen, corticosteroids, NSAIDs, 
ciclosporin
NSAIDs, Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs.
	
	
Systemic and Pulmonary Hypertension  CHAPTER 6	
111
are more likely to occur if it is accompanied by hyper-
cholesterolaemia, diabetes mellitus or smoking.
The underlying reasons for the complications of 
hypertension include accelerated formation of athero-
matous plaques in many parts of the arterial circulation 
and development of microaneurysms on intracerebral 
blood vessels. Sustained hypertension predisposes 
to left ventricular muscle hypertrophy (LVH). LVH 
is an independent risk factor for the complications of 
hypertension, particularly ischaemic heart disease (as 
the muscle outgrows its blood supply), heart failure 
with preserved ejection fraction (see Chapter 7) and 
arrhythmias leading to sudden death (see Chapter 8). 
The cardiovascular changes and consequent clinical 
complications of hypertension are often referred to 
as ‘target organ damage’. The underlying vascular 
lesions that occur in hypertension and their resulting 
complications are shown in Fig. 6.4.
Sometimes BP is raised only when the measure-
ment is taken by a doctor or, to a lesser extent, by a 
nurse. This phenomenon is termed white coat or office 
hypertension and appears to carry little short-term 
risk of complications, but can eventually lead to sus-
tained hypertension. Hypertension should therefore 
be confirmed by ambulatory 24 hours BP monitoring 
or home BP monitoring, unless target organ damage 
gives a clear indication that treatment is necessary. 
White coat hypertension often persists despite drug 
treatment, which can then result in quite troublesome 
hypotension away from the surgery or clinic. There is 
also a phenomenon of ‘masked’ hypertension, when 
BP is normal in the clinic but high at home. This 
appears to carry a similar risk of complications as sus-
tained hypertension.
Accelerated or malignant hypertension is an infre-
quently encountered condition produced by very 
high BP or a rapid rise in BP. It is characterised patho-
logically by arterial fibrinoid necrosis. Accelerated 
hypertension is identified clinically by the presence 
in the retina of flame-shaped haemorrhages, hard 
exudates and ‘cotton wool’ spots; malignant hyper-
tension is present when there is also papilloedema, 
which can lead to visual disturbance. If untreated, 
accelerated or malignant hypertension usually leads 
to death from renal failure, heart failure or stroke 
within 5 years.
ANTIHYPERTENSIVE DRUGS
Not surprisingly, because the cause of hypertension 
is unclear, treatment cannot be directed precisely at 
the underlying mechanism(s). Most antihypertensive 
drugs are vasodilators, and they often modulate the 
natural hormonal or neuronal mechanisms respon-
sible for BP regulation. Less commonly, a hypotensive 
action is partially achieved by reducing CO. The prin-
cipal classes of antihypertensive drugs and their sites 
of action are shown in Table 6.2 and Fig. 6.5.
Fundal
haemorrhage
Thromboembolic
stroke
Ischaemic heart
disease
Aortic aneurysm
Peripheral vascular
disease (intermittent
claudication)
Chronic kidney
disease
Renal failure
Ischaemic heart
disease
Intracerebral and
subarachnoid
haemorrhage
Heart failure
Arrhythmias and
sudden death
Atheroma
Complication
Lesion
Complication
Lesion
Aneurysms
(Charcot–
Bouchard
and Berry)
Left
ventricular
hypertrophy
Arterial
ﬁbrinoid
necrosis (in
malignant
hypertension)
Fig. 6.4  Complications of hypertension. Hypertension causes vascular lesions and damage throughout the body.
112	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
DRUGS AFFECTING THE RENIN–ANGIOTENSIN 
SYSTEM
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
  Examples
enalapril, lisinopril, ramipril
Mechanisms of action and uses
ACE inhibitors lower BP by several mechanisms 
(Figs. 6.2, 6.5 and 6.6).
• Inhibition of tissue ACE in the vascular wall is cen-
tral to the hypotensive effect of these drugs (see 
Fig. 6.6). The reduced tissue concentration of angio-
tensin II leads to arterial dilation and, to a lesser 
extent, venous dilation. Angiotensin II production 
is not completely inhibited owing to alternative 
pathways for its generation by proteases, includ-
ing chymase and chymotrypsin-like angiotensin 
II-generating enzyme (CAGE). During ACE inhibi-
tion, the activity in these pathways is enhanced due 
to stimulation of renin release by the fall in BP.
• Competitive inhibition of plasma ACE reduces gen-
eration of circulating angiotensin II and consequently 
reduces the release of aldosterone (see Fig. 6.6).
• Reduction in angiotensin II-mediated potentiation 
of the sympathetic nervous system (see Figs. 6.2 and 
6.3), which also prevents reflex tachycardia.
• Angiotensin II is implicated in the development of 
arterial remodelling and LVH in hypertension. ACE 
inhibitors are highly effective in producing regression 
of LVH and may have a similar action on the arterial 
wall, reducing peripheral resistance.
• ACE also degrades other peptides, including the 
vasodilator bradykinin (see Fig. 6.6). ACE inhibitors 
Table 6.2  Sites of Action of the Principal Classes of 
Drugs Used for Systemic Hypertension.
SITES OF ACTION
DRUGS
Hormonal 
control (renin–
angiotensin 
system)
ACE inhibitors
Angiotensin II receptor (AT1) 
antagonists
Direct renin inhibitors
Vasodilation 
by other 
mechanisms
Diuretics
Calcium channel blockers
Potassium channel openers
Hydralazine and nitrovasodilators
Sympathetic 
nervous system
β-Adrenoceptor antagonists
α1-Adrenoceptor antagonists
Selective imidazoline I1 receptor agonists
Centrally acting α2-adrenoceptor 
agonists
ACE, Angiotensin-converting enzyme; AT1, angiotensin II type 1 receptor.
ANGIOTENSIN RECEPTORS
ON VESSELS
ACE inhibitors
AT1 receptor antagonists
α-ADRENOCEPTORS
ON VESSELS
α1-Adrenoceptor antagonists
β-ADRENOCEPTORS ON HEART
β-Adrenoceptor antagonists
VASOMOTOR CENTRE
α2 -Adrenoceptor agonists
Imidazoline receptor agonists
SYMPATHETIC GANGLIA
VASCULAR SMOOTH MUSCLE
Diuretics
Vasodilators
Nitrovasodilators
Calcium channel blockers
Potassium channel openers
Endothelin receptor blockers
Prostaglandins
Phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors
ADRENAL CORTEX
ACE inhibitors
AT1 receptor antagonists
KIDNEY TUBULES
Diuretics
ACE inhibitors 
JUXTAGLOMERULAR CELLS
THAT RELEASE RENIN
β-Adrenoceptor antagonists
Direct renin inhibitor
Fig. 6.5  The main classes of drugs for systemic hypertension and their sites of action. ACE, Angiotensin 
converting enzyme; AT1, angiotensin II type 1 receptor.
	
	
Systemic and Pulmonary Hypertension  CHAPTER 6	
113
increase bradykinin in the vascular wall and this 
may contribute to their hypotensive actions.
There are many clinical uses of ACE inhibitors other 
than hypertension; these are listed in Box 6.1.
Pharmacokinetics
Many ACE inhibitors are given orally as prodrugs 
because the active forms are polar and poorly absorbed 
from the gut. The prodrugs are converted in the gut or 
liver to the active agent; for example, ramipril is con-
verted to the active compound ramiprilat. In contrast, 
lisinopril is absorbed adequately as an active molecule. 
Most ACE inhibitors are excreted by the kidney with 
half-lives ranging from about 1 to 5 hours (ramiprilat) 
to about 30 to 35 hours (enalaprilat).
Unwanted effects
• Persistent dry cough that is not dose-related occurs 
in 10% to 30% of people who take ACE inhibitors. It 
is more common in women and can develop after 
many months of treatment. It may be caused by 
accumulation in the lungs of irritant kinins that are 
normally metabolised by ACE.
• Postural hypotension, which is rare unless there is 
salt and water depletion (e.g. as a result of therapy 
with diuretics). Profound hypotension can occur in 
such individuals, particularly after the first dose. 
This is rarely a problem in the treatment of hyper-
tension but can be in the treatment of severe heart 
failure (see Chapter 7).
• Renal impairment, especially in those with severe 
bilateral renal artery stenosis who rely on angioten-
sin-mediated efferent glomerular arterial vasocon-
striction to maintain glomerular perfusion pressure.
• Disturbance of taste (which may be permanent), 
nausea, vomiting, dyspepsia or bowel disturbance.
• Rashes.
• Angioedema, which is more frequent in Black 
people.
Angiotensin II Receptor Antagonists
  Examples
candesartan, losartan, valsartan
Mechanism of action and uses
The angiotensin II receptor antagonists are selective 
for the AT1 receptor subtype, which is found in the 
heart, blood vessels, kidney, adrenal cortex, lungs and 
Treatment of hypertension (this chapter)
Treatment of heart failure (see Chapter 7)
Secondary prevention after myocardial infarction (see 
Chapter 5)
Diabetic nephropathy (see Chapter 40 and this chapter)
Box 6.1
  Clinical Uses of Angiotensin Converting 
Enzyme (ACE) Inhibitors and Angiotensin II 
Receptor Blockers.
Kidney
Prorenin
Elastin
Cathepsin G
Kallikrein
Kallikrein
Renin
Liver
ACEI
ACEI
Angiotensinogen
Angiotensin I
Angiotensin II
AT1 receptor 
antagonists
ACE
Kininogens
Bradykinin
ACE
Bradykinin
breakdown
products
Bradykinin
receptor
AT1 receptor
Blood
vessel
diameter 
Aldosterone
release
AT1 receptor
Adrenal
cortex
Non-ACE pathways
Aliskiren
Fig. 6.6  The biological actions of angiotensin II and bradykinin and drugs that modify these actions. Angiotensin II 
causes vasoconstriction by stimulating angiotensin type 1 (AT1) receptors in the blood vessels and causes Na+ retention 
by stimulating AT1 receptors in the adrenal cortex, which results in aldosterone release. Bradykinin causes vasodilation by 
acting on vascular smooth muscle cells and on endothelial cells. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors block 
angiotensin II formation from angiotensin I, although alternative, non–ACE-dependent protease pathways remain that 
can result in some angiotensin II formation. ACE inhibitors (ACEI) also reduce the breakdown of bradykinin, contribut-
ing to their vasodilator effects. Angiotensin II receptor antagonists block AT1 receptors in blood vessels and the adrenal 
cortex. Aliskiren directly inhibits the actions of renin on angiotensinogen.
114	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
brain. They have less effect at the AT2 receptor subtype, 
the function of which remains unclear (see Fig. 6.2). 
Actions of angiotensin II via the AT1 receptor that are 
inhibited by these drugs include vasoconstriction, 
aldosterone release with salt and water retention, sym-
pathetic nervous system stimulation, and cell growth 
and proliferation. Angiotensin II receptor antagonists 
lower BP mainly by arterial vasodilation. In contrast 
to ACE inhibitors, kinin degradation is unaffected by 
angiotensin II receptor antagonists, and inhibition 
of the effects of angiotensin II is more complete (see 
Fig. 6.6). There are many clinical uses of angiotensin II 
receptor antagonists other than hypertension; these are 
listed in Box 6.1.
Pharmacokinetics
Losartan is partially converted to an active metabolite, 
which is responsible for most of the pharmacological 
effects and has a longer half-life (6 hours) than the par-
ent drug (2 hours). Losartan and its active metabolite 
are eliminated by the kidneys and in bile. Candesartan 
is given as a prodrug that is activated in the liver. It is 
eliminated by the kidneys and in bile and has a half-
life of 10 hours. Valsartan is eliminated unchanged in 
the bile and has a half-life of 8 hours.
Unwanted effects
Drugs in this class are usually well tolerated. Their 
major advantages over ACE inhibitors are the low 
incidence of cough, and that angioedema is rare. 
Unwanted effects include:
• Headache, dizziness.
• Arthralgia or myalgia.
• Fatigue.
Direct Renin Inhibitors
  Example
aliskiren
Mechanism of action
Aliskiren is a selective renin inhibitor with low affin-
ity for other proteases. It binds competitively to the 
active site of the enzyme and inhibits the generation 
of angiotensin I (see Fig. 6.6). Vasodilation is achieved 
by reduced angiotensin II synthesis, without the com-
pensatory increase in plasma renin activity that occurs 
with an ACE inhibitor or angiotensin II receptor antag-
onist. Aliskiren is not widely used for the treatment of 
hypertension because of concerns over increased vas-
cular events when it is combined with an ACE inhibi-
tor or an angiotensin II receptor antagonist, especially 
in people with type 2 diabetes mellitus or those with 
renal impairment.
Pharmacokinetics
Aliskiren is metabolised in the liver and has a very 
long half-life of 40 hours.
Unwanted effects
• Diarrhoea.
• Cough.
• Renal function may deteriorate when aliskiren is 
combined with an ACE inhibitor or an angiotensin 
II receptor antagonist, and especially in people with 
diabetes mellitus and preexisting renal impairment.
• Combination treatment with an ACE inhibitor or 
an angiotensin II receptor antagonist in people with 
diabetes mellitus may increase the risk of stroke.
Vasodilators
Diuretics
  Examples
thiazide and thiazide-type diuretics: bendroflumethiazide, 
chlortalidone, hydrochlorothiazide, indapamide
loop diuretic: furosemide
potassium-sparing diuretic: spironolactone
Thiazide or thiazide-type diuretics are most frequently 
used to lower BP, but loop and potassium-sparing 
diuretics are used in some situations.
Mechanism of action in hypertension
Full details of the sites and mechanisms of action of 
diuretics on the kidney and their unwanted effects are 
considered in Chapter 14. Actions involved in lower-
ing BP include the following:
• An initial hypotensive effect is produced by intra-
vascular salt and water depletion. However, com-
pensatory mechanisms such as activation of the 
renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system largely restore 
plasma and extracellular fluid volumes (see Fig. 6.3), 
unless salt and water retention was a major contribu-
tory factor in the aetiology of the hypertension (e.g. in 
advanced chronic kidney disease or fluid retention as 
a consequence of other antihypertensive treatment).
• Direct arterial dilation is responsible for the longer-
term reduction in BP. The mechanism of vaso-
dilation is not well understood. It may result from 
reduced Ca2+ entry into the smooth muscle of the 
arteriolar resistance vessel walls, perhaps as a con-
sequence of intracellular Na+ depletion.
Thiazide and thiazide-type diuretics
These drugs produce their maximum BP-lowering 
effect at doses lower than those required for signifi-
cant diuretic activity. This is an advantage as most 
unwanted effects are dose-related. They become less 
effective at low glomerular filtration rates.
Loop diuretics
Loop diuretics are usually less effective than thia-
zides in the treatment of essential hypertension. 
Despite having a more powerful diuretic action, 
their duration of action is too short. However, 
hypertension with advanced chronic kidney disease 
or hypertension resistant to multiple drug treatment 
	
	
Systemic and Pulmonary Hypertension  CHAPTER 6	
115
are more likely to be associated with fluid retention 
and often respond better to a loop diuretic than to a 
thiazide.
Potassium-sparing diuretics
Spironolactone, a specific aldosterone antagonist, is 
particularly effective for hypertension caused by pri-
mary hyperaldosteronism. It is also very effective in 
the treatment of resistant hypertension. Amiloride and 
triamterene, which directly block distal renal tubule 
Na+ channels (see Chapter 14), are less effective than 
thiazides in essential hypertension.
Calcium Channel Blockers
  Examples
amlodipine, diltiazem, nifedipine, verapamil
The calcium channel blockers lower BP principally by 
arterial vasodilation. For clinical uses, see Box 6.2. For 
further details, see Chapter 5.
Potassium Channel Openers
  Example
minoxidil
Mechanism of action
Vascular smooth muscle possesses ATP-sensitive K+ 
channels (KATP) that are responsible for repolarisation of 
the cell (see also Chapter 8). Minoxidil opens KATP chan-
nels, causing an efflux of K+ which hyperpolarises the 
cell and leads to closure of voltage-gated Ca2+ channels 
and muscle relaxation (see also Chapter 5). Minoxidil 
is one of the most powerful peripheral arterial dilators.
Pharmacokinetics
Minoxidil is mainly metabolised in the liver and has a 
short half-life (3–4 hours).
Unwanted effects
• Arterial vasodilation produces flushing and headache.
• The reflex sympathetic nervous system response 
to vasodilation causes tachycardia and palpita-
tion (which can be blunted by concurrent use of an 
ACE inhibitor, angiotensin II receptor antagonist or 
β-adrenoceptor antagonist).
• Salt and water retention occurs through stimula-
tion of the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system 
(see  Fig. 6.2). Along with increased transcapil-
lary pressure from vasodilation, this can produce 
peripheral oedema, which can be reduced by the 
concurrent use of diuretics.
• Hirsutism. Minoxidil is therefore rarely used for 
treatment of women. Topical minoxidil is used as a 
treatment for male pattern baldness.
Hydralazine
Hydralazine is rarely used for long-term treatment of 
hypertension but is an important treatment for hyper-
tension in late pregnancy (preeclampsia) as it main-
tains uterine blood flow.
Mechanism of action
The mechanism of action of hydralazine is uncertain, but 
it is linked to the production of nitric oxide by arteriolar 
vascular endothelium, leading to activation of guanylyl 
cyclase and the intracellular production of cGMP. This 
will produce smooth muscle relaxation by mechanisms 
similar to those of organic nitrates (see Fig. 5.3).
Pharmacokinetics
Hydralazine undergoes extensive first-pass metabolism 
in the gut wall and liver, principally by N-acetylation. 
Genetically determined slow acetylators (see Table 2.9) 
are more sensitive to clinical doses of hydralazine and 
more susceptible to some of the unwanted effects.
Unwanted effects
• Arterial vasodilation with reflex sympathetic acti-
vation produces tachycardia, flushing, hypotension 
and fluid retention.
• Headache, dizziness.
• A systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)-like syn-
drome, which usually occurs after several months of 
treatment, is dose-related (and unusual at low doses 
of hydralazine) and more common in slow acetyl-
ators. It resembles the naturally occurring disease 
but does not produce renal or cerebral damage and 
is slowly reversed if treatment is stopped. A positive 
antinuclear antibody is found in many individuals 
who develop the syndrome.
Nitrovasodilators
  Example
sodium nitroprusside
Because it must be given intravenously, the use of 
nitroprusside is limited to the short-term management 
of hypertensive emergency.
Mechanism of action
Nitroprusside is a nitrovasodilator; it reacts with oxy-
haemoglobin in erythrocytes to produce methaemo-
globin, cyanide and nitric oxide (NO). The NO gives 
the drug a mechanism of action similar to that of 
Box 6.2  Clinical Uses of Calcium Channel Blockers.
Treatment of hypertension (this chapter)
Prophylaxis of angina (see Chapter 5)
Treatment of Raynaud’s phenomenon (see Chapter 10)
Prevention and treatment of supraventricular arrhythmias 
(see Chapter 8)
Subarachnoid haemorrhage (see Chapter 9)
116	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
organic nitrates (see Chapter 5), producing dilation of 
arterioles and veins.
Pharmacokinetics
Nitroprusside is given by intravenous infusion and its 
duration of action is less than 5 minutes. The cyanide by-
product is liberated from erythrocytes and reduces aero-
bic metabolism in tissues by inhibiting mitochondrial 
cytochrome oxidase; free cyanide is converted in the 
liver to less toxic thiocyanate, but thiocyanate accumu-
lates with prolonged infusion. Therefore treatment with 
nitroprusside is usually limited to a maximum of 3 days.
Unwanted effects
• Headache, dizziness.
• Nausea, retching, abdominal pain.
• Thiocyanate accumulation causes tachycardia, sweat-
ing, hyperventilation, arrhythmias and metabolic aci-
dosis from inhibition of aerobic metabolism in cells.
Drugs Acting on the Sympathetic Nervous System
Beta-adrenoceptor antagonists
  Examples
atenolol, bisoprolol, labetalol
Mechanism of action in hypertension.  Beta-adreno-
ceptor antagonists (often referred to as β-blockers) 
reduce BP in several ways (Fig. 6.7). Selective β1-
adrenoceptor antagonists are as effective as nonselec-
tive drugs, indicating that β2-adrenoceptor blockade 
makes little contribution. The more important actions 
for reducing BP are:
• Reduction of heart rate and myocardial contractil-
ity, which decreases CO.
• Antagonist action at renal juxtaglomerular β1-
adrenoceptors, which reduces renin secretion and 
therefore generation of angiotensin II and aldo-
sterone. This produces arterial vasodilation and 
reduces plasma volume.
• Some β-adrenoceptor antagonists have a hybrid 
action (such as nebivolol and labetalol; see Fig. 6.7C, 
and especially Chapter 5) which produces direct 
peripheral arterial vasodilation. Pure β-adrenoceptor 
antagonists such as atenolol and bisoprolol do not 
directly produce vasodilation.
• Blockade of presynaptic β-adrenoceptors in sympa-
thetic neurons supplying arteriolar resistance ves-
sels reduces the release of NA and thus attenuates 
reflex arterial vasoconstriction. The clinical impor-
tance of this effect is uncertain.
(C)
Skeletal muscle blood vessels
 and other blood vessels
NA
NA
β1-Adrenoceptor
–
Cardiac output
Renin release and
angiotensin generation
(A)
Heart
NA
NA
ADR
β1-Adrenoceptor 
(B)
Kidney
juxtaglomerular cells
β-Adrenoceptor
antagonist with partial
agonist activity at β2-
adrenoceptors in
skeletal muscle
(e.g. pindolol, celiprolol) 
+
Skeletal 
muscle
vessel 
dilatation
only
α2-Adrenoceptor
General vasodilation
nebivolol (  NO synthesis)
carvedilol (antioxidant
in endothelium)
β-Adrenoceptor
antagonist plus
vasodilator
α1-Adrenoreceptor
antagonist activity
(carvedilol,
labetalol)
β2-Adrenoceptor
ADR
–
β1-Adrenoceptor 
antagonist
–
β1-Adrenoceptor 
antagonist
Fig. 6.7  Sites of action of the β-adrenoceptor antagonists relevant to their use as antihypertensive agents. 
(A) In the heart, the β1-adrenoceptor antagonist drugs reduce stimulation of the β1-adrenoceptors by noradrenaline (NA) 
and circulating adrenaline (ADR). Presynaptic stimulation of α2-adrenoceptors, which inhibits noradrenaline release, still 
functions normally. (B) In the kidney, β1-adrenoceptor blockade reduces the activity of the renin–angiotensin system. 
(C) Some selective β1-adrenoceptor antagonists have hybrid activity: pindolol and celiprolol have intrinsic sympatho-
mimetic activity, acting as partial agonists at β2-adrenoceptors in skeletal muscle blood vessels, leading to vasodilation 
and reduced peripheral resistance. As partial agonists, these drugs reduce heart rate and cardiac output less than full 
antagonists. Nebivolol may dilate blood vessels more generally by releasing nitric oxide (NO). Carvedilol and labetalol also 
have α1-adrenoceptor antagonist activity, reducing peripheral resistance.
	
	
Systemic and Pulmonary Hypertension  CHAPTER 6	
117
Beta-adrenoceptor antagonists are no longer widely 
used for management of hypertension as they are 
less effective than many other drug classes for reduc-
ing complications of hypertension. For further details 
about β-adrenoceptor antagonists, see Chapter 5 and 
Box 6.3.
Alpha-adrenoceptor antagonists (α-blockers)
  Examples
selective α1-adrenoceptor antagonists: doxazosin, prazosin 
nonselective α-adrenoceptor antagonists: phenoxybenzamine 
(irreversible), phentolamine (reversible)
Mechanisms of action and uses.  Alpha-adrenoceptor 
antagonists (often referred to as α-blockers) lower BP 
by blockade of postsynaptic α1-adrenoceptors, leading 
to:
• dilation of arteriolar resistance vessels, which low-
ers peripheral resistance;
• dilation of venous capacitance vessels, which re-
duces venous return and therefore CO.
A fall in BP is detected by arterial baroreceptors, 
which initiate an increase in sympathetic discharge from 
the medulla that will normally cause a reflex tachycardia 
(see Figs. 6.1 and 6.3). However, NA released from car-
diac sympathetic nerve terminals also stimulates inhibi-
tory α2-adrenoceptors on the presynaptic sympathetic 
neuron (see Fig. 6.7A). Selective α1-adrenoceptor antag-
onists do not block the presynaptic α2-adrenoceptors 
on sympathetic nerve terminals, and therefore the 
sympathetic stimulation of the heart is attenuated and 
reflex tachycardia is unusual. By contrast, nonselective 
α-adrenoceptor antagonists block both postsynaptic α1-
adrenoceptors and presynaptic α2-adrenoceptors, and 
their use is accompanied by a marked reflex tachycar-
dia. Nonselective α-adrenoceptor antagonists are rarely 
used in clinical practice except for the perioperative 
management of phaeochromocytoma.
Alpha-adrenoceptor antagonists produce a poten-
tially beneficial effect on plasma lipids by increas-
ing high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol and 
reducing triglycerides (see Chapter 48). Whether this 
has any relevance for the prevention of atheroma in 
individuals with hypertension is uncertain. Selective 
α1-adrenoceptor antagonists are also used to treat the 
symptoms of bladder outlet obstruction (see Chapter 15).
Pharmacokinetics.  Selective α1-adrenoceptor antago-
nists undergo extensive first-pass hepatic metabolism. 
The compounds differ principally in their half-lives 
and, therefore, duration of action; for example, prazo-
sin has a half-life of 3 hours, whereas doxazosin has a 
half-life of 9 to 12 hours. The nonselective drug phen-
tolamine is given intravenously and has a short half-
life (1.5 hours); phenoxybenzamine has a longer half-
life (24 hours) and can be given orally.
Unwanted effects
• Postural hypotension caused by venous pooling; 
this can be particularly troublesome following the 
first dose, which should therefore generally be 
smaller than subsequent doses.
• Lethargy, headache, dizziness.
• Nausea.
• Rhinitis.
• Urinary frequency or incontinence.
• Palpitation from reflex cardiac stimulation with 
nonselective drugs.
Centrally acting antihypertensive drugs
Centrally acting antihypertensives are not widely used 
due to their unwanted effect profiles. However, meth-
yldopa is still used during pregnancy as it has little or 
no teratogenic effects.
Selective imidazoline receptor agonists
  Example
moxonidine
Mechanism of action.  Imidazoline I1 receptors are 
important for the regulation of sympathetic drive 
(Fig. 6.8). These receptors are concentrated in the rostral 
ventrolateral medulla (RVLM), a part of the brainstem 
involved in sympathetic control of BP (see Fig. 6.1). In-
creased neuronal activity in the RVLM, either through 
baroreceptor stimulation or by direct stimulation of I1 
receptors by moxonidine, will decrease sympathetic 
outflow, which results in a fall in BP with no reflex 
tachycardia. Unlike other centrally acting drugs (cloni-
dine and methyldopa, discussed later), moxonidine 
has a low affinity for presynaptic α2-adrenoceptors.
Pharmacokinetics.  Moxonidine has a short half-life 
(2–3 hours) but a prolonged duration of action, which 
may reflect its high affinity for I1 receptors.
Unwanted effects
• Dry mouth.
• Nausea.
• Fatigue, headache, dizziness.
Centrally acting α2-adrenoceptor agonists
  Examples
clonidine, methyldopa
Box 6.3  Clinical Uses of β-Adrenoceptor Antagonists.
Treatment of hypertension (this chapter)
Prophylaxis of angina (see Chapter 5)
Secondary prevention after myocardial infarction (see 
Chapter 5)
Treatment of heart failure (see Chapter 7)
Prevention and treatment of arrhythmias (see Chapter 8)
Control of symptoms in thyrotoxicosis (see Chapter 41)
Alleviation of symptoms in anxiety (see Chapter 20)
Prophylaxis of migraine (see Chapter 26)
Topical treatment of glaucoma (see Chapter 50)
118	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
Unwanted effects limit the use of centrally acting α2-
adrenoceptor agonists, although methyldopa is a drug 
of choice in the treatment of hypertension in pregnancy 
(described later).
Mechanisms of action.  The α2-adrenoceptor ago-
nists act at presynaptic inhibitory autoreceptors in the 
central nervous system (CNS) to reduce sympathetic 
nervous outflow and increase vagal outflow from the 
medulla (see Fig. 6.8). This produces both peripheral 
arterial and venous dilation.
Methyldopa is a prodrug that is metabolised in 
the nerve terminal as a ‘false substrate’ in the biosyn-
thetic pathway for NA to produce α-methyl NA, a 
potent α2-adrenoceptor agonist. Clonidine is a direct-
acting α2-adrenoceptor agonist that is also an agonist 
at imidazoline I1 receptors (discussed previously; see 
Fig. 6.8). Clonidine has some peripheral postsynap-
tic α1-adrenoceptor agonist activity. This produces 
direct peripheral vasoconstriction which initially off-
sets some of the central BP-lowering effect.
Pharmacokinetics.    Methyldopa 
undergoes 
dose-
dependent first-pass metabolism. It is eliminated by 
hepatic metabolism and has a half-life of 1 to 2 hours. 
Clonidine is excreted by the kidneys and has a half-life 
of about 24 hours.
Unwanted effects
• Sympathetic blockade: failure of ejaculation, and 
postural or exertional hypotension (unusual with 
clonidine, owing to its direct peripheral action).
• Unopposed parasympathetic action: diarrhoea.
• Dry mouth.
• CNS effects: sedation and drowsiness occur in up to 
50% of people who take methyldopa; depression is 
occasionally seen.
• Fluid retention with peripheral oedema.
• Methyldopa induces a reversible positive Coombs’s 
test in 20% of people, resulting from production of 
IgG to red cell membrane constituents; however, 
haemolytic anaemia is rare.
• Sudden withdrawal of clonidine can produce severe 
rebound hypertension with tachycardia, sweating 
and anxiety.
TREATMENT OF SYSTEMIC HYPERTENSION
Morbidity and premature deaths associated with 
untreated hypertension are considerable (see Fig. 6.4) 
and increase with advancing age. Treatment of older 
people with hypertension therefore prevents more 
events in the short-term than treating a similar num-
ber of younger people. However, early treatment will 
prevent vascular damage occurring in the younger 
individuals with hypertension – an important con-
sideration because the vascular changes are not com-
pletely reversible once established.
Stage 1 hypertension is a clinic/office BP between 
140/90 mm Hg and 159/99 mm Hg. Daytime ambu-
latory BP or home BP measurements will give lower 
values, and the equivalent blood pressures by these 
methods are 135/95 to 149/94 mm Hg. Stage 2 hyper-
tension is a daytime ambulatory or home BP average 
of 150/95 mm Hg or higher. In the absence of target 
organ damage, hypertension should be confirmed by 
ambulatory or home blood pressure monitoring before 
treatment.
Treatment of stage 1 hypertension is recom-
mended if there is evidence of target organ damage, 
the person has diabetes mellitus, or the 10-year risk 
of cardiovascular disease is calculated as 10% or 
greater. If these other factors are not present, drug 
treatment is often not recommended until stage 2 
hypertension. However, in those under 60 years old, 
the cardiovascular risk calculation often underes-
timates lifetime risk, and a discussion about drug 
treatment of stage 1 hypertension may be appropri-
ate. Treating isolated systolic hypertension (clinic 
systolic >160 mm Hg, diastolic <90 mm Hg) in the 
elderly gives similar benefits to the treatment of dia-
stolic hypertension in this age group.
Asymptomatic severe hypertension (clinic BP 
180/120 mm Hg or higher) requires same day full assess-
ment if there are retinal changes suggesting accelerated 
or malignant hypertension. Same day assessment is also 
recommended if there is new onset confusion, chest 
pain, signs of heart failure or acute kidney injury. Severe 
hypertension without these symptoms or signs should 
prompt rapid investigation for target organ damage, 
and if present, treatment should be started without 
waiting for ambulatory blood pressure monitoring.
UK guidelines recommend that the optimal tar-
get BP in uncomplicated hypertension for people 
under the age of 80 years is a clinic systolic BP below 
Increased
parasympathetic
outﬂow
(slows heart)
Spinal cord
Inhibition of
sympathetic
outﬂow (results
in decreased
vasoconstriction,
heart rate and
myocardial
contractility)
RVLM
–
+
Medulla
+
+
VN
α2
NTS
+
α-Methyldopa
α-Methyl-
noradrenaline
+
I1
+
+
Clonidine
Moxonidine
Fig. 6.8  Mechanisms of centrally acting antihypertensive drugs. 
These drugs act on the same medullary centres that respond to raised 
blood pressure (BP; see Fig. 6.1). Methylnoradrenaline and clonidine 
stimulate α2-adrenoceptors in the nucleus of the tractus solitarius (NTS). 
Moxonidine, and possibly also clonidine, act on imidazoline I1 receptors 
in the rostral ventrolateral medulla (RVLM). α2, α2-Adrenoceptors; I1, 
I1-imidazoline receptors; VN, vagal nucleus.
	
	
Systemic and Pulmonary Hypertension  CHAPTER 6	
119
140 mm Hg and a diastolic pressure below 90 mm Hg 
(equivalent to a home BP below 135/85  mm  Hg). 
In those aged over 80 years, a clinic target of 
150/90  mm  Hg is recommended. Some interna-
tional guidelines recommend that when there is 
target organ damage or diabetes mellitus, a BP of 
130/80 mm Hg or lower should be the goal, but there 
is little outcome evidence to support this. In the UK, 
30% of treated hypertensives do not reach target 
blood pressures. Although the target blood pressure 
should always be the goal, any BP reduction will 
reduce the risk of complications. There is no recom-
mended lower limit for BP reduction, except in peo-
ple with significant coronary artery disease. In this 
situation, lowering the diastolic BP below 70 mm Hg 
may reduce coronary artery perfusion and increase 
the risk of myocardial infarction.
It is rarely possible to correct the underlying cause 
of hypertension. Lifestyle modifications such as 
weight loss, restriction of alcohol and salt intake, and 
increasing exercise may be enough to lower the BP 
satisfactorily in some individuals with mild hyperten-
sion. In people with more severe hypertension, these 
measures can produce a substantial reduction in BP 
but rarely restore it to normal values. Drug treatment 
is usually started if BP remains higher than the lev-
els discussed previously despite nonpharmacological 
approaches.
Drug Regimens in Hypertension
Lowering BP by a very modest amount with drugs 
(even if the target levels described previously are not 
achieved) produces a substantial (≈40%) reduction in 
the risk of stroke, as well as reducing the risk of heart 
failure by 50% and reducing the incidence of chronic 
kidney disease. Drug treatment also reduces the risk 
of coronary artery disease in the elderly by about 25%. 
Evidence for a reduction in heart disease in the young 
is less convincing, but this may reflect the short dura-
tion of the trials (up to 5 years). In people with LVH, 
regression of left ventricular mass during treatment 
of hypertension will reduce cardiovascular events by 
60% compared with those in whom left ventricular 
mass is unchanged.
Treatment regimens that are based on diuretics, 
calcium channel blockers, ACE inhibitors or angio-
tensin II receptor antagonists have generally shown 
equal efficacy in reducing vascular events. In contrast 
β-adrenoceptor antagonists are less effective at pre-
venting the complications of hypertension and are 
no longer recommended as first-line therapy. Treat-
ment of hypertension should follow a ‘stepped care’ 
approach. A single drug will achieve good BP control 
in about one-third of people with hypertension. If the 
initial choice of drug fails to produce a sufficient reduc-
tion in BP, then the first drug should be continued and 
a second drug should be added.
The British Hypertension Society (BHS) and the 
National Institute of Health and Care Excellence 
(NICE) have endorsed a protocol for combining 
BP-lowering drugs, which is based on their mode 
of action (see Further Reading later). The underlying 
principle is that younger people (under 55 years) with 
hypertension are more likely to have high plasma 
renin concentrations, and therefore a drug that sup-
presses the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system is 
most likely to be effective when used alone. An ACE 
inhibitor, or an angiotensin II receptor antagonist are 
the drugs of choice. Conversely, older people or Black 
people at any age with hypertension are more likely to 
have ‘low renin’ hypertension, and a calcium channel 
blocker is more likely to produce a substantial reduc-
tion in BP. At step 2, the original drug is continued 
and a second drug added. Optimal third-step therapy 
is the combination of an ACE inhibitor or angioten-
sin II receptor blocker with a calcium channel blocker 
and a thiazide or thiazide-like diuretic. These recom-
mendations are based on the probability of achieving 
optimal BP control and the evidence that the achieved 
BP is most important for improving outcome, rather 
than the means by which it was achieved.
Both thiazide diuretics and β-adrenoceptor antago-
nists increase the risk of developing new-onset dia-
betes mellitus, particularly when used together. This 
combination is not recommended for those who are at 
increased risk of glucose intolerance, such as people 
who are obese, those with a strong family history of 
type 2 diabetes mellitus, Black people or people of 
South Asian origin who have a higher risk of develop-
ing diabetes mellitus. In contrast, both ACE inhibitors 
and angiotensin II receptor antagonists reduce the risk 
of developing diabetes mellitus.
It is now recommended antihypertensive drugs are 
taken in the evening rather than in the morning. Taking 
medications in the evening is associated with a lower 
risk of cardiovascular events, as well as improved renal 
function and significantly lower LDL cholesterol. The 
mechanism may be reduction of night-time hyperten-
sion and blunting of the surge in blood pressure that 
occurs on waking.
Resistant and refractory hypertension
If three drugs, as recommended at step 3 in the UK 
hypertension treatment guidelines, and taken in ade-
quate dosage, are insufficient to control the BP, then the 
person is said to have ‘resistant’ hypertension. There 
are several possible causes of apparently resistant 
hypertension. These include:
• poor adherence to prescribed therapy, which is the 
most common reason (see Chapter 55);
• ‘white coat’ hypertension, which responds poorly to 
drug treatment;
• secondary hypertension, most often caused by renal 
artery stenosis or primary hyperaldosteronism;
120	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
• concurrent use of drugs that raise BP, such as a non-
steroidal antiinflammatory drug or a glucocorticoid 
or excessive alcohol consumption;
• obstructive sleep apnoea;
• intravascular volume expansion, due to antihyper-
tensive drug therapy or chronic kidney disease.
A volume overload state is a common reason for 
resistance and spironolactone added to a thiazide 
diuretic may be the optimal choice as the fourth drug 
unless serum potassium is greater than 4.5 mmol/L. 
An α-adrenoceptor antagonist or β-adrenoceptor 
antagonist are options if the serum potassium is raised. 
Minoxidil is a particularly powerful hypotensive agent 
and is an option for men, but excess hair growth limits 
its use for women. In a few individuals, treatment with 
five or more drugs may be necessary.
Failure to respond to intensive treatment with five 
drugs is called refractory hypertension. If poor adher-
ence to treatment is not the cause, then increased sym-
pathetic nervous system drive may be a major factor 
sustaining the BP.
Additional treatment to reduce risk of vascular 
complications
Control of hypertension should be seen as part of a strat-
egy to tackle all factors that increase the risk of cardiovas-
cular disease. Smoking cessation is important. A statin is 
recommended for primary prevention of cardiovascular 
disease in people with hypertension and a predicted risk 
of cardiovascular disease greater than 10% in the subse-
quent 10 years, or in those with diabetes mellitus who 
have a greatly increased risk (see Chapter 48).
Hypertension in Special Groups
There may be reasons for selecting particular classes 
of drugs rather than following the standard algorithm, 
particularly if there are comorbid conditions that need 
treatment (Table 6.3).
Accelerated or malignant hypertension and 
hypertensive emergency
Immediate treatment is important for people with 
hypertension who have retinal haemorrhages and 
exudates or papilloedema (‘hypertensive urgency’), 
or who have hypertensive encephalopathy, includ-
ing posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome 
(PRES) (‘hypertensive emergency’). Rapid BP reduc-
tion is potentially dangerous in severe hypertension 
because autoregulation of cerebral blood flow is reset 
at a higher level than normal. A sudden fall in per-
fusion pressure can lead to a profound drop in cere-
bral blood flow and ischaemic cerebral damage. Oral 
amlodipine is the most widely recommended treat-
ment, which gradually reduces the BP over 24 hours 
or more.
Intravenous drugs should usually be avoided 
unless there are complications such as encephalopathy, 
acute heart failure or acute coronary syndrome which 
necessitate very rapid BP reduction (hypertensive 
emergency). In that situation, drugs such as labetalol 
or nitroprusside can be used.
Renal artery stenosis
If hypertension is caused by renal artery stenosis, 
because of the high plasma renin concentration ACE 
inhibitors or angiotensin II receptor antagonists 
usually produce an excellent reduction in BP. How-
ever, they can lead to deterioration in renal func-
tion, especially if there are bilateral stenoses. Renal 
artery angioplasty with insertion of a stent is recom-
mended when the stenosis is caused by fibromuscu-
lar dysplasia. In atherosclerotic renovascular disease, 
angioplasty is not usually recommended for either 
preservation of renal function or BP control, as cho-
lesterol embolisation to small arteries in the kidney 
during angioplasty may cause permanent deteriora-
tion of renal function.
Table 6.3  Selection of Antihypertensive Drugs for Coexisting Conditions.
DIURETIC
β-ADRENOCEPTOR 
ANTAGONIST
ANGIOTENSIN-
CONVERTING 
ENZYME INHIBITOR
CALCIUM CHANNEL 
BLOCKER
α1-ADRENOCEPTOR 
ANTAGONIST
Angina
+/−
+
+/−
+
+/−
After myocardial infarction
+/−
+
+
−
+/−
Congestive heart failure
+
+
+
−
+/−
Diabetes mellitus (with or 
without nephropathy)
+/−
+/−
+
+/−
+/−
Raynaud’s phenomenon
+/−
−
+
+
+
Gout
−
+/−
+/−
+/−
+/−
Prostatism
−
+/−
+/−
+/−
+
Supraventricular 
arrhythmias
+/−
+
+/−
+ (diltiazem or 
verapamil only)
+/−
Migraine
+/−
+
+/−
+/−
+/−
+, Treatment of choice; +/−, no obvious advantage/not preferred; −, usually contraindicated.
	
	
Systemic and Pulmonary Hypertension  CHAPTER 6	
121
Diabetic nephropathy
Although older people and Black people respond 
less well to ACE inhibitors or angiotensin II receptor 
antagonists as first-line therapy, they are preferred as 
first-line therapy in all people with hypertension if 
there is diabetes mellitus because of the renal pro-
tection they give. ACE inhibitors and angiotensin II 
receptor antagonists are more effective than other 
classes of antihypertensive drug in both prevention 
and treatment of diabetic nephropathy. In particular, 
they reduce progression from microalbuminuria to 
overt nephropathy. The benefit from these classes of 
antihypertensive drugs is probably not simply due 
to BP reduction. They produce afferent glomerular 
artery vasodilation by inhibiting the generation or 
action of angiotensin II and therefore reduce glo-
merular perfusion pressure. Other complications of 
hypertension in people with diabetes mellitus are 
prevented equally well by other antihypertensive 
drugs.
Phaeochromocytoma
Phaeochromocytoma is a catecholamine-secreting 
tumour, often arising from the adrenal gland. 
NA-secreting tumours most often lead to sustained 
hypertension, through vasoconstriction mediated by 
α1-adrenoceptor stimulation. Treatment should be 
started with a nonselective α-adrenoceptor antago-
nist (usually phenoxybenzamine) to prevent exces-
sive vasoconstriction, followed by a β-adrenoceptor 
antagonist to block the arrhythmogenic effects of the 
catecholamines on the heart. Definitive treatment, 
whenever possible, is by surgical removal of the 
tumour.
Primary hyperaldosteronism
This can be caused by bilateral adrenal hyperplasia or, 
less commonly, by an adrenal adenoma (Conn’s syn-
drome). The drug treatment of choice is spironolactone 
to directly block the effects of aldosterone at its renal 
tubular receptor. If there is an adenoma, surgical exci-
sion should be considered.
Pregnancy
There are three issues specific to pregnancy:
• Preexisting chronic hypertension. The risk of 
hypertension to mother and fetus is probably not 
great until the clinic systolic BP reaches 140 mm Hg 
or the diastolic BP reaches 90 mm Hg. Treatment of 
BP at lower levels carries a risk of impairment of 
fetal growth. Many antihypertensive drugs should 
be avoided if possible in early pregnancy because 
they are teratogenic, or their potential for teratoge-
nicity is not known (see Chapter 56). The drug with 
the best safety record for preexisting hypertension 
in women who wish to become pregnant is labet-
alol, but nifedipine or, as a third-line drug, methyl-
dopa can be considered.
	
In the second trimester the risk of fetal malfor-
mations is lower, but thiazide diuretics and pure 
β-adrenoceptor antagonists are usually avoided 
because they may retard fetal growth by reducing 
placental blood flow. ACE inhibitors or angiotensin 
II receptor antagonists can cause oligohydramnios 
(reduced amniotic fluid production), renal failure 
and hypotension in the fetus, or intrauterine death. 
They should be avoided, and stopped if the woman 
becomes pregnant while taking them.
	
	
The target clinic blood pressure in pregnancy 
should be less than 135/85 mm Hg. Low-dose aspi-
rin should also be considered from 12 weeks’ gesta-
tion to reduce the risk of preterm births.
• Gestational hypertension. This is hypertension 
arising after 20 weeks of pregnancy, but without sig-
nificant proteinuria. Clinic blood pressure should be 
reduced to less than 135/85 mm Hg using the same 
drug choices as for chronic hypertension.
• Preeclampsia. This usually occurs after 20 weeks 
of gestation. It presents as hypertension with 
oedema and proteinuria or hyperuricaemia in 
women whose BP had previously been normal. If 
this condition is untreated, there is a risk to the 
mother of convulsions, cerebral haemorrhage, 
abruptio placentae, pulmonary oedema and renal 
failure, and a risk to the fetus of severe growth 
retardation or even death. A clinic blood pres-
sure sustained above 140/90 mm Hg should be 
treated with drugs, aiming for a clinic blood pres-
sure less than 135/85 mm Hg. Once the diagno-
sis is established, bed rest is supplemented by 
antihypertensive drugs, as described previously 
for preexisting hypertension in pregnancy. Labet-
alol given by intravenous infusion is favoured in 
severe preeclampsia.
PULMONARY ARTERIAL HYPERTENSION
Pulmonary hypertension is most commonly second-
ary to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and 
some other lung disorders, where it arises as a result 
of destructive changes affecting the structure of the 
vascular bed. It also occurs with multiple small pul-
monary emboli, which silt up the peripheral pulmo-
nary arteries and increase vascular resistance, as well 
as a variety of less common disorders. However, some 
people develop increased pulmonary arterial vascular 
resistance for unknown reasons (idiopathic pulmonary 
arterial hypertension, IPAH), which has distinctive 
pathological findings of either formation of plexiform 
vascular lesions or thrombotic arteriopathy. The most 
common presenting complaint in IPAH is shortness of 
breath, although fatigue, chest pain, syncope, periph-
eral oedema and palpitation also frequently occur. The 
sustained increase in pulmonary vascular resistance 
leads to progressive right heart failure and premature 
death.
122	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
DRUGS FOR TREATING IDIOPATHIC PULMONARY 
HYPERTENSION
Endothelin Receptor Antagonists
  Examples
ambrisentan, bosentan, macitentan
Mechanism of action
In IPAH the production of endothelin-1 is increased 
in the pulmonary arteries. Endothelin-1 is a power-
ful vasoconstrictor and smooth muscle mitogen which 
exerts its effects via two receptors, ETA and ETB. ETA 
receptors on vascular smooth muscle cells primarily 
mediate vasoconstriction and cell proliferation, whilst 
a smaller population of ETB receptors on endothelial 
cells mediates vasodilation via nitric oxide release. ETB 
receptors are also responsible for clearance of endo-
thelin from the circulation. Bosentan is an antagonist 
at both endothelin ETA and ETB receptors, whereas 
ambrisentan and macitentan are selective for ETA 
receptors.
Pharmacokinetics
Ambrisentan and bosentan are metabolised in the 
liver and have half-lives of 13 to 16 hours and 5 hours, 
respectively. Macitentan is metabolised to an active 
derivative which has a half-life of 48 hours.
Unwanted effects
• Gastrointestinal disturbances, including diarrhoea 
and gastroesophageal reflux.
• Vasodilator effects, including headache, flushing, 
hypotension, palpitation, oedema and syncope.
• Drug interactions: bosentan inhibits the metabolism 
of warfarin by CYP2C9, with the risk of excessive 
anticoagulation. Combination of macitentan with 
strong inducers of CYP3A4, such as rifampicin, St. 
John’s wort, carbamazepine, and phenytoin, should 
be avoided.
Prostaglandins
  Examples
epoprostenol, iloprost
Epoprostenol is the synthetic version of naturally 
occurring prostacyclin (prostaglandin I2, PGI2) and 
iloprost is a prostacyclin analogue. Prostacyclin is 
a vasodilator that also inhibits platelet aggregation 
(see Chapter 11), and both effects may be useful in 
the management of IPAH. Iloprost is given by inha-
lation, but its short duration of action requires use 
every 2 to 3 hours and it is associated with a high 
incidence of flushing, headache, jaw pain and cough. 
Epoprostenol must be given by continuous intrave-
nous infusion, so it is only used when other treat-
ments are ineffective.
Selective Prostacyclin Receptor Agonist
  Example
selexipag
Mechanism of action
Selexipag is not a prostanoid analogue, but is a specific 
agonist of prostacyclin IP receptors which dilates pul-
monary arteries.
Pharmacokinetics
Selexipag is taken orally and rapidly absorbed. It 
is hydrolysed in the gut wall and liver to an active 
metabolite, which is responsible for most of its 
pharmacological activity. The active metabolite is fur-
ther metabolised in the liver and has a half-life of 6 to 
13 hours.
Unwanted effects
• Anorexia, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, 
diarrhoea.
• Vasodilator effects, including headache, flushing, 
hypotension.
• Nasopharyngitis.
• Myalgia, arthralgia, jaw pain.
• Skin reactions.
Phosphodiesterase-5 Inhibitors
  Examples
sildenafil, tadalafil
Cyclic GMP production in the pulmonary vascu-
lature may be a protective mechanism against IPAH. 
Oral phosphodiesterase (PDE) type 5 inhibitors 
that inhibit breakdown of cGMP, such as sildenafil 
and tadalafil, reduce pulmonary artery pressure. 
Further details about these drugs can be found in 
Chapter 16.
Guanylate Cyclase Stimulator
  Example
riociguat
Mechanism of action
Stimulation of soluble guanylate cyclase by riociguat 
mimics the action of nitric oxide by generating cGMP, 
which vasodilates the pulmonary arteries.
Pharmacokinetics
Riociguat is metabolised in the liver and has a half-life 
of about 12 hours.
Unwanted effects
• Epistaxis, haemoptysis.
• Vasodilator effects, including headache, hypoten-
sion, dizziness, oedema.
	
	
Systemic and Pulmonary Hypertension  CHAPTER 6	
123
• Nausea, vomiting, dyspepsia, abdominal pain, con-
stipation, diarrhoea.
MANAGEMENT OF PULMONARY ARTERIAL 
HYPERTENSION
Secondary pulmonary hypertension in chronic lung 
disease is most effectively managed by alleviating 
hypoxaemia when possible, using bronchodilators or 
long-term domiciliary oxygen therapy. There is no spe-
cific drug therapy. Chronic pulmonary embolic disease 
is treated by lifelong anticoagulation.
IPAH can be treated with drugs that reduce pul-
monary vascular resistance. About 25% of people 
with IPAH maintain a vasoactive pulmonary vascular 
bed (defined as a 20% decrease in pulmonary vascu-
lar resistance on acute challenge with a vasodilator). 
In this situation, treatment with a calcium channel 
blocker such as nifedipine will improve both symp-
toms and survival. However, most people with IPAH 
show little evidence of vascular reactivity, and in this 
situation calcium channel blockers usually produce 
excessive systemic hypotension before useful pulmo-
nary vasodilation is achieved. For such individuals, 
treatment is considered with an endothelin antagonist, 
inhaled prostacyclin, a PDE5 inhibitor or riociguat. All 
these drugs can improve symptoms and quality of life 
but have not been shown to improve survival. Com-
bination therapy using two or three drugs from more 
than one class (such as an endothelin receptor antago-
nist with a PDE5 inhibitor) is more effective for reduc-
ing pulmonary artery pressure than single agents, and 
may reduce both morbidity and mortality. Riociguat 
should not be used with PDE5 inhibitors because of 
the risk of excessive hypotension. Diuretics may be 
helpful to alleviate right ventricular volume overload.
SELF-ASSESSMENT
TRUE/FALSE QUESTIONS
1.	 Stretch of baroreceptors increases the afferent 
impulses to the vasomotor centre, resulting in a rise 
in blood pressure.
2.	 Nifedipine lowers blood pressure principally by 
arterial vasodilation.
3.	 Moxonidine stimulates imidazoline receptors in the 
medulla.
4.	 Propranolol lowers blood pressure by peripheral 
vasodilation.
5.	 Thiazide diuretics reduce Na+ and water reabsorp-
tion in the distal convoluted tubule.
6.	 Thiazide diuretics are the drugs of choice for treat-
ing pregnancy-related hypertension.
7.	 The potassium-sparing diuretics amiloride and spi-
ronolactone have the same mechanism of action in 
the renal tubule.
8.	 Selective blockade of α1-adrenoceptors by prazosin 
increases noradrenaline release.
	 9.	 ACE inhibitors prevent the conversion of angio-
tensinogen to angiotensin I.
10.	 ACE inhibitors prevent the breakdown of bradykinin.
11.	 Minoxidil blocks K+ channels in smooth muscle 
cell membranes.
12.	 Nitroprusside can be infused for up to 3 months.
13.	 PDE type 5 inhibitors are used in idiopathic pul-
monary arterial hypertension.
14.	 Ambrisentan selectively blocks pulmonary vaso-
constriction mediated by endothelin ETA receptors.
15.	 Riociguat causes vasodilation by stimulating ade-
nylyl cyclase.
16.	 Selexipag, used in idiopathic pulmonary arterial 
hypertension, is a prostagandin analogue.
ONE-BEST-ANSWER (OBA) QUESTIONS
1.	 What is the likely cause of isolated systolic hyper-
tension, defined as systolic blood pressure >160 mm 
Hg but diastolic BP <90 mm Hg?
A.	Arterial fibrinoid necrosis due to a hypersensitiv-
ity reaction.
B.	 Excessive venous return to the heart.
C.	Reduced compliance of the large conductance 
arteries.
D.	The ‘white coat’ or ‘office hypertension’ effect.
E.	 Ventricular hypertrophy and enhanced ejection 
fraction.
2.	 Identify the least accurate statement about antihy-
pertensive drugs.
A.	Thiazide diuretics increase the risk of diabetes 
mellitus.
B.	 β-Adrenoceptor antagonists are first-line therapy 
for hypertension.
C.	Blood pressure is not always lowered adequately 
by a single drug.
D.	Angiotensin II receptor antagonists selectively 
block angiotensin AT1 receptors.
E.	 Nifedipine is more likely to cause reflex tachycar-
dia than verapamil.
EXTENDED-MATCHING-ITEM QUESTION
Choose which drug class A–D would be a good choice 
for initial treatment of the people newly diagnosed 
with hypertension in scenarios 1.1–1.3 provided. An 
answer may be used more than once.
A.	An ACE inhibitor or angiotensin II receptor 
antagonist.
B.	 A nonselective β-adrenoceptor antagonist.
C.	A calcium channel blocker.
D.	A thiazide diuretic.
1.1  An obese man of Black African family origin aged 
75 years with a BP of 150/100 mm Hg and no evi-
dence of target organ damage.
1.2  A Caucasian female aged 40 years with type 1 dia-
betes mellitus and a BP of 150/100 mm Hg.
1.3  A woman 24 weeks pregnant with preexist­
ing chronic hypertension and a BP of 150/ 
100 mm Hg.
124	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
CASE-BASED QUESTION
Mr A.T., a 60-year-old man with type 2 diabetes melli-
tus, smokes 20 cigarettes a day. His plasma lipid levels 
are normal and there is no proteinuria. His ECG is nor-
mal. His height is 1.70 m and his weight is 95.5 kg. He 
has no evidence of fluid retention or heart failure. Fol-
lowing treatment with a calcium channel blocker, his 
BP has reduced from 175/110 mm Hg but he remains 
hypertensive (155/95 mm Hg), and he then has a non-
ST elevation myocardial infarction. What changes in 
his therapy would you consider?
ANSWERS
TRUE/FALSE ANSWERS
1.	 False. Baroreceptor impulses to the vasomotor cen-
tre reduce sympathetic outflow, enhance vagal out-
flow and lower BP.
2.	 True. Calcium channel blockers act by opening 
L-type voltage-gated Ca2+ channels, and nifedipine, 
a dihydropyridine, is relatively selective for these 
channels in arterial smooth muscle. The nondihy-
dropyridines verapamil and diltiazem have addi-
tional cardiodepressant properties.
3.	 True. Moxonidine selectively stimulates imidazoline I1 
receptors in the rostral ventrolateral medulla (RVLM); 
this decreases sympathetic outflow and reduces BP.
4.	 False. Propranolol lowers BP by reducing CO and by 
reducing renin production, but only β1-adrenoceptor 
antagonists with partial agonist activity at β2-
adrenoceptors (such as pindolol) or those drugs with 
other hybrid properties (such as nebivolol that gen-
erates NO) produce direct peripheral vasodilation.
5.	 True. All diuretics reduce Na+ and water reabsorp-
tion in the renal tubule; thiazides act at the Na+/Cl− 
co-transporter (NCC) in the distal convoluted tubule.
6.	 False. Thiazide diuretics cause fetal growth retardation 
by reducing plasma volume and placental blood flow; 
the centrally acting drug methyldopa, the calcium 
channel blocker nifedipine and the vasodilating beta-
blocker labetalol are most often used in pregnancy.
7.	 False. Spironolactone competes with aldosterone 
for the mineralocorticoid receptor (MR), blocking 
its stimulation of the Na+/K+-ATPase pump and 
expression of the epithelial Na+ channel (ENaC); 
this reduces uptake of Na+ and loss of K+ from the 
tubule. Amiloride, however, directly blocks ENaC 
(see Chapter 14).
8.	 False. Prazosin and related drugs dilate blood ves-
sels by selective blockade of α1-adrenoceptors; they 
do not block the presynaptic α2-adrenoceptors, and 
stimulation of these receptors to limit further NA 
release can still take place.
9.	 False. Angiotensinogen is converted to angiotensin 
I by renin. ACE effects the subsequent conversion of 
angiotensin I to angiotensin II.
10.	 True. ACE inhibitors reduce the breakdown of bra-
dykinin, a potent vasodilator, and this action may 
contribute to their antihypertensive effects, but 
also to the persistent cough that occurs in some 
people taking them.
11.	 False. Minoxidil is an ATP-sensitive potassium 
channel (KATP) opener; it causes an efflux of K+ ions 
resulting in hyperpolarisation of arterial smooth 
muscle cells and vasodilation.
12.	 False. Nitroprusside is converted to cyanide and 
then to thiocyanate. The toxicity of these metabo-
lites limits its use to 3 days for emergency manage-
ment of some hypertensive states.
13.	 True. IPAH is often associated with poor vascu-
lar reactivity, but vasodilation may be achieved 
by endothelin antagonists, PDE type 5 inhibitors, 
prostacyclin or riociguat.
14.	 True. Ambrisentan (and macitentan) selectively 
block vasoconstriction mediated by ETA receptors; 
endothelial ETB receptors which mediate vasodila-
tion via NO are relatively unaffected.
15.	 False. Riociguat stimulates guanylyl cyclase to 
synthesise 
cyclic 
guanosine 
monophosphate 
(cGMP), mimicking the vasodilator action of nitric 
oxide (NO).
16.	 False. Selexipag is not a prostaglandin analogue, 
but the parent drug (and a highly-active metabo-
lite) selectively activate prostacyclin IP receptors 
and cause vasodilation.
OBA ANSWERS
1.	 Answer C is the best answer. Reduced compliance 
(stiffening) of the large arteries, particularly in older 
people, is the likely cause of isolated systolic hyper-
tension. The reason is that when the conductance 
arteries are less compliant, the systolic pressure wave 
is reflected back from the peripheral resistance ves-
sels early, during systole, enhancing systolic BP; in the 
healthy heart the pressure wave is slowed by compli-
ant conductance arteries and is reflected back more 
slowly, during diastole, supporting the diastolic BP.
2.	 Answer B is the least accurate.
A.	True. Thiazides increase the risk of new-onset 
diabetes, particularly when combined with 
β-adrenoceptor antagonists.
B.	 False. β-Adrenoceptor antagonists are relegated 
in the BHS guidelines, as they are less effective 
in reducing the risk of myocardial infarction and 
stroke than other antihypertensive drugs.
C.	True. Satisfactory lowering of BP is achieved 
with a single drug in only 30%–40% of people 
with hypertension.
D.	True. Angiotensin II receptor antagonists block 
the vasoconstrictor and aldosterone secretory ac-
tions of angiotensin II at AT1 receptors; AT2 recep-
tors are involved in vascular growth and are less 
affected by these drugs.
	
	
Systemic and Pulmonary Hypertension  CHAPTER 6	
125
E.	 True. Nifedipine selectively dilates arterioles and 
may cause reflex tachycardia; this is unlikely 
with verapamil, which has negative chronotropic 
activity.
EXTENDED-MATCHING-ITEM ANSWERS
1.1	 Answer C (a calcium channel blocker) would 
be a good choice in this 75-year-old Black Afri-
can man. The elderly and Black people usually 
have low plasma renin concentrations, so an ACE 
inhibitor or angiotensin II receptor antagonist 
would be less effective. A thiazide diuretic or a 
β-adrenoceptor antagonist might increase the risk 
of diabetes mellitus because of his obesity and 
ethnic background.
1.2	 Answer A (an ACE inhibitor or, if poorly tolerated, 
an angiotensin II receptor antagonist) would be a 
good choice in a 40-year-old White female. A thia-
zide diuretic or a β-adrenoceptor antagonist may 
exacerbate the diabetes mellitus.
1.3	 Answer C (a calcium channel blocker) would be 
an appropriate first choice in a pregnant woman 
with preexisting hypertension. All the other drugs 
can cause unwanted effects on the fetus.
CASE-BASED ANSWER
Mr A.T.’s BP has not reached the target level (office 
140/90 mm Hg or home 135/85 mm Hg). His BP may 
be reduced further by introducing an ACE inhibitor, 
which improve survival after a myocardial infarction, 
especially when there is left ventricular impairment. 
ACE inhibitors also protect the kidney in diabetic 
nephropathy and could be considered in this situation. 
The addition of a β-adrenoceptor antagonist could also 
be considered for additional long-term prognostic ben-
efit, particularly if there is left ventricular impairment.
FURTHER READING
SYSTEMIC HYPERTENSION
Bramham, K., Nelson-Piercy, C., Brown, M.J., et  al., 2013. 
Postpartum management of hypertension. Br. Med. J. 346, f894.
National Institute for Health Care Excellence, 2019. Hypertension 
in adults: diagnosis and management (NICE guidance NG136). 
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng136.
Poulter, N.R., Prabhakaran, D., Caulfield, M., 2015. Hypertension. 
Lancet 386, 801–812.
Sheppard, J.P., Martin, U., McManus, R.J., 2017. Diagnosis and 
management of resistant hypertension. Heart 103, 1295–1302.
Sundström, J., Arima, H., Jackson, R., et al., 2015. Effects of blood 
pressure reduction in mild hypertension: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Ann. Intern. Med. 162, 184–191.
Xie, X., Atkins, E., Lv, J., et al., 2016. Effects of intensive blood 
pressure lowering on cardiovascular and renal outcomes: 
updated systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet 387, 
435–443.
Yoder, S.R., Thomberg, L.L., Bisognano, J.D., 2009. Hypertension 
in pregnancy and women of childbearing age. Am. J. Med. 
122, 890–895.
PULMONARY ARTERIAL HYPERTENSION
Hambly, N., Alawfi, F., Mehta, S., 2016. Pulmonary hypertension: 
diagnostic approach and optimal management. CMAJ 188, 
804–812.
Klinger, J.R., Elliott, C.G., Levine, D.L., et al., 2019. Therapy for 
pulmonary hypertension in adults. Chest 155, 565–586.
Compendium of Drugs Used to Treat Hypertension.
DRUG
CHARACTERISTICS
β-Adrenoceptor Antagonists
All β-adrenoceptor antagonists except esmolol and sotalol are used for systemic hypertension; see Chapter 5 for individual drugs.
α-Adrenoceptor Antagonists
Selective α1-adrenoceptor antagonists
Doxazosin
Used for hypertension and for benign prostatic hyperplasia (see Chapter 15). Given orally.
Indoramin
Used for hypertension and benign prostatic hyperplasia. Given orally.
Prazosin
Used for hypertension, congestive heart failure, Raynaud’s phenomenon and benign prostatic 
hyperplasia. Given orally.
Terazosin
Used for hypertension and benign prostatic hyperplasia. Given orally.
Nonselective α-adrenoceptor antagonists
Used in phaeochromocytoma only.
Phenoxybenzamine
Used for hypertensive episodes associated with phaeochromocytoma. Given orally or by 
intravenous infusion.
Phentolamine
Used for diagnosis and hypertensive episodes in phaeochromocytoma. Given by intravenous 
injection.
Centrally Acting Antihypertensive Drugs
Clonidine
Selective α2-adrenoceptor agonist. Used for hypertension, migraine and menopausal flushing. 
Given orally or by slow intravenous injection.
Continued
126	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
DRUG
CHARACTERISTICS
Methyldopa
Selective α2-adrenoceptor agonist. Used particularly for hypertension in pregnancy. Given orally.
Moxonidine
Selective imidazoline I1 receptor agonist. Used for resistant hypertension. Given orally.
Guanethidine
Blocks release and depletes stores of noradrenaline in adrenergic nerves. Used only for 
hypertensive crisis but other drugs usually preferred. Given by intramuscular injection.
Angiotensin Converting Enzyme (ACE) Inhibitors
ACE inhibitors are used for hypertension, heart failure, prophylaxis of ischaemic heart disease and diabetic nephropathy. All are 
given orally; many are prodrugs activated by metabolism in liver or gut. Some are available in combination formulations with a 
calcium channel blocker (see Chapter 5) or a diuretic (Chapter 14).
Captopril
Parent drug is active.
Enalapril maleate
Prodrug converted to enalaprilat. Also available combined with hydrochlorothiazide.
Fosinopril sodium
Prodrug converted to fosinoprilat.
Imidapril hydrochloride
Prodrug converted to imidaprilat.
Lisinopril
Parent drug is active. Also available combined with hydrochlorothiazide.
Perindopril erbumine and 
perindopril arginine
Prodrugs converted to perindoprilat. Perindopril arginine also available in combination with 
indapamide.
Quinapril
Prodrug converted in liver to quinaprilat. Also available combined with hydrochlorothiazide.
Ramipril
Prodrug converted to ramiprilat. Also available in combination with felodipine.
Trandolapril
Prodrug converted to trandolaprilat.
Angiotensin II Receptor (AT1) Antagonists
Used for hypertension, heart failure, prophylaxis after myocardial infarction and diabetic nephropathy. All are given orally. Some 
are available in combination formulations with a calcium channel blocker such as amlodipine (see Chapter 5) or a diuretic 
such as hydrochlorothiazide (see Chapter 14). Angiotensin II blockers should not be used together with aliskiren (see below) 
if renal function is poor or in people with diabetes mellitus.
Azilsartan
Given as prodrug (azilsartan medoxemil). Used for essential hypertension.
Candesartan
Given as prodrug (candesartan cilexitil).
Eprosartan
Parent drug is active.
Irbesartan
Also available combined with hydrochlorothiazide.
Losartan (potassium)
Also available combined with hydrochlorothiazide.
Olmesartan
Given as prodrug (olmesartan medoxomil). Also available combined with amlodipine, or with 
hydrochlorothiazide, or with amlodipine and hydrochlorothiazide.
Telmisartan
Also available combined with hydrochlorothiazide.
Valsartan
Also available in combination with amlodipine or with hydrochlorothiazide, or with sacubitril (a 
neprilysin inhibitor; see Chapter 7).
Direct Renin Inhibitor
Aliskiren
Nonpeptide inhibitor of renin. Given orally.
Diuretics
Diuretics are commonly used to treat hypertension; see Chapter 14 for individual drugs.
Calcium Channel Blockers
All calcium channel blockers (except nimodipine) are used for treatment of hypertension; see Chapter 5 for individual drugs.
Potassium Channel Opener
Minoxidil
Used with α2-adrenoceptor antagonist and a diuretic for severe hypertension resistant to other 
drugs. Given orally.
Hydralazine and Nitrovasodilators
Drugs used under special circumstances.
Diazoxide
Given in hypertensive emergencies by intravenous bolus injection.
Hydralazine
Used as an adjunct for moderate or severe hypertension, for heart failure and for hypertensive 
crisis. Given orally, by slow intravenous injection or by intravenous infusion.
Sodium nitroprusside
Used for hypertensive crisis, for controlled hypotension in anaesthesia and for acute heart failure. 
Given intravenously. Very short half-life (<5 min).
Endothelin Receptor Antagonists
Block vasoconstrictor activity of endothelin; used for pulmonary arterial hypertension
Ambrisentan
Selective antagonist of endothelin ETA receptors. Given orally.
Compendium of Drugs Used to Treat Hypertension—cont’d.
	
	
Systemic and Pulmonary Hypertension  CHAPTER 6	
127
DRUG
CHARACTERISTICS
Bosentan
Nonselective antagonist of endothelin ETA and ETB receptors. Given orally.
Macitentan
Noncompetitive antagonist of endothelin ETA/ETB receptors, selective for ETA subtype. Given orally.
Prostaglandins
Vasodilator and antiplatelet drugs; used for pulmonary arterial hypertension.
Epoprostenol
Natural prostacyclin (PGI2). Used when other drugs are ineffective. Given by continuous 
intravenous infusion. Very short half-life (<3 min). See also Chapter 11.
Iloprost
Synthetic prostacyclin analogue. Given by nebuliser.
Selective Prostacyclin Receptor Antagonist
Selexipag
Active metabolite is mainly responsible for selective agonism of prostacyclin IP receptors, causing 
vasodilation. Used for pulmonary arterial hypertension. Given orally.
Phosphodiesterase 5 Inhibitors
Vasodilate by reducing breakdown of cGMP by phosphodiesterase 5 (PDE5); used for pulmonary arterial hypertension. For use 
of PDE5 inhibitors in erectile dysfunction, see Chapter 16.
Sildenafil
Given orally or intravenously.
Tadalafil
Given orally or intravenously.
Guanylate Cyclase Stimulator
Riociguat
Vasodilates by increasing synthesis of cGMP by guanylate cyclase. Used for pulmonary arterial 
hypertension. Given orally.
Compendium of Drugs Used to Treat Hypertension—cont’d.
ACE, Angiotensin-converting enzyme; cGMP, cyclic guanosine monophosphate; PGI2, prostaglandin I2 (prostacyclin).
128
Heart Failure and Shock
7
Chapter Outline
Maintenance of Cardiac Output  128
Pathophysiology of Heart Failure  128
Acute Left Ventricular Failure  131
Chronic Heart Failure  131
Role of Calcium in Cardiac Contraction  131
Shock  131
Pathophysiology of Shock   131
Inotropic and Sympathomimetic Drugs for the 
Treatment of Heart Failure and Shock  132
Cardiac Glycosides  132
Sympathomimetics  134
Phosphodiesterase Inhibitors  135
Angiotensin Receptor Neprilysin Inhibitors  135
Management of Heart Failure  136
Acute Left Ventricular Failure  136
Chronic Heart Failure with Reduced Ejection Fraction  136
Heart Failure with Preserved Ejection Fraction  138
Management of Shock  138
Cardiogenic Shock  138
Distributive (Vasodilatory) Shock  138
Self-Assessment  138
Answers  139
Further Reading  140
Compendium of Drugs Used to Treat Heart Failure  141
There is no universally accepted definition of heart fail-
ure. The heart failure syndrome is usually said to exist 
when there is inadequate oxygen delivery to peripheral 
tissues, either at rest or during exercise, due to dysfunc-
tion of the heart or when adequate oxygen delivery can 
be maintained only with an elevated left ventricular 
filling pressure. It is a clinical syndrome with character-
istic signs and symptoms (oedema, breathlessness and 
fatigue) that has many underlying causes.
MAINTENANCE OF CARDIAC OUTPUT
There are four major determinants of cardiac output:
• preload: this is governed by the left ventricular end-
diastolic volume, which in turn is related to left 
ventricular filling pressure and therefore to venous 
return of blood to the heart,
• heart rate,
• myocardial contractility,
• afterload: the systolic wall tension generated in the 
left ventricle to overcome aortic pressure, which 
reflects the resistance to ventricular emptying within 
both the heart (during isovolumic contraction when 
the mitral valve is closed and before the aortic valve 
opens) and in the peripheral arterial bed.
The output from both the right and left sides of the 
heart is normally balanced. In the healthy heart, car-
diac output is mainly regulated by changes in heart 
rate and preload. Heart rate is largely modulated by 
the autonomic nervous system, with sympathetic ner-
vous stimulation increasing the heart rate and para-
sympathetic stimulation via the vagus nerve slowing 
the rate.
The relationship between preload and stroke vol-
ume (the amount of blood ejected from the ventricle 
during systole with each contraction) is shown in 
Fig. 7.1. The degree of stretch of the ventricular muscle 
(preload) determines the force of cardiac contraction 
(the Frank–Starling phenomenon). The curve describ-
ing this relationship is governed by intrinsic myocar-
dial contractility: thus, the curve is shifted upwards 
and to the left when contractility is augmented, for 
example, by sympathetic nervous stimulation. If myo-
cardial contractility is normal, the range of left ventric-
ular filling pressures lie on the steep part of the curve, 
making stroke volume very sensitive to small changes 
in preload.
The relationship between afterload and stroke 
volume is shown in Fig. 7.2. Afterload is determined 
largely by peripheral arterial resistance but also by the 
size of the ventricle. Enlargement of the left ventricu-
lar cavity (e.g. as a result of increased venous return 
or preload) increases wall tension, and the heart must 
generate greater pressure both to initiate and to main-
tain contraction. Preload and afterload are therefore 
closely interrelated. A rise in afterload will cause a 
fall in stroke volume, but the consequent sympathetic 
stimulation of healthy ventricular muscle will increase 
myocardial contractility and restore stroke volume.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF HEART FAILURE
Heart failure has several underlying causes (Box 7.1). 
Occasionally it arises suddenly (acute heart failure), 
such as after acute myocardial infarction (due to sub-
stantial muscle damage) or acute mitral regurgitation 
	
	
Heart Failure and Shock  CHAPTER 7	
129
Stroke volume 
Left ventricular filling pressure (preload)
Sympathetic
stimulation
Normal 
at rest
Failing ventricle
Pulmonary
congestion
Fig. 7.1  The Frank–Starling relationship between preload (left ven-
tricular filling pressure) and stroke volume in healthy and failing 
hearts. In the severely failing heart, increases in filling pressure and 
heart rate are insufficient to restore cardiac output; thus pulmonary 
congestion will occur.
from rupture of the chordae tendineae of the mitral 
valve or from papillary muscle dysfunction. More com-
monly the onset is gradual (chronic heart failure) and 
arises from progressive loss of myocardial function or 
a slow degenerative change in valve function. Acute 
deterioration can occur in chronic heart failure, termed 
‘acute decompensated heart failure’ (see also later).
The underlying problem in heart failure is reduced 
cardiac output and therefore low blood pressure, but 
the syndrome of heart failure arises largely from com-
pensatory neurohormonal responses to low blood 
pressure and reduced renal perfusion. These are prin-
cipally due to activation of the sympathetic nervous 
system and the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system 
as well as increased release of antidiuretic hormone 
(Fig. 7.3). The consequences of these compensatory 
mechanisms are vasoconstriction of both arteries and 
veins and excessive salt and water retention by the 
kidneys. Although these are the normal physiological 
responses to reduced blood pressure, in the setting of a 
failing heart they have limited benefit.
In the failing ventricle, the Frank–Starling curve is 
shifted downwards and to the right (failing-ventricle 
curve, see Fig. 7.1) and the maximum achievable stroke 
volume is reduced. The curve is also flatter, indicat-
ing that stroke volume has become less responsive to 
changes in preload. This shift in the curve is due to the 
inability of the ventricular muscle to respond to a rise 
in preload by increasing the force of contraction. Acti-
vation of the compensatory mechanisms in response to 
the fall in cardiac output leads to retention of salt and 
water, which expands plasma volume, and venocon-
striction, which enhances venous return to the heart. 
These factors increase the filling pressure of the left 
ventricle in an attempt to restore the resting stroke 
volume. The heart rate will also increase, which will 
raise cardiac output despite a lower stroke volume. 
However, a persistently high level of sympathetic ner-
vous system tone results in downregulation of cardiac 
β1-adrenoceptors and therefore less ability to rely on 
increased heart rate to maintain cardiac output. If these 
responses are successful in restoring a normal resting 
cardiac output, the heart failure is said to be compen-
sated. However, the cardiac output may be unable to 
rise further to meet the needs of the body during exer-
tion. Decompensation occurs when the combination of 
the increases in preload and heart rate fail to restore a 
normal resting cardiac output (see Fig. 7.3).
Peripheral arterial resistance (afterload) will also 
rise as a result of the neurohormonal compensatory 
mechanisms (see Fig. 7.2). The failing ventricle cannot 
meet this demand with an increase in myocardial con-
tractility, so stroke volume will fall (see Fig. 7.2), lead-
ing to further cardiac decompensation.
In response to the rise in atrial and ventricular filling 
pressures, A-type natriuretic peptide (ANP) and B-type 
natriuretic peptide (BNP) are released from the heart. 
These peptides promote natriuresis and vasodilation 
but are less effective in the presence of neurohormonal 
Stroke volume 
Outflow resistance (afterload)
Failing ventricle
Normal
Fig. 7.2  The relationship between afterload (outflow resistance) 
and stroke volume in the presence of normal and reduced myo-
cardial contractility. Sympathetic stimulation maintains the stroke 
volume of the normal heart (but not of the failing heart) against an 
increasing afterload.
Box 7.1  Causes of Heart Failure.
Coronary artery disease
Hypertension
Myocardial disease: cardiomyopathies, myocarditis
Valvular heart disease
Constrictive pericarditis
Congenital: atrial septal defect, ventricular septal defect, aortic 
coarctation
Infiltrative: amyloid, sarcoid, iron
Iatrogenic: β-adrenoceptor antagonists (high doses), 
antiarrhythmics, calcium channel blockers, some 
cytotoxic anticancer drugs, alcohol, irradiation
Arrhythmias, especially incessant tachyarrhythmias
130	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
activation. The natriuretic peptides are degraded by 
neprilysin, a neutral endopeptidase, which has several 
other substrates including angiotensin II, bradykinin, 
endothelin and vasopressin.
In most cases of heart failure, the impairment of 
function initially affects the left ventricle. As the central 
blood volume is increased in an attempt to raise the left 
ventricular stroke volume, the hydrostatic pressure in 
the pulmonary veins will rise. When this hydrostatic 
pressure exceeds the plasma colloid oncotic pressure 
that holds fluid in the blood vessel, fluid leaves the 
capillaries. It moves into the interstitium of the alveoli 
and then into the alveolar spaces, producing pulmo-
nary oedema (see Fig. 7.2). Raised pulmonary venous 
pressure will also lead to a rise in pulmonary arterial 
pressure which eventually compromises right ventric-
ular output and leads to right heart failure (produc-
ing biventricular failure, or congestive cardiac failure). 
When the right ventricle fails, increased hydrostatic 
pressure in the systemic veins results in oedema in the 
peripheral and splanchnic tissues.
The most common type of heart failure is associ-
ated with impaired systolic contraction of the left ven-
tricle and a reduced ejection fraction (the proportion 
of blood in the ventricle that is expelled during sys-
tole; normally 50%–70%) which falls below 40%. This 
is referred to as heart failure with reduced ejection 
fraction (HFrEF), which has several causes. Following 
myocyte loss, such as occurs with myocardial infarc-
tion or dilated cardiomyopathies, adaptive changes 
take place in the surviving myocytes and extracellu-
lar matrix – a process known as remodelling. This is 
driven by several factors, including the local effects of 
catecholamines, angiotensin II, aldosterone, and pro-
inflammatory cytokines. Remodelling eventually pro-
duces a more globular, and less efficient left ventricle. 
In aortic or mitral valve regurgitation, heart failure 
arises because the left ventricle must dilate to accom-
modate the normal forward stroke volume and also the 
regurgitant volume (the volume leaking back into the 
left ventricle or left atrium, respectively). Eventually, 
the left ventricle dilates to the point where contractil-
ity is reduced and it is unable to maintain an effective 
stroke volume. This effect is reflected in the flattening 
of the Frank–Starling curve as the ventricular end-
diastolic pressure rises.
Heart failure can also arise from impaired diastolic 
relaxation when contractile function in systole is nor-
mal but ventricular filling is reduced. Stroke volume is 
reduced but ejection fraction is normal (>50%). This is 
known as heart failure with preserved ejection fraction 
(HFpEF). If the left ventricle fails to relax adequately, 
it will not accommodate the venous return, leading to 
back pressure into the pulmonary vein with pulmonary 
Sympathetic nervous
system activation
Venous
constriction
Arterial
constriction
Heart failure
   Cardiac output
Compensation
  Cardiac output
Decompensation
  Cardiac output
Renin release
Angiotensin II
generation
Aldosterone
release
Fluid and salt
retention
Heart contractility
Heart rate
Filling pressure
in left ventricle
(   preload)
Afterload
Carotid sinus
baroreceptor outflow
Renal blood flow
(See Fig. 7.2)
(See Fig. 7.1)
Fig. 7.3  Neurohormonal consequences of heart failure. In the mildly impaired heart, a fall in cardiac output results in 
a cascade of compensatory events (green arrows), including sympathetic stimulation of heart rate and contractility, con-
striction of arteries and veins, and activation of the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system; overall these compensatory 
mechanisms restore cardiac output. If cardiac function is significantly impaired (red arrows), an increased preload cannot 
restore an adequate stroke volume (decompensation) (see Fig. 7.1); the increased afterload will put additional strain on 
the failing heart and further decrease cardiac output (see Fig. 7.2). In chronic heart failure these effects are compounded 
by cardiac remodelling and downregulation of cardiac β1-adrenoceptors.
	
	
Heart Failure and Shock  CHAPTER 7	
131
venous congestion and a low cardiac output. This 
will activate the same compensatory neurohormonal 
responses found in HFrEF. HFpEF characteristically 
occurs in older people in association with left ven-
tricular hypertrophy, but it also contributes to heart 
failure in ischaemic left ventricular dysfunction (see 
Chapter 5) and aortic stenosis.
A third category, heart failure with mid-range ejec-
tion fraction (HFmrEF; ejection fraction 40%–49%), has 
been described to cover the range of ejection fractions 
in the intermediate range.
Symptoms in heart failure are caused by a reduced 
cardiac output (‘forward failure’) or venous congestion 
(‘backward failure’). The most common complaints 
are breathlessness from increased pulmonary venous 
pressure and fatigue resulting from the reduced car-
diac output and impaired skeletal muscle perfusion. 
In response to the reduced perfusion, biochemical 
changes also occur in skeletal muscle, making it less 
efficient. Other symptoms, such as the discomfort of 
peripheral oedema and anorexia due to bowel con-
gestion, are attributable to a high systemic venous 
pressure. Increased stimulation of β-adrenoceptors 
in the heart as a consequence of the neurohormonal 
compensation can lead to life-threatening ventricular 
arrhythmias.
ACUTE LEFT VENTRICULAR FAILURE
Acute left ventricular failure usually results from a 
sudden inability of the heart to maintain an adequate 
cardiac output and blood pressure. It can follow acute 
myocardial infarction or acute mitral or aortic valvu-
lar regurgitation or arise from the onset of a brady- or 
tachyarrhythmia if there is preexisting poor left ven-
tricular function. The sudden fall in cardiac output 
leads to reflex arterial and venous constriction (see 
Fig. 7.3). There is a rapid rise in filling pressure of the 
left ventricle as a result of increased venous return. If 
the heart is unable to expel the extra blood, the hydro-
static pressure in the pulmonary veins rises until it 
exceeds the plasma oncotic pressure and produces 
acute pulmonary oedema. The principal symptom is 
breathlessness, usually at rest, with orthopnoea or par-
oxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea.
CHRONIC HEART FAILURE
Myocardial damage from ischaemic heart disease 
is the most common cause of chronic heart failure, 
but potentially correctable causes – such as valvular 
lesions, as well as treatable exacerbating factors such 
as anaemia or arrhythmias – may be identified. In 
most people with heart failure there are signs of both 
right and left ventricular failure (biventricular or con-
gestive heart failure). Chronic heart failure has a high 
mortality from progressive heart failure or ventricular 
arrhythmias. People with HFrEF who have symptoms 
only on exertion have a 2-year mortality risk of about 
20%, whereas if there are symptoms at rest, the 1-year 
mortality is 80%. In HFrEF the degree of left ventricu-
lar dysfunction is a guide to prognosis.
HFpEF has about half the mortality rate when 
compared with HFrEF, and the mortality associated 
with HFmrEF is intermediate between the other two 
categories.
ROLE OF CALCIUM IN CARDIAC CONTRACTION
In cardiac muscle cells, depolarisation of the cell 
opens L-type Ca2+ channels allowing a small amount 
of Ca2+ into the cell. This is insufficient to initiate mus-
cle contraction but results in a large increase in Ca2+ 
in the space between the t-tubule and sarcoplasmic 
reticulum. The increase in Ca2+ opens the Ca2+ release 
channels in the sarcoplasmic reticulum (ryanodine 
receptors; RyR2) so that Ca2+ travels down its concen-
tration gradient into the cytosol and is available to the 
contractile elements. This process is known as Ca2+-
induced Ca2+ release.
Muscle fibres comprise thick filaments containing 
myosin molecules and thin filaments containing actin 
molecules. Associated with the actin molecules are 
tropomyosin molecules with attached troponin regu-
latory proteins. Calcium binds to troponin C, which 
in turn weakens the binding of troponin I to actin 
and allows the tropomyosin molecule to move and 
uncover the myosin binding site on the actin molecule. 
This initiates contraction. The amount of free Ca2+ in 
the cytosol will determine the number of actin-myosin 
cross-bridges and therefore the force of contraction.
SHOCK
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF SHOCK
Shock is an acute, life-threatening condition in which 
tissue perfusion is insufficient to meet cellular oxygen 
demands, leading to tissue hypoxia. Usually this is due 
to circulatory failure, manifesting with hypotension. 
There are four principal types of shock:
• Hypovolaemic shock.
• Cardiogenic shock.
• Distributive shock.
• Obstructive shock.
Hypovolaemic shock is usually due to severe blood 
loss. Obstructive shock usually arises from pulmonary 
emboli, pneumothorax, haemothorax or cardiac tam-
ponade. The treatment of these types of shock is by 
management of the underlying cause.
Cardiogenic Shock
The syndrome of cardiogenic shock arises when 
the systolic function of the left ventricle is acutely 
impaired. This may be due to a disease of the myocar-
dial tissue (e.g. myocardial infarction), an arrhythmia 
(e.g. sustained ventricular tachycardia) or an intracar-
diac mechanical lesion (e.g. acute mitral valve regur-
gitation due to papillary muscle rupture). Cardiogenic 
shock following acute myocardial infarction usually 
132	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
indicates loss of at least 40% of the left ventricular 
myocardium. The clinical hallmarks are a low systolic 
blood pressure (usually <90 mm Hg), with a reduced 
cardiac output and an elevated left ventricular filling 
pressure. The mortality of cardiogenic shock, even 
with intensive treatment, is in excess of 70%.
Distributive (Vasodilatory) Shock
Distributive shock is characterised by vasodilation 
that is so profound that it impairs circulation of blood 
through the vascular system. It is the most common 
form of shock and is the process that underlies sep-
tic shock (see also Chapter 51), anaphylactic shock 
(Chapter 39) and neurogenic shock. The pathophysiol-
ogy varies by aetiology. Histamine and other products 
of mast cell degranulation are the mediators of vaso-
dilation in anaphylactic shock. Neurogenic shock in 
high spinal cord injury is due to interruption of sym-
pathetic nervous system pathways, which exit the cen-
tral nervous system via the thoracolumbar cord (see 
Chapter 4). Septic shock is due to a dysregulated host 
response to infection, one part of which is vascular 
endothelial dysfunction. This results in diffuse vasodi-
lation throughout the microcirculation, and fluid loss 
from the intravascular compartment due to increased 
endothelial permeability.
INOTROPIC AND SYMPATHOMIMETIC DRUGS FOR 
THE TREATMENT OF HEART FAILURE AND SHOCK
Myocardial contractility can be improved by increas-
ing the amount of intracellular Ca2+ available to interact 
with contractile proteins or by increasing the sensitiv-
ity of the myofibrils to Ca2+. Only drugs that increase 
myocardial intracellular Ca2+ are established in clinical 
use; they work indirectly on Ca2+ availability by one of 
two distinct mechanisms:
• an action on the cell membrane Na+/K+-ATPase 
pump (e.g. cardiac glycosides),
• by increasing intracellular cyclic adenosine mono-
phosphate (cAMP) (e.g. inotropic sympathomimet-
ics, phosphodiesterase inhibitors).
CARDIAC GLYCOSIDES
  Example
digoxin
Mechanism of Action and Effects
Effect on myocardial contractility
Cardiac glycosides are compounds with a steroid 
nucleus that were originally isolated from a species of 
foxglove (Digitalis purpura). Digoxin is the drug most 
widely used in clinical practice.
The intracellular Ca2+ concentration in the myocar-
dium is maintained indirectly by the activity of the 
energy-dependent Na+ pump (Na+/K+-ATPase) in 
the myocyte membrane. This pump establishes and 
maintains the Na+ and K+ gradients across the cell 
(Fig. 7.4), producing low intracellular Na+ and high 
intracellular K+ concentrations. There is a separate pas-
sive transmembrane exchange of Na+ and Ca2+ driven 
by the Na+ concentration gradient, with Na+ entering 
the cell while Ca2+ is translocated out. The activity of 
this exchange mechanism is dependent on the intracel-
lular Na+ concentration.
Cardiac glycosides partially inhibit the Na+/K+-
ATPase, which increases the intracellular Na+ concentra-
tion. This lowers the concentration gradient for Na+ across 
the cell membrane, which in turn reduces the Na+/Ca2+ 
exchange, so that Ca2+ is retained in the cell. The excess 
intracellular Ca2+ is stored in the sarcoplasmic reticulum 
during diastole and released during cell membrane exci-
tation, leading to enhanced myocardial contraction.
Effects on cardiac action potential and intracardiac 
conduction
Digoxin can be arrhythmogenic but also has actions 
that are useful for treating certain arrhythmias.
Direct actions of digoxin on the heart can provoke 
arrhythmias by increasing myocardial cell excitability 
(see Chapter 8) as follows:
• Reduction of the resting cell membrane potential. 
The cell membrane Na+/K+-ATPase pump extrudes 
three Na+ ions out of the cell for every two K+ ions 
that enter, which increases the negative intracellular 
electrical potential and hyperpolarises the cell, mak-
ing it less excitable (see Chapter 8). Inhibition of the 
Na+/K+-ATPase membrane pump by digoxin causes 
the cell membrane potential to become less negative 
and closer to the threshold potential for depolarisa-
tion. Action potentials, and therefore arrhythmias 
are therefore more readily initiated.
• Triggering of spontaneous release of Ca2+ from 
the sarcoplasmic reticulum. This leads to transient 
depolarisation of the cell immediately following 
an action potential (‘delayed afterdepolarisation’), 
which can initiate arrhythmias (see Chapter 8).
Digoxin also has useful indirect actions on the heart 
that arise from stimulation of the central vagal nucleus 
and enable it to be used for treating arrhythmias (see 
Chapter 8). The vagal effects on the heart are as follows:
• decreased automaticity of the sinoatrial node which 
slightly slows the heart rate in sinus rhythm. This is 
not a clinically important action,
• increased refractory period of the atrioventricular 
node, which slows impulse transmission to the ven-
tricles and is useful in the management of the fast 
ventricular rates resulting from atrial flutter and 
fibrillation (see Chapter 8).
Pharmacokinetics
Digoxin is eliminated by the kidneys via glomerular 
filtration and active tubular secretion. The half-life 
of digoxin is long (about 1.5 days) and is increased 
if renal function is impaired; the dose must be reduced 
	
	
Heart Failure and Shock  CHAPTER 7	
133
in the presence of renal impairment to avoid toxic-
ity (see later). If an early onset of action is required, 
oral loading doses should be given over the first 
24 or 36 hours (see Chapter 2). If a rapid response is 
essential, digoxin can be given by slow intravenous 
infusion.
Unwanted Effects
Digitalis glycosides have a narrow therapeutic index 
and toxicity is mostly dose-related.
• Gastrointestinal disturbances: anorexia, nausea and 
vomiting (largely a central effect at the chemorecep-
tor trigger zone), and diarrhoea.
• Neurological disturbances: fatigue, malaise, con-
fusion, vertigo, coloured vision (especially yellow 
halos around lights, possibly from inhibition of 
Na+/K+-ATPase in the cones of the retina).
• Distinctive changes on the electrocardiogram (ECG): 
this includes nonspecific T-wave changes and sag-
ging of the S-T segment with an upright T-wave 
(‘reverse tick’), often referred to as the ‘digoxin 
effect’. These ECG effects do not indicate toxicity 
but can be mistaken for myocardial ischaemia.
• Consequences of intracellular Ca2+ overload: 
increased excitability of the atrioventricular node 
and Purkinje fibres produces atrial or nodal ecto-
pic beats, atrial or nodal tachycardia, ventricu-
lar ectopic beats, or (less commonly) ventricular 
tachycardia.
• Consequences of increased vagal activity: exces-
sive atrioventricular nodal block (‘heart block’) 
can occur. When associated with increased atrial 
excitability, this produces atrial tachycardia with 
atrioventricular nodal block, a rhythm characteristic 
of digitalis toxicity.
• Gynaecomastia: during long-term treatment, the 
steroid structure allows digitalis glycosides to stim-
ulate oestrogen receptors in breast tissue.
Exacerbating Factors for Cardiac Glycoside 
Toxicity
• Hypokalaemia: reduced extracellular K+ concentra-
tion increases the effects of cardiac glycosides on 
the Na+/K+-ATPase pump. Care must be taken if 
potassium-losing diuretics such as furosemide (see 
Chapter 14) are used with cardiac glycosides.
• Renal impairment: reduces the excretion of digoxin.
• Hypoxaemia: this sensitises the heart to cardiac 
glycoside-induced arrhythmias.
• Hypothyroidism: the renal elimination of digoxin 
is decreased because of a reduced glomerular filtra-
tion rate.
• Drugs that displace digoxin from tissue binding 
sites and interfere with its renal excretion: these 
include verapamil (see Chapter 5) and quinidine 
(see Chapter 8), which can double the plasma con-
centration of digoxin. Amiodarone (see Chapter 8) 
produces a less marked effect.
Treatment of Cardiac Glycoside Toxicity
Cardiac glycoside toxicity can be treated by:
• withholding further doses of cardiac glycoside,
• using K+ supplementation (see Chapter 14) for hypo-
kalaemia. This is usually given orally but should be 
given by slow intravenous infusion if there are dan-
gerous arrhythmias,
Fig. 7.4  The action of digoxin on the cardiac myocyte. Digoxin increases intracellular Na+ by inhibiting the Na+/
K+-ATPase. This reduces the Na+ gradient for the passive export of Ca2+, resulting in increased intracellular Ca2+ and 
enhanced contractile responses.
Na+/K+-
ATPase
pump
Na+/Ca2+
exchange
(passive)
2K+
3Na+
Ca2+
3Na+
Cardiac
myocyte
membrane
Inside
Na+ 9 mmol/L
K+
150 mmol/L
Outside
Na+ 140 mmol/L
K+
 5 mmol/L
Digoxin
–
–
–
–
–
Digoxin inhibits
pump and
Na+ increases
inside cell
Reduced exchange of
Ca2+ with Na+
Increased intracellular Ca2+
ENHANCED CONTRACTION PROCESS
134	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
• using atropine (see Chapter 8) for sinus bradycardia 
or atrioventricular block (with temporary transve-
nous pacing for marked bradycardia unresponsive 
to atropine),
• digoxin-specific antibody fragments for serious 
digoxin toxicity (see Chapter 53).
SYMPATHOMIMETICS
  Examples
selective α1-adrenoceptor agonists: phenylephrine (pure α1 
agonist), noradrenaline (norepinephrine) (predominant α1 
agonist)
selective β1-adrenoceptor agonist: dobutamine
selective β2-adrenoceptor agonist and dopamine receptor 
agonist: dopexamine
nonselective β-adrenoceptor and α-adrenoceptor agonist: 
adrenaline (epinephrine)
nonselective β-adrenoceptor, α-adrenoceptor, and dopa-
mine receptor agonist: dopamine
Mechanisms of Action and Effects
The mechanisms of action of the inotropic sympa-
thomimetic drugs are also considered in Chapter 4. 
It is the β-adrenoceptor agonist action of these drugs 
that produces positive inotropic effects, and the α1-
adrenoceptors agonist action that produces vasocon-
strictor (vasopressor) effects.
Dobutamine, a synthetic dopamine analogue, is 
a selective β1-adrenoceptor agonist that produces a 
powerful positive inotropic response, with relatively 
less increase in heart rate than isoprenaline and little 
direct effect on vascular tone, even at high concentrations. 
Dopexamine has agonist activity at β2-adrenoceptors, 
which increases heart rate and produces vasodilation. 
It has less activity at β1-adrenoceptors, giving a weak 
direct positive inotropic effect. It also acts on periph-
eral dopamine receptors and produces some increase in 
renal blood flow, but unlike dopamine, it does not cause 
peripheral vasoconstriction with high doses.
Dopamine has dose-related actions at several 
receptors.
• At low doses, dopamine selectively stimulates 
peripheral dopamine receptors, which are structur-
ally distinct from those in the central nervous sys-
tem. This produces renal arterial vasodilation and 
diuresis (via D1 receptors) and peripheral arterial 
vasodilation (via D2 presynaptic receptors, which 
inhibit noradrenaline release from sympathetic 
nerves).
• At moderate doses, dopamine produces non-
selective β-adrenoceptor stimulation which results 
in tachycardia and a positive inotropic action 
(Fig. 7.5). Tachycardia is more marked than with 
dobutamine because of stimulation of both cardiac 
β1- and β2-adrenoceptors and the reflex response 
to β2-adrenoceptor–mediated peripheral arterial 
dilation.
• At high doses, α1-adrenoceptor stimulation by 
dopamine produces peripheral vasoconstriction, 
which also affects the renal arteries and overcomes 
D1-receptor–mediated renal vasodilation.
Phosphodiesterase type 3
ATP
AMP
β1-Adrenoceptor
G-protein
Adenylyl
cyclase
Increased influx of calcium
across cell membrane
Increased affinity of
myofilaments for Ca2+
Increased reuptake of Ca2+
into sarcoplasmic reticulum
Protein kinases
+
−
Positive inotropy
Shortens systole, aids relaxation in diastole
cAMP
β-Adrenoceptor agonists, e.g. dobutamine,
adrenaline, noradrenaline, isoprenaline
Milrinone
Enoximone
Fig. 7.5  Mechanisms by which sympathomimetics and phosphodiesterase inhibitors exert their positive inotro-
pic effects. AMP, Adenosine monophosphate; ATP, adenosine triphosphate; cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate.
	
	
Heart Failure and Shock  CHAPTER 7	
135
The doses of dopamine that produce these differ-
ent effects differ widely among individuals. Unfortu-
nately, there is no dose that can be relied upon to act 
selectively at dopamine receptors without stimulating 
adrenoceptors.
Noradrenaline (norepinephrine) and adrenaline (epi-
nephrine) are mixed α- and β-adrenoceptor agonists. 
The dominant effect of noradrenaline is marked vaso-
constriction through its actions on α1-adrenoceptors. 
This is accompanied by a modest increase in cardiac 
output due to weaker β1-adrenoceptor agonism. It is 
widely used in the management of septic shock, in 
which vasodilation is central to the pathophysiology. 
Adrenaline is also an α1-adrenoceptor agonist, but in 
addition, it has potent activity at the β1-adrenoceptor. 
It therefore increases blood pressure through vasocon-
striction, and cardiac output through both inotropic 
and chronotropic effects. It is used in the manage-
ment of anaphylaxis and cardiac arrest, but marked 
tachycardia and arrhythmogenicity limit its value 
in other forms of shock. Phenylephrine is a pure α1-
adrenoceptor agonist that produces vasoconstriction 
only; it is occasionally used to treat hypotension caused 
by vasodilation (for example, in general anaesthesia). 
Isoprenaline is a nonselective β-adrenoceptor agonist 
that is now available in the UK only on special order. 
It is not used clinically for its positive inotropic actions 
because of a risk of arrhythmias. It is sometimes used 
to increase heart rate in the emergency treatment of 
bradycardias through its action on both β1- and β2-
adrenoceptors (see Chapter 8).
Pharmacokinetics
All positive inotropic and vasoconstrictor sympatho-
mimetics are administered by intravenous infusion 
because of their very short half-lives (<12  minutes). 
Vasoconstrictor sympathomimetics are usually given 
via a central venous catheter to avoid the risks of 
local vasoconstriction and tissue necrosis associ-
ated with peripheral extravasation. The exception 
to intravenous use is intramuscular injection of 
adrenaline for treatment of anaphylaxis. Metabolic 
inactivation of sympathomimetics is by the same 
monoamine oxidase (MAO) and catechol-O-methyl-
transferase (COMT) pathways as for noradrenaline 
(see Chapter 4). Desensitisation and downregulation 
of cardiac β-adrenoceptors (see Chapter 1) rapidly 
reduce the positive inotropic response to sustained 
infusions over 48 to 72 hours.
Unwanted Effects
• Excessive cardiac stimulation, with tachycardia, pal-
pitations and arrhythmias.
• Nausea and vomiting.
• Chest pain, dyspnoea.
• Headache.
• Extravasation (inadvertent infiltration into tissue 
around the vascular access device, due to misplace- 
ment or migration) of drugs with vasoconstricting 
effect can cause local tissue necrosis.
PHOSPHODIESTERASE INHIBITORS
  Examples
enoximone, milrinone
Mechanism of Action and Effects
Milrinone and enoximone are specific inhibitors of 
the type 3 isoenzyme of phosphodiesterase (PDE3) 
found in cardiac and smooth muscle. The inotropic 
action of these drugs on the heart is due to an increase 
in intracellular cAMP with increased mobilisation of 
intracellular Ca2+ (see Fig. 7.5). The increase in myo-
cardial cAMP also enhances the reuptake of Ca2+ by 
the sarcoplasmic reticulum in diastole. This improves 
diastolic relaxation in addition to augmenting systolic 
contractility.
Unlike β-adrenoceptor agonists, the activity of phos-
phodiesterase inhibitors is not limited by desensitisa-
tion of cell surface receptors because they act at a site 
beyond the receptor. Because they have complemen-
tary sites of action, phosphodiesterase inhibitors and 
β-adrenoceptor agonists will have additive effects on 
the heart. PDE3 inhibition in vascular smooth muscle 
produces peripheral arterial vasodilation.
Pharmacokinetics
Phosphodiesterase inhibitors are given by intravenous 
infusion. Milrinone is eliminated by the kidneys and 
enoximone by hepatic metabolism. They have elimina-
tion half-lives of about 1 hour.
Unwanted Effects
• These are mainly a consequence of excessive cardiac 
stimulation and include ectopic beats and both ven-
tricular and supraventricular arrhythmias.
• Nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea (milrinone).
• Headache.
• Long-term oral use increases mortality in heart fail-
ure. Oral use has therefore been abandoned.
ANGIOTENSIN RECEPTOR NEPRILYSIN 
INHIBITORS
  Example
sacubitril valsartan
Mechanism of Action and Effects
Sacubitril is an inhibitor of neprilysin. Previous 
attempts to treat heart failure with a neprilysin inhibi-
tor were unsuccessful, possibly because the inhibition 
of angiotensin II breakdown antagonises the effects of 
increased natriuretic peptides. Combining a neprily-
sin inhibitor with an angiotensin-converting enzyme 
(ACE) inhibitor increased the risk of angioedema from 
dual inhibition of the breakdown of bradykinin. The 
136	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
combination of sacubitril with an angiotensin II recep-
tor antagonist was therefore a logical next step, as only 
one of the enzymes responsible for breakdown of bra-
dykinin is inhibited. The addition of sacubitril to val-
sartan produces greater vasodilation and natriuresis 
than either drug alone.
Pharmacokinetics
Sacubitril valsartan is a molecular combination of the 
two drugs that dissociates into the individual compo-
nent molecules after absorption. Sacubitril is a prodrug 
that is converted to sacubitrilat by esterases. Sacubi-
trilat is eliminated by the kidneys and has a half-life 
of 12 hours.
Unwanted Effects
These are similar to those of an angiotensin II receptor 
antagonist but with a greater risk of hypotension.
MANAGEMENT OF HEART FAILURE
ACUTE LEFT VENTRICULAR FAILURE
The immediate aim of pharmacological treatment 
in acute left ventricular failure is to reduce excessive 
venous return to the heart. Treatment includes the fol-
lowing steps:
• Oxygen in high concentration via a facemask.
• Intravenous injection of a loop diuretic such as furo-
semide (see Chapter 14), which initially produces 
venodilation and peripheral venous pooling. Symp-
toms are therefore improved even before the onset 
of a diuresis that reduces plasma volume and fur-
ther decreases preload.
• Noninvasive ventilatory support can be useful if 
there is severe breathlessness with acidaemia.
• Sublingual glyceryl trinitrate (GTN) (see Chapter 5), 
which dilates venous capacitance vessels, is not rec-
ommended as a first-line treatment but can be use-
ful if there is co-existing hypertension or myocardial 
ischaemia.
Whenever possible, a potentially correctable precip-
itating or exacerbating cause of acute left ventricular 
failure should be treated; for example, arrhythmias, 
anaemia, thyrotoxicosis, acute mitral regurgitation or 
critical aortic stenosis. However, there is often under-
lying impairment of left ventricular systolic function, 
when management as for chronic heart failure is sub-
sequently necessary.
CHRONIC HEART FAILURE WITH REDUCED 
EJECTION FRACTION
Much of the treatment of chronic heart failure is 
directed towards counteracting the compensatory 
mechanisms for the reduced cardiac output and low 
blood pressure generated by a failing heart – that is, 
arterial and venous vasoconstriction and fluid reten-
tion. When there is a reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF), 
a further desirable action is to reduce or reverse the 
shape change (remodelling) that occurs in the failing 
ventricle and makes contraction less efficient. Overall, 
treatment of HFrEF has two main aims: symptom relief 
and improved prognosis.
Nonpharmacological Treatment
A number of lifestyle changes can be helpful.
• Weight reduction should be encouraged for an 
obese person; this improves exercise tolerance.
• Bed rest may be appropriate to rest the heart during 
acute episodes of fluid retention.
• Modest dietary salt restriction is desirable (severe 
salt restriction is unnecessary).
• Fluid restriction is rarely required unless profound 
hyponatraemia accompanies severe oedema. In 
this situation, diuretics may be ineffective until the 
plasma Na+ concentration is corrected.
• If possible, drugs that exacerbate heart failure 
by producing myocardial depression (e.g. most 
calcium channel blockers) or by promoting fluid 
retention (e.g. nonsteroidal antiinflammatory 
drugs) should be withdrawn. Beta-adrenoceptor 
antagonists can cause myocardial depression 
but should not be stopped (see later), although 
a high dose may have to be reduced. Alcohol 
intake should be moderate at most as alcohol 
depresses myocardial contractility and can be 
arrhythmogenic.
• A graded exercise programme for people with sta-
ble heart failure can improve symptoms.
Diuretics
Diuretics remain the mainstay of treatment for chronic 
heart failure with fluid retention and are very effec-
tive for relief of symptoms (see Chapter 14). A loop 
diuretic (usually furosemide), taken once daily in the 
morning, is typically used. There is no evidence that 
the use of a loop or thiazide diuretic alters progno-
sis in heart failure. Hypokalaemia is unusual when 
loop diuretics are used in chronic heart failure, espe-
cially as an ACE inhibitor or angiotensin II receptor 
antagonist is usually taken concurrently (see later). 
Nevertheless, the use of a potassium-sparing diuretic 
is advisable if the plasma K+ falls below 3.5 mmol/L, 
especially if digoxin or antiarrhythmic therapy is used 
concurrently (because of an increased risk of gener-
ating cardiac rhythm disturbances). Spironolactone is 
the preferred potassium-sparing diuretic as it is also 
a standard treatment in severe heart failure. Spirono-
lactone reduces mortality in HFrEF by 25% if a low 
dose is added to maximal therapy with other drugs. 
Eplerenone has a similar benefit for heart failure fol-
lowing acute myocardial infarction. In more severe 
heart failure, the fluid retention may not respond to 
usual doses of a loop diuretic. Strategies for the man-
agement of diuretic-resistant fluid retention are con-
sidered in Chapter 14.
	
	
Heart Failure and Shock  CHAPTER 7	
137
Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors and 
Angiotensin II Receptor Antagonists
An ACE inhibitor (see Chapter 6) is now considered 
to be essential in the treatment of HFrEF and is usu-
ally started at the same time as a diuretic. By reduc-
ing angiotensin II synthesis, ACE inhibitors produce 
arterial and venous dilation, which improves cardiac 
function by decreasing ventricular end-diastolic vol-
ume and increasing cardiac output (see Figs. 7.1 and 
7.2). ACE inhibitors usually improve breathlessness 
and fatigue and increase exercise tolerance. Despite 
early haemodynamic changes, the full symptomatic 
response is often delayed for 4 to 6 weeks after the 
start of treatment. A further benefit of ACE inhibitors 
is improved survival, which may be due to a reversal 
of the remodelling of the left ventricle. High doses of 
an ACE inhibitor are more effective than low doses and 
reduce mortality by 20% to 25% in HFrEF.
ACE inhibitors promote K+ retention by the kidney. 
The combination of an ACE inhibitor with spironolac-
tone is used to improve prognosis in severe heart fail-
ure but carries a small additive risk of hyperkalaemia.
If an ACE inhibitor is not tolerated, usually because 
of cough, an angiotensin II receptor antagonist (see 
Chapter 6) can be substituted. These have similar effi-
cacy to ACE inhibitors.
Beta-Adrenoceptor Antagonists
Beta-adrenoceptor antagonists (see Chapter 5) are 
highly effective for the treatment of HFrEF, usually 
after the condition has been stabilised with an ACE 
inhibitor (or an angiotensin II receptor antagonist) 
and a diuretic. When introduced gradually, after 
starting with a low dose to avoid acute deterioration 
from the negative inotropic effects, they improve 
both symptoms and survival. The survival advan-
tage is additive to that produced by an ACE inhibitor, 
with a further reduction of 30% to 35% in mortal-
ity at all classes of severity of heart failure. Possi-
ble explanations for the benefit of β-adrenoceptor 
antagonists are numerous (Box 7.2), but a reversal of 
cardiac remodelling is probably particularly impor-
tant. Unless there are contraindications, which do 
not include chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD), all people who have HFrEF should be con-
sidered for treatment with a β-adrenoceptor antag-
onist once they are clinically stable. There remains 
some doubt about the value of a β-adrenoceptor 
Box 7.2  Possible Beneficial Effects of β-Adrenoceptor 
Antagonists in Heart Failure.
Reduced workload of ischaemic myocardium
Restoration of cardiac excitation–contraction coupling and 
improved intracellular Ca2+ handling
Reduced cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis
Reduced myocyte apoptosis
Antiarrhythmic effects
antagonist in people who are in atrial fibrillation, in 
whom the benefit may be less than for those in sinus 
rhythm. The β-adrenoceptor antagonists licensed 
for use in heart failure in the UK are bisoprolol, 
carvedilol and nebivolol, although there are also data 
to show the efficacy of a modified-release formula-
tion of metoprolol.
Sacubitril Valsartan
Compared with an ACE inhibitor, the use of the angio-
tensin II receptor antagonist valsartan combined with 
the neprilysin inhibitor sacubitril reduces hospitalisa-
tion as well as mortality by up to 20%. Sacubitril val-
sartan is recommended to replace an ACE inhibitor or 
an angiotensin II antagonist (used in combination with 
a β-adrenoceptor antagonist) if there are persistent 
symptoms and the left ventricular ejection fraction is 
less than 35%.
Ivabradine
The sinus node inhibitor ivabradine (see Chapter 5) 
is advocated for those with a left ventricular ejection 
fraction less than 35% who have a heart rate above 
75 beats/minute despite use of the maximum toler-
ated dose of a β-adrenoceptor antagonist. Ivabradine 
reduces hospital admissions but has no effect on 
mortality.
Digoxin
Digoxin is widely used to control heart rate when heart 
failure is associated with atrial fibrillation and a rapid 
ventricular rate. The use of digoxin for heart failure 
associated with sinus rhythm has been more contro-
versial, but its positive inotropic effect can be useful 
as a supplement to standard therapy when there is 
severe left ventricular systolic dysfunction and per-
sistent symptoms despite standard therapy. Digoxin 
improves symptoms and the need for hospitalisation; 
survival may be improved if the serum digoxin con-
centration is kept low.
Other Vasodilators
Treatment with a combination of hydralazine (see 
Chapter 6) and isosorbide dinitrate or mononitrate 
(see Chapter 5) in addition to a diuretic and digoxin 
provides balanced arterial and venous dilation. This 
combination improves exercise tolerance in heart fail-
ure but produces only a modest reduction in mortality, 
although there may be greater benefits in Black people. 
The combination can be tried for people who cannot 
tolerate an ACE inhibitor or angiotensin II receptor 
antagonist (see Chapter 6).
Cardiac Resynchronisation Therapy and 
Implantable Cardioverter Defibrillators
Cardiac resynchronisation therapy (CRT), or biven-
tricular electrical pacing, is helpful in severe heart fail-
ure when the ECG shows bundle branch block and the 
138	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
ventricles display marked dyssynchronous contrac-
tion on echocardiography. The pacing of both ventri-
cles simultaneously restores synchronous contraction 
and improves cardiac output.
About half of all people with heart failure die sud-
denly of ventricular arrhythmias; an implantable car-
dioverter defibrillator (ICD) can improve prognosis 
when there is severe left ventricular impairment and a 
propensity to ventricular arrhythmias. Combined car-
diac resynchronisation–defibrillator devices (CRT-Ds) 
are also available.
Antiarrhythmic drugs do not improve survival in 
heart failure.
HEART FAILURE WITH PRESERVED EJECTION 
FRACTION
The optimal management of HFpEF and HFmrEF is 
unclear. Most of the interventions that improve prog-
nosis in HFrEF have little impact on survival when 
ejection fraction is preserved; therefore, treatment is 
mainly directed at symptom relief using the drugs dis-
cussed previously (with the exception of positive ino-
tropic agents such as digoxin).
MANAGEMENT OF SHOCK
CARDIOGENIC SHOCK
The immediate aim of treatment is resuscitation while 
looking for a remediable cause. If the underlying cause 
is ischaemic heart disease, then early coronary revas-
cularisation is crucial to increase the probability of 
survival. Supportive measures include the following:
• Supplemental oxygen to achieve normal oxygen 
saturations.
• Correction of any acid–base imbalance (especially 
acidosis) and electrolyte abnormalities (particularly 
hypokalaemia).
• Correction of any cardiac rhythm disturbance (see 
Chapter 8).
• Ensuring adequate left ventricular filling pressure. 
This can be low after right ventricular infarction 
despite a high central venous pressure (right ven-
tricular filling pressure). If intravenous volume 
and vascular tone is adequate but tissue perfusion 
remains impaired, dobutamine is usually the inotro-
pic drug of choice.
• Phosphodiesterase inhibitors are sometimes given 
to improve myocardial contractility and produce 
peripheral vasodilation. They are usually reserved 
for those in whom maximum tolerated doses of 
dobutamine produce insufficient effect. Phosphodi-
esterase inhibitors can be combined with noradrena-
line (norepinephrine) to offset the vasodilator effect.
• Vasodilators can be given to ‘offload’ the heart once 
an adequate blood pressure has been established. 
This strategy is particularly helpful if there is sig-
nificant mitral regurgitation, as reduced resistance 
to left ventricular emptying will diminish the 
regurgitant volume. Either glyceryl trinitrate (see 
Chapter 5) or nitroprusside (see Chapter 6) is used.
DISTRIBUTIVE (VASODILATORY) SHOCK
In anaphylaxis, rapid intramuscular administration of 
adrenaline is potentially life-saving (see Chapter 39). In 
other forms of distributive shock, such as septic shock 
(see Chapter 51), intravenous infusion of isotonic fluid, 
to restore effective circulating volume in the dilated 
vascular system, is the cornerstone of initial supportive 
management. Where this, together with treatment of 
the underlying cause, is insufficient to restore adequate 
tissue perfusion, it may be augmented by infusion of a 
vasoconstrictor (vasopressor). This generally requires 
placement of a central venous catheter and invasive hae-
modynamic monitoring in a critical care environment. 
Noradrenaline (norepinephrine) is usually the first-
choice vasoconstrictor, and vasopressin (see Chapter 43) 
may be added if the response to this is inadequate. 
Vasopressin is a direct-acting vasoconstrictor that also 
increases vascular sensitivity to noradrenaline.
SELF-ASSESSMENT
TRUE/FALSE QUESTIONS
	 1.	 When blood pressure falls, sympathetic outflow 
increases because of an increase in the sensory 
input from the baroreceptors in the carotid sinus.
	 2.	 In the healthy heart, a rise in afterload increases 
myocardial contractility.
	 3.	 Breathlessness and fatigue are common symptoms 
of heart failure.
	 4.	 Pulmonary oedema occurs when the hydrostatic 
pressure in the pulmonary veins is less than the 
plasma osmotic pressure.
	 5.	 In severe heart failure, the body’s attempts to com-
pensate for the cardiac dysfunction are detrimental.
	 6.	 Digoxin is the mainstay of the treatment of heart 
failure.
	 7.	 Digoxin inhibits the Na+/K+-ATPase pump on the 
cardiac myocyte membrane.
	 8.	 Hypokalaemia reduces the effect of digoxin on the 
Na+/K+-ATPase pump.
	 9.	 Digoxin inhibits the vagus nerve, thus decreasing 
the refractory period of the atrioventricular node.
10.	 Dobutamine produces peripheral vasodilation by 
its effect on β2-adrenoceptors.
11.	 Sustained infusion of dobutamine desensitises the 
receptor response.
12.	 Milrinone is given intravenously to improve tissue 
perfusion in cardiogenic shock.
13.	 Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibi-
tors should not be given together with K+-sparing 
diuretics.
14.	 ACE inhibitors can cause cough by reducing the 
synthesis of bradykinin.
	
	
Heart Failure and Shock  CHAPTER 7	
139
15.	 Survival in chronic heart failure is improved by 
β-adrenoceptor antagonists.
16.	 Hydralazine is a vasodilator with a predominant 
effect on veins.
17.	 Natriuretic peptides are synthesised by neprilysin.
18.	 Sacubitril valsartan is no more effective than an 
ACE inhibitor in heart failure with reduced ejec-
tion fraction.
ONE-BEST-ANSWER (OBA) QUESTIONS
1.	 Which cardiovascular action of dopamine is medi-
ated by D2 receptors?
A.	Diuresis
B.	 Peripheral arterial vasodilation
C.	Positive inotropy
D.	Renal arterial vasodilation
E.	 Tachycardia
2.	 Which enzyme is a neutral endopeptidase?
A.	Angiotensin-converting enzyme
B.	 Catechol-O-methyltransferase
C.	Monoamine oxidase
D.	Neprilysin
E.	 Phosphodiesterase
CASE-BASED QUESTIONS
Mr D.Y. is 78 years of age and had a large anterior 
myocardial infarction 3 years ago. Echocardiography 
revealed significant left ventricular systolic dysfunc-
tion with an ejection fraction of 30%. He presents 
with several symptoms, including fatigue, decreased 
exercise ability, shortness of breath, and peripheral 
oedema. Examination shows cardiomegaly, a raised 
jugular venous pressure, and crackles in the lungs. An 
ECG shows that he is in sinus rhythm.
1.	 What are the choices of diuretic open to you in treat-
ing Mr D.Y.?
2.	 Potassium loss produced by diuretics may lead to 
hypokalaemia. What is an effective way of reducing 
urinary K+ loss?
3.	 Mr D.Y. was started on an ACE inhibitor. What pre-
cautionary measures should be taken in starting this 
new medication?
4.	 Could long-term oral digoxin be used as part of the 
treatment for Mr D.Y.?
5.	 Could the use of a β-adrenoceptor antagonist make 
Mr D.Y.’s condition worse?
ANSWERS
TRUE/FALSE ANSWERS
1.	 False. A falling blood pressure reduces the baro-
receptor reflex input to the vasomotor centre, result-
ing in increased sympathetic outflow.
2.	 True. A rise in afterload decreases stroke volume ini-
tially, but the consequent sympathetic stimulation 
increases contractility in the healthy heart and restores 
the stroke volume. In the failing heart, contractility 
increases less readily and stroke volume falls.
	 3.	 True. The breathlessness is caused by increased 
pulmonary venous pressure, leading to pulmo-
nary oedema; fatigue is caused by reduced car-
diac output and impaired perfusion of skeletal 
muscle.
	 4.	 False. Oedema occurs when the net hydrostatic 
pressure, which moves fluid out of the vessel, is 
greater than the plasma osmotic pressure, which 
moves interstitial fluid into the vessel.
	 5.	 True. The fall in cardiac output activates the sym-
pathetic nervous system and the renin–angio-
tensin–aldosterone system; these changes are 
appropriate to restore blood pressure in the event 
of haemorrhage but are unhelpful in severe heart 
failure as they increase preload, afterload and 
heart rate, hence increasing the workload of the 
failing heart.
	 6.	 False. Digoxin may be of benefit, but the main-
stay of treatment is a diuretic such as furosemide 
and an ACE inhibitor (or angiotensin II receptor 
antagonist). If diuretics are given concurrently 
with digoxin, a potassium-sparing diuretic such 
as spironolactone may also be required to prevent 
hypokalaemia; hypokalaemia increases the risk of 
digoxin-induced rhythm disturbances.
	 7.	 True. By blocking the Na+/K+-ATPase pump, cel-
lular export of Na+ is reduced and intracellular 
Na+ concentrations rise. The reduced Na+ con-
centration gradient across the cell membrane 
reduces the linked export of Ca2+ ions. Increased 
intracellular Ca2+ concentrations enhance con­- 
tractility.
	 8.	 False. Potassium ions and digoxin compete for the 
pump; hypokalaemia can therefore increase the 
activity and proarrhythmic risk of digoxin.
	 9.	 False. As well as its direct effects on the heart, 
digoxin increases vagal outflow from the vasomo-
tor centre. This increases the refractory period of 
the atrioventricular node and is the reason why 
digoxin is useful in some arrhythmias, such as 
atrial fibrillation.
10.	 False. Dobutamine is a selective β1-adrenoceptor 
agonist and does not produce peripheral vaso­- 
dilation.
11.	 True. Stimulation of β1-adrenoceptors by dobu-
tamine results in cAMP synthesis and increased 
cardiac contractility. Prolonged stimulation 
(48–72 hours) desensitises the receptors; this 
does not occur with phosphodiesterase type 3 
inhibitors, such as milrinone, which bypass the 
receptor and raise levels of cAMP by blocking its 
breakdown.
12.	 True. Milrinone inhibits the breakdown of intracel-
lular cAMP by phosphodiesterase type 3 in cardiac 
and vascular smooth muscle, resulting in an ino-
tropic effect and peripheral vasodilation; it is used 
to treat cardiogenic shock not responding to full 
doses of dobutamine.
140	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
13.	 False. The combination of an ACE inhibitor and 
spironolactone provides additive clinical benefit, 
but care must be taken to avoid dangerous hyper-
kalaemia, with regular monitoring of the plasma 
K+ concentration. This is because ACE inhibitors 
reduce aldosterone-dependent reabsorption of 
Na+ in the collecting duct. Because Na+ reabsorp-
tion at this site occurs in exchange for K+ efflux, 
ACE inhibitors may increase K+ retention, par-
ticularly in combination with potassium-sparing 
diuretics.
14.	 False. ACE inhibitors reduce the breakdown of 
bradykinin by ACE (which is also known as kini-
nase II); increased levels of bradykinin and other 
kinins in the lungs are thought to be responsible 
for the cough seen in up to 30% of people taking 
ACE inhibitors. An alternative strategy is to use an 
angiotensin II receptor antagonist.
15.	 True. ACE inhibitors, β1-adrenoceptor antagonists 
and spironolactone improve survival in chronic 
heart failure, possibly by reducing the cardiac 
remodelling effects of catecholamines, angiotensin 
II and aldosterone, respectively.
16.	 False. Hydralazine is predominantly an arte-
rial vasodilator, whereas isosorbide mononitrate 
mainly acts as a venodilator; their combined use 
may be effective in chronic heart failure in peo-
ple intolerant of ACE inhibitors or angiotensin II 
receptor antagonists.
17.	 False. Neprilysin degrades A- and B-type natri-
uretic peptides and also other vasoactive peptides 
including angiotensin II, bradykinin, endothelin 
and vasopressin.
18.	 False. Sacubitril valsartan is more effective in 
reducing morbidity and mortality than an ACE 
inhibitor.
OBA ANSWERS
1.	 Answer B is correct. Peripheral arterial vasodilation 
is produced by low concentrations of dopamine 
acting at presynaptic D2 receptors, thus reducing 
the release of noradrenaline; however, high con-
centrations of dopamine acting at α1-adrenoceptors 
cause peripheral arterial vasoconstriction. Diuresis 
(answer A) and renal arterial vasodilation (answer 
D) are produced by low doses of dopamine acting 
at D1 receptors. Moderate doses of dopamine pro-
duce positive inotropic effects (answer C) by act-
ing nonselectively at myocardial β-adrenoceptors 
and by acting at β2-adrenoceptors to cause periph-
eral vasodilation, leading to reflex tachycardia 
(answer E).
2.	 Answer D is correct. Neprilysin is a neutral endo-
peptidase that breaks down A-type natriuretic 
peptide (ANP), B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) 
and other peptides including angiotensin II, bra-
dykinin, endothelin and vasopressin (ADH). 
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE; answer A) 
is a zinc metalloprotease that synthesises angioten-
sin II from its precursor angiotensin I. Monoamine 
oxidase (MAO; answer C) and catechol-O-methyl-
transferase (COMT; answer B) break down catechol-
amines such as adrenaline, whilst the substrates 
of phosphodiesterases (PDE; answer E) are cyclic 
nucleotides such as cAMP and cGMP, not peptides.
CASE-BASED ANSWERS
1.	 The treatment of first choice for fluid retention in 
chronic heart failure is a diuretic. For mild symp-
toms, a thiazide diuretic may be adequate, but in 
most people a loop diuretic such as furosemide is 
used. The loss of renal function in the elderly and 
reduced renal perfusion in heart failure means that 
thiazide diuretics are less effective in older people 
with this condition, such as Mr D.Y.
2.	 Hypokalaemia is arrhythmogenic and should 
be avoided in people with heart failure, particu-
larly those taking digoxin. Urinary K+ loss caused 
by a loop diuretic or thiazide can be reduced by 
combination with a K+-sparing diuretic such as 
amiloride or spironolactone. Amiloride directly 
blocks epithelial Na+/K+ exchange in the collect-
ing duct. In severe heart failure, spironolactone, 
which competes with aldosterone for the mineralo-
corticoid receptor, also improves prognosis, pos-
sibly by blocking aldosterone-dependent cardiac 
remodelling.
3.	 ACE inhibitors reduce preload and afterload by 
reducing the production of angiotensin II, a pow-
erful vasoconstrictor, and reducing blood volume 
(via reduced aldosterone production). They also 
slow the progression of heart failure and improve 
survival. There is a small risk of severe hypotension 
following the first dose; omission of the diuretic 
immediately prior to this may be helpful.
4.	 The place of digoxin is well established in heart 
failure associated with atrial fibrillation and a 
rapid ventricular rate, but the benefit of a low dose 
of digoxin combined with a diuretic and an ACE 
inhibitor is now established in heart failure with 
severe left ventricular systolic dysfunction and 
sinus rhythm.
5.	 When 
used 
injudiciously 
at 
high 
dosages, 
β-adrenoceptor antagonists may worsen heart fail-
ure by reducing cardiac output; however, low doses 
are beneficial (see Box 7.2) if the patient’s condi-
tion has been stabilised with diuretics and an ACE 
inhibitor.
FURTHER READING
Bangash, M.N., Kong, M.-L., Pearse, R.M., 2011. Use of inotropes 
and vasopressor agents in critically ill patients. Br. J. 
Pharmacol. 165, 2015–2033.
Hammond, D.A., Smith, M.N., Lee, K.C., et  al., 2016. Acute 
decompensated heart failure. J. Intensive Care Med. 33, 
456–466.
	
	
Heart Failure and Shock  CHAPTER 7	
141
Compendium of Drugs Used to Treat Heart Failure.
DRUG
CHARACTERISTICS
Cardiac Glycoside
Increase intracellular Ca2+ by inhibiting Na+/K+-ATPase in myocyte membrane.
Digoxin
Used in heart failure and for supraventricular arrhythmias (particularly atrial fibrillation, see Chapter 8). 
Given orally, or by intravenous infusion for rapid effect.
Inotropic Sympathomimetics
β-Adrenoceptor agonists, some with additional actions; rapidly metabolised by local MAO and COMT pathways, giving very 
short half-lives, so all are given by intravenous infusion.
Dobutamine
Selective β1-adrenoceptor agonist; inotropic action with little effect on heart rate or vascular tone. 
Used after myocardial infarction, cardiac surgery, cardiomyopathies, septic shock, and cardiogenic 
shock.
Dopamine
Nonselective β-adrenoceptor agonist; increases cardiac contractility and heart rate; agonism of 
peripheral dopamine receptors increases renal perfusion, offset by α1-adrenoceptor-mediated 
vasoconstriction at high doses. Used for cardiogenic shock in exacerbations of chronic heart failure 
and in heart failure associated with cardiac surgery.
Dopexamine
Selective β2-adrenoceptor agonist; increases cardiac contractility and rate; agonism of renal 
dopamine receptors increases renal perfusion. Used for inotropic effect after myocardial infarction, 
cardiac surgery, cardiomyopathies, septic shock, and cardiogenic shock.
Isoprenaline
Nonselective β-adrenoceptor agonist. Used in emergency treatment of bradycardia. Available in the 
UK only from ‘special order’ manufacturers.
Phosphodiesterase Inhibitors
Inhibit phosphodiesterase (PDE) type 3 in myocytes.
Enoximone
Used for congestive heart failure where cardiac output is reduced and filling pressure increased. 
Given by intravenous infusion.
Milrinone
Used for short-term treatment of severe congestive heart failure and acute heart failure. Given by 
intravenous infusion.
Angiotensin Receptor Neprilysin Inhibitor (ARNI)
Sacubitril valsartan
Conjugate of sacubitril with the angiotensin II receptor antagonist valsartan; sacubitril is a prodrug 
of sacubitrilat, which inhibits the breakdown of A- and B-type natriuretic peptides by neprilysin. 
Valsartan is an angiotensin II receptor antagonist (see Chapter 6). Used for symptomatic chronic 
heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. Given orally.
MAO, Monoamine oxidase; COMT, catechol-O-methyltransferase.
Houston, B.A., Kalathiya, R.J., Kim, D.A., et  al., 2015. 
Volume overload in heart failure. Mayo Clin. Proc. 90, 
1247–1261.
Metra, M., Teerlink, J.R., 2017. Heart failure. Lancet 390, 
1981–1995.
Owens, A.T., Brozena, S.C., Jessup, M., 2016. New management 
strategies in heart failure. Circ. Res. 118, 480–495.
Redfield, M.M., 2016. Heart failure with preserved ejection 
fraction. N. Engl. J. Med. 375, 1868–1877.
Thiele, H., Ohman, E.M., Desch, S., et al., 2015. Management of 
cardiogenic shock. Eur. Heart J. 36, 1223–1230.
Yang, E.H., Shah, S., Criley, J.M., 2012. Digoxin toxicity: a fading 
but crucial complication to recognize. Am. J. Med. 125, 
337–343.
142
Cardiac Arrhythmias
8
Chapter Outline
Basic Cardiac Electrophysiology  142
Pacemaker Activity of Cells in the Specialised 
Conducting System  142
Control of Depolarisation in Pacemaker and 
Nonpacemaker Cells  143
Control of Cell Repolarisation in Pacemaker and 
Nonpacemaker Cells  144
Mechanisms of Tachyarrhythmogenesis  145
Mechanisms of Action and Classification of 
Antiarrhythmic Drugs  147
Vaughan-Williams Classification  147
Proarrhythmic Activity of Antiarrhythmic Drugs  148
Class Ia Drugs  149
Class Ib Drugs  149
Class Ic Drugs  149
Class II Drugs  149
Class III Drugs  150
Class IV Drugs  150
Other Drugs for Cardiac Rhythm Disturbances  151
Drug Treatment of Arrhythmias  151
Supraventricular Tachyarrhythmias  152
Ventricular Tachyarrhythmias  155
Bradycardias  156
Self-Assessment  157
Answers  157
Further Reading  159
Compendium of Drugs Used to Treat Cardiac 
Arrhythmias  159
BASIC CARDIAC ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY
Action potentials in myocardial cells and the highly 
regulated cardiac contractions that result are a prod-
uct of transmembrane ion currents generated by the 
movement of ions through membrane channels (see 
Chapter 1). A variety of specific channels exist for trans-
membrane Na+, Ca2+ and K+ transport in the myocar-
dium (Figs. 8.1 and 8.2). These channels cycle through 
three states: resting, open or closed (inactive and refrac-
tory). Whether the channels are open to allow ion 
flow or closed is determined by the electrical potential 
across the cell membrane; therefore they are called volt-
age-gated ion channels. The direction in which ions move 
is dependent on the type of channel, the concentration 
gradient of the ions and the transmembrane electrical 
potential (see Figs. 8.1 and 8.2). Channels may ‘rectify’ 
which means that they pass current more readily in 
one direction across a membrane than the other way. 
For example, inward rectifying channels preferentially 
conduct current into the cell. As a result of activity in 
some of these ion channels, the resting electrical poten-
tial inside a cardiac cell is approximately −70 to −80 mV 
compared with the extracellular environment. Depolar-
isation of myocardial cells generates an action potential 
that passes from one cell to the next.
The sinoatrial (SA) node, atrioventricular (AV) 
node, bundle of His and Purkinje system are part of the 
specialised conducting system of the heart. This system is 
responsible for initiating a depolarising impulse and 
ensures that it is conducted rapidly and synchronously 
through the ventricular myocardium. In addition, the 
AV node slows impulse conduction. This allows time 
for the completion of mechanical events in the atrium 
and therefore enables ventricular filling before ven-
tricular contraction begins. Once the impulse is passed 
from these specialised cells to cardiac myocytes, depo-
larisation initiates myocyte contraction and also trig-
gers depolarisation in adjacent myocytes. This ensures 
conduction of the impulse progressively throughout 
the myocardium.
The action potentials in cells of the SA and AV nodes, 
Purkinje fibres and ventricular muscle vary substan-
tially in their characteristics, which reflect differences 
in the ion channels that are activated during depolari-
sation and repolarisation (see Figs. 8.1, 8.2 and 8.5). 
Action potentials in cardiac cells can be divided into 
four phases (see Figs. 8.1A and 8.2), although phases 1 
and 2 are not clearly evident in the SA and AV nodes 
(see Fig. 8.1A).
PACEMAKER ACTIVITY OF CELLS IN THE 
SPECIALISED CONDUCTING SYSTEM
The myocardial cells of the specialised conducting sys-
tem (SA node, AV node, bundle of His and Purkinje 
system) are distinguished electrophysiologically from 
cardiac myocytes by their intrinsic ability to depola-
rise spontaneously in phase 4 of the action potential 
and independently generate a propagated action 
potential. These cells are said to possess automaticity 
and are termed pacemaker cells. In contrast, cardiac 
myocytes have a stable resting potential and do not 
	
	
Cardiac Arrhythmias  CHAPTER 8	
143
show phase 4 spontaneous depolarisation (compare 
Fig. 8.1A and C).
The primary pacemaker that drives normal repeti-
tive cardiac contractions is the SA node. The cells of the 
SA node have the fastest rate of spontaneous depolari-
sation, producing a normal sinus rhythm in the heart 
of 60 to 100 propagated impulses (and therefore ven-
tricular contractions) per minute at rest. The second-
ary pacemaker, the AV node, depolarises more slowly 
and can only generate 40 to 60 impulses per minute, 
whereas the tertiary pacemakers (the bundle of His, its 
branches and the Purkinje fibres) can fire between 20 
and 40 times per minute. The secondary and tertiary 
pacemakers will therefore only be utilised if there is a 
failure of pacemakers that have a faster rate of sponta-
neous depolarisation.
CONTROL OF DEPOLARISATION IN PACEMAKER 
AND NONPACEMAKER CELLS
The negative internal resting membrane potential 
in myocardial cells is maintained by high K+ perme-
ability of resting cell membranes through inward rec-
tifying voltage- and ligand-gated K+ channels, which 
+50
–100
0
4
0
1
2
3
Time (s)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Membrane potential (mV)
Inward
Ca2+
currents
Inward
Na+, K+ 
currents
(If current)
+40
0
–40
–80
Membrane potential (mV)
RP RRP
–50
Fast 
inward
Na+ 
current
Inward Ca2+
currents
SA node
A
Purkinje fibre
B
Ventricle
C
Phase 3
Outward
K+ 
currents
Phase 0
Phase 4
Outward
K+ currents
Outward
K+ 
currents
Fig. 8.1  Action potentials show variations in pattern among dif-
ferent populations of myocytes in different regions of the heart.
The patterns are determined by the opening and closing of selective 
gates for Na+, Ca2+ and K+ ions, and this figure should be studied in 
conjunction with Fig. 8.2. The overall stability of the resting transmem-
brane ionic balance is controlled by active pumps, such as the Na+/K+-
ATPase pump, which maintain the Na+ concentration gradient at about 
140 mM outside the cell versus 10–15 mM inside and the K+ con-
centration gradient at 140 mM inside and 4 mM outside the cell. This 
results in an electrical potential at rest of approximately −70 to −80 mV 
inside the cell relative to outside the cell. Large ion fluxes at rest are 
prevented by specific pumps and closure of voltage-gated channels. 
Action potentials in the atrioventricular (AV) node, bundle of His and 
ventricle are controlled by the sinoatrial (SA) node when the heart is in 
sinus rhythm. The rate of spontaneous depolarisation of the SA node 
determines its primacy as a pacemaker in the healthy heart. Phase 
0 (panels B and C) occurs when the membrane potential reaches a 
defined threshold potential and an ‘all-or-none’ influx of Na+ through 
voltage-dependent fast Na+ channels occurs; this is transient and the 
gates close after a few milliseconds. Phase 0 is much slower in the 
SA and AV nodes than in ventricular cells and depends mainly on Ca2+ 
influx (panel A). This causes the conduction velocity in the SA node to 
be considerably lower than in the Purkinje fibres, and the refractory 
period is longer in proportion to the total duration of the action poten-
tial. Phase 1, called the early repolarisation and notch, results from K+ 
efflux (the transient outward current Ito1) and reduced Na+ influx (see 
Fig. 8.2). The phase 2 plateau is primarily a result of Ca2+ influx (slow 
inward, or SI, current) which is balanced by K+ efflux over a slow time 
course. Phase 3 repolarisation results from inactivation of Ca2+ influx 
and increasing K+ efflux via a number of currents (see text, Table 8.1 
and Fig. 8.2). Part of the overall importance of the K+ currents lies in 
maintaining a stable resting membrane potential. Phase 4 (panels A 
and B) is termed the diastolic or pacemaker depolarisation generated 
on hyperpolarisation. The phase 4 inward ‘funny’ current (If) involves 
Na+ and K+ and is gated both by changes in voltage and by cAMP. The 
If current controls the rate of spontaneous beating of the heart and is 
regulated by the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems. 
Ca2+ currents may also be involved in pacemaker activity in phase 4. 
RP, Absolute refractory period; RRP, relative refractory period.
remove K+ from the cell. These channels close when the 
cell depolarises. As previously discussed, progressive 
spontaneous depolarisation in phase 4 of the action 
potential distinguishes pacemaker cells from other 
cells in the heart. This depolarisation of pacemaker 
cells results from influx of positive ions (Na+ and K+) 
into the cell through HCN (hyperpolarisation-acti-
vated cyclic nucleotide-gated) channels that generate 
the cardiac pacemaker current If (the ‘funny current’) 
(see Figs 8.1A and 8.2). The pacemaker current is 
unusual because it is generated by mixed-ion transport 
through a single channel, is activated by the negative 
intracellular potential in diastole, and has slow activa-
tion and deactivation rates. Nonpacemaker cells have 
a minimal or no If.
The intrinsic rate of firing of a pacemaker cell 
depends on four factors:
• the resting intracellular electrical potential,
• the resting electrical potential at which the If is 
activated,
• the rate of spontaneous depolarisation by the If,
• the threshold intracellular electrical potential for 
initiating full depolarisation.
144	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
Activation of the If in the SA node is modulated by 
the autonomic nervous system via intracellular cyclic 
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). Stimulation of β1-
adrenoceptors generates cAMP which shifts the intra-
cellular electrical potential required for activation of 
the channel to a less negative voltage difference, which 
increases the probability of initiating depolarisation. It 
also increases the rate of diastolic depolarisation. By 
contrast, vagal stimulation via muscarinic M2 receptors 
inhibits cAMP production so that activation of the chan-
nel only occurs at a more negative intracellular voltage.
During initial depolarisation, T-type Ca2+ chan-
nels open to enhance depolarisation. Full depolari-
sation of the SA or AV node occurs when, as a result 
of the If, the internal membrane potential reaches a 
threshold potential that opens voltage-gated L-type 
Ca2+ channels so that greater Ca2+ influx into the 
cell occurs (phase 0) (see Fig. 8.1A; ICaL in Fig. 8.2). 
As phase 0 of the action potential in the SA and AV 
nodes is Ca2+-dependent, the rate of depolarisation 
is slower than in Purkinje fibres or myocytes where 
this phase is Na+-dependent. The slow influx of Ca2+ 
that generates phase 0 in the AV node is the reason 
for slow conduction of the depolarising impulse 
through the AV node.
The SA node is the dominant cardiac pacemaker 
because even in the absence of sympathetic stimula-
tion, activation of the If current in the SA node occurs at 
a less negative intracellular potential and has a faster 
intrinsic rate of depolarisation than in the AV node or 
Purkinje fibres. Spontaneous diastolic depolarisation 
in the SA node is therefore initiated earlier after repo-
larisation and the threshold potential for full depolari-
sation of the cell (phase 0) is reached sooner.
Phase 0 of the action potential in Purkinje fibres and 
atrial and ventricular myocytes is initiated by a rapid 
influx of Na+ through voltage-gated Na+ ion channels 
(fast Na+ channels) (see Fig. 8.1B; INa in Fig. 8.2). In cells 
other than the triggering pacemaker, the depolarising 
current in phase 0 is initiated by propagation of the 
depolarising wave between cells. The change of intra-
cellular potential in myocytes as a consequence of the 
Na+ influx opens the L-type Ca2+ channels that initiate 
muscle contraction. At the end of phase 0, the intracel-
lular voltage potential briefly becomes positive, at which 
point a voltage-triggered ‘gate’ closes and inactivates the 
depolarising Na+ or Ca2+ channels (see Fig. 8.1A and B).
CONTROL OF CELL REPOLARISATION IN 
PACEMAKER AND NONPACEMAKER CELLS
Once depolarised, cardiac cells undergo repolarisation 
to return the membrane potential to its resting level. 
This creates the conditions for the next action potential 
to be initiated (see Figs. 8.1 and 8.2). In both pacemaker 
and nonpacemaker cells, repolarisation (phase 3) is 
achieved by the opening of cell membrane K+ rectifier 
channels (see Table 8.1 for explanation). In the Purkinje 
system and nonpacemaker cardiac cells, initial repolar-
isation through the Ito current (phase 1) is interrupted 
by influx of Ca2+ through L-type channels (phase 2, 
the plateau phase; ICaL in Fig. 8.2), which balances K+ 
efflux (see Fig. 8.1B, phase 2). This plateau is essential 
for excitation–contraction coupling. Eventually, the K+ 
current dominates in these cells through activation of 
IKr, IKs and IK1 currents (phase 3) and the cell returns to a 
negative intracellular resting potential. Repolarisation 
is also helped by Ca2+ extrusion from the cell through 
the Na+/Ca2+ ion exchanger and by Ca2+ uptake by the 
sarcoplasmic reticulum.
In the resting phase between action potentials, Na+ 
and K+ transmembrane concentration gradients are 
restored by an energy-dependent ion exchange pump 
(Na+/K+-ATPase; see Fig. 7.4), and the low intracellu-
lar Ca2+ concentration is restored by the cell membrane 
Na+/Ca2+ ion exchanger and Ca2+ uptake into the sar-
coplasmic reticulum.
During the period between phase 0 and the end of 
phase 2 of the action potential, the myocardial cell is 
refractory to any further depolarisation (the absolute 
refractory period, RP; see Fig. 8.1B). This is because the 
depolarising channels are held in the inactivated state 
Action
potential 
Ionic current
0
1
2
3
4
INa
ICaL
INa/Ca
Ito1
IKs
IKr
IKur
IKp
IK1
IKACh/IKATP
If
A
B
Fig. 8.2  A schematic representation of the influx and efflux of 
Na+, Ca2+ and K+ in Purkinje fibres. (A) Action potential, (B) ionic cur-
rents underlying the action potential. This figure should be examined 
in conjunction with Table 8.1 and other explanations given in the text. 
A downward inflection represents an influx of the ion and an upward 
inflection, an efflux. (Modified and reproduced with permission from 
Tamargo J, Caballero R, Gomez R, et al., 2004. Pharmacology of car-
diac potassium channels. Cardiovasc. Res. 62, 9–33).
	
	
Cardiac Arrhythmias  CHAPTER 8	
145
until a sufficiently negative potential is restored inside 
the cell. During phase 3, a large depolarising stimu-
lus can open sufficient Na+ or Ca2+ channels (many 
of which will have returned to the resting state) to 
overcome the K+ efflux and initiate a further action 
potential. This part of the action potential is the relative 
refractory period (RRP; see Fig. 8.1B).
The sum of the electrical activity generated by the 
individual action potentials that pass from one cell to 
another through the heart can be recorded as the sur-
face electrocardiogram (ECG) (Fig. 8.3).
MECHANISMS OF TACHYARRHYTHMOGENESIS
Arrhythmias are disorders of rate and rhythm of the 
heart, which can arise as the result of either abnor-
mal impulse generation (abnormal focal activity) or 
abnormal impulse conduction (re-entry). Tachyar-
rhythmias (tachycardias) are a subset of arrhythmias 
in which there is an abnormally rapid ventricular rate 
(>100 beats per minute). There are three mechanisms 
of tachyarrhythmogenesis:
• Enhanced automaticity. Dominant ectopic pace-
makers (pacemakers other than the SA node) can 
arise when pacemaker cells in the specialised 
conducting tissue develop a more rapid phase 4 
depolarisation than that of the SA node. Ectopic 
pacemakers can also arise when rapid spontane-
ous phase 4 depolarisation develops in myocytes 
that usually have a stable phase 4. The enhanced 
automaticity can arise from a negative shift in the 
threshold potential or a positive shift in the maxi-
mum diastolic repolarisation associated with an 
increased rate of diastolic depolarisation. Ischaemia 
or other changes in the microcellular environment 
can create conditions that allow a nonpacemaker 
myocardial cell to express an If current and become 
a pacemaker. Increased automaticity can produce 
various supraventricular and ventricular tachyar-
rhythmias (VAs).
Table 8.1  Selected Examples of K+ Channels and Associated Currents.
TYPE OF GATING
EXAMPLES OF 
DISTRIBUTION
COMMENT
KV Voltage-Gated Channel Family
KV channels carrying 
delayed inward 
rectifying currents
Widely distributed, 
including brain, 
heart, pancreas
Multiple subtypes of K+ channels are involved in delayed inward rectification 
and are responsible for slow (IKs), rapid (IKr) and ultrarapid (IKur) K+ currents 
involved in repolarisation in phases 2 and 3 in the heart. Inhibited by 
some class I and class III antiarrhythmics (e.g. amiodarone and sotalol)
KV channel carrying 
transient outward 
rectifying (IKTO) current
A genetically distinct member of the KV family of channels. Responsible for 
the Ito1 transient current in phase 1. Activated by adenosine; inhibited by 
quinidine, amiodarone
K ir Family
Inward rectifying
Heart, muscle, 
brain, pancreas
Inward rectifying, rapidly inactivates cardiac Na+ channels; sets resting 
membrane potential (IK1, IKr). Inhibited by amiodarone
Ligand-Gated Channels
ATP-sensitive channels 
(KATP)
Heart, muscle, 
pancreas, 
mitochondria
Composed of coexpressed K ir and sulfonylurea subunits with varied 
configurations in different tissues. Provide a weak inward rectifying 
current. Opened by minoxidil and nicorandil and by ischaemia; inhibited 
by ATP and sulfonylureas
Acetylcholine-sensitive 
channel (KACh)
SA node, AV node 
and atria
This is G-protein–linked in the SA node, atria and AV node and is a member 
of the K ir family, resulting in an inward rectifying (Kir) current. Opened by 
adenosine; inhibited by atropine and disopyramide
Two-pore channel (K2P)
Heart, brain, 
pancreas
Weak inward rectifying current; modulates resting membrane potential. 
Opened by arachidonic acid
Calcium-activated  
(KCa family)
Members of Kir family of channels
Large conductance 
channel (BKca)
Heart, brain, 
pancreas
Possible roles in neuroprotection, erectile dysfunction and other disorders
Intermediate conductance 
channel (IKca)
T-lymphocytes, 
smooth muscle, 
brain, heart
Opened by hydralazine
This table should be studied in conjunction with Fig. 8.2. Potassium channels are diverse in structure and behaviour. Each channel consists of four membrane-spanning 
subunits, with each subunit consisting of two to six linked membrane segments which make up the water-filled pore. This allows many different configurations of K+ 
channels, many of which have particular physiological roles. Channels with subunit variations are associated with different types of current which are involved in repo-
larisation at different phases of the cardiac action potential. The channels can be open or closed depending on the voltage across the cell or the presence of a selective 
ligand. Rectifying current: an inward rectifying current means that, under conditions of equivalent but opposing electrochemical potentials, these channels pass more 
current inwards than outwards. An outward rectifying current is similar but in an outward direction.
ATP, Adenosine triphosphate; AV, atrioventricular; SA, sinoatrial.
146	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
• Triggered activity. A cell can develop transient rapid 
depolarising activity during or following repolarisa-
tion (‘afterdepolarisations’), which will initiate an 
action potential if they reach the threshold potential 
of the cell. Afterdepolarisations are said to be ‘early’ 
if they occur during phase 3 repolarisation (RRP in 
Fig. 8.1B), or ‘delayed’ if they occur during phase 4. 
Early afterdepolarisations (EADs) occur when the 
repolarising K+ current is decreased, or there is an 
increased late Na+ current or Ca2+ current. Delayed 
afterdepolarisations (DADs) are due to intracellular 
Ca2+ overload and follow spontaneous Ca2+ release 
from the sarcoplasmic reticulum during prolonged 
repolarisation. This activates the cell membrane 
3Na+/Ca2+ exchange transporter and produces a net 
depolarising current. Triggered activity is a relatively 
uncommon mechanism of arrhythmogenesis but can 
underlie a variety of atrial and ventricular tachyar-
rhythmias. EADs are responsible for the proarrhyth-
mic activity of class Ia and III antiarrhythmic agents 
and are also more common in pathophysiological 
states such as heart failure and ventricular hypertro-
phy. DADs are provoked by digitalis glycosides and 
also promoted by ischaemia, hypokalaemia, hyper-
calcaemia and increased circulating catecholamines.
• Re-entry. This is the cause of most clinically impor-
tant arrhythmias. It is frequently initiated when a 
depolarising impulse, which is often a premature 
(ectopic) beat from elsewhere in the heart, arrives at 
a part of the myocardium that is still in its refractory 
period. A refractory part of the myocardium is usu-
ally created by a fast conducting pathway that has 
a slow recovery from depolarisation. If the impulse 
can access an adjacent part of the myocardium, it 
can bypass the refractory tissue. When this alterna-
tive pathway has a slower rate of conduction but a 
fast recovery rate, the impulse may subsequently 
arrive at the distal part of the refractory tissue when 
this tissue has had sufficient time to repolarise. 
The impulse can then be conducted retrogradely 
through this previously refractory tissue (Fig. 8.4). 
R
P
Q
S
T
P–R interval
QRS complex
Q –T interval
Fig. 8.3  The waveform for cardiac events seen on a surface elec-
trocardiogram. The P wave represents the spread of depolarisation 
through the atria and the QRS complex is the spread through the ven-
tricles. The T wave represents repolarisation of the ventricle. The P–R 
interval is the time of conductance from atrium to ventricles, and the 
QRS time is the time the ventricles are activated. The duration of the 
ventricular action potential is given by the Q–T interval.
Conduction block 
at refractory 
damaged tissue
Refractory 
damaged 
tissue
Re-entry circuit 
set up
Excitable 
damaged tissue 
conducts slowly 
retrogradely
Normal tissue
A
Refractory 
damaged  
tissue
B
Excitable 
damaged 
tissue
C
Fig. 8.4  Conduction in normal and damaged cardiac tissue. (A) In normal tissue, conduction is carefully ordered. 
When an action potential has been generated, the cells cannot be immediately reactivated because of refractoriness of 
the myocardial cells. If conducted impulses meet, they die out. (B) If an area of damage or dysfunction is present, impulses 
are conducted abnormally. If an action potential arrives at the area of damaged tissue and it is fully refractory, the impulse 
is blocked and an arrhythmia will not develop. (C) If an action potential arrives at a damaged area and is capable of being 
excited and conducting in a retrograde direction, a perpetuating abnormal re-entry circuit may be set up.
	
	
Cardiac Arrhythmias  CHAPTER 8	
147
When the retrograde conduction is complete and 
if there has been sufficient time for the alternative 
pathway to repolarise, a self-perpetuating circuit 
of electrical activity will be initiated (a re-entry 
circuit or ‘circus’ movement of the impulse). Once 
established, the re-entry circuit acts as a pacemaker 
that initiates impulses which are then propagated 
through the heart.
Functional re-entry circuits can be localised 
within a small area of myocardium that has been 
damaged by pathology such as fibrosis or isch-
aemia (micro re-entry circuits). This underlies many 
arrhythmias such as atrial or ventricular fibrillation. 
The myocardium can also support large anatomi-
cal re-entry circuits (macro re-entry circuits). These 
circuits arise over a larger area of myocardium and 
cause arrhythmias such as atrial or ventricular flut-
ter or AV nodal re-entry tachycardia. Macro re-entry 
circuits are also found when there is a congeni-
tal accessory pathway that connects the atria and 
ventricles, which provides an alternative pathway 
to the AV node for conducting electrical activity 
between the atria and ventricles. The re-entry circuit 
between the atria and ventricles includes both the 
accessory pathway and the AV node (AV re-entry). 
An example of this type of macro re-entry circuit is 
Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome.
• Other mechanisms of re-entry have been identi-
fied that do not depend on ‘circus’ movement of an 
impulse. These include reflection of an impulse that 
is confronted with an area of depressed excitability, 
and phase 2 re-entry, in which an action potential is 
propagated from a site with longer action potential 
duration to one with shorter action potential dura-
tion producing re-excitation.
MECHANISMS OF ACTION AND CLASSIFICATION OF 
ANTIARRHYTHMIC DRUGS
A widely used classification of antiarrhythmic drugs 
(the Vaughan-Williams classification) is based on their 
effects on the action potential (Fig. 8.5). This classifica-
tion has many flaws and does not take account of the 
multiple actions possessed by some drugs or the fact 
that the effects of drugs on diseased myocardium may 
differ from those on healthy myocardium. However, 
there is no widely accepted alternative classification.
VAUGHAN-WILLIAMS CLASSIFICATION
The Vaughan-Williams classification recognises four 
classes of drug (Table 8.2).
Class I
All class I drugs inhibit fast Na+ channels and slow the 
rate of rise of phase 0; therefore they reduce the rate of 
the myocardial cell’s depolarisation and slow action 
potential conduction in atria, ventricles and special-
ised conducting tissue. They also increase the excitation 
threshold of the cell. Class 1 drugs are often called mem-
brane stabilisers. They readily penetrate the phospholipid 
4
0
1
2
3
Class Ia
Class Ib
Class Ic
Class II
Class III
Class IV
A
B
C
D
E
F
Fig. 8.5  Effects of different classes of antiarrhythmic drugs on the car-
diac action potential in ventricular cells (panels A, B, C and E) and the 
atrioventricular (AV) node (panels D and F). (A) Class Ia drugs block fast 
Na+ channels in phase 0 with moderate potency and some K+ chan-
nels; repolarisation is prolonged. (B) Class Ib drugs weakly block fast 
Na+ channels in phase 0 only in abnormal tissue, with little effect on 
K+ channels. (C) Class Ic drugs potently block fast Na+ channels and 
weakly block Ca2+ channels and some K+ channels. (D) Class II drugs 
reduce phase 4 and phase 0 depolarisation in AV and sinoatrial (SA) 
nodes; repolarisation in the AV node is prolonged. (E) Class III drugs 
block some K+ channels, inhibiting repolarisation and prolonging the 
action potential. (F) Class IV drugs block L-type Ca2+ channels, slowing 
phase 0 and phase 4 depolarisation particularly in the AV node, with 
less effect in the SA node; repolarisation is prolonged.
Table 8.2  Principal Indications for Antiarrhythmic Drugs.
CLASS
EXAMPLES
SUPRAVENTRICULAR TACHYARRHYTHMIAS
VENTRICULAR TACHYARRHYTHMIAS
Ia
Disopyramide (procainamide)
+
+
Ib
Lidocaine
−
+ (especially after myocardial infarction)
Ic
Flecainide, propafenone
+
+
II
β-Adrenoceptor antagonists
+
+ (especially after myocardial infarction)
III
Amiodarone, sotalol
+
+
IV
Calcium channel blockers
+
−
148	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
bilayers of the cell membrane, where they concentrate in 
the hydrophobic core and bind to hydrophobic amino 
acids in the Na+ channel (see also local anaesthetics; see 
Chapter 18). Class I drugs are subdivided according to 
their effects on the duration of the action potential.
• Class Ia drugs, such as disopyramide, produce 
moderate Na+ channel blockade with intermediate 
dissociation kinetics. In addition, they block some 
K+ channels (see Table 8.1, and Figs. 8.1 and 8.5A), 
which slows repolarisation and therefore prolongs 
the duration of the action potential. They are effective 
for the treatment of both supraventricular and ventricu-
lar tachyarrhythmias (see Table 8.2).
• Class Ib drugs, such as lidocaine, produce weak Na+ 
channel blockade with rapid dissociation kinetics 
mainly in abnormal tissue (such as ischaemic, par-
tially depolarised myocardium) with little effect in 
healthy tissue. They do not block K+ channels and 
have either no effect on repolarisation or may shorten 
it in healthy tissue (see Fig. 8.5B). They are effective 
only for the treatment of ventricular tachyarrhythmias.
• Class Ic drugs, such as flecainide, produce marked 
Na+ channel blockade with slow dissociation kinet-
ics. They produce weak blockade of some K+ chan-
nels (see Table 8.1), and also block intracellular 
ryanodine receptor (RyR2) Ca2+ channels and reduce 
Ca2+ release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum. There 
is minimal effect on repolarisation (see Fig. 8.5C). 
They are effective for the treatment of both supraventricu-
lar and ventricular tachyarrhythmias.
The different effects of the class I subgroups result 
from their diverse ion-channel binding characteristics. 
During the time course of the action potential, access of 
the drug to its binding site is intermittent and dependent 
on the state of the channel. Class Ib drugs (such as lido-
caine) show marked use-dependence. They associate 
more rapidly with Na+ channels during depolarisation 
and rapidly dissociate from the channel when it returns 
to the resting state. This means they are more effective 
when there are repetitive depolarisations and they can 
block premature impulses. Cells in ischaemic myocar-
dium are more likely to be depolarised, and ischaemia 
mainly affects the ventricles, which explains the selec-
tivity of class Ib drugs for ventricular tachyarrhythmias 
in ischaemic heart disease. Class Ic drugs (such as fle-
cainide) also show use-dependent binding but dissociate 
more slowly from their binding sites in the Na+ channel 
and therefore produce prolonged blockade. This results 
in a more widespread reduction in cellular excitability. 
Class Ia drugs (such as disopyramide) have binding 
characteristics between those of the other two subgroups.
Class II
The class II drugs are the β-adrenoceptor antagonists 
(β-blockers), which block the actions of catecholamines 
on HCN pacemaker channels (see Fig. 8.5D). Beta-adre-
noceptor antagonists reduce the rate of spontaneous 
depolarisation of SA and AV nodal tissue, which slows 
the heart rate in sinus rhythm and reduces conduction 
through the AV node. They can also inhibit ectopic pace-
makers that have developed dominant automaticity. 
Beta-adrenoceptor antagonists are effective for the treatment 
of both supraventricular and ventricular tachyarrhythmias, 
particularly if these are catecholamine-dependent.
Class III
Class III drugs such as amiodarone prolong the dura-
tion of the action potential by inhibiting some K+ chan-
nels involved in repolarisation, thus increasing the 
absolute RP of the cell (see Table 8.1 and Fig. 8.5E). 
They are effective for the treatment of both supraventricular 
and ventricular tachyarrhythmias.
Class IV
The class IV drugs are calcium channel blockers that 
selectively block the L-type Ca2+ channel. They slow 
conduction of the action potential, particularly in the 
AV node. They have a lesser effect on the rate of depo-
larisation at the SA node (see Fig. 8.5F). They are effec-
tive for the treatment of supraventricular tachyarrhythmias. 
They are ineffective and potentially harmful in ventricular 
tachyarrhythmias, except in very rare situations.
Unclassified Drugs
Five drugs used in the treatment of rhythm distur-
bances do not fit into the Vaughan-Williams classi-
fication: cardiac glycosides, adenosine, magnesium 
sulfate, atropine sulfate and glycopyrronium bromide.
PROARRHYTHMIC ACTIVITY OF 
ANTIARRHYTHMIC DRUGS
Many antiarrhythmic drugs have the potential to pre-
cipitate serious arrhythmias, such as incessant ven-
tricular tachycardia (VT). Several of them (particularly 
class Ia agents and sotalol) prolong the Q–T interval 
on the ECG (see Fig. 8.3). This predisposes to a poly-
morphic VT known as torsade de pointes, which has 
a characteristic twisting QRS axis on the ECG and can 
degenerate into ventricular fibrillation. Drug-induced 
ventricular rhythm disturbances are particularly 
refractory to treatment.
There are probably multiple mechanisms of drug-
induced arrhythmogenesis. Several risk factors have 
been identified, including the following:
• Excessive slowing of cardiac impulse conduction, 
such as occurs with marked blockade of Na+ channels.
• Excessive prolongation of the action potential, espe-
cially if this is due to blockade of the IKr repolaris-
ing current (see Table 8.1 and Fig. 8.2). Prolonged 
repolarisation may cause early after-depolarisations 
(see previous discussion) or a selective effect of the 
drugs on some cells in the myocardium can lead to 
differential rates of repolarisation that predispose to 
re-entry circuits.
• Mutations in genes coding for channels that regu-
late Na+, K+ and Ca2+ transmembrane ion flows exist 
	
	
Cardiac Arrhythmias  CHAPTER 8	
149
in 5% to 10% of people and are probably subclini-
cal variants of the congenital long QT syndrome. 
A common mutation involves the human ether-a-
go-go-related gene (hERG) that encodes a subunit 
of the IKr channel. Individuals with this mutation 
are more susceptible to torsade de pointes when 
exposed to a drug that prolongs the Q–T interval.
• Structural heart disease, especially ischaemic heart 
disease, with greater slowing of conduction in dis-
eased myocardium.
• Hypokalaemia.
• Increased circulating catecholamines.
• Female sex: about 70% of those who develop tors-
ade de pointes are women.
CLASS IA DRUGS
  Example
disopyramide
Disopyramide is no longer widely used in the UK 
because of its unwanted effects.
Pharmacokinetics
Disopyramide is absorbed orally and metabolised in 
the liver to a compound with less antiarrhythmic activ-
ity but greater antimuscarinic activity. Its half-life is 4 
to 10 hours.
Unwanted effects
•	 Gastrointestinal disturbances.
•	 Powerful negative inotropic effect; disopyramide 
should be avoided in people with left ventricular 
dysfunction.
•	 Proarrhythmic effects (see earlier).
• Antimuscarinic effects (see Chapter 4), especially 
urinary retention, dry mouth and blurred vision.
CLASS IB DRUGS
  Example
lidocaine
Pharmacokinetics
Extensive first-pass metabolism to a potentially toxic 
metabolite means that oral administration of lidocaine 
is not practicable. It is given intravenously, initially 
as a loading dose by bolus injection followed by an 
infusion. Lidocaine is extensively metabolised in the 
liver to compounds with little antiarrhythmic activity, 
although they can cause seizures. The half-life of lido-
caine is 2 hours.Unwanted effects
•	 Central nervous system (CNS) toxicity: muscle 
twitching, seizures, respiratory depression, dizzi-
ness, drowsiness, paraesthesia.
•	 Negative inotropic effect.
• Bradycardia.
CLASS IC DRUGS
  Examples
flecainide, propafenone
Flecainide
Pharmacokinetics
Flecainide is absorbed orally, but an intravenous for-
mulation is also available for rapid onset of action. Fle-
cainide has a half-life of 14 hours.
Unwanted effects
• Oedema.
• Fever.
• Dyspnoea.
• CNS toxicity – dizziness, fatigue, visual disturbances.
• Negative inotropic effect.
• Proarrhythmic effects, possibly more marked after 
recent myocardial infarction, when flecainide may 
increase mortality.
Propafenone
Propafenone has weak β-adrenoceptor antagonist 
activity in addition to its class Ic action.
Pharmacokinetics
Propafenone undergoes extensive first-pass metabo-
lism by cytochrome P450-mediated oxidation, which 
is saturable, so the half-life is dose-dependent. Elimi-
nation is much slower in people with CYP2D6 genetic 
polymorphism.
Unwanted effects
• Gastrointestinal disturbances: nausea, vomiting, 
diarrhoea, bitter taste.
• CNS toxicity – dizziness, anxiety, confusion, ataxia, 
headache, insomnia, seizures.
• Negative inotropic effect, producing hypotension.
• Weak β-adrenoceptor antagonist activity which can 
cause bronchoconstriction in people with asthma.
• Proarrhythmic effects.
CLASS II DRUGS
Beta-Adrenoceptor Antagonists
  Examples
atenolol, bisoprolol, esmolol, metoprolol, propranolol
Antagonist activity at cardiac β1-adrenoceptors is 
responsible for the antiarrhythmic effects of this class. 
The most widely used oral agents for the treatment of 
rhythm disturbances are atenolol, metoprolol, bisopro-
lol and propranolol, but all β-adrenoceptor antagonists 
have antiarrhythmic activity. Beta-adrenoceptor antag-
onists are discussed in more detail in Chapters 5 and 6.
Esmolol is an ultra-short-acting β1-adrenoceptor-
selective agent used exclusively for the treatment of 
arrhythmias. It is used where rapid offset of effect is 
150	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
advantageous, such as during anaesthesia or critical 
illness.
Pharmacokinetics
The half-life of esmolol is very short (about 9 minutes), 
as it is metabolised rapidly by esterases after uptake by 
erythrocytes. It therefore needs to be given by intrave-
nous infusion.
CLASS III DRUGS
  Examples
amiodarone, dronedarone, sotalol
Amiodarone
Amiodarone is a drug with multiple antiarrhythmic 
actions. It has class III actions by blocking several types 
of K+ channels, an action that shows use-dependence 
(see class 1 antiarrhythmics). However, amiodarone 
also has a class Ib-like action on Na+ channels as well 
as noncompetitive β-adrenoceptor antagonist (class II) 
activity and calcium channel-blocking (class IV) actions. 
The antiarrhythmic effects produced early after intrave-
nous infusion are believed to be due to β-adrenoceptor 
antagonist activity, as the class III effect is delayed.
Pharmacokinetics
Amiodarone can be used orally or by intravenous infu-
sion for a more rapid onset of action. It has a large vol-
ume of distribution as a result of extensive uptake in 
adipose tissue. Both amiodarone and its major hepatic 
metabolite have extremely long half-lives (50–60 days), 
so a prolonged loading dose regimen is used for both 
routes of administration.
Unwanted effects
• Gastrointestinal disturbances – for example, consti-
pation and nausea, occurring most often during the 
loading period.
• Reversible corneal microdeposits develop in almost 
all people and can cause dazzling by lights when 
driving at night.
• Amiodarone has high iodine content and a structural 
relationship to thyroid hormone. In iodine-sufficient 
areas (such as the UK), inhibition of intracellular 
thyroxine (T4) transport and 5′-deiodinase by ami-
odarone reduces the conversion of T4 to active tri-
iodothyronine (T3) (see Chapter 41). This produces 
hypothyroidism in about 10% of those taking the 
drug. Hypothyroidism can be treated by levothyrox-
ine replacement without stopping amiodarone (see 
Chapter 41). In contrast, in people who are iodine-
deficient, amiodarone can produce a destructive thy-
roiditis with release of preformed thyroid hormone, 
leading to thyrotoxicosis in up to 10% of those tak-
ing it. Amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis is often 
resistant to treatment. Thyroid function should be 
checked every 6 months during treatment.
• Photosensitive skin rashes are common and the use 
of wide-spectrum sunscreen is recommended. Slate-
grey skin discoloration can also occur.
• Peripheral neuropathy or myopathy.
• Hepatitis and cirrhosis occur rarely.
• Progressive pneumonitis and lung fibrosis are rare 
but serious effects of long-term treatment.
• Proarrhythmic effects.
• Drug interactions: the plasma concentrations of 
warfarin (see Chapter 11) and digoxin (see Chapter 
7) are increased by amiodarone, with consequent 
potentiation of their effects. Amiodarone inhibits 
the metabolism of warfarin. It displaces digoxin 
from tissue stores and inhibits its renal excretion, 
both of which actions increase the risk of digoxin 
toxicity.
Unlike most antiarrhythmic drugs, amiodarone 
does not have negative inotropic effects.
Sotalol
Sotalol is a nonselective β-adrenoceptor antagonist 
(see Chapter 5) with additional class III antiarrhyth-
mic properties. It selectively blocks the IKr current 
(which is particularly involved in phase 2 and 3 repo-
larisation) and shows reverse use-dependence (higher 
receptor binding when the channel is closed), so that 
sotalol is most effective during slow rates of cell depo-
larisation (bradycardia). Sotalol is a racemic mixture; 
the L-isomer has both β-adrenoceptor antagonist and 
class III activity, whereas the d-isomer has only class 
III activity. The class III activity gives sotalol a greater 
proarrhythmic potential than other β-adrenoceptor 
antagonists (see earlier). Sotalol is used in selected 
cases of atrial fibrillation and ventricular tachycar-
dia, and is not used for the other indications for 
β-adrenoceptor antagonists.
Pharmacokinetics
Sotalol is excreted unchanged by the kidneys. Its half-
life is 7 to 18 hours.
Unwanted effects
These are discussed in Chapter 5. Sotalol also has pro-
arrhythmic activity (see earlier).
CLASS IV DRUGS
  Examples
diltiazem, verapamil
Calcium Channel Blockers
Verapamil and diltiazem (see Chapter 5), but not the 
dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers such as 
amlodipine, have antiarrhythmic activity. Verapamil 
can be given intravenously for a rapid effect but 
should not be given together with a β-adrenoceptor 
antagonist because of summation of myocar-
dial depression and AV nodal conduction block. 
	
	
Cardiac Arrhythmias  CHAPTER 8	
151
Details of calcium channel blockers can be found in 
Chapter 5.
OTHER DRUGS FOR CARDIAC RHYTHM 
DISTURBANCES
Those drugs used for the management of rhythm dis-
turbances that do not fit into the Vaughan-Williams 
classification are considered here.
Cardiac Glycosides
Cardiac glycosides (usually digoxin) are not strictly 
antiarrhythmic, but they are useful for controlling 
ventricular rate in atrial flutter and atrial fibrillation 
by reducing conduction through the AV node. Cardiac 
glycosides are discussed in Chapter 7.
Adenosine
Mechanism of action and effects
Adenosine is a purine nucleoside with electrophysi-
ological actions mediated by the A1 subtype of specific 
G-protein–coupled adenosine receptors. These recep-
tors activate inward rectifier KACh channels, enhancing 
the flow of K+ out of myocardial cells and hyperpolaris-
ing the resting cell (see Table 8.1). In addition, adenos-
ine antagonises the stimulatory effects of noradrenaline 
on Ca2+ currents. These actions combine to stabilise the 
myocardial cell transmembrane ion fluxes. Adenosine 
has potent effects on the SA node, producing sinus bra-
dycardia. It also slows impulse conduction through the 
AV node but has no effect on conduction in the ven-
tricles. Consequently, its only therapeutic effects are in 
supraventricular tachyarrhythmias, particularly those 
caused by AV nodal re-entry mechanisms. It may still 
be useful diagnostically in other tachyarrhythmias, as 
the transient suppression of ventricular depolarisation 
may reveal additional information about the nature of 
the rhythm disturbance.
An additional action of adenosine at A2 adenos-
ine receptors reduces Ca2+ uptake in vascular smooth 
muscle and produces vasodilation. In the coronary 
circulation, preferential dilation of healthy arteries 
produces coronary blood flow ‘steal’, which reduces 
blood flow in stenosed arteries. This receptor action 
enables adenosine to be used as a pharmacologi-
cal stress to induce myocardial ischaemia in people 
with coronary artery disease, which can then be 
assessed by imaging the myocardium with radio-
nuclide scanning, magnetic resonance imaging or 
echocardiography.
Pharmacokinetics
Adenosine is given by rapid bolus intravenous injec-
tion. The effect is terminated by uptake into erythro-
cytes and endothelial cells, followed by metabolism to 
inosine and hypoxanthine. Adenosine has a half-life of 
less than 10 seconds and its duration of action is less 
than 1 minute.
Unwanted effects
Unwanted effects are common and occur in about 25% 
of those given adenosine, but they last less than 1 min-
ute. They include the following.
• Bradycardia and AV block.
• Malaise, facial flushing, headache, chest pain or 
tightness, bronchospasm; adenosine should be 
avoided in people with asthma.
• Drug interactions – dipyridamole (see Chapter 11) 
potentiates the effects of adenosine, whereas meth-
ylxanthines such as aminophylline (see Chapter 12) 
inhibit its action.
Atropine Sulfate and Glycopyrronium Bromide
Atropine sulfate (see Chapter 4) and glycopyrronium 
bromide are antimuscarinic drugs given by intrave-
nous bolus injection. They reduce the inhibitory effect 
of the vagus nerve on the heart. Blockade of muscarinic 
M2 receptors increases the rate of firing of the SA node 
and increases conduction through the AV node. This is 
due to inhibition of inward rectifying KACh channels, 
which prevents hyperpolarisation of the cell membrane 
(see Table 8.1) and enhanced activation of pacemaker 
HCN channels through increased availability of cAMP. 
Atropine is used specifically for the treatment of sinus 
bradycardia and atrioventricular block. It is metabo-
lised in the liver and has a half-life of 2 to 5 hours. Gly-
copyrronium is similar to atropine except that it does 
not cross the blood–brain barrier. It is mainly used for 
bradycardias arising during anaesthesia.
Magnesium Sulfate
Intravenous magnesium sulfate is used to control the 
ventricular arrhythmia torsade de pointes and dig-
italis-induced ventricular arrhythmias. The mecha-
nism is not well understood, but Mg2+ regulates the 
movement of other cations through ion channels. 
Relevant actions may include reduction of transmem-
brane Na+ efflux, inhibition of the IKr delayed rectifier 
current and block of transmembrane Ca2+ currents 
through L-type Ca2+ channels. Flushing is the main 
unwanted effect.
DRUG TREATMENT OF ARRHYTHMIAS
Arrhythmias can be asymptomatic or can produce a 
variety of consequences that range from mild symp-
toms to a life-threatening reduction of cardiac output. 
The probability of developing symptoms depends on 
several factors, the most important of which are the 
heart rate arising from the abnormal rhythm and the 
presence of underlying heart disease. The range of con-
sequences of rhythm disturbances includes:
• awareness of palpitation,
• dizziness,
• syncope,
• precipitation of angina or heart failure,
• sudden death.
152	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
Treatment may not be necessary for brief self-termi-
nating arrhythmias with minimal symptoms; reassur-
ance may be all that is required. For some arrhythmias 
it may be possible to remove or treat an underlying 
cause, such as an electrolyte disturbance.
The choice of treatment depends on the situation. 
With many tachyarrhythmias, sinus rhythm should be 
restored if possible. Direct current (DC) cardioversion is 
used to achieve this in severe, life-threatening, or drug-
resistant arrhythmias. Drug therapy is used if there 
is less need for an immediate effect or to control the 
ventricular rate if the abnormal rhythm cannot be ter-
minated. Ablation of an arrhythmogenic focus or path-
way is increasingly used to prevent arrhythmia. This is 
carried out after intracardiac electrophysiological stud-
ies, using a diagnostic cardiac catheter, followed by 
delivery of energy in the form of heat (radiofrequency 
ablation) or cold (cryoablation) to destroy the tissue 
responsible for generating the arrhythmia. Long-term 
drug treatment for bradyarrhythmia is not possible; an 
implanted pacemaker may be necessary.
SUPRAVENTRICULAR TACHYARRHYTHMIAS
Atrial Premature Beats
Atrial premature beats are very common and usually 
benign, but sometimes they arise as a consequence of 
digoxin toxicity; frequent multifocal atrial ectopics can 
also result from organic heart disease. Other than treat-
ment of an underlying cause, specific drug therapy is 
rarely needed. Some people are disturbed by a post-
ectopic pause followed by a more forceful beat when 
sinus rhythm recommences. If treatment is required, 
a β-adrenoceptor antagonist or a calcium channel 
blocker such as verapamil or diltiazem can be used to 
suppress the ectopics.
Focal Atrial Tachycardia
Focal atrial tachycardia (AT) is an infrequent rhythm 
disturbance usually arising from a small automatic 
focus that produces an atrial rate of 150 to 250 beats/
min. There is often an associated AV conduction block 
at faster heart rates as the AV node will still be in its 
refractory period when some of the impulses reach it. 
This prevents all of the atrial impulses reaching the 
ventricle and results in a slower ventricular rate com-
pared to the atrial rate. AT is not usually associated 
with significant cardiac disease but can be a manifesta-
tion of digitalis toxicity. If drug therapy is necessary, 
an AV nodal blocking agent such as a β-adrenoceptor 
antagonist or calcium channel blocker (verapamil or 
diltiazem) will control the ventricular rate but rarely 
restores sinus rhythm. Sinus rhythm can be achieved 
with a class Ic antiarrhythmic agent such as flecainide, 
but this must be given with an AV nodal blocking 
drug. Flecainide alone increases the risk of 1 : 1 AV 
nodal conduction and a paradoxical increase in the 
ventricular rate if the atrial rate slows sufficiently, but 
sinus rhythm is not restored. Ablation of the initiating 
focus may also be considered if symptoms are refrac-
tory to drug treatment.
A less common form of AT is multifocal AT arising 
from several ectopic foci, usually in people with severe 
pulmonary disease. If treatment is needed, calcium chan-
nel blockers are usually used for ventricular rate control.
Atrial Flutter
Atrial flutter is a macro re-entrant tachycardia usually 
arising in the right atrium, which is uncommon under 
the age of 40 years. About half of those who present 
with atrial flutter will develop atrial fibrillation over 
the subsequent 5 years, whatever treatment is chosen. 
Underlying causes include recent cardiac surgery, cor 
pulmonale and congenital heart disease, but it can 
arise for no obvious reason.
In atrial flutter, the atrial rate is usually 250 to 300 
beats/min and the impulses are conducted to the ventri-
cles with 2 : 1 or greater degrees of AV block. Flutter waves 
may be obvious on the ECG or appear if the ventricular 
rate is slowed by transiently increasing the degree of 
AV block using vagal stimulation (such as carotid sinus 
massage) or the administration of adenosine.
About 50% of episodes of atrial flutter will sponta-
neously revert to sinus rhythm within 24 hours. Drug 
therapy is relatively unsuccessful for restoring sinus 
rhythm, and DC cardioversion (synchronised to dis-
charge on the R wave of the ECG) or rapid ‘overdrive’ 
electrical pacing to capture the ventricle followed by a 
gradual reduction in the paced rate may be required. 
Amiodarone may convert to sinus rhythm and can also 
be used to prevent recurrence of paroxysmal atrial flut-
ter. Class Ic agents such as flecainide or propafenone 
should be avoided as the atrial rate could slow with 
1 : 1 AV conduction, causing an unacceptably high ven-
tricular rate (see also AT, discussed earlier).
Control of the ventricular rate in atrial flutter can be 
achieved with a β-adrenoceptor antagonist, but treat-
ment is often less successful than for atrial fibrillation. 
For this reason, highly symptomatic people and younger 
people with no structural heart disease are often treated 
with ablation of the re-entrant pathway. Atrial flutter has 
a similar risk of systemic embolism as atrial fibrillation 
(see later). Anticoagulant prophylaxis against thrombo-
embolism should be given, as for atrial fibrillation.
Atrial Fibrillation
Apart from ectopic beats, atrial fibrillation (AF) is the 
most common rhythm disturbance encountered in 
clinical practice. It has a variety of underlying causes 
(Box 8.1), some of which may be treatable. In younger 
people, AF often occurs without any obvious underly-
ing cause; it is then called ‘lone’ AF. The arrhythmia 
usually arises from atrial fibrosis that creates electrical 
dissociation between muscle bundles and generates 
multiple micro re-entry circuits in the atria. Intracel-
lular changes involving depolarising K+ and Ca2+ 
	
	
Cardiac Arrhythmias  CHAPTER 8	
153
currents in the atria also shorten the atrial refractory 
period. These lead to electrophysiological changes in 
myocytes in the pulmonary veins, which initiate or 
perpetuate the re-entry circuits. The combination of 
cellular, structural and electrical remodelling is respon-
sible for persistence and chronicity of AF.
The ventricular rate will depend on AV nodal func-
tion, so that when the AV node conducts well, AF 
produces a rapid but irregular ventricular rate. AF pre-
disposes to left atrial thrombus formation that begins 
in the left atrial appendage and can lead to systemic 
emboli, which most commonly cause stroke. Clinically, 
four forms of AF are recognised: paroxysmal AF (inter-
mittent self-limiting episodes (usually lasting <24 hours, 
but always <7 days)); persistent AF (present for more 
than 7 days but less than 1 year); long-persistent AF 
(lasting >1 year but with the intention of restoring sinus 
rhythm); and permanent AF (present for >1 year after 
unsuccessful attempts to maintain sinus rhythm or if a 
decision has been made not to attempt this).
Management of AF has three components, often 
described as an ABC strategy: Avoid stroke, Better 
symptom control and Cardiovascular and comorbidity 
risk reduction (which is not considered further).
Avoiding stroke
• Avoiding stroke is achieved by reduction of throm-
boembolism by long-term anticoagulation (see 
Chapter 11). Anticoagulation with warfarin is the 
treatment of choice in AF associated with moderate 
to severe mitral stenosis or mechanical prosthetic 
heart valves which have a high risk of embolism 
and where the safety and efficacy of other antico-
agulants is not established. In other causes of AF, 
the risk of embolism is related to the number of 
associated risk factors which can be assessed by the 
CHA2DS2–Vasc score (Table 8.3). Most people with 
AF, whether sustained or paroxysmal, should take 
an anticoagulant for thromboprophylaxis. Warfa-
rin, maintaining the international normalised ratio 
(INR) between 2 and 3 (see Chapter 11), reduces 
the risk of thromboembolism by about two-thirds. 
Direct-acting oral anticoagulants (DOACs) have 
similar efficacy to warfarin in non-valvular AF. 
These include dabigatran, apixaban, edoxaban and 
rivaroxaban (see Chapter 11) and are increasingly 
preferred to warfarin because they pose a lower 
risk of intracranial bleeding and there is no need 
for monitoring. Bleeding risk should be assessed 
using the ORBIT-AF score (Table 8.4). A high score 
identifies those at higher risk of major bleeding 
and encourages targeted action to reduce the risk, 
such as control of hypertension, addressing alcohol 
excess or reviewing NSAID use. Oral anticoagula-
tion has little advantage in those at very low risk, 
when the increased risk of bleeding outweighs the 
small benefit. Even after restoration of sinus rhythm 
in paroxysmal or persistent AF, people at high risk 
of thromboembolic events should continue to take 
thromboprophylaxis because the risk of stroke does 
not decrease. This may reflect the high risk of recur-
rence (often asymptomatic) of AF.
• Aspirin is ineffective for thromboprophylaxis and 
should not be used for this purpose. Even dual 
antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and clopidogrel is 
inferior to anticoagulation for preventing emboli but 
carries a similar bleeding risk. For those unable to take 
an anticoagulant, occlusion of the left atrial append-
age with a mechanical device can be considered.
Better symptom control
• Identify and treat an underlying cause whenever 
possible.
• Rhythm control: to restore or maintain sinus rhythm 
in paroxysmal or persistent AF (Box 8.2) may be 
Box 8.1  Causes of Atrial Fibrillation.
STRUCTURAL HEART DISEASE
Hypertension
Coronary heart disease
Valvular heart disease (especially mitral)
Cardiomyopathies
Cardiac surgery
Congenital heart disease (especially atrial septal defect)
OTHER CAUSES
Major infections
Thyrotoxicosis, myxoedema
Alcohol intoxication
Systemic illness (e.g. amyloid, sarcoidosis)
Pulmonary embolism
Table 8.3
  The CHA2DS2–Vasc Scorea for Assessing 
Risk of Stroke in Nonrheumatic Atrial 
Fibrillation.
SCORE
ANNUAL RISK OF 
STROKE (%)
RECOMMENDED 
THROMBOPROPHYLAXIS
0
0
None
1
1.3
None if only point for being 
female; consider warfarin or 
NOAC if male
2
2.2
NOAC or warfarin
3
3.2
NOAC or warfarin
4
4.0
NOAC or warfarin
5
6.7
NOAC or warfarin
6
9.8
NOAC or warfarin
7
9.6
NOAC or warfarin
8
6.7
NOAC or warfarin
9
15.2
NOAC or warfarin
aThe CHA2DS2–Vasc score is a summation of the following component scores: 
congestive heart failure, 1; hypertension, 1; age >75 years, 2; diabetes mellitus, 
1; prior stroke or transient ischaemic attack, 2; age 64–74 years, 1; vascular 
disease (prior myocardial infarction, peripheral arterial disease, aortic plaque), 
1; age 64–74, 1; female sex, 1.
NOAC, Novel oral anticoagulant.
154	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
desirable in younger people or those who tolerate 
the rhythm disturbance poorly. In these individu-
als, symptoms and exercise tolerance are usually 
improved when they are in sinus rhythm, but the 
risk of stroke is not removed (see later). There is 
less justification for restoring sinus rhythm in older 
people who tolerate the rhythm well because there 
is no reduction in the risk of thromboembolic events 
(see later) and their quality of life may not improve. 
Restoration of sinus rhythm is usually possible in 
lone AF or when a precipitating factor has been 
treated. It can be achieved with drugs (pharmaco-
logical or chemical cardioversion), especially if the 
rhythm disturbance is of recent onset. There is a 
40% to 80% success rate if the arrhythmia is of less 
than 7 days’ duration. Pharmacological cardiover-
sion is most rapidly achieved (within a few hours) 
by using a single oral dose of a class Ic drug such 
as flecainide or propafenone. For infrequent epi-
sodes of paroxysmal AF, a ‘pill in the pocket’ strat-
egy can be considered, with advice to take a single 
dose of flecainide, propafenone or dronedarone at 
the onset of the arrhythmia. These drugs should be 
avoided if there is underlying structural heart dis-
ease, when intravenous amiodarone is preferred 
although this takes longer to restore sinus rhythm. 
Digoxin is ineffective for restoring or for maintain-
ing sinus rhythm in paroxysmal AF and should be 
avoided. QRS-synchronised DC cardioversion is 
usually required for a more prolonged duration AF. 
Recurrence of AF is most frequent during the first 3 
to 6 months after restoration of sinus rhythm. Ami-
odarone for 4 weeks before and up to 12 months 
after cardioversion increases the chance of main-
taining sinus rhythm, and maintains sinus rhythm 
in about 75% of people at 1 year, compared to less 
than 40% maintenance without prophylaxis. Abla-
tion therapy to isolate a pulmonary vein trigger 
area via a cardiac catheter is becoming increasingly 
used for younger people with paroxysmal or per-
sistent AF, especially if symptoms are problematic.
• Rate control: control of a rapid ventricular response 
is the goal in persistent or permanent AF. For ven-
tricular rate control both at rest and on exercise, a 
drug that slows AV nodal conduction – such as a 
β-adrenoceptor antagonist, verapamil, or diltiazem 
– should be used. Rate control at rest can be achieved 
with digoxin, but a rapid heart rate often still 
occurs during exercise (see Chapter 7), so it is only 
used alone for sedentary people. A β-adrenoceptor 
antagonist, verapamil, diltiazem, or amiodarone 
can be used together with digoxin if rate control is 
difficult to achieve. Sotalol has no additional ben-
efit in sustained AF and should be avoided because 
of its greater proarrhythmic activity compared with 
that of other β-adrenoceptor antagonists. Droneda-
rone is not used for rate control due to evidence of 
increased mortality. Most people gain relief from 
symptoms if the resting heart rate is less than 110 
beats per minute. If drug combinations do not pro-
vide satisfactory rate control, AV nodal ablation 
with insertion of a pacemaker can be considered.
Junctional (Nodal) Tachycardias
Junctional tachycardias usually arise from a re-entry 
circuit and are often initiated by an ectopic beat. A 
macro re-entry circuit can form within the AV node 
if there are two functional intranodal pathways with 
different recovery times (AV nodal re-entrant tachy-
cardia or AVNRT). Such circuits account for 60% of 
supraventricular tachycardias (SVTs) excluding AF/
flutter and are not usually associated with structural 
cardiac disease. A second form of junctional rhythm 
is a macro re-entry circuit which involves an acces-
sory pathway connecting the atria and ventricles, as 
Box 8.2
  Factors Predicting a High Probability of 
Successful Restoration of Sinus Rhythm in 
People With Atrial Fibrillation.
Short duration of atrial fibrillation (<1 year)
Younger age (<50 years)
Absence of underlying heart disease
Normal left ventricular function
Little or no enlargement of the left atrium
Withdrawal or treatment of a precipitating factor 
(e.g. thyrotoxicosis, alcohol)
Table 8.4
  The ORBIT-AF score for assessing annual 
major bleeding risk in people with atrial 
fibrillation.
RISK FACTOR
SCORE
O Older age: ≥75 years old
1 point
R Reduced haemoglobin/reduced 
haematocrit/anaemia: 
Hb: <130 g/L males; <120 g/L females
Hct: <40% Males; <30% females 
or history of anaemia
2 points
B Bleeding history
2 points
I Insufficient renal function: eGFR <60 mL/min
1 point
T Treatment with anti-platelet agents
1 point
INTERPRETATION
Score
Bleeds per 100 
person-years
Bleed risk 
category
0
  1.7
Low
1 
  2.3
2
  2.9
3
  4.7
Medium
4
  6.8
High
5
  9.0
6
12.3
7
14.9
The score is the sum of points from the risk factors listed.
	
	
Cardiac Arrhythmias  CHAPTER 8	
155
in Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome (AV re-entrant 
tachycardia or AVRT). AVRT accounts for 30% of SVTs 
excluding AF/flutter.
Most junctional tachycardias produce narrow QRS 
complexes on the ECG, including AVRT with ante-
grade conduction through the AV node (‘orthodromic’ 
conduction AVRT). However, AVRT with antegrade 
conduction via the accessory pathway and retrograde 
conduction through the AV node (‘antidromic’ con-
duction AVRT) is a broad QRS complex tachycardia.
Termination of an acute attack of nodal tachycar-
dia can often be achieved with vagotonic manoeuvres 
such as carotid sinus massage or by a bolus injection of 
adenosine. Intravenous verapamil is as effective as ade-
nosine, but β-adrenoceptor antagonists are less effective 
for termination of junctional tachycardias. Antidromic 
AVRT should not be treated with drugs that block con-
duction at the AV node, as this can facilitate propagation 
of a disorganised rhythm through the accessory path-
way. Flecainide is preferred in this situation. DC cardio-
version is an option if there is haemodynamic instability.
Ablation of the re-entry circuit via a cardiac cathe-
ter is curative and increasingly used for both AVNRTs 
and AVRTs in preference to drugs for prophylaxis. If 
drug therapy is chosen for prophylaxis, then vera-
pamil or a β-adrenoceptor antagonist can be used.
Immediate Management of Narrow-Complex 
Tachycardia of Uncertain Origin
If the tachycardia is very fast and the rhythm is regu-
lar, it is often not possible to determine from the ECG 
whether a narrow-complex tachycardia has an atrial or 
nodal origin. If vagotonic manoeuvres are unsuccess-
ful and the person is haemodynamically stable, intra-
venous adenosine should be given. This often converts 
a junctional tachycardia to sinus rhythm or can slow 
the ventricular rate sufficiently to identify the origin of 
the rhythm on an ECG (e.g. revealing flutter waves). If 
there is a history of severe asthma, intravenous vera-
pamil may be preferred. DC cardioversion should be 
considered if there is haemodynamic instability.
VENTRICULAR TACHYARRHYTHMIAS
Ventricular Ectopic Beats
Ventricular ectopic beats often occur in healthy individ-
uals or in association with a variety of cardiac disorders 
such as ischaemic heart disease and heart failure. They 
are often asymptomatic. Frequent ventricular ectopic 
beats after myocardial infarction predict a poorer long-
term outcome; however, suppressing such ectopics 
with class I antiarrhythmic drugs increases mortality 
and should be avoided. In contrast, β-adrenoceptor 
antagonists after myocardial infarction may suppress 
the ectopic beats and reduce the risk of sudden death 
(see Chapter 5). A β-adrenoceptor antagonist can also 
suppress ventricular ectopic beats induced by stress or 
anxiety. In the absence of ischaemic heart disease, symp-
tomatic ventricular ectopic beats that do not respond 
to a β-adrenoceptor antagonist can be suppressed by a 
class I drug such as flecainide. Ablation is an option for 
multiple ventricular ectopic beats that disturb the per-
son’s well-being and are not controlled by drugs.
Ventricular Tachycardia
VT presents with broad QRS complexes on the ECG 
(broad-complex tachycardia). Although broad com-
plexes can arise with SVTs (when there is bundle branch 
block or antidromic AVRT; see earlier), broad-complex 
tachycardia is usually treated on the assumption that 
it is VT. VT is often associated with serious underlying 
heart disease, such as ischaemic heart disease or heart 
failure, and is more common following myocardial 
infarction. It can be either sustained or non-sustained. 
Sustained VT can be associated with a minimal or 
absent cardiac output (‘pulseless’ VT) when it is treated 
in the same way as VF (see later). Polymorphic or inces-
sant VTs can arise as a complication of antiarrhythmic 
drug therapy (see earlier) and with other drugs that 
prolong the Q–T interval on the ECG.
For acute sustained VT, amiodarone is usually recom-
mended, although it is relatively ineffective. Termination 
may require emergency DC cardioversion for haemo-
dynamic deterioration. Long-term management with 
amiodarone can prevent recurrence, but an implantable 
cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) is often used to avoid 
sudden cardiac death. Amiodarone or a β-adrenoceptor 
antagonist can be used with an ICD to suppress episodes 
of VT and reduce the frequency of shocks from the ICD. 
Sustained VT is often associated with a poor long-term 
outlook in ischaemic heart disease, and coronary revas-
cularisation with or without an ICD is often appropriate. 
During and after the acute phase of myocardial infarc-
tion, a β-adrenoceptor antagonist is the treatment of 
choice to suppress non-sustained VTs.
Polymorphic or incessant VTs do not respond well to 
conventional treatments. Withdrawal of a precipitant 
drug, correction of electrolyte imbalance, and intrave-
nous magnesium sulfate are the therapies of choice. 
Temporary transvenous overpacing at a rate of 90 to 
110 beats/minute may prevent recurrence. In the con-
genital form of long QT syndrome, a β-adrenoceptor 
antagonist is the mainstay of treatment.
Ventricular Fibrillation
VF is a potentially lethal arrhythmia that constitutes 
one form of ‘cardiac arrest’. An algorithm for the man-
agement of cardiac arrest is regularly updated by the 
Resuscitation Council (UK) and is shown in Fig. 8.6. 
The important principles of prolonged resuscitation are 
the maintenance of adequate cardiac output by external 
chest compression and oxygenation of the blood by arti-
ficial inflation of the lungs while attempting to restore 
sinus rhythm. VF is the commonest arrhythmia in car-
diac arrest and it should be assumed to be present unless 
an ECG is available to show otherwise. VF should be 
treated with immediate DC cardioversion. Intravenous 
156	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
adrenaline (epinephrine; see Chapter 4) may be given 
to vasoconstrict the peripheries and thus maintain pres-
sure in the central arteries perfusing the heart and brain. 
For recurrent VF, an ICD is usually required.
BRADYCARDIAS
Sinus Bradycardia
Treatment with atropine may be necessary if sinus bra-
dycardia is causing symptoms (e.g. after myocardial 
Adult advanced life support 
Unresponsive and 
not breathing normally
Assess rhythm
Return of spontaneous 
circulation  
(ROSC)
SHOCKABLE
(VF/Pulseless VT)
NON-SHOCKABLE 
(PEA/Asystole)
CPR 30:2 
Attach defibrillator/monitor
Call resuscitation 
team/ambulance
1 shock
Immediately resume 
CPR for 2 min
Immediately resume 
CPR for 2 min
Give high-quality 
chest compressions, 
and:
• Give oxygen
• Use waveform capnography
• Continuous compressions if 
advanced airway
• Minimise interruptions  
to compressions
• Intravenous or intraosseous 
access
• Give adrenaline every  
3–5 min
• Give amiodarone after  
3 shocks
• Identify and treat reversible 
causes
Identify and treat 
reversible causes
• Hypoxia
• Hypovolaemia
• Hypo-/hyperkalaemia/
metabolic
• Hypo/hyperthermia
• Thrombosis – coronary or 
pulmonary
• Tension pneumothorax
• Tamponade – cardiac
• Toxins
Consider ultrasound imaging 
to identify reversible causes
Consider
• Coronary angiography/
percutaneous coronary 
intervention 
• Mechanical chest 
compressions to facilitate 
transfer/treatment
• Extracorporeal CPR
After ROSC
• Use an ABCDE approach
• Aim for SpO 2 of 94–98% and 
normal PaCO2
• 12-lead ECG
• Identify and treat cause
• Targeted temperature 
management
Maintain 
personal 
safety
Fig. 8.6  An algorithm for the management of cardiac arrest. CPR, Cardiopulmonary resuscitation; ECG, electrocardio-
gram; PaCO2, partial pressure of carbon dioxide; PEA, pulseless electrical activity; SpO2, oxygen saturation; VF, ventricular 
fibrillation; VT, ventricular tachycardia. (Modified from the Resuscitation Council [UK] 2021 guidelines for advanced life support. 
https://www.resus.org.uk/sites/default/files/2021-04/Adult%20Advanced%20Life%20Support%20Algorithm%202021.pdf.)
infarction or an overdose of a β-adrenoceptor antago-
nist). Glycopyrronium is used in anaesthetic practice 
as a premedication to prevent vagally mediated bra-
dycardia produced by suxamethonium, halothane or 
propofol.
Sinus node disease is a condition most often seen in the 
elderly and presents with sinus bradycardia and intermit-
tent sinus arrest. Drugs have no role in treatment, and the 
condition is managed with an implantable pacemaker.
	
	
Cardiac Arrhythmias  CHAPTER 8	
157
Atrioventricular (AV) Block (‘Heart Block’)
AV block can be congenital or can be caused by a vari-
ety of heart diseases. When it occurs after myocardial 
infarction, it is usually temporary if the infarct is inferior 
but is often permanent after anterior infarction. First-
degree heart block (prolongation of the P–R interval on 
the ECG but with all P waves conducted to the ven-
tricles) or Wenckebach (Mobitz type 1) second-degree 
AV block (progressive P–R prolongation until there is a 
non-conducted P wave) rarely require treatment.
Mobitz type 2 second-degree AV block (with regular 
non-conducted P waves without preceding P–R pro-
longation) and third-degree (or complete) AV block 
(when all P waves are non-conducted and there is a 
slow escape rhythm arising from tissues below the AV 
node) should be treated. If complete AV block arises 
suddenly, loss of consciousness (Stokes–Adams attack) 
or death can occur. If the onset of heart block is acute, 
atropine should be given intravenously to increase 
AV conduction. Alternatively, an intravenous infusion 
of the nonselective β-adrenoceptor agonist isoprena-
line can be used (see Chapter 7). However, external 
or temporary transvenous electrical cardiac pacing is 
usually required in an emergency. If the AV block is 
permanent, the implantation of a permanent electrical 
cardiac pacemaker is almost always necessary.
SELF-ASSESSMENT
TRUE/FALSE QUESTIONS
	 1.	 The SA node and the AV node have pacemaker 
activity.
	 2.	 Pacemaker cells in the SA node discharge at a higher 
frequency than those in other parts of the heart.
	 3.	 Spontaneous or pacemaker depolarisation during 
diastole results solely from the influx of Na+.
	 4.	 The influx of Na+ during phase 0 lasts for only 
milliseconds.
	 5.	 Cells are unable to generate further action poten-
tials during phases 0, 1 and 2 of the action potential.
	 6.	 Reducing the gradient of the slope of phase 4 will 
slow the normal pacemaker rate.
	 7.	 Sympathetic and vagal stimulation reduce the 
slope of phase 4 depolarisation and slow the pace-
maker rate.
	 8.	 Healthy nonpacemaker cells remain quiescent if not 
excited by an impulse arising from other regions in 
the heart.
	 9.	 Flecainide blocks Na+ channels.
10.	 Beta-adrenoceptor antagonist drugs are useful in 
stress-induced tachycardias.
11.	 The antiarrhythmic action of amiodarone depends 
only on blockade of K+ channels.
12.	 Amiodarone reaches steady-state concentrations 
after several months of treatment.
13.	 Adenosine is effective in the treatment of VT.
14.	 Verapamil affects both the plateau phase 2 and 
phase 4 of the action potential cycle.
15.	 Combining verapamil and a β-adrenoceptor antag-
onist may cause AV nodal conduction block.
ONE-BEST-ANSWER (OBA) QUESTION
1.	 Which change in the flow of ions into or out of cardiac 
myocytes would most likely prevent arrhythmias?
A.	Increased influx of Na+ during phase 0 of the 
action potential.
B.	 Increased influx of Ca2+ during phase 4 of the 
action potential.
C.	Decreased influx of Na+ during phase 0 of the 
action potential.
D.	Increased influx of Ca2+ during phase 2 of the 
action potential.
E.	 Decreased efflux of K+ in phase 3 of the action 
potential.
CASE-BASED QUESTIONS
Mr G.H., aged 48 years, consulted his GP complain-
ing of palpitations and was found to have an irreg-
ular pulse with a rate of 120 beats/minute. He had 
been experiencing shortness of breath and faintness 
for the previous 6 hours. The symptoms started after 
a drinking binge 36 hours earlier. Examination, blood 
tests (including thyroid function tests), ECG and a 
chest radiograph showed no coexisting heart disease, 
diabetes or hypertension. The ECG confirmed AF.
1.	 What are the options available for treating Mr G.H.?
2.	 Before any treatment could be instituted, Mr G.H. 
spontaneously reverted to sinus rhythm. He was well 
for a year but then returned to his GP with a 3-day 
history of palpitations, breathlessness, chest pain and 
dizziness. Examination and an ECG again showed 
AF. He was referred to a cardiologist and echocar-
diography showed no evidence of structural cardiac 
disease. Electrical DC cardioversion was carried out 
and the rhythm reverted to sinus rhythm. Over the 
next 5 years, episodes of AF occurred with increasing 
frequency, and eventually sinus rhythm could not be 
restored with a variety of antiarrhythmic drugs or by 
DC conversion. What prophylactic treatment should 
be considered at the time of DC cardioversion? What 
drug treatments may be useful after DC cardioversion?
ANSWERS
TRUE/FALSE ANSWERS
1.	 True. The SA and AV nodes, the bundle of His and 
the Purkinje system are pacemaker cells and form 
the specialised conducting system of the heart.
2.	 True. Pacemaker cells in the SA node therefore initi-
ate cardiac rhythm.
3.	 False. Slow spontaneous depolarisation in pace-
maker cells results from an inward flow of Na+ and 
K+ ions (the funny current, If).
4.	 True. The fast Na+ channels for influx close at the 
end of phase 1.
158	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
	 5.	 True. However, during phase 3, the cells are only 
relatively refractory to further depolarising stimuli 
and a sufficient stimulus can fire an action poten-
tial during this phase.
	 6.	 True. The slope in phase 4 controls the normal 
pacemaker rate as it determines the time taken to 
reach the threshold potential.
	 7.	 False. Vagal stimulation reduces the slope of phase 
4 and slows the rate of firing, but sympathetic 
stimulation increases the slope and hence also the 
firing rate.
	 8.	 True. However, if the intracellular Ca2+ concen-
tration rises abnormally (e.g. under the influence 
of cardiac glycosides or catecholamines), this 
can exchange with Na+ passing inwards, causing 
membrane depolarisations called afterdepolarisa-
tions or triggered activity.
	 9.	 True. All class I antiarrhythmics such as flecainide 
(class Ic) block fast Na+ channels and slow the rate 
of rise of phase 0, therefore reducing myocardial 
excitability.
10.	 True. Beta-adrenoceptor antagonists reduce the 
pacemaker depolarisation rate by inhibiting the 
sympathetic stimulation of the cAMP-dependent 
funny current (If) in the SA and AV nodes.
11.	 False. Like other class III agents, amiodarone 
blocks several types of K+ channels but also has 
a class Ib-like action on Na+ channels, class II 
activity (noncompetitive β-adrenoceptor antag-
onism), and class IV activity (calcium channel 
blockade).
12.	 True. The accumulation of amiodarone to steady 
state after about 6 months is due to its lipophilicity, 
resulting in a high apparent volume of distribution 
and very long half-life (50–60 days).
13.	 False. Adenosine has no beneficial effect on VT. Its 
main effect involves enhancing K+ conductance 
and inhibiting Ca2+ influx, resulting in reduced 
AV nodal conduction and an increase in the AV 
nodal refractory period. Adenosine is useful in 
supraventricular tachyarrhythmias, particularly 
when caused by AV nodal re-entry mechanisms; 
it has high efficacy and a very short duration of 
action.
14.	 True. L-type Ca2+ channels are involved in the 
phase 2 plateau, while both T- and L-type chan-
nels contribute to depolarisation in phase 0 and 
the funny current in phase 4. Verapamil acts both 
to slow the rate of pacemaker depolarisation and 
reduce the plateau phase, thus shortening the 
action potential. These effects make verapamil 
useful in SVTs but not in VT.
15.	 True. Verapamil is a highly negatively inotropic 
calcium channel blocker which reduces cardiac 
output. It also slows the heart rate and impairs 
AV conduction, so it may cause AV nodal block 
or heart failure when used with a β-adrenoceptor 
antagonist.
OBA ANSWER
1.	 Answer C is correct because decreased Na+ inflow 
during phase 0 slows the rate of depolarisation 
and is one of the mechanisms by which class I anti­
arrhythmics exert their therapeutic actions. Answers 
A and B are incorrect as they would increase depo-
larisation rate in phase 4 and the rate of firing of the 
SA and AV nodes. Answers D and E are incorrect as 
they would shorten action potential duration, thus 
increasing the likelihood of arrhythmias.
CASE-BASED ANSWERS
1.	 The aim at this stage is to restore and maintain sinus 
rhythm in Mr G.H., who appears to have no struc-
tural heart disease. As the arrhythmia is of short 
duration, pharmacological cardioversion may be 
successful. This could be achieved by flecainide, 
propafenone or amiodarone. Amiodarone is usually 
reserved for people with significant cardiac dys-
function or AF refractory to other agents. Flecainide 
and propafenone should be avoided in people with 
significant cardiac dysfunction or concomitant isch-
aemic heart disease. However, they are probably 
suitable for this man. Digoxin, calcium channel 
blockers and β-adrenoceptor antagonists are inef-
fective for terminating AF. Synchronised DC cardio-
version is successful in up to 90% of people with 
AF who have no structural heart disease or heart 
failure, who are below 50 years of age, and whose 
duration of AF is less than 1 year. It could be con-
sidered if drugs are unsuccessful. About 50% of the 
time, recent-onset AF (of less than 48 hours in dura-
tion) spontaneously converts to sinus rhythm. In Mr 
G.H., the AF could have been brought on by exces-
sive alcohol use (the so-called ‘holiday heart’). If he 
moderates his alcohol intake, prophylaxis would 
not be necessary after a single attack.
2.	 Anticoagulation with warfarin or a DOAC is essen-
tial for at least 3 to 4 weeks before and 4 weeks after 
a DC cardioversion to minimise the risk of a systemic 
embolus. For prophylaxis against recurrence, anti-
fibrillatory drugs are usually given for at least 3 to 
6 months following DC cardioversion as this is the 
period of highest risk of recurrence. Digoxin, vera-
pamil and β-adrenoceptor antagonists are not effec-
tive for prophylaxis. After 5 years of recurrence of AF, 
sinus rhythm cannot be restored. The aim in Mr G.H. 
is therefore to control the ventricular rate. Digoxin 
suppresses AV nodal conduction and can reduce the 
ventricular response rate. This is mediated through 
potentiation of vagal effects on the heart and is less 
effective during exercise; therefore, a β-adrenoceptor 
antagonist or calcium channel blocker (such as vera-
pamil) is preferred. However, β-adrenoceptor antag-
onists in high doses and verapamil are negatively 
inotropic; if there is significant cardiac dysfunction or 
heart failure, they are contraindicated. The positive 
inotropic action of digoxin might be helpful if there 
	
	
Cardiac Arrhythmias  CHAPTER 8	
159
is coexisting left ventricular impairment. The major 
long-term consequence of AF is the risk of thrombo-
embolism, which is greatest in those over 75 years of 
age. For Mr G.H., no thromboprophylaxis is required 
as he is at a relatively low risk of stroke because of his 
age and lack of any coexisting hypertension, diabetes 
mellitus, or significant left ventricular impairment.
FURTHER READING
Dumotier, B.M., 2014. A straightforward guide to the basic 
science behind arrhythmogenesis. Heart 100, 1907–1915.
Freedman, B., Potpara, T.S., Lip, G.Y.H., 2016. Stroke prevention 
in atrial fibrillation. Lancet 388, 806–817.
Gupta, A., Lawrence, A.T., Krishnan, K., et  al., 2007. Current 
concepts in the mechanisms and management of drug- 
induced QT prolongation and torsade de pointes. Am. Heart 
J. 153, 891–899.
Link, M.S., 2012. Evaluation and initial treatment of 
supraventricular tachycardia. N. Engl. J. Med. 367, 1438–1448.
Piccini, J.P., Fauchier, L., 2016. Rhythm control in atrial 
fibrillation. Lancet 388, 829–840.
Resuscitation Council (UK). Adult advanced life support, 2021. 
https://www.resus.org.uk/sites/default/files/2021-04/Adult%20
Advanced%20Life%20Support%20Algorithm%202021.pdf.
Roberts-Thomson, K.C., Lau, D.H., Sanders, P., 2011. The 
diagnosis and management of ventricular arrhythmias. Nat. 
Rev. Cardiol. 8, 311–321.
Van Gelder, I.C., Rienstra, M., Crijns, H.J.G.M., et al., 2016. Rate 
control in atrial fibrillation. Lancet 388, 818–828.
Vogler, J., Breithardt, G., Eckardt, L., 2012. Bradyarrhythmias 
and conduction blocks. Rev. Esp. Cardiol. 65, 656–667.
Whinnett, Z.I., Sohaib, S.M.A., Davies, D.W., 2012. Diagnosis and 
management of supraventricular tachycardia. BMJ 345, e7769.
Compendium of Drugs Used to Treat Cardiac Arrhythmias.
DRUG
CHARACTERISTICS
Drugs are listed by their main effect on the cardiac action potential according to the Vaughan-Williams classification, although 
some antiarrhythmic drugs have multiple sites and mechanisms of action. The types of arrhythmias commonly treated are 
AF, AT, SVT, VF and VT.
Class I Drugs: Sodium Channel Blockers (‘Membrane Stabilisers’)
Disopyramide
Class Ia drug. Used for SVT, VF and VT but rarely in the UK. Given orally or by slow intravenous injection (over 
at least 5 min) or by intravenous infusion.
Flecainide
Class Ic drug. Used for AF, SVT. Given orally or by slow intravenous injection (over 10–30 min) or intravenous 
infusion (for resistant VT).
Lidocaine
Class Ib drug. Used for VT in haemodynamically stable patients and for VF and pulseless VT in cardiac arrest 
refractory to defibrillation. Given by intravenous injection or intravenous infusion.
Mexelitine
Class 1b drug. Available in the UK only from special-order manufacturers or specialist importers; used for life-
threatening VT. Given orally or intravenously.
Procainamide
Class Ia drug. Available in the UK only from special-order manufacturers or specialist importers; used for VT. 
Given by slow intravenous injection or intravenous infusion.
Propafenone
Class Ic drug; also has some β-adrenoceptor antagonist (class II) activity. Used for VT and some SVTs. Given orally.
Class II Drugs: β-Adrenoceptor Antagonists
β-Adrenoceptor antagonists are used in a wide variety of indications and are listed in the drug compendium at the end of 
Chapter 5. The β-adrenoceptor antagonists most commonly used in arrhythmia are atenolol, bisoprolol, esmolol and pro-
pranolol. See also sotalol in class III below.
Class III Drugs: Potassium Channel Blockers
Amiodarone
Blocks potassium channels but also has class Ib, class II and class IV actions. Used for paroxysmal SVT, 
VT, AF and VF, with treatment usually initiated in hospital or under specialist supervision. Given orally or by 
intravenous injection (over 3 min) for VF.
Dronedarone
Multichannel blocker; related to amiodarone but has less complicated dosing due to shorter half-life. Used 
for maintenance of sinus rhythm after cardioversion in those who are clinically stable with paroxysmal or 
persistent AF when alternative treatments are unsuitable. Given orally.
Sotalol
Blocks potassium channels but is also a nonselective β-adrenoceptor antagonist (class II). Used for life-
threatening VT and prophylaxis of SVT and AF. Given orally.
Class IV Drugs: Calcium Channel Blockers
Dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers (see Chapter 5) have no antiarrhythmic activity.
Diltiazem
Non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker. Not licensed for arrhythmia in the UK. Given orally.
Verapamil
Non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker. Used for SVT. Given orally or by intravenous injection.
Other Drugs
Adenosine
Purine nucleoside. Used as the treatment of choice for terminating paroxysmal SVT. Given intravenously.
Atropine
Muscarinic receptor antagonist. Used for bradycardia, especially if complicated by hypotension. Given intravenously.
Digoxin
Cardiac glycoside (see Chapter 7). Used for AF. Given orally or intravenously.
Magnesium 
sulfate
Magnesium salt. Used for emergency treatment of serious arrhythmias, especially in presence of hypokalae-
mia, hypomagnesaemia or for torsade de pointes. Given intravenously over 10–15 min.
AF, Atrial fibrillation; AT, atrial tachycardia; SVT, supraventricular tachycardia; VF, ventricular fibrillation; VT, ventricular tachycardia.
160
Cerebrovascular Disease and Dementia
Chapter Outline
Stroke  160
Aetiology  160
Prevention and Treatment of Stroke  160
Subarachnoid Haemorrhage  163
Drugs for Subarachnoid Haemorrhage  163
Management of Subarachnoid Haemorrhage  163
Dementia  164
Alzheimer’s Disease  164
Vascular Dementia  165
Dementia with Lewy Bodies  166
Self-Assessment  166
Answers  167
Further Reading  167
Compendium of Drugs Used to Treat Cerebrovascular 
Disease and Dementia  168
STROKE
AETIOLOGY
Strokes are a major cause of morbidity and mortal-
ity, particularly in older people. They present as tran-
sient or permanent neurological disturbances caused 
by ischaemic infarction or haemorrhagic disruption 
of neuronal pathways in the brain. Almost all strokes 
result from arterial occlusion or rupture. Fewer than 
1% of strokes arise from venous occlusion (cerebral 
venous sinus or cortical vein thrombosis).
Ischaemic Strokes and Transient Ischaemic 
Attacks
Ischaemic strokes and transient ischaemic attacks 
(TIAs) account for about 85% of cerebrovascular 
events. Focal occlusion can take place in arteries 
within the brain (intracranial arterial occlusion) or in 
those leading to the brain (extracranial cervical artery 
occlusion). Cerebral infarction can result from arte-
rial thrombosis occluding the vessel, occlusive arte-
rial disease or small vessel disease. Alternatively, it 
arises from emboli travelling to the intracranial arter-
ies, typically from an unstable atheromatous plaque 
in an internal carotid artery (see also Chapter 5) or 
from the heart (cardioembolism, particularly com-
mon in association with atrial fibrillation). The mech-
anism underlying ischaemic stroke is important for 
selecting the most appropriate treatment for second-
ary prevention but is not relevant to the choice of 
acute treatment.
Following occlusion of a cerebral artery, the extent 
and duration of the resulting functional deficit are 
very variable. TIAs arise from small cerebral arterial 
emboli that briefly interrupt blood flow but disperse 
rapidly. They produce short-lived neurological signs 
and symptoms but leave no functional deficit 24 hours 
later. A completed stroke results from more prolonged 
cerebral ischaemia, which produces cerebral infarc-
tion. The neurological disturbance in completed 
stroke persists for more than 24 hours and frequently 
there is some permanent loss of function. Following 
a TIA there is a high risk of a completed stroke in 
the subsequent 7 days and a 30% risk of a completed 
stroke in the subsequent 5 years. However, the indi-
vidual risk varies widely according to the features at 
presentation.
Haemorrhagic Strokes
Primary intracerebral haemorrhage is responsible for 
up to 15% of strokes. It often arises from rupture of 
microaneurysms on intracerebral arteries, usually 
caused by hypertension. Less commonly, a haemor-
rhagic stroke arises from an intracerebral arteriove-
nous malformation or secondary to a subarachnoid 
haemorrhage. Haemorrhagic strokes frequently leave 
a permanent functional deficit.
PREVENTION AND TREATMENT OF STROKE
Considerations in the prevention and treatment of 
stroke are:
• primary prevention of a first event,
• acute reperfusion therapy for ischaemic stroke,
• prevention of recurrence of stroke or of other 
cardiovascular events,
• rehabilitation after the stroke.
About one-third of strokes are recurrent. The recur-
rence rate for ischaemic stroke is about 3% to 7% per 
year for individuals who are in sinus rhythm and up to 
12% per year for those in atrial fibrillation.
9
	
	
Cerebrovascular Disease and Dementia  CHAPTER 9	
161
Primary Prevention of Ischaemic Stroke
• Blood pressure reduction. Hypertension is the 
single most powerful predictor of both ischaemic 
and haemorrhagic stroke, with a linear relationship 
between blood pressure and stroke risk. Pooled trial 
results indicate that a reduction in systolic blood 
pressure of 10 mm Hg or diastolic blood pressure 
by 5 mm Hg reduces the risk of stroke by about 40% 
(see Chapter 6). For isolated systolic hypertension, 
a similar reduction in risk has been shown after an 
average reduction of 11  mm Hg in systolic blood 
pressure.
• Smoking cessation. Smoking nearly doubles the 
risk of ischaemic stroke, but the excess risk almost 
disappears 2 to 4 years after smoking cessation. This 
is probably due to slower progression of arterial 
atherothrombotic disease.
• Inhibition of blood coagulation in atrial fibrilla-
tion. Oral anticoagulation (see Chapters 8 and 11) 
in people with atrial fibrillation reduces the risk of a 
first ischaemic stroke by 70%. Warfarin at a dosage 
giving an international normalised ratio (INR) of 2 
to 3, or one of the direct-acting oral anticoagulants 
(e.g. apixaban, dabigatran, edoxaban or rivaroxa-
ban) can be used. Warfarin reduces the risk of stroke 
following myocardial infarction if there is an intra-
cardiac clot associated with an akinetic area of the 
left ventricular wall. Low-dose aspirin does not pre-
vent a first ischaemic stroke when taken by healthy 
individuals, whether they are in sinus rhythm or 
atrial fibrillation.
• Cholesterol reduction. Reduction of raised plasma 
cholesterol with a statin (see Chapter 48) produces 
a 25% reduction in the risk of a first stroke over 
5 years, although much of the evidence for this 
effect derives from trials in people who already 
have clinical evidence of vascular disease or have 
diabetes mellitus. Intensive reduction in serum cho-
lesterol has additional benefit over low-dose statins.
• Carotid endarterectomy or stenting. This is some-
times recommended for asymptomatic carotid 
artery disease when the stenosis exceeds 60%, but 
the annual risk of an ischaemic stroke is low in this 
situation.
• Glycaemic control in diabetes mellitus. People 
with diabetes mellitus have a higher risk of stroke 
and at a younger age than those without, with a 
higher risk the longer the duration of the condition. 
Glycaemic control alone may not be sufficient to 
reduce the risk, but combined with intensive blood 
pressure control and cholesterol reduction the risk 
can be reduced.
Acute Reperfusion Therapy for Ischaemic Stroke
Immediate treatment of disabling acute ischaemic 
stroke should be considered. Whether the stroke 
is disabling is determined from the severity of the 
neurological deficit and the person’s activity prior to 
the stroke. Acute treatment is carried out to restore 
perfusion to ischaemic tissue either using a fibrinolytic 
drug, by endovascular intervention or a combination 
of the two. Exclusion of intracranial haemorrhage with 
a CT scan is essential before considering reperfusion 
therapy.
Thrombolytic therapy with intravenous recombi-
nant tissue plasminogen activator (rt-PA, alteplase; 
see Chapter 11) can reduce the long-term neurological 
deficit after an ischaemic stroke. There are also data 
indicating that tenecteplase is at least as effective, 
with greater ease of use. If treatment is started within 
4.5 hours of the onset of symptoms, thrombolysis 
reduces the risk of death or dependency at 3 months, 
with greater benefit the earlier that treatment is given. 
Overall, 7% more people who are given a fibrinolytic 
drug after an ischaemic stroke will have no or minimal 
disability 3 months later and an additional one-third 
will have improved function. About 6% of people 
who are treated will have a symptomatic intracranial 
haemorrhage after thrombolysis, with a higher risk in 
those with a blood pressure above 185/110  mm Hg 
(blood pressure should be reduced before treatment), 
or when treatment is delayed. Bleeding can outweigh 
the benefit from neuronal salvage. Indications and 
usual contraindications for thrombolytic therapy in 
acute stroke are shown in Box 9.1. Anticoagulants or 
antiplatelet drugs should not be given for 24 hours 
after thrombolysis.
Endovascular recanalization using microcatheters 
for mechanical thrombectomy with a stent retriever or 
suction of the thrombus is now the treatment of choice 
for ischaemic stroke due to large anterior circulation 
vessel occlusion. It is essential to image the cerebral 
arterial circulation before attempting treatment, but the 
treatment window for improved outcomes is longer than 
for thrombolysis with benefit up to 24 hours after the 
onset of stroke if imaging confirms potential to salvage 
tissue. This allows treatment of late-presenting stroke 
as well as wake-up stroke when the time of onset is 
not known. Endovascular treatment is sometimes aug-
mented by an intraarterial fibrinolytic drug applied 
directly to the site of the thrombus.
Secondary Prevention of Recurrent Ischaemic 
Stroke
Many treatments are similar to those used for primary 
prevention of ischaemic stroke (see earlier).
• Blood pressure reduction. Lowering blood pres-
sure after a stroke will reduce the risk of recur-
rence by 30% to 40%. Blood pressure should not be 
reduced in the first few days after a stroke (unless 
it is very high and thrombolysis is considered; see 
earlier) because of concern that cerebral perfusion 
pressure may fall too much if the normal cerebral 
arterial autoregulation has been disturbed by the 
162	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
stroke. The target for blood pressure treatment for 
longer-term management is 130/80 mm Hg.
• Inhibition of platelet aggregation. Low-dose 
aspirin with dipyridamole can be used following a 
TIA for people who are in sinus rhythm. The com-
bination reduces the risk of a subsequent nonfatal 
stroke by about 35% and is more effective than 
aspirin alone. This combination is recommended 
for up to 2 years after a TIA, when the risk of 
recurrent stroke is highest, after which aspirin is 
usually used alone. Clopidogrel is often used as 
an alternative to aspirin with dipyridamole based 
on evidence from completed ischaemic stroke. Fol-
lowing acute ischaemic stroke, aspirin should be 
given alone for 2 weeks. After this, clopidogrel 
alone (see Chapter 11) is the preferred treatment. 
The combination of aspirin and clopidogrel is no 
more effective than aspirin alone for long-term 
prevention (unlike the case in acute coronary syn-
dromes; see Chapter 5) and increases the risk of 
serious bleeding. Anticoagulants have no role in 
preventing recurrent stroke in people who are in 
sinus rhythm.
• Inhibition of blood clotting. After a first stroke in 
people with atrial fibrillation, oral anticoagulation 
reduces the risk of a further stroke by two-thirds. 
Antiplatelet drugs have no protective effect in atrial 
fibrillation (see Chapter 11).
• Cholesterol reduction. Cholesterol reduction with 
a statin is effective in the secondary prevention 
of non-cardioembolic ischaemic stroke, reducing 
recurrent stroke by 15% over 5 years. However, the 
greatest advantage of cholesterol reduction in this 
situation lies in the prevention of ischaemic cardiac 
events. Coronary artery disease often coexists with 
atheromatous cerebrovascular disease and stroke 
survivors have a 17% risk of a myocardial infarction 
or vascular death in the subsequent 5 years.
• Carotid endarterectomy or stenting. This reduces 
the risk of recurrent stroke if there have already 
been transient focal neurological symptoms in the 
cerebral territory supplied by a diseased carotid 
artery. If the stenosis is 70% or greater of the vessel 
diameter (but without near total occlusion), then 
endarterectomy reduces the risk of recurrent stroke 
by about two-thirds over the subsequent 2 years 
(although there is a perioperative risk of stroke or 
death of 3%–5%). There is no benefit from surgery 
if the stenosis is less than 50%, and only marginal 
benefit if the stenosis is between 50% and 69%. 
Surgery should be carried out within 2 weeks of 
the initial ischaemic event, when the risk of recur-
rence is highest. Intervention carries no benefit after 
this time.
Primary Prevention of Haemorrhagic Stroke
• Blood pressure reduction. Treatment of raised 
blood pressure is the only means of reducing the 
risk of a first cerebral haemorrhage.
Acute Treatment of Haemorrhagic Stroke
• Blood pressure reduction. Systolic blood pressure 
should be gradually reduced to a target of 130 to 
140 mm Hg over 1 to 2 hours.
Box 9.1  Usual Indications and Contraindications for Thrombolysis in Acute Ischaemic Stroke.
INDICATIONS FOR THROMBOLYSIS
POTENTIAL CONTRAINDICATIONS TO THROMBOLYSIS
•  Clinical diagnosis of ischaemic stroke causing measur-
able neurological deficit for at least 30 min
•  Gastrointestinal or genitourinary haemorrhage in previous 
21 days
•  Onset of symptoms less than 4.5 h before beginning 
treatment
•  The person and family understand the potential risks 
and benefits of therapy
•  Active or recent bleeding at a non-compressible site e.g. 
gastrointestinal, intracranial, traumatic or surgical bleeding
•  History of previous intracranial haemorrhage within 3 months
•  Prior ischaemic stroke in past 3 months
•  Intracranial haemorrhage excluded by CT or MR scan 
of the head
•  Systolic blood pressure above 185 mm Hg or diastolic blood 
pressure above 110 mm Hg
•  Systemic malignancy
•  Intracranial malignant neoplasm
•  Intracranial arterial dissection
•  Suspected aortic dissection
•  Taking an oral anticoagulant (and if so, INR greater than 1.7)
•  Heparin within 48 h unless the activated partial 
thromboplastin time is ≤15 seconds
•  Platelet count of less than 100 × 109 L
•  Blood glucose less than 2.0 mmol/L or greater than 
22 mmol/L
CT, Computed tomography; INR, international normalised ratio; MR, magnetic resonance.
	
	
Cerebrovascular Disease and Dementia  CHAPTER 9	
163
• Correction of haemostatic abnormalities. This may 
involve reversal of therapeutic anticoagulation and 
temporary cessation of antiplatelet drugs.
• Neurosurgery. Decompression of raised intracra-
nial pressure from haematoma by craniotomy may 
be life-saving for rapid deterioration due to brain-
stem compression. Acute hydrocephalus should be 
treated by temporary catheter drainage.
Secondary Prevention of Recurrent 
Haemorrhagic Stroke
• Blood pressure reduction. Lowering blood pres-
sure after a haemorrhagic stroke will reduce the risk 
of recurrence by up to 40%. The reduction in risk 
from treating hypertension is greater than for isch-
aemic stroke, and even lowering a ‘normal’ blood 
pressure may be effective.
• Vascular protection. For most people, the risk of a 
subsequent ischaemic stroke is just as great as recur-
rence of haemorrhagic stroke. Attention should be 
given to factors that increase the risk of ischaemic 
strokes as previously described. Restarting anti-
platelet or anticoagulant treatments that were being 
used for primary or secondary prevention of isch-
aemic stroke or cardiac disease is controversial. 
However, the current evidence is that restarting 
treatment has greater benefit in preventing isch-
aemic events compared to the risk of recurrent cere-
bral haemorrhage, unless scanning shows multiple 
cerebral microbleeds.
SUBARACHNOID HAEMORRHAGE
About 85% of subarachnoid haemorrhages are caused 
by rupture of a saccular (or berry) aneurysm on an 
intracranial artery, usually on or close to the circle of 
Willis. These aneurysms are acquired during life and 
the cause is unknown. Of the remainder, 10% are non–
aneurysmal perimesencephalic haemorrhages which 
carry a more favourable prognosis, and 5% have 
a variety of causes including trauma and cerebral 
venous thrombosis. There is a genetically linked risk 
in first-degree relatives of people with aneurysmal 
subarachnoid haemorrhage. Other risk factors for the 
development of aneurysms include smoking, hyper-
tension and excess alcohol intake. Of these, hyper-
tension is the most important modifiable factor that 
predicts rupture. The peak incidence of subarachnoid 
haemorrhage is between the ages of 50 and 60 years.
Sudden onset of a severe occipital headache (thun-
derclap headache) is the most common presenting 
symptom (70% of cases). Up to 40% of people have 
a warning headache in the hours or days before the 
haemorrhage; this predicts a higher risk of rebleeding. 
Other symptoms are present in 50% of people with 
subarachnoid haemorrhage and include nausea, vom-
iting, focal neurological signs, progressive confusion 
and loss of consciousness. Rebleeding is a significant 
cause of disability and death and most often occurs 
within 72 hours of the first event. However, a more 
common cause of permanent neurological disability or 
later death is delayed cerebral ischaemia, which devel-
ops in about 25% of cases usually 3 to 14 days after the 
initial haemorrhage. The mechanism is poorly under-
stood but probably involves vasospasm, impaired 
autoregulation of blood flow, microthrombosis, cortical 
spreading ischaemia and immune responses. Delayed 
cerebral ischaemia presents with confusion, decreased 
consciousness, and new focal neurological deficits.
DRUGS FOR SUBARACHNOID HAEMORRHAGE
Nimodipine
Nimodipine is a dihydropyridine L-type calcium 
channel blocker (see Chapter 5) which is an arterial 
vasodilator with some selectivity for cerebral arteries. 
It reduces the risk of vasospasm following subarach-
noid haemorrhage, but probably produces most of its 
benefits by protecting ischaemic neurons from Ca2+ 
overload. There is a theoretical risk that cerebral arte-
rial vasodilation may facilitate further bleeding, but 
this does not appear to be a problem in practice.
Pharmacokinetics
Oral nimodipine is completely absorbed but under-
goes extensive first-pass metabolism (approximately 
90%) in the gut wall and liver. It has a half-life of 8 to 
9 hours and is eliminated by metabolism in the liver. It 
can also be given by intravenous infusion.
Unwanted effects
These are mainly caused by arterial dilation and 
include:
• hypotension, which can have a detrimental effect on 
cerebral perfusion,
• headache, flushing, sweating,
• thrombocytopenia (uncommon).
MANAGEMENT OF SUBARACHNOID 
HAEMORRHAGE
Initial treatment of subarachnoid haemorrhage aims 
to reduce ischaemic cerebral damage. Nimodipine 
is the only drug that has been shown to reduce the 
development of delayed cerebral ischaemia. It should 
be started within 96 hours of the initial bleed and 
given orally (intravenously in the acute stage if oral 
use is not possible) for 21 days. Intravenous fluids 
are given if necessary to maintain euvolaemia and 
avoid hypotension. The optimum blood pressure in 
the early period after the haemorrhage is not known. 
In those who present with significant hypertension, 
blood pressure should be lowered modestly prior to 
aneurysm repair to minimise the risk of rebleeding. 
Seizures occur in 25% of people with subarachnoid 
164	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
haemorrhage, and are treated by short-term use of 
anticonvulsants.
An important element in the management of sub-
arachnoid haemorrhage is surgical. Either endovas-
cular coil occlusion of the aneurysm or neurosurgical 
clipping of the neck of the aneurysm that produced the 
bleeding will reduce the risk of rebleeding. In the last 
20 years, early surgical intervention combined with 
medical therapy has reduced mortality from subarach-
noid haemorrhage from 50% to about 25%.
DEMENTIA
Dementia usually begins with forgetfulness and is 
characterised by disorientation in unfamiliar sur-
roundings, variable mood, restlessness and poor sleep. 
Deterioration in social behaviour with self-neglect 
often follows and may be accompanied by personal-
ity change including loss of inhibition. Most demen-
tia results from Alzheimer’s disease, cerebrovascular 
disease (multiinfarct dementia), or a combination of 
the two, but there are other causes (Box 9.2). Memory 
impairment in dementia is associated with bilateral 
hippocampal damage.
ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE
Alzheimer’s disease is the commonest cause of demen-
tia in people over the age of 65 years. About 10% of 
people over the age of 65 and about 30% of those over 
the age of 85 have some signs of Alzheimer’s disease. 
The onset of symptoms is gradual, with progressive 
deterioration, unlike the case with vascular dementia. 
Alzheimer’s disease is a neurodegenerative disorder 
that begins pathologically 20 to 30 years before the 
clinical onset. If there is doubt about the diagnosis on 
clinical grounds, typical abnormalities can be shown 
on FDG-PET (fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission 
tomography)-CT scanning.
The cause of Alzheimer’s disease is unknown, but 
there are several factors associated with the disease:
• Amyloid protein. Amyloid β is deposited in 
the medial temporal lobe and cerebral cortex of 
people with Alzheimer’s disease as senile plaques. 
The initiating factor may be an imbalance between 
production and reduced clearance of amyloid β in 
the brain, leading to toxic effects on neuronal syn-
apses. Deposition of amyloid β may be the driver 
for excessive phosphorylation of tau protein (found 
in axons, where it promotes microtubule assembly 
and vesicle transport), which then aggregates into 
the neurofibrillary tangles characteristic of Alzheim-
er’s disease.
• Genetic predisposition. This accounts for about 
70% of the risk. Mutations of the apolipopro-
tein E ε4 allele (APOE ε4, essential for amyloid 
β clearance) confer a higher risk of late-onset 
Alzheimer’s disease, whereas mutations in genes 
coding for amyloid β precursor protein and prese-
nilin 1 and 2 explain the rare familial version of the 
disease.
• Glutamate 
excitotoxicity. Amyloid 
β 
depos-
its may promote neuronal damage by increas-
ing the neuronal release of glutamate. This acts at 
N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptors to gener-
ate glutamate-induced excitotoxicity of cholinergic 
neurons. Hyperactivity of glutamatergic neurons is 
a common finding in Alzheimer’s disease.
• Oxidative stress. There is evidence of excessive 
free radical production in Alzheimer’s disease, 
possibly through NMDA receptor activation. 
Increased oxidative stress may contribute to the 
condition by reducing amyloid β clearance, and 
promoting metabolic derangement and apoptosis 
in neurons.
• Loss of cholinergic neurotransmission. There is a 
marked loss of acetylcholine neurotransmitter syn-
thesis and release in the cerebral cortex and the hip-
pocampus, particularly affecting the areas involved 
in cognition and in memory. This may be connected 
to glutamate-induced excitotoxicity. There is also 
loss of nicotinic and muscarinic receptors, possibly 
as a consequence of interaction of amyloid β with 
cholinergic receptors.
Drugs for Alzheimer’s Disease
Anticholinesterases
  Examples
donepezil, galantamine, rivastigmine
Mechanisms of action and effects.  The basis of the 
cholinergic hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease is that 
loss of cholinergic neurons in the basal forebrain nuclei 
results in abnormal function at cholinergic terminals in 
the hippocampus and neocortex, which are involved 
in memory and cognition. Anticholinesterases increase 
cholinergic transmission in the brain by inhibiting 
acetylcholinesterase (AChE) in the synaptic cleft (see 
Chapter 4).
• Donepezil is a reversible AChE inhibitor with a 
high degree of selectivity for the central nervous 
system.
Box 9.2  Causes of Dementia.
TREATABLE CAUSES OF 
DEMENTIA
IRREVERSIBLE AND PARTIALLY 
TREATABLE CAUSES OF DEMENTIA
Hypothyroidism
Vascular dementia
Neurosyphilis
Alzheimer’s disease
Vitamin B1 deficiency
Lewy body-type dementia
Normal-pressure 
hydrocephalus
Parkinson’s disease dementia
Progressive supranuclear palsy
Frontal lobe tumours
Multiple-system atrophy
Cerebral vasculitis
Cerebral hypoperfusion
	
	
Cerebrovascular Disease and Dementia  CHAPTER 9	
165
• Galantamine is a reversible AChE inhibitor that 
also has agonist activity at presynaptic nicotinic 
receptors by allosterically enhancing the receptor 
response to acetylcholine.
• Rivastigmine is a slowly reversible AChE inhibi-
tor with selectivity for the CNS, but it also inhib-
its pseudocholinesterase (butyrylcholinesterase), 
which is present in tissues and plasma.
Pharmacokinetics.  Donepezil and galantamine are 
metabolised in the liver; galantamine has a half-life of 
5 to 7 hours, whilst the half-life of donepezil is very 
long, at 70 to 80 hours. Rivastigmine is rapidly inacti-
vated by cholinesterase-mediated hydrolysis and has a 
short half-life of 1 to 2 hours. It can also be delivered by 
the transdermal route using a sustained release patch 
that is changed daily.
Unwanted effects
• Anorexia, nausea and vomiting, diarrhoea, abdomi-
nal pain.
• Drowsiness, hallucination, agitation, dizziness, 
insomnia, headache, depression.
• Rash, pruritus.
• Bradycardia.
N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor antagonists
  Example
memantine
Mechanism of action and effects.  Memantine is a 
derivative of the antiviral drug amantadine (see 
Chapter 24) and is a noncompetitive antagonist 
at glutamate NMDA receptors. This may prevent 
glutamate-induced excitotoxicity by limiting long-
lasting influx of Ca2+ into neurons but without inter-
fering with the actions of glutamate, which are in-
volved in memory and learning. Memantine is also 
a 5-HT3 receptor antagonist and a noncompetitive 
nicotinic receptor antagonist, but the significance 
of these actions for the treatment of dementia is un-
known. Memantine can be used together with an 
anticholinesterase.
Pharmacokinetics.  Memantine 
is 
excreted 
un-
changed by the kidneys. It has a very long half-life of 
60 to 80 hours.
Unwanted effects
• Constipation.
• Headache, dizziness, drowsiness, impaired balance.
• Hypertension.
• Dyspnoea.
Treatment of Alzheimer’s Disease
Group cognitive stimulation, group reminiscence and 
cognitive rehabilitation therapies should be offered to a 
person with dementia. Coordinated care with appropri-
ate support for the person and any carers is important.
Drug treatment for Alzheimer’s disease with an anti-
cholinesterase is recommended for people with mild 
to moderate dementia. The diagnosis of ­Alzheimer’s 
­disease should first be confirmed by a health profes-
sional with suitable expertise.
Current treatments for Alzheimer’s disease do not 
alter progression of the underlying pathology. Because 
the pathological changes are apparent many years 
before symptoms arise, intervention before neurode-
generative disease is established might be beneficial. 
This will become possible only with the introduction 
of markers for early diagnosis, and extensive research 
has so far failed to find an effective intervention that 
prevents the onset of significant symptoms. At the time 
of writing, the most promising potential treatment is a 
monoclonal antibody, aducanumab. This binds to amy-
loid β aggregates, especially in brain parenchyma, 
and reduces the size of senile plaques. The end result 
appears to be a slowing of cognitive decline in people 
with established Alzheimer’s disease.
All anticholinesterases produce a similar modest 
improvement in symptoms and a delay in the decline 
of cognitive function and memory in up to two-thirds 
of those who are treated. Efficacy should be assessed 
by questioning the person treated or a carer after 
2 to 4 months of treatment at the maximum tolerated 
dose. Treatment should not be stopped on the basis of 
disease severity alone. Anticholinesterases delay 
the decline in mental function by about 3 to 6 months, 
but it is not arrested. Rapid progression resumes when 
the drugs are stopped, but there may be limited benefit 
from restarting treatment if it is longer than a month 
after withdrawal. Anticholinesterases produce some 
improvement in other functional measures and behav-
iour, which also affect the quality of life.
Memantine produces moderate improvement in 
cognition and a reduction in functional decline; it is 
usually well tolerated. However, it may be ineffective 
in the early stages of Alzheimer’s disease. It is rec-
ommended for use in moderate Alzheimer’s disease 
when an anticholinesterase is poorly tolerated, or as 
monotherapy for severe Alzheimer’s disease. The 
combination of an anticholinesterase with memantine 
can produce additive benefits in severe dementia.
Neuropsychiatric complications of Alzheimer’s dis-
ease, such as depression and severe aggression, may 
require treatment. However, the value of antidepres-
sant therapy is uncertain. Antipsychotic drugs can pro-
duce significant unwanted effects with only modest 
benefit and should be avoided unless the person is at 
risk of harming themselves or others or is experiencing 
distressing agitation, hallucinations or delusions.
VASCULAR DEMENTIA
Cerebrovascular disease is a particularly common 
cause of dementia in people above 85 years of age; 
overall, it is the second most frequent cause of demen-
tia. The deterioration in mental function is produced 
by multiple cerebral infarcts (multiinfarct dementia), 
particularly if they affect the white matter. The risk of 
166	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
dementia is increased ninefold in people with stroke. 
In some of these, dementia may be produced by spe-
cific, strategically located infarcts, especially in the 
angular gyrus of the inferior parietal lobule. In contrast 
to Alzheimer’s disease, the initial presentation is usu-
ally more acute and cognitive decline has a stepwise 
course arising from recurrent cerebrovascular events.
Treatment of Vascular Dementia
• Prophylaxis against cerebral emboli with aspirin or 
warfarin, depending on the heart rhythm (see preven-
tion of stroke, discussed previously), is often recom-
mended. However, there is no evidence that aspirin 
is of benefit in preventing deterioration of vascular 
dementia in people who are in sinus rhythm.
• Control of hypertension (see Chapter 6). Calcium 
channel blockers reduce the risk of vascular demen-
tia, but it is likely to be an effect related to blood 
pressure reduction rather than a more specific effect 
of this class of drug.
• Anticholinesterases or memantine may produce 
some improvement in function in those suspected 
of having comorbid Alzheimer’s disease or demen-
tia with Lewy bodies.
• Immunosuppressant drugs (see Chapter 38) can be 
used in the rare cases caused by cerebral vasculitis.
DEMENTIA WITH LEWY BODIES
This form of dementia presents with fluctuating cogni-
tion and profound variations in attention and alertness. 
Recurrent complex visual hallucinations are character-
istic, along with REM sleep behaviour disorder with 
dream enactment behaviour. Features of parkinsonism 
are also common later in the disease process, usually 
at least a year after the onset of dementia. The appear-
ances on scanning the brain are different from the pat-
tern in Alzheimer’s disease.
Anticholinesterases or memantine improve cogni-
tion or prevent further deterioration in dementia with 
Lewy bodies. Antipsychotics should be avoided as 
they carry a risk of serious sensitivity reactions and 
increased mortality. Levodopa (see Chapter 24) may 
improve parkinsonian features, but the response is 
often less than that in Parkinson’s disease.
SELF-ASSESSMENT
TRUE/FALSE QUESTIONS
1.	 Aspirin reduces the risk of a first stroke in healthy 
individuals.
2.	 Aspirin cannot prevent a first stroke in people with 
persistent atrial fibrillation.
3.	 Approximately 85% of all strokes have a haemor-
rhagic aetiology.
4.	 If thrombolysis with rt-PA (alteplase) is given in 
acute stroke, antiplatelet and anticoagulant thera-
pies should not be given concurrently.
	 5.	 Anticoagulation with warfarin and antiplatelet 
therapy with aspirin are equal first-choice drugs 
for the secondary prevention of recurrent isch-
aemic strokes in the presence of sinus rhythm.
	 6.	 Cerebral ischaemia depolarises neurons and 
causes the release of large amounts of glutamate.
	 7.	 Donepezil is an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor with 
selectivity for the CNS.
	 8.	 Nimodipine reduces the risk of vasospasm follow-
ing subarachnoid haemorrhage.
	 9.	 The NMDA receptor antagonist memantine reduces 
neurotoxicity caused by the excitatory transmitter 
glutamate.
10.	 Cerebral emboli arising from the heart are invari-
ably caused by atrial fibrillation.
ONE-BEST-ANSWER (OBA) QUESTIONS
1.	 Smoking doubles the risk of ischaemic stroke, but 
after how many years does the excess risk almost 
disappear following smoking cessation?
A.	Within 2 years.
B.	 About 2–4 years.
C.	About 4–8 years.
D.	About 8–15 years.
E.	 The excess risk never disappears.
2.	 What proportion of people over 85 years of age 
show signs of Alzheimer’s disease?
A.	About 10%
B.	 About 20%
C.	About 30%
D.	About 40%
E.	 About 50%
3.	 Choose the most accurate statement about Alzheimer’s 
disease.
A.	Alzheimer’s disease is associated with re- 
duced cholinergic and glutamatergic neuro- 
transmission.
B.	 Group reminiscence is of little value in Alzheimer’s 
disease.
C.	Memantine is a muscarinic receptor agonist.
D.	Anticholinesterases should not be co-prescribed 
with memantine.
E.	 Unlike donepezil, rivastigmine inhibits both ace-
tylcholinesterase and butyrylcholinesterase.
CASE-BASED QUESTIONS
A 70-year-old man has a blood pressure of 190/110 mm 
Hg despite intensive antihypertensive drug treatment. 
He was admitted to hospital 6 hours after the acute onset 
of unilateral weakness and sensory loss. At the time of 
admission to hospital, most of the neurological signs had 
resolved. He had no headache or vomiting and remained 
conscious and in sinus rhythm. Following clinical exami-
nation and a computed tomography (CT) brain scan, this 
episode was diagnosed as a TIA.
1.	 Should thrombolysis be given?
2.	 What 
other 
therapies 
should 
be 
instituted 
immediately?
	
	
Cerebrovascular Disease and Dementia  CHAPTER 9	
167
3.	 What secondary prevention strategy should be 
employed?
ANSWERS
TRUE/FALSE ANSWERS
	 1.	 False. Aspirin does not reduce the risk of a first 
stroke in healthy individuals in sinus rhythm.
	 2.	 False. Aspirin reduces the risk of a first embolic 
stroke in atrial fibrillation by about 25% but is less 
effective than warfarin.
	 3.	 False. About 85% of strokes have ischaemic aeti-
ology; up to 15% are caused by intracerebral 
haemorrhage.
	 4.	 True. The immediate risk of intracranial haemor-
rhage with alteplase could be compounded by 
simultaneous use of antiplatelet or anticoagulant 
agents. These should be considered later when the 
effect of the fibrinolytic has waned.
	 5.	 False. In people in sinus rhythm, aspirin alone (or 
together with dipyridamole) reduces the risk of 
stroke; warfarin is no more effective and poses a 
greater risk of major bleeding.
	 6.	 True. The excitatory transmitter glutamate can 
cause a substantial rise in intracellular Ca2+, caus-
ing Ca2+ overload and cell death by the generation 
of free radicals.
	 7.	 True. Anticholinesterase drugs enhance cholin-
ergic activity in the hippocampus and neocortex, 
improving memory and cognition.
	 8.	 True. By blocking L-type calcium channels in the 
CNS, nimodipine reduces vasospasm and also 
protects ischaemic neurons from Ca2+ overload.
	 9.	 True. Memantine blocks NMDA (glutamate) 
receptors and reduces the glutamate-induced 
excitotoxicity of cholinergic neurons.
10.	 False. Cerebral emboli arising from the heart can 
also be caused by infected or damaged prosthetic 
valves or following damage to the myocardium.
OBA ANSWERS
1.	 Answer B is correct. The excess risk of smoking 
for ischaemic stroke almost disappears within 2 to 
4 years of smoking cessation. See Chapter 54 for nic-
otine replacement therapy (NRT) and other drugs 
used to aid smoking cessation.
2.	 Answer C is correct. About 30% of people over 
85 years of age show signs of Alzheimer’s disease.
3.	 Answer E is correct.
A.	Incorrect. Alzheimer’s disease is associated with 
reduced cholinergic transmission and increased 
glutamatergic transmission.
B.	 Incorrect. Group reminiscence, group cognitive 
stimulation and group cognitive rehabilitation 
should be offered.
C.	Incorrect. Memantine is a glutamate NMDA re-
ceptor antagonist.
D.	Incorrect. Anticholinesterases and memantine 
can be usefully co-prescribed.
E.	Correct. Rivastigmine inhibits both acetylcho-
linesterase and pseudocholinesterase (butyr-
ylcholinesterase), but it is unclear whether its 
additional inhibition of the latter provides extra 
clinical benefit.
CASE-BASED ANSWERS
1.	 Thrombolysis is inappropriate in this 70-year-old 
man. His blood pressure is high and a consider-
able time (>4.5 hours) has passed since the onset 
of symptoms. The rapid resolution of signs indi-
cates a TIA, for which thrombolysis is not given. 
Although thrombolysis has been shown in some 
trials to be useful in the treatment of stroke, safe 
and effective use is determined by a rigid set of 
criteria as there is a significant risk of intracranial 
haemorrhage.
2.	 The patient’s blood pressure must be brought under 
control. Reduction in blood pressure has a major 
effect on the prevention of a recurrent stroke. He 
should also be given the antiplatelet drugs aspirin 
and dipyridamole, or clopidogrel alone.
3.	 Antiplatelet therapy should be continued. Dipyri-
damole has additional benefit when given together 
with aspirin. Cholesterol reduction with a statin is 
effective in the secondary prevention of ischaemic 
stroke. It would be worth treating this man with 
a statin even if his cholesterol were not raised. An 
important reason for cholesterol reduction is the 
prevention of ischaemic cardiac events as coronary 
artery disease often coexists with atheromatous 
cerebrovascular disease.
FURTHER READING
STROKE
Boehme, A.K., Esenwa, C., Elkind, M.S.V., 2017. Stroke risk 
factors, genetics, and prevention. Circ. Res. 120, 472–495.
Cordonnier, C., Demchuk, A., Ziai, W., Anderson, C.S., 2018. 
Intracerebral haemorrhage: current approaches to management. 
Lancet 392, 1257–1268.
Zerna, C., Thomalla, G., Campbell, B.C.V., et al., 2018. Current 
practice and future directions in the diagnosis and acute 
treatment of ischaemic stroke. Lancet 392, 1247–1256.
SUBARACHNOID HAEMORRHAGE
Macdonald, R.L., Schweizer, T.A., 2018. Spontaneous sub­
arachnoid haemorrhage. Lancet 389, 655–666.
DEMENTIA
Briggs, R., Kennelly, S.P., O’Neill, D., 2016. Drug treatment in 
Alzheimer’s disease. Clin. Med 16, 247–253.
Scheltens, P., Blennow, J., Breteler, M.M.B., et  al., 2016. 
Alzheimer’s disease. Lancet 388, 505–517.
168	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
Compendium of Drugs Used to Treat Cerebrovascular Disease and Dementia.
DRUG
CHARACTERISTICS
Anticholinesterase (AChE) Drugs
Donepezil
AChE inhibitor. Used for mild to moderate dementia in Alzheimer’s disease. Given orally. Long half-
life (70–80 h).
Galantamine
AChE inhibitor and nicotinic receptor agonist. Used for mild to moderate dementia in Alzheimer’s 
disease. Given orally.
Rivastigmine
Inhibitor of AChE and pseudocholinesterase (butyrylcholinesterase). Used for mild to moderate 
dementia in Alzheimer’s disease; also used in Parkinson’s disease. Given orally or by 
transcutaneous patch.
Other Drugs
Antiplatelet drugs 
(aspirin, clopidogrel, 
dipyridamole)
See Chapter 11.
Memantine
Glutamate NMDA receptor antagonist; significance of additional actions at 5-HT3, nicotinic 
and dopamine D2 receptors is unclear. Used for moderate to severe dementia in Alzheimer’s 
disease. Given orally. Long half-life (60–80 h).
Nimodipine
Dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker (see Chapter 5) selective for cerebral arteries. Use is 
confined to the prevention and treatment of ischaemic neurological deficits following aneurysmal 
subarachnoid haemorrhage. Given orally or by intravenous infusion.
NMDA, N-methyl-d-aspartate.
169
Peripheral Artery Disease
10
Chapter Outline
Atheromatous Peripheral Artery Disease  169
Symptoms of Peripheral Artery Disease  169
Drugs for Peripheral Artery Disease  169
Management of Intermittent Claudication  170
Acute and Critical Limb Ischaemia  170
Management of Acute and Critical Limb  
Ischaemia  171
Raynaud’s Phenomenon  171
Management of Raynaud’s Phenomenon  172
Self-Assessment  172
Answers  173
Further Reading  174
Compendium of Drugs Used to Treat Peripheral Artery 
Disease  174
ATHEROMATOUS PERIPHERAL ARTERY DISEASE
Atherothrombotic disease is by far the most important 
cause of peripheral artery disease. Disease in periph-
eral arteries principally affects the aorta and the renal 
and lower limb arteries. The risk factors for its devel-
opment are similar to those for coronary artery and 
cerebrovascular disease (see Chapters 5 and 9). The 
strongest associations of peripheral artery disease are 
with increasing age, smoking and diabetes mellitus, 
and to a lesser extent with a raised systolic blood pres-
sure, a raised plasma low-density lipoprotein (LDL) 
cholesterol and chronic kidney disease. Not surpris-
ingly, symptomatic ischaemic heart disease and cere-
brovascular disease coexist in up to 60% of people with 
peripheral artery disease and are responsible for about 
70% of their excess mortality.
SYMPTOMS OF PERIPHERAL ARTERY DISEASE
Symptoms usually arise as a consequence of athero-
sclerotic stenosis of a lower limb artery involving more 
than 50% of the diameter of an arterial lumen. Hypoxia 
of skeletal muscle occurs when blood flow through the 
diseased artery fails to increase sufficiently to meet 
the increased metabolic demand of the muscle dur-
ing exercise. This produces intermittent claudication, 
which is ischaemic pain in the muscles of the limb aris-
ing from metabolic changes that accompany the switch 
to anaerobic metabolism. The severity of reduction in 
blood flow to the limb does not correlate well with 
symptoms, which may be determined by ischaemia–
reperfusion injury and altered oxidative metabolism in 
the poorly perfused muscle.
Intermittent claudication is precipitated by exercise 
and relieved by rest. Depending on whether the vas-
cular narrowing is in a distal or proximal lower limb 
artery, pain can be experienced in the calf, thigh or but-
tock. The presence of a collateral arterial circulation 
(see Chapter 5) will reduce the severity of the symp-
toms and influence the long-term outcome. In three-
quarters of people with peripheral artery disease, 
the symptoms stabilise or improve within a few 
months of presentation. The remaining 25% experi-
ence steady progression, but fewer than 5% of symp-
tomatic individuals will develop critical ischaemia, 
which causes pain at rest and ultimately distal gan-
grene (described later).
DRUGS FOR PERIPHERAL ARTERY DISEASE
Naftidrofuryl Oxalate
Mechanism of action and effects
Naftidrofuryl oxalate activates the mitochondrial 
enzyme succinic dehydrogenase, promoting the pro-
duction of high-energy adenosine triphosphate (ATP) 
in ischaemic tissue. It is also a 5-hydroxytryptamine 
type 2 (5-HT2) receptor antagonist, which may cause 
arterial vasodilation and reduce platelet aggregation. 
These actions could improve blood flow to ischaemic 
tissues and tissue nutrition.
Pharmacokinetics
Naftidrofuryl is given orally and metabolised in the 
liver. It has a half-life of 3 to 4 hours.
Unwanted effects
• Nausea, vomiting, epigastric pain.
• Rash.
• Hepatitis is a rare but potentially serious com- 
plication.
Cilostazol
Mechanism of action
Cilostazol is a reversible inhibitor of the phosphodi-
esterase type 3 (PDE3) enzyme and therefore reduces 
breakdown of cAMP (see Table 1.1). PDE3 is present 
170	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
in vascular smooth muscle cells and platelets, and its 
inhibition causes vasodilation and inhibits platelet 
activation and aggregation. Other potential actions 
of cilostasol include inhibition of cellular adenosine 
reuptake, which promotes vasodilation, increasing 
plasma high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, 
and inhibition of cell proliferation in vascular smooth 
muscle. Cilostazol is no longer recommended for the 
treatment of claudication in peripheral artery disease.
Pharmacokinetics
Cilostazol undergoes hepatic metabolism via cyto-
chrome P450 to two metabolites with antiplatelet 
activity, one of which is more active than cilostazol. 
Cilostazol has a half-life of about 12 hours.
Unwanted effects
• Decreased appetite, nausea, abdominal discomfort, 
diarrhoea.
• Headache.
• Palpitation and tachycardia.
• Other PDE3 inhibitors such as milrinone have 
been shown to increase mortality in people with 
heart failure (see Chapter 7); cilostazol does not 
appear to increase the risk of life-threatening 
arrhythmias, but is contraindicated in people with 
heart failure, cardiac arrhythmias and ischaemic 
heart disease.
• Increased risk of bleeding when combined with 
aspirin and clopidogrel.
• Blood dyscrasias.
• Drug interactions: the dose of cilostazol should be 
reduced with concomitant use of drugs that inhibit 
cytochrome P450 isoenzymes 3A4 (such as clarithro-
mycin, itraconazole) or 2C19 (such as erythromycin, 
omeprazole).
MANAGEMENT OF INTERMITTENT 
CLAUDICATION
Most people with peripheral artery disease are asymp-
tomatic, probably because many become sedentary to 
avoid symptoms.
Nonpharmacological Treatment
• Stopping smoking slows the progression of periph-
eral atherosclerosis and may improve walking dis-
tance by improving blood oxygen transport. It will 
also reduce the risk of coronary and cerebrovascu-
lar events and is therefore a cornerstone of long-
term management. The chance of survival 5 years 
from diagnosis is halved in those who continue to 
smoke.
• Regular supervised exercise past the usual claudica-
tion distance can improve maximum walking dis-
tance by 150% over 8 to 12 weeks. Walking for more 
than 30 minutes three times a week to moderate dis-
comfort is most effective.
Pharmacological Treatment
Much of the treatment of peripheral artery disease is 
aimed at reducing the risk of myocardial infarction and 
stroke, which are the main reasons for excess mortality.
• Low-dose aspirin inhibits platelet aggregation and 
reduces cardiac and cerebrovascular events (see 
Chapter 11).
• Intensive management of hypertension reduces pro-
gression of atheroma. Conventional antihyperten-
sive therapy is used, with ramipril widely endorsed 
as first-line treatment (see Chapter 6). Treatment of 
hypertension does not affect symptoms of intermit-
tent claudication. Although β-adrenoceptor antago-
nists could theoretically exacerbate intermittent 
claudication by reducing cardiac output and impair-
ing vasodilation of arteries supplying skeletal muscle 
(see Chapter 5), there is little evidence of a deleterious 
effect, except when there is critical limb ischaemia.
• Lowering serum LDL cholesterol with a statin (see 
Chapter 48) can stabilise or regress atherosclerotic 
plaques. It is unclear whether this improves walk-
ing distance, but there may be a lower risk of ampu-
tation. The main benefit of lowering cholesterol may 
be reduced morbidity and mortality from coexistent 
ischaemic heart disease and stroke (see Chapter 5).
• Controlling HbA1c in people with diabetes mellitus 
reduces the risk of microvascular complications but 
has little effect on the risk of amputation.
• Naftidrofuryl oxalate improves maximum walk-
ing distance by up to 60%, but this is often insuf-
ficient to make a difference to quality of life. A trial 
of treatment may be justified for those who remain 
restricted by the disease after 6 to 12 months of 
conservative treatment, and for whom surgical 
intervention is inappropriate or has failed. With-
drawal is advised after 3 to 6 months of treatment 
to assess whether spontaneous improvement has 
occurred.
• Cilostazol can improve maximum walking distance 
by up to 25% over 3 to 6 months of treatment, but 
the impact of this on quality of life is often minimal 
and it is no longer recommended.
Surgical Treatment
Surgical treatment is usually considered if quality 
of life is significantly impaired by claudication after 
3 months of supervised exercise or if tissue integrity 
is at risk. Percutaneous transluminal angioplasty, often 
with insertion of a stent, is used particularly for single 
stenoses above the inguinal ligament while bypass sur-
gery, usually using autologous vein as the conduit, is 
used for multiple or large occlusions.
ACUTE AND CRITICAL LIMB ISCHAEMIA
Acute limb ischaemia is usually caused by an arterial 
embolus. This can arise from an intracardiac throm-
bus, usually associated with atrial fibrillation (see 
	
	
Peripheral Artery Disease  CHAPTER 10	
171
Chapter 8) or following a myocardial infarction, or 
from aortic or internal iliac artery thrombus. Acute 
limb ischaemia often arises when an embolus occludes 
a previously healthy artery and it presents with a clus-
ter of symptoms and signs – the “6P’s”. These are acute 
onset of severe pain at rest, associated with signs of 
critically impaired tissue perfusion (pallor, pulseless-
ness, perishing cold, paraesthesia and paralysis).
Critical limb ischaemia results from subtotal 
occlusion of an artery, and is typically due to partial 
occlusion of the vessel from thrombus at the site of a 
flow-limiting stenosis or on a ruptured atherosclerotic 
plaque (‘acute-on-chronic’ ischaemia). The symptoms 
include rest pain in the foot, often worse at night and 
relieved by hanging the leg out of the bed.
MANAGEMENT OF ACUTE AND CRITICAL 
LIMB ISCHAEMIA
Unless treatment of acute or acute-on-chronic critical 
limb ischaemia is rapid, the person may be left with 
a chronically ischaemic limb, or occasionally the limb 
may be lost through gangrene. If the limb is still via-
ble, then a peripheral arterial angiogram should be 
carried out.
For acute embolic arterial occlusion of an otherwise 
healthy vessel, embolectomy is the treatment of choice. 
An acute thrombus or embolus occluding a previously 
stenotic vessel can be dissolved by intraarterial throm-
bolysis with recombinant tissue plasminogen activator 
(rt-PA; alteplase; see Chapter 11). Alteplase is usu-
ally infused via a catheter into the thrombus for up to 
24 hours, or it can be given as repeated boluses. Reper-
fusion takes several hours and in about 25% of acute 
vascular occlusions lysis is not achieved, especially 
if there is embolic occlusion. The risk of intracerebral 
haemorrhage is also a concern. Thrombolysis can be 
complemented by thrombectomy via a catheter to aid 
clearance. A surgical bypass may be considered if there 
is no time for thrombolysis or for treatment of chronic 
limb ischaemia.
RAYNAUD’S PHENOMENON
Raynaud’s phenomenon is a profound and exag-
gerated vasospastic response of blood vessels in the 
extremities on exposure to cold, change in environ-
mental temperature or during emotional upset. This 
leads to episodes of ischaemia that most commonly 
affect the fingers (occasionally also the toes, lips, ear 
lobes or the nipples). A typical attack initially pro-
duces pallor of the affected part (deoxygenation), fol-
lowed by one or both of cyanosis and then erythema 
as blood flow returns to the affected area. The hyper-
aemic phase may be accompanied by pain and paraes-
thesia. Each attack can last several minutes or up to a 
few hours. The prevalence of Raynaud’s phenomenon 
in the population is about 5%, with about two-thirds 
of cases occurring in women. Common symptoms 
include discomfort, numbness and tingling, with loss 
of function and pain if the condition is severe.
The majority of cases of Raynaud’s phenomenon 
are idiopathic (primary Raynaud’s phenomenon; also 
called Raynaud’s disease). Symptoms usually begin in 
teenage years or early twenties. The cause of the exces-
sive vascular reactivity is unknown, although there 
is a genetic predisposition. Vascular function in other 
tissues is often abnormal in primary Raynaud’s phe-
nomenon – for example, in the cerebral arteries (giv-
ing an association with migraine), the coronary arteries 
(producing variant angina) or, more rarely, in the pul-
monary arteries (leading to primary pulmonary hyper-
tension). In primary Raynaud’s phenomenon, tissue 
ischaemia is completely reversible, almost always 
without leaving permanent tissue damage.
In about 10% of cases, Raynaud’s phenomenon is 
secondary to another disorder. This is most commonly 
systemic sclerosis, but there are many other associated 
conditions (Box 10.1). Structural damage to arteries is 
common in secondary Raynaud’s phenomenon, and 
digital ulceration or occasionally gangrene is much 
more common than in the primary type.
Other disorders of the peripheral circulation should 
also be considered in the differential diagnosis of 
Raynaud’s phenomenon:
• Acrocyanosis usually affects the hands and pro-
duces persistently cold, bluish fingers which are 
often sweaty or oedematous. The management 
of this condition is similar to that of Raynaud’s 
phenomenon.
Box 10.1  Conditions Associated with Raynaud’s 
Phenomenon.
Connective tissue disorders
Systemic sclerosis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Rheumatoid arthritis
Dermatomyositis and polymyositis
Obstructive arterial disorders
Carpal tunnel syndrome
Thoracic outlet syndrome
Atherosclerosis
Thromboangiitis obliterans
Drugs and chemicals
Ergotamine
Beta-adrenoceptor antagonists
Bleomycin, vinblastine, cisplatin
Oral contraceptives
Vinyl chloride
Occupational
Vibrating tools
Cold environment
Blood disorders
Polycythaemia
Cold agglutinin disease
Monoclonal gammopathies
Thrombocytosis
172	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
• Chilblains are an inflammatory disorder with ery-
thematous lesions on the feet, or less commonly 
the hands or face, which are precipitated by rapid 
rewarming after exposure to cold and humidity. The 
lesions are often painful or itchy. Treatments used 
for Raynaud’s phenomenon may help, with the 
addition of topical nonsteroidal antiinflammatory 
agents (see Chapter 29).
• Erythromelalgia is a painful, burning condition 
often affecting the hands and feet that, unlike Rayn-
aud’s phenomenon, is usually provoked by heat. 
It sometimes responds to treatment with a calcium 
channel blocker (see Chapter 5) or gabapentin (see 
Chapter 23).
• Vibration white finger is a patchy digital vasospasm 
associated with prolonged use of vibrating tools. If 
drug treatment is necessary, it is similar to that for 
Raynaud’s phenomenon.
MANAGEMENT OF RAYNAUD’S PHENOMENON
Many people with Raynaud’s phenomenon are 
only mildly inconvenienced by their symptoms and 
respond to simple measures. Drug treatment is usually 
reserved for those experiencing pain, impairment of 
function or trophic changes. Responses to individual 
treatments are unpredictable, and less satisfactory in 
secondary Raynaud’s phenomenon because of struc-
tural changes to the vessel wall.
Nonpharmacological Treatment
• Minimising changes in ambient temperature with 
insulating clothing is often enough to reduce the 
number of attacks. Electrically heated gloves or 
socks may be useful for more severely affected 
people.
• Smoking should be strongly discouraged. Nico-
tine promotes vasospasm and may also reduce the 
threshold for other provoking factors.
• Aggravating factors should be withdrawn or cor-
rected whenever possible (see Box 10.1). Beta-
adrenoceptor antagonists (see Chapter 5) produce 
peripheral circulatory problems sufficient to neces-
sitate stopping treatment in about 3% to 5% of peo-
ple who take them.
• Surgical sympathectomy is occasionally used for 
advanced disease.
Pharmacological Treatment
Arterial vasodilators
• Calcium channel blockers (see Chapter 5): modi-
fied-release nifedipine is the drug of first choice for 
Raynaud’s phenomenon, and usually reduces the 
frequency, duration and intensity of vasospastic epi-
sodes. Several other dihydropyridines are probably 
equally effective, but diltiazem is less effective and 
verapamil ineffective in this condition.
• Naftidrofuryl oxalate may produce a modest reduc-
tion in the severity of attacks.
• Alpha1-adrenoceptor antagonists (see Chapter 6): 
moxisylyte or prazosin are typically used. Moxi-
sylyte does not lower blood pressure to the same 
degree as other α1-adrenoceptor antagonists, but its 
efficacy is not supported by good evidence.
• Angiotensin II receptor antagonists or angiotensin-
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors (see Chapter 6).
• Phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors, such as silde-
nafil (see Chapter 16), have been used particularly 
in secondary Raynaud’s phenomenon that is resis-
tant to other vasodilators.
• Bosentan, 
an 
endothelin 
receptor 
antagonist 
(see Chapter 6), is effective in severe Raynaud’s 
phenomenon.
• Fluoxetine (see Chapter 22), a selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) antidepressant, may be 
helpful for people who experience unwanted effects 
with other vasodilators.
• Calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) is effective 
for prolonged periods when given by short intrave-
nous infusions over 5 or more consecutive days. It is 
a neurotransmitter for vasodilator cutaneous senso-
rimotor nerves in the fingers and toes. CGRP is usu-
ally reserved for failure to respond to epoprostenol 
(described later).
Drugs acting primarily on blood components
• Prostaglandins: short intravenous infusions of epo-
prostenol (prostacyclin, PGI2, see Chapter 11) over 
at least 5 consecutive days produce immediate vaso-
dilation. There is long-term improvement in symp-
toms and healing of ulcers over a period of 10 to 
16 weeks following treatment. Prolonged effects are 
believed to be caused by reduced platelet aggrega-
tion, increased red cell deformability and reduced 
neutrophil adhesiveness, which together improve 
blood flow. Epoprostenol is rapidly inactivated in 
plasma by hydrolysis and has a very short half-life 
of about 3 minutes. Unwanted effects due to vasodi-
lation include flushing, headache and hypotension, 
as well as nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, diar-
rhoea, anxiety, arrhythmias, chest discomfort and 
arthralgia. Epoprostenol is usually used for refrac-
tory secondary Raynaud’s phenomenon.
• Inositol nicotinate (a nicotinic acid derivative) pro-
duces a gradual onset of clinical response and only 
modest improvement in symptoms and is not rec-
ommended. Its action may result more from fibrino-
lysis (reducing plasma viscosity) and reduction in 
platelet aggregation than from vasodilation.
SELF-ASSESSMENT
TRUE/FALSE QUESTIONS
1.	 Diabetes mellitus, hypertension and smoking con-
fer an additive risk of developing peripheral artery 
disease.
	
	
Peripheral Artery Disease  CHAPTER 10	
173
2.	 People with intermittent claudication do not have 
an increased risk of developing coronary artery 
disease.
3.	 Statin drugs are indicated in people with symptom-
atic atherosclerotic peripheral artery disease.
4.	 Epoprostenol mimics the actions of thromboxane 
A2.
5.	 Bosentan is an endothelin receptor antagonist used 
in Raynaud’s phenomenon.
6.	 Verapamil is the calcium channel blocker of choice 
in the treatment of Raynaud’s phenomenon.
ONE-BEST-ANSWER (OBA) QUESTION
1.	 What is the mechanism of action of naftidrofuryl 
oxalate?
A.	Naftidrofuryl decreases plasma HDL cholesterol.
B.	 Naftidrofuryl inhibits PDE3 in vascular tissues.
C.	Naftidrofuryl inhibits succinic dehydrogenase in 
mitochondria.
D.	Naftidrofuryl is a 5-hydroxytryptamine type 2 
(5-HT2) receptor antagonist.
E.	 Naftidrofuryl is an α1-adrenoceptor antagonist.
CASE-BASED QUESTIONS
Mr T.H., aged 67 years, has type 1 diabetes mellitus 
and smokes 20 cigarettes a day. His plasma total cho-
lesterol is raised at 7.2 mmol/L and his blood pressure 
is 160/110 mm Hg. After walking 50 metres he devel-
ops pain in his left calf muscle, which is relieved by 
rest. He occasionally has rest pain at night. On exami-
nation, both popliteal and posterior tibial pulses are 
absent, and femoropopliteal atherosclerotic disease is 
diagnosed.
1.	 Comment on the usefulness and drawbacks of the 
following drugs to treat Mr T.H.’s peripheral vascu-
lar disease.
A.	Propranolol
B.	 Atenolol
C.	Nifedipine
D.	A statin
E.	 Low-dose aspirin
F.	 Cilostazol
2.	 What other therapy could be of benefit?
3.	 Should the use of an electric blanket be discouraged?
ANSWERS
TRUE/FALSE ANSWERS
1.	 True. The risk factors for peripheral artery disease 
are similar to those for coronary artery and cerebro-
vascular disease.
2.	 False. There is a two- to fourfold increased risk of 
developing coronary disease, stroke or heart failure 
compared with age-matched subjects who do not 
have intermittent claudication.
3.	 True. Lowering serum LDL cholesterol can stabilise 
or regress atherosclerotic plaques.
4.	 False. Epoprostenol is prostacyclin (prostaglandin 
I2), which has actions on vessels and platelets oppo-
site to those of thromboxane A2.
5.	 True. Bosentan produces vasodilation by block-
ing the action of endothelin-1 at its ET-A and ET-B 
receptors; it is used for Raynaud’s phenomenon in 
people with systemic sclerosis.
6.	 False. Verapamil is ineffective in the treatment of 
Raynaud’s phenomenon, and the drug of choice is 
nifedipine.
OBA ANSWER
1.	 Answer D is correct; naftidrofuryl oxalate is a 5-HT2 
antagonist that causes vasodilation and reduced plate-
let activity; it also increases ATP in ischaemic tissue by 
activating succinic dehydrogenase (not by inhibiting 
it, as in answer C). It has no effect on plasma HDL 
cholesterol (answer A). Answer B is the mechanism of 
cilostazol and answer E that of moxisylyte.
CASE-BASED ANSWERS
1.	 The usefulness and drawbacks of drugs A–F in 
treating Mr T.H. are as follows:
A.	Beta-adrenoceptor antagonists should probably be 
avoided in this man. They would not be the drug 
of choice in the initial treatment of his high blood 
pressure (see Chapter 6), and by reducing cardiac 
output and inhibiting vasodilation, they could fur-
ther reduce blood flow in critical limb ischaemia.
B.	 Cardioselective β-adrenoceptor antagonists such 
as atenolol do not cause deterioration in walking 
distance when used without a vasodilator.
C.	Vasodilators will lower blood pressure but do 
not improve walking distance. In some people, 
they may redirect blood from the maximally di-
lated ischaemic tissues to healthy tissues (vascu-
lar steal). This can be particularly troublesome 
in critical limb ischaemia, or when the cardiac 
output is also reduced by concurrent use of a 
β-adrenoceptor antagonist.
D.	Lowering LDL cholesterol can stabilise atheroscle-
rotic plaques, perhaps reducing the conse­quences 
of coexistent heart disease; it is not known whether 
walking distance or limb survival are improved.
E.	 Low-dose aspirin inhibits platelet aggregation 
and reduces future cardiac events, which are com-
mon in people with peripheral vascular disease.
F.	 Cilostazol is no longer recommended for people 
with claudication due to peripheral artery disease.
2.	 Intensive management of blood pressure, control 
of diabetes mellitus and antiplatelet therapy will 
reduce the risk of cardiac events. An exercise pro-
gramme can improve walking distance significantly. 
Smoking is a major contributory factor to impaired 
walking distance and cardiac events.
3.	 An electric blanket should be discouraged, as exces-
sive warming of limbs may dilate normal arteries, 
‘stealing’ blood from diseased arteries.
174	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
FURTHER READING
Morley, R.L., Sharma, A., Horsch, A.D., Hinchcliffe, R.J., 2018. 
Peripheral artery disease. BMJ 360, j5842.
Wigley, F.M., Flavahan, N.A., 2016. Raynaud’s phenomenon. N. 
Engl. J. Med. 375, 556–565.
Compendium of Drugs Used to Treat Peripheral Artery Disease.
DRUG
CHARACTERISTICS
All given orally unless otherwise stated.
Cilostazol
Reversible inhibitor of phosphodiesterase (PDE) type 3 and adenosine reuptake inhibitor in vascular 
smooth muscle cells, causing vasodilation; also has antiplatelet activity and increases plasma HDL 
cholesterol. Not recommended in peripheral artery disease.
Epoprostenol
Prostaglandin I2 (prostacyclin); vasodilator and antiplatelet activity. Freshly reconstituted from dry 
powder before intravenous infusion. Very short half-life (<3 min).
Inositol nicotinate
Hydrolysed to nicotinic acid (niacin), a vasodilator, but not recommended; also used for 
hyperlipidaemias.
Moxisylyte
Formerly known as thymoxamine in the UK. Prodrug converted to desacetylmoxisylyte, which blocks 
α1-adrenoceptors. Used for the short-term treatment of primary Raynaud’s phenomenon.
Naftidrofuryl oxalate
Activates mitochondrial succinic dehydrogenase and is a 5-HT2 receptor antagonist.
Pentoxifylline
PDE inhibitor; increases erythrocyte flexibility and decreases blood viscosity, possibly by increasing 
erythrocyte cAMP, but not recommended.
cAMP, Cyclic adenosine monophosphate; HDL, high-density lipoprotein.
175
Haemostasis
11
Chapter Outline
Platelets and Platelet Aggregation  175
Blood Coagulation and the Coagulation  
Cascade  177
Arterial and Venous Thrombosis  178
Antiplatelet Drugs  178
Cyclooxygenase Inhibitors  178
Phosphodiesterase Inhibitors  179
Adenosine Diphosphate (ADP) Receptor 
Antagonists  179
Glycoprotein IIb-IIIa Receptor Antagonists  180
Epoprostenol  180
Clinical Uses of Antiplatelet Drugs  180
Anticoagulant Drugs  181
Injectable Anticoagulants  181
Oral Anticoagulants  182
Clinical Uses of Anticoagulants  184
Venous Thromboembolism  184
Anticoagulation for Arterial Thromboembolism  186
The Fibrinolytic System  186
Fibrinolytic (Thrombolytic) Agents  186
Antifibrinolytic and Haemostatic Agents   187
Clinical Uses of Antifibrinolytic and  
Haemostatic Agents  188
Self-Assessment  188
Answers  188
Further Reading  189
Compendium of Drugs Used to Affect  
Haemostasis  190
Haemostasis is a complex process involving vaso-
constriction, platelet aggregation, blood coagulation 
and the interactions among them. The descriptions 
of the processes of platelet aggregation and coagula-
tion pathways in this chapter are restricted to essential 
knowledge required for understanding the actions of 
pharmacological agents.
PLATELETS AND PLATELET AGGREGATION
Platelets are critical components of the blood for initi-
ating thrombus formation, although they also have a 
role in host immunity and the response to inflamma-
tion. Platelets are formed from megakaryocytes in the 
bone marrow where they are extruded as cytoplasmic 
anucleate fragments. They are metabolically active 
with an array of surface receptors and adhesion mol-
ecules, and granules that contain numerous preformed 
molecules inherited from the megakaryocytes. They 
do possess mRNA, so can synthesise a limited range 
of proteins. Platelets have a lifespan in the circulation 
of 8 to 10 days, with about 10% to 12% being replaced 
each day.
Blood flow is laminar, with the highest velocity in 
the centre of the vessel, creating shear stress which is 
greatest near the endothelium. Platelets circulate in 
plasma close to the vessel wall as a result of the slower 
blood flow in this region. Here they are exposed to 
high shear force and roll along the endothelial surface. 
Platelets only adhere to an injured endothelium, fol-
lowing which they are activated and then aggregate.
Intact endothelium produces substances such as 
prostacyclin and nitric oxide that inhibit platelet acti-
vation and is protected by surface expression of the 
anticoagulants heparin sulfate and thrombomodu-
lin. When the integrity of vascular endothelium is 
breached, subendothelial collagen and von Willebrand 
factor (vWF) come into contact with blood. They can 
then interact with platelet-surface glycoprotein (GP) 
receptors (integrin receptors, such as the GPIb-V-IX 
(vWF receptor complex) and GPIa/IIa and GPVI (col-
lagen receptors)), resulting in platelets adhering to the 
site of injury. This forms a platelet plug that seals the 
breached endothelial surface (Fig. 11.1).
Platelet adhesion initiates a process known as plate-
let activation, which is a prerequisite for platelet aggre-
gation and the extension of the platelet plug. Platelet 
activation is initiated by exposure to agonists, such 
as exposed collagen and thrombin generated by local 
coagulation. These activators lead to a reduction in 
platelet adenylyl cyclase activity which in turn reduces 
generation of intracellular cyclic adenosine monophos-
phate (cAMP) and increases intracellular Ca2+. The rise 
in intracellular Ca2+ activates myosin light-chain kinase 
(MLCK) which phosphorylates myosin light chains 
enabling them to interact with actin within the plate-
let. These myofibrils disrupt the platelet cytoskeleton 
resulting in the platelet becoming more spherical and 
developing protuberant pseudopodia. Myofibril con-
traction may help to stabilise the platelet plug. Platelet 
shape change initiates a release reaction from platelet 
granules that expels several mediators, such as platelet 
176	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
factor 4, adrenaline, adenosine diphosphate (ADP) 
and serotonin, from the platelet. The increase in plate-
let intracellular Ca2+ also activates phospholipase A2, 
which liberates arachidonic acid (AA) from membrane 
phospholipids. AA is converted by cyclooxygenase 
type 1 (COX-1) in the platelet to thromboxane A2, the 
most potent naturally occurring proaggregating agent, 
which diffuses from the platelet.
Outside the platelet ADP, thromboxane A2, thrombin 
and collagen all interact with their specific platelet surface 
receptors and trigger intracellular pathways that express 
and activate GPIIb-IIIa fibrinogen receptors on the sur-
face of the platelets (see Figs. 11.1 and 11.2). ADP ampli-
fies platelet activation by other agonists. The GPIIb-IIIa 
receptors on the surface of the platelets are crosslinked 
by fibrinogen in the plasma, producing irreversible 
platelet aggregation. The cross-linked fibrinogen catches 
other circulating platelets which in turn are activated and 
aggregate, increasing the size of the platelet plug.
The substances released from platelets during acti-
vation also facilitate haemostasis by:
• Reducing prostacyclin (prostaglandin I2, PGI2) 
synthesis by vascular endothelium. Prostacyclin 
is a vasodilator and a potent inhibitor of platelet 
aggregation.
• Inhibiting the action of heparin sulfate produced by 
vascular endothelium. This enhances activity of the 
coagulation cascade.
The expression of platelet GPIIb-IIIa surface recep-
tors can be inhibited by an increase in the concentra-
tion of cyclic nucleotides (cAMP and cGMP) in the 
platelet. This is the mechanism by which prostacyclin 
(PGI2) inhibits platelet aggregation (see Figs. 11.1 and 
11.2).
Polyunsaturated (omega-3) fatty acids in fish oils 
are precursors for thromboxane A3, which causes less 
platelet aggregation than thromboxane A2; they also 
increase production of a modified form of prostacyclin 
(PGI3) by vascular endothelium, which has equal anti-
aggregatory activity to PGI2. Therefore a high intake of 
fish oils may create a state in which platelets are less 
able to aggregate.
AA COX-1
GPIIb/
GPIIIa
GPIIb/
GPIIIa
+
GPIIb/GPIIIa
TXA2
PGI2
+
–
I
n
hi
bi
t 
a
ct
iv
a
ti
o
n
 
–
Endothelium
Subendothelium
Fibrinogen
Collagen
von Willebrand factor
Lumen
Fibrinogen
TXA2
ADP
Coagulation
cascade
Upregulate
receptors
Aggr
e
gation
 
Activation
Activation
Fibrin
Thrombin
Prothrombin
Rel
eas
ed 
fa
ct
or
s 
Activation/
aggregation
Platelet
GPVI, GPIb
D
o
w
nr
eg
ul
at
e 
r
e
c
e
p
t
o
r
s
 
U
p
r
e
g
u
l
a
t
e
 r
e
c
e
pt
or
s 
Fig. 11.1  Platelets and platelet aggregation. Subendothelial macromolecules such as von Willebrand factor and col-
lagen interact with glycoprotein receptors (GPVI and GPIb) on platelets, activating them and upregulating GPIIb-IIIa 
receptors, which are crosslinked by fibrinogen, resulting in aggregation. During the initial processes of aggregation, 
stimulation of the synthesis and release of a number of platelet-derived substances, such as adenosine diphosphate 
(ADP), thromboxane A2(TXA2), which is synthesised from arachidonic acid (AA) by cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1), and other 
factors (described previously) further promote aggregation by upregulation of GPIIb-IIIa receptors. Conversely, prosta-
cyclin (PGI2) from endothelial cells inhibits platelet activation and upregulation of GPIIb-IIIa receptors. The mechanisms 
of action of antiplatelet drugs that act on these pathways are shown in Fig. 11.2. Platelet activation is also stimulated by 
thrombin generated from prothrombin by the coagulation cascade (see Fig. 11.3).
	
	
Haemostasis  CHAPTER 11	
177
BLOOD COAGULATION AND THE COAGULATION 
CASCADE
Both procoagulant and anticoagulant factors regulate 
haemostasis. The traditional model of activation of the 
coagulation cascade is divided into extrinsic and intrin-
sic pathways, although these pathways are integrated 
in vivo. The factors involved in these cascades amplify 
the coagulation response and work together to produce 
a stable thrombus. The processes are dependent on a 
series of serine proteases together with various cofactors 
that interact on a phospholipid surface such as platelet 
membrane or damaged endothelium. The coagulation 
pathways respond to breaches in endothelial integrity 
much more slowly than platelet aggregation. The follow-
ing description of the pathways is simplified to identify 
the key steps at which drugs can modulate coagulation.
The coagulation pathway is initiated by expo-
sure of blood to the protein tissue factor (TF) which 
is expressed on the surface of subendothelial fibro-
blasts and damaged or stimulated monocytes, macro-
phages and endothelial cells. TF is expressed rapidly 
within minutes of endothelial disruption and is the cell 
–
–
–
–
–
–
Epoprostenol (PGI2)
Dipyridamole
Endothelium
Aspirin
Abciximab
Tirofiban
Eptifibatide
Collagen
von Willebrand factor
Lumen
GPVI, GPIb
TXA2
Upregulates GPIIb/
IIIa receptors
Upr
egu
late
s r
ec
ep
to
r
s
 
U
pr
e
g
ul
at
e
s 
r
e
c
e
p
t
o
rs
 
Activation
Thrombin
Clopidogrel
Prasugrel
Ticagrelor
Cangrelor
ADP
D
o
w
nr
e
g
ul
a
t
e
 
Activation/
aggregation
I
n
h
i
b
it
 
a
ct
iv
at
io
n 
r
e
ce
pt
or
s 
GPIIb/IIIa
receptors
GPIIb/
IIIa
Fibrinogen
GPIIb/
IIIa
AA
COX-1
TXA2
Block ADP 
P2Y12 receptor
Fig. 11.2  Sites of action of major antiplatelet drugs. Drugs act directly or indirectly to block activation of platelets and 
inhibit upregulation of the glycoprotein GPIIb-IIIa receptors, which are necessary for platelet aggregation. Abciximab is a 
monoclonal antibody, tirofiban a nonpeptide inhibitor and eptifibatide a peptide inhibitor of these glycoprotein receptors. 
Epoprostenol and dipyridamole inhibit activation of platelets and downregulate the glycoprotein receptors by increasing 
cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). Clopidogrel and related drugs inhibit ADP (P2Y12) receptors and prevent ADP-
induced upregulation of the glycoprotein GPIIb-IIIa receptors. Aspirin inhibits the generation of thromboxane A2(TXA2) 
by cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1), which otherwise causes platelet activation and upregulation of GPIIb-IIIa receptors. AA, 
Arachidonic acid; ADP, adenosine diphosphate. For the sites of action of anticoagulant drugs that directly or indirectly 
inhibit thrombin and/or factor Xa, see Fig. 11.3.
surface receptor for coagulation factor VIIa. Formation 
of complexes of TF with factor VIIa in the presence of 
phospholipids and Ca2+ results in the conversion of 
inactive factor X to active Xa, and also activation of fac-
tor IX to IXa. Factor Xa combines with factor Va and 
generates enough thrombin to induce local platelet 
aggregation. The TF-VIIa complex also activates the 
coagulation cofactors V and VII to Va and VIIa. This 
initiation phase is insufficient alone to produce stable 
thrombus as Xa also promotes rapid inactivation of 
TF-VIIa by tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI).
The propagation phase of the coagulation path-
way relies on the formation of the tenase complex of 
IXa-VIIIa which also activates factor X to Xa. Factor 
Xa forms prothrombinase complex with Va, which 
mediates the hydrolysis of prothrombin to thrombin 
(factor IIa; Fig. 11.3). Thrombin converts the soluble 
protein fibrinogen to an insoluble fibrin gel. Throm-
bin also activates factor XIII, which crosslinks the 
fibrin and forms a fibrin mesh that traps circulating 
platelets, leucocytes and red blood cells. It also acti-
vates factor XI which in turn enhances activation of 
factor IX, and promotes platelet aggregation via its 
178	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
protease-activated receptors (PAR) (see Chapter 1 and 
Fig 1.6). Other coagulation factors that participate in 
clotting in in vitro assays do not appear to be essential 
to in vivo coagulation.
The actions of thrombin and several other activated 
coagulation factors (see Fig. 11.3) are inhibited by cir-
culating antithrombin and related anticoagulants. 
Antithrombin inhibits coagulation factors after form-
ing complexes with heparin-like molecules that are 
produced by intact endothelial cells, and with heparin 
released from mast cells. The protein C system (factor 
XIX) in the presence of protein S also has an antico-
agulant effect by neutralising activated coagulation 
factors. Once sufficient thrombin has been produced 
to overcome the effect of circulating antithrombin, it is 
able to initiate coagulation.
Each activated clotting factor is inactivated extremely 
rapidly so that the coagulation process remains local-
ised at the site of the initiating event. However, 
aggregates of platelets combined with fibrin thrombi 
can embolise and occlude more distal parts of the 
circulation.
The coagulation process is balanced by the fibrino-
lytic mechanism that limits the production of throm-
bus (see later).
ARTERIAL AND VENOUS THROMBOSIS
There are differences in the composition of an arterial 
or venous thrombus. Arterial thrombosis occurs in the 
setting of high flow and high shear stress, and plate-
lets play a prominent role in the initiation and growth 
of the thrombus. In contrast, venous thrombi form 
in a low-flow, low-shear stress environment. Venous 
thrombus usually forms initially as a result of stasis in 
the valve pockets of deep veins and consists mainly of 
fibrin and red cells with relatively few platelets.
ANTIPLATELET DRUGS
CYCLOOXYGENASE INHIBITORS
  Example
aspirin
XII
XIIa
PK
Collagen
Tissue Factor (TF)
Platelet
aggregation
+
+
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
HK
XIa
XI
X
IXa
VIIa-
TF
XIII
FVIIIa
VII
IX
X
Xa
Va
Heparin - ATIII
Heparin - ATIII
Rivaroxaban
Dabigatran
LMWH - ATIII
Fondaparinux - ATIII
Warfarin
Warfarin
Prothrombin
Thrombin
Fibrinogen
Fibrin monomers
Fibrin polymers
Fig. 11.3  The coagulation cascade and the sites of action of anticoagulants. Roman numerals (e.g. ‘XI’) indicate the 
individual clotting factors in the cascade, with ‘XIa’ indicating the activated form. Contact with subendothelial collagen 
induces conformational change and activation of factor XII to factor XIIa. This activates high molecular weight kininogen 
(HK) and plasma prekallikrein (PK), which further activate factor XII in a positive feedback cycle. Factor XIIa in turn acti-
vates factor XI, and its activated form factor XIa contributes to the formation of factor IXa. Factor IX is also activated as 
the consequence of tissue factor (TF) resulting from vascular damage forming a complex with factor VII. Both factor IXa 
and the complex of factor VIIa with tissue factor (VIIa-TF) both activate factor X. With factor Va as a co-factor, factor Xa 
converts prothrombin to thrombin, which generates fibrin monomers from its precursor fibrinogen, and these polymerise 
to form the fibrin mesh in a thrombus. Platelet products, Ca2+ ions and many other regulatory factors are involved at 
numerous sites in the coagulation cascade, and thrombin from the coagulation cascade acts at its protease-activated 
receptors to promote platelet aggregation (see Fig 11.1). The main sites of action of representative members of antico-
agulant drug classes are shown. Coumarins such as warfarin interfere with the role of vitamin K in the hepatic synthesis 
of clotting factors VII, IX, X and prothrombin, preventing their subsequent activation in the coagulation cascade. Unfrac-
tionated heparin forms a complex with antithrombin III (ATIII) that promotes the inactivation of factors Xa, XIa, XIIa and 
thrombin. Low-molecular-weight heparins (LMWH) and fondaparinux form a similar complex with ATIII but preferentially 
inactivate factor Xa. The xaban drugs (e.g. rivaroxaban) and the gatrans (e.g. dabigatran) are direct and selective inhibi-
tors of factor Xa and thrombin respectively.
	
	
Haemostasis  CHAPTER 11	
179
Mechanism of Action on Platelets
The highly potent platelet-aggregating agent throm-
boxane A2 is formed in platelets from arachidonic acid 
by cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1). After release from the 
platelet, thromboxane A2 acts via thromboxane (TP) 
receptors on the surface of the platelet to generate the 
intracellular second messengers inositol triphosphate 
(IP3) and diacylglycerol (DAG). These lead to Ca2+ 
release in the cell and the expression and activation of 
cell surface GPIIb-IIIa receptors (described earlier).
Inhibition of COX-1 by aspirin reduces plate-
let thromboxane A2 synthesis and inhibits platelet 
aggregation, but does not eliminate it completely, 
because other pathways for platelet activation still 
function (see Figs. 11.1 and 11.2). Aspirin (acetylsali-
cylic acid) irreversibly inhibits COX-1 by acetyla-
tion (see Chapter 29). Since platelets, unlike vascular 
endothelial cells, lack a nucleus and cannot generate 
new COX-1 enzyme, their ability to aggregate will be 
reduced throughout the lifespan of the platelet, while 
vascular endothelial cells can generate new COX-1 
protein and maintain a capacity to synthesise prosta-
cyclin. Other non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs) reversibly inhibit COX-1 and have a much 
weaker antiplatelet action. The antiplatelet action of 
aspirin occurs at very low doses that produce little 
analgesic or antiinflammatory effects. Much of the 
irreversible inactivation of platelet COX-1 occurs 
as platelets pass through the splanchnic circulation 
and are exposed locally to aspirin absorbed from the 
GI tract. At low doses very little aspirin reaches the 
systemic circulation to acetylate COX-1 in vascular 
endothelium elsewhere, so vascular endothelial pros-
tacyclin production is less affected. At higher doses, 
enough aspirin reaches the systemic circulation to 
inhibit the production of prostacyclin by vascular 
endothelium, which may offset some of the beneficial 
effects on platelets. Details of the pharmacology of 
aspirin can be found in Chapter 29.
PHOSPHODIESTERASE INHIBITORS
  Example
dipyridamole
Mechanism of action
Dipyridamole inhibits the cellular reuptake of adenos-
ine. The increased plasma concentration of adenosine 
produces vasodilation, and inhibits platelet aggrega-
tion by activating cell surface adenosine A2 receptors. 
These stimulate intracellular guanylyl cyclase and 
adenylyl cyclase to synthesise cGMP and cAMP, which 
inhibit expression of cell surface GPIIb-IIIa receptors 
(see Fig. 11.2). Dipyridamole also inhibits phosphodi-
esterase (PDE) types 3 and 5. As PDE degrades intra-
cellular cyclic nucleotides, this also contributes to 
reduced platelet activation.
Pharmacokinetics
Dipyridamole is metabolised in the liver and has a 
half-life of 12 hours. A modified-release formulation is 
better tolerated than the standard formulation.
Unwanted Effects
• Diarrhoea, nausea, vomiting.
• Myalgia.
• Dizziness, headache.
• Flushing, hypotension, tachycardia.
• Hypersensitivity reactions, including rash, urticaria, 
bronchospasm and angioedema.
ADENOSINE DIPHOSPHATE (ADP) RECEPTOR 
ANTAGONISTS
  Examples
cangrelor, clopidogrel, prasugrel, ticagrelor
Mechanism of Action
ADP activates platelets via two surface receptors, P2Y1 
and P2Y12. Stimulation of P2Y1 receptors increases 
intracellular Ca2+ and initiates platelet shape change 
and reversible aggregation. Stimulation of P2Y12 recep-
tors inhibits adenylyl cyclase and reduces genera-
tion of the intracellular cyclic nucleotides that inhibit 
expression and activation of GPIIb-IIIa receptors.
ADP receptor antagonists inhibit platelet aggrega-
tion by binding selectively to purinergic P2Y12 receptors 
(see Fig. 11.2). Clopidogrel and prasugrel are irrevers-
ible P2Y12 receptor inhibitors, whilst ticagrelor and can-
grelor bind to a different (allosteric) site on the receptor 
and produce reversible inhibition. There is considerable 
interindividual variability in the degree of platelet inhi-
bition by clopidogrel, and it has a slow onset of action 
(about 5 days for full effect) which can be accelerated 
by using a loading dose. Both prasugrel and ticagrelor 
are more predictable inhibitors of platelet activation 
than clopidogrel and have a more rapid onset of action.
Pharmacokinetics
Clopidogrel is a prodrug. It is activated by metabolism 
in the liver by cytochrome P450 isoenzymes, includ-
ing CYP2C19, to a derivative that has a half-life of 
7 hours. Between 2% and 14% of people, who have 
low CYP2C19 activity, are less able to convert clopi-
dogrel to its active metabolite and have a higher risk 
of treatment failure. Prasugrel is also a prodrug but 
is not affected by this pharmacogenetic variability; it 
is metabolised in the liver to an active product with 
a half-life of 8 days. Ticagrelor is active as the parent 
drug and also has an active metabolite. The offset of 
action of ticagrelor over 3 days is much slower than 
would be predicted from its short half-life. Cangrelor is 
only available for intravenous use and is rapidly inac-
tivated by plasma enzymes, with recovery of platelet 
function within 1 hour of stopping the infusion.
180	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
Unwanted Effects
• Bleeding; a greater risk with prasugrel and ticagre-
lor than clopidogrel.
• Gastrointestinal upset, especially nausea, dyspepsia 
and diarrhoea with clopidogrel and ticagrelor.
• Dizziness and headache with ticagrelor.
• Dyspnoea with ticagrelor and cangrelor.
GLYCOPROTEIN IIB-IIIA RECEPTOR 
ANTAGONISTS
  Examples
eptifibatide, tirofiban
Mechanism of Action
Eptifibatide is a synthetic peptide that binds revers-
ibly to the GPIIb-IIIa receptor and blocks the bind-
ing of fibrinogen. Tirofiban is a nonpeptide reversible 
antagonist of the receptor. Both have a short dura-
tion of action and need to be given by infusion if an 
ongoing effect is required. A murine/human chimae-
ric monoclonal antibody, abciximab, irreversibly tar-
gets the same receptor resulting in a long duration of 
action (about 48 hours), but it is no longer marketed. 
GPIIb-IIIa antagonist drugs can reduce platelet aggre-
gation by more than 90%.
Pharmacokinetics
The GPIIb-IIIa antagonists are given intravenously, 
usually as an initial bolus to achieve rapid inhibition 
of platelets, followed by continuous infusion. Eptifi-
batide is partially metabolised and partly excreted by 
the kidneys and has a half-life of about 2.5 hours. Tiro-
fiban is eliminated by the kidneys and has a half-life 
of 2 hours. Platelet aggregation recovers rapidly after 
stopping treatment with eptifibatide or tirofiban due to 
dissociation of the drug from the receptor.
Unwanted Effects
• Bleeding, especially in the elderly and those of 
low body weight; the risk is reduced if the dose is 
adjusted for body weight.
• Thrombocytopenia.
EPOPROSTENOL
Mechanism of Action
Epoprostenol (prostacyclin, prostaglandin I2) acts at 
prostacyclin IP receptors to increase platelet cAMP, 
which at low concentrations inhibits platelet aggre-
gation and at higher concentrations reduces platelet 
adhesion. Epoprostenol is also a peripheral arterial 
vasodilator.
Pharmacokinetics
Epoprostenol is given by intravenous infusion. Unlike 
most other prostaglandins, it is not significantly 
metabolised in the lung as it is rapidly metabolised by 
hydrolysis in plasma and peripheral tissues, giving a 
very short half-life of about 3 minutes.
Unwanted Effects
These can be reduced by starting the infusion with a 
low dose and include:
• facial flushing;
• headache;
• hypotension;
• jaw pain, arthralgia;
• gastrointestinal disturbances.
CLINICAL USES OF ANTIPLATELET DRUGS
Aspirin is often used as the sole antiplatelet drug in a 
variety of ischaemic vascular conditions. However, there 
are some situations where clopidogrel is more effective, 
or where combinations of aspirin and another antiplate-
let agent (dual antiplatelet therapy or DAPT) give better 
outcomes than aspirin alone. A combination of antiplate-
let drugs inevitably carries a greater risk of bleeding than 
a single agent. Despite the unpredictable response of indi-
viduals to antiplatelet treatment, platelet function testing 
is not routinely advocated to assess efficacy because the 
effect of this strategy on outcomes is uncertain.
The main uses of antiplatelet drugs are listed here.
• Secondary prevention of embolic stroke and tran-
sient ischaemic attacks (aspirin, clopidogrel, dipyri-
damole). Clopidogrel alone is more effective than 
aspirin alone for the secondary prevention of stroke. 
Dipyridamole combined with aspirin is better than 
aspirin alone for prevention of recurrent transient 
ischaemic attacks, and is equally effective as clopi-
dogrel after stroke. Clopidogrel is usually better 
tolerated than aspirin with dipyridamole. The com-
bination of aspirin and clopidogrel is no more effec-
tive than clopidogrel alone, yet has a higher risk of 
bleeding (see Chapter 9).
• Secondary prevention after acute coronary syndrome 
(aspirin, clopidogrel, prasugrel, ticagrelor). The com-
bination of aspirin and clopidogrel is better than 
aspirin alone for reducing further vascular events 
after myocardial infarction. Prasugrel and ticagrelor 
can be used in place of clopidogrel (see Chapter 5).
• Reduction of ischaemic complications produced by 
stent thrombosis following percutaneous coronary 
intervention (PCI) with stent insertion (aspirin, clop-
idogrel, prasugrel, ticagrelor, cangrelor, eptifibitide, 
tirofiban). These complications include nonfatal 
myocardial infarction, death and the need for emer-
gency surgical revascularisation. Aspirin together 
with clopidogrel, prasugrel or ticagrelor are given 
for up to a year (longer for a drug-eluting stent than 
a bare-metal stent). Tirofiban or eptifibatide can be 
used at the time of the procedure in people at high 
risk of complications. Cangrelor is also used at the 
time of a procedure if an oral P2Y12 antagonist has 
not been already used (see Chapter 5).
	
	
Haemostasis  CHAPTER 11	
181
• Secondary prevention of myocardial infarction in 
stable angina or peripheral vascular disease (aspi-
rin, clopidogrel). Either aspirin or clopidogrel alone 
is effective, and there is no evidence to support com-
bination therapy (see Chapters 5 and 10).
• Primary prevention of ischaemic heart disease 
(aspirin). This is a controversial area, with the risk of 
serious haemorrhage offsetting much of the poten-
tial benefit. Use of aspirin should be confined to 
people at very high risk of developing cardiovascu-
lar disease.
• Anticoagulation in extracorporeal circulations e.g. 
cardiopulmonary bypass and renal haemodialysis 
(epoprostenol).
• Symptom relief in Raynaud’s phenomenon (epo-
prostenol; see Chapter 10).
• Dipyridamole is used as a pharmacological stress 
for the coronary circulation to detect myocardial 
ischaemia in people who are unable to exercise. This 
is related to its ability to block the cellular uptake of 
adenosine. In the heart, adenosine acts on specific 
receptors in the small resistance coronary arteries 
to produce vasodilation. Dipyridamole can divert 
blood away from myocardium supplied by ste-
nosed coronary arteries by preferentially dilating 
healthy vascular beds (vascular steal).
ANTICOAGULANT DRUGS
Anticoagulation can be achieved with either inject-
able or oral drug therapy. Direct-acting (non–vitamin 
K-dependent) oral anticoagulants are increasingly 
replacing coumarins such as warfarin for long-term oral 
therapy. Because of their rapid onset of action, direct-
acting oral anticoagulants are also frequently used in 
acute thrombosis in place of the long-established use of 
heparin followed by warfarin to initiate anticoagulation.
INJECTABLE ANTICOAGULANTS
Heparins
  Examples
unfractionated heparin 
low molecular weight heparins: dalteparin, enoxaparin, tinza-
parin, fondaparinux
Heparins are a family of highly sulfated acidic muco-
polysaccharides (glycosaminoglycans) that are found 
in mast cells, basophils and vascular endothelium. 
Heparins have a variable molecular weight of between 
3000 and 30 000 Da according to the numbers of poly-
saccharide subunits.
Mechanism of action and effects
Heparin is available as an unfractionated preparation, 
or as low-molecular-weight heparins (LMWHs), which 
consist of the heparin subfractions that have molecular 
weights of less than 7000 Da.
Unfractionated heparin forms a reversible complex 
with and alters the conformation of antithrombin III. 
This complex can then inactivate thrombin and factors 
IXa, Xa, XIa and XIIa (see Fig. 11.3). LMWH produces 
LMWH–antithrombin complexes that have a more 
selective anticoagulant action, mainly inhibiting factor 
Xa (see Fig. 11.3).
Additional actions of heparins are as follows:
• promotion of TFPI release from the vascular wall, 
which contributes to the antithrombotic effects of 
heparin. TFPI inhibits the formation of factor Xa.
• inhibition of platelet aggregation through binding 
to platelet factor 4 (mainly unfractionated heparin).
• activation of lipoprotein lipase, which in addi-
tion to promoting lipolysis, also reduces platelet 
adhesiveness.
Pharmacokinetics
Heparins are inactive orally and are given intrave-
nously or by subcutaneous injection. They have a rapid 
onset of action. Heparins do not cross the placenta or 
enter breast milk. The two principal forms of heparin 
have different pharmacokinetic properties.
Unfractionated heparin.  This is extracted from por-
cine intestinal mucosa or bovine lung and consists of 
an average of 45 polysaccharide units. It has dose-
dependent (saturable) pharmacokinetics, giving a 
very short half-life of about 30 minutes at low doses, 
increasing to 2 to 3 hours at higher doses. Variable 
binding to plasma proteins contributes to interindi-
vidual variation in the dose required to achieve target 
levels of anticoagulation. Most unfractionated hepa-
rin is metabolised in endothelial cells after binding to 
cell surface receptors. Unfractionated heparin is usu-
ally given by continuous intravenous infusion for full 
anticoagulation. Low doses are used by subcutane-
ous injection for prophylaxis against venous throm-
bosis, although bioavailability by this route is only 
about 30%.
Low-molecular-weight heparins.  LMWHs have an av-
erage of 15 polysaccharide units. They are almost com-
pletely absorbed after subcutaneous administration 
and only need to be given once or twice daily by sub-
cutaneous injection for full anticoagulation. LMWHs 
have a low affinity for plasma protein binding sites 
and for endothelial cell heparin receptors. They have 
two routes of elimination: a rapid, saturable liver up-
take and slower renal excretion. The different LMWHs 
have half-lives in the range of 2 to 6 hours. When the 
dose of an LMWH is based on body weight, it produces 
a more predictable anticoagulant effect compared with 
unfractionated heparin.
Control of heparin therapy
The therapeutic index for heparin is low. The degree of 
anticoagulation with unfractionated heparin is usually 
monitored with the activated partial thromboplastin 
time (APTT; a global test of the activity of the intrinsic 
182	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
coagulation pathway which is dependent on a cascade 
involving factors XII, XI, IX, X, V and thrombin), which 
should be prolonged by 1.5 to 2.0 times the control value 
for full anticoagulation. Monitoring is not required when 
low-dose unfractionated heparin is used subcutaneously 
for prophylaxis. The anticoagulant effect of LMWHs can 
be monitored by the extent of inhibition of factor Xa, but 
this is not carried out routinely as their effect is much 
more predictable than that of unfractionated heparin.
Unwanted effects
• Haemorrhage is the most common complication. 
The risk is greater in the elderly, especially if there 
is a history of heavy alcohol intake. The effect of 
unfractionated heparin can be rapidly reversed by 
intravenous injection of protamine sulfate, a basic 
peptide which binds strongly to the acidic heparin 
components. Protamine binds poorly to LMWHs 
and only partially reverses their action.
• Osteoporosis is a rare complication which can occur 
when heparin is given for several weeks; heparin 
binds to osteoblasts and inhibits their activity. The 
risk is less with LMWHs.
• Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) usually 
occurs 5 to 15 days after starting intravenous hepa-
rin. It affects about 2% of those treated and arises 
from the development of antibodies to the heparin–
platelet factor 4 complex. This causes platelet acti-
vation, aggregation and intravascular thrombosis. 
LMWHs are much less likely to cause HIT as they 
have much less affinity for platelet factor 4. Argatro-
ban or danaparoid (see the drug compendium at the 
end of this chapter) can be used if continued paren-
teral anticoagulation is necessary.
• Hyperkalaemia by inhibition of aldosterone secre-
tion. This is most likely to occur after at least 7 days 
of treatment.
• Hypersensitivity reactions.
Fondaparinux
Mechanism of action
Fondaparinux is a synthetic pentasaccharide, almost 
identical to the natural pentasaccharide sequence of 
heparin, that binds irreversibly to antithrombin III. It 
selectively enhances the innate ability of antithrombin 
III to inhibit factor Xa, but does not inactivate throm-
bin. Fondaparinux has no effect on platelets.
Pharmacokinetics
Fondaparinux is given by subcutaneous injection or 
intravenous infusion. It is predictably absorbed from 
an injection site and has a long half-life (18 hours).
Unwanted effects
• Haemorrhage.
• Anaemia, thrombocytopenia.
• Oedema.
• Gastrointestinal upset.
ORAL ANTICOAGULANTS
Vitamin K Antagonists
  Examples
warfarin, acenocoumarol (especially in mainland Europe)
Mechanism of action
Hepatic synthesis of clotting factors II (prothrombin), 
VII, IX and X requires gamma-carboxylation of glu-
tamate residues within the clotting factor by gamma-
glutamyl carboxylase. An essential cofactor for 
gamma-carboxylation is vitamin K, which is generated 
by the intestinal flora. During the carboxylation reac-
tion, the reduced form of vitamin K (hydroquinone) is 
oxidised by gamma-glutamyl carboxylase to vitamin K 
epoxide, which is then restored to the active hydroqui-
none form by vitamin K epoxide reductase (VKOR). 
Vitamin K antagonists exert their anticoagulant action 
by inhibiting VKOR, preventing the regeneration of 
active vitamin K hydroquinone and inhibiting gamma-
carboxylation of the vitamin K-dependent clotting fac-
tors (see Fig. 11.3). There is a delay in the onset of the 
anticoagulant effect due to the presence of previously 
synthesised clotting factors in the circulation; these must 
be cleared and replaced by the noncarboxylated forms 
which cannot be activated in the coagulation cascade.
Pharmacokinetics
Warfarin is eliminated by cytochrome P450-mediated 
hepatic metabolism (CYP2C9) and has a long half-life 
of 1 to 2 days. Functional CYP2C9 polymorphisms 
contribute to considerable interindividual variability 
in warfarin sensitivity. However, the plasma concen-
tration of warfarin does not correlate directly with the 
clinical effect of the drug, which is determined by the 
balance between the rates of synthesis and degradation 
of clotting factors. The maximum effect of an individual 
dose of warfarin is reflected in the blood coagulation 
time some 24 to 48 hours later. On stopping treatment, 
the duration of anticoagulant action is determined 
largely by the time required to synthesise new clotting 
factors, which is approximately 2 to 4 days.
Monitoring of oral vitamin K antagonist therapy
Factor VII is the clotting factor that is most sensitive to 
vitamin K deficiency as it has the shortest half-life of the 
vitamin K-sensitive clotting factors. A test of the extrinsic 
coagulation pathway (which is dependent on a cascade 
involving factors VII, X, V and thrombin) – the pro-
thrombin time – is therefore used as a measure of effec-
tiveness. The degree of prolongation of the prothrombin 
time is standardised by comparison with control plasma 
from a single source, with the result referred to as the 
international normalised ratio (INR). Therapeutic INR 
ranges differ according to the condition being treated:
• An INR of 2 to 2.5 is used for prophylaxis of deep 
vein thrombosis (thromboprophylaxis).
	
	
Haemostasis  CHAPTER 11	
183
• An INR of 2 to 3 is used for thromboprophylaxis 
in hip surgery and fractured femur operations, for 
treatment of deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary 
embolism, and for prevention of thromboembolism 
in atrial fibrillation.
• An INR of 3 to 4.5 is used for prevention of recurrent 
deep vein thrombosis and for preventing thrombo-
sis on mechanical prosthetic heart valves.
The percentage of time in therapeutic range (TTR) 
for the INR is often used to determine the effectiveness 
of long-term anticoagulation with vitamin K antago-
nists. A TTR greater than 65% is considered accept-
able. Persistently lower values despite counselling on 
adherence and correction of interfering factors suggest 
that alternative oral anticoagulants should be consid-
ered where appropriate.
Unwanted effects
Warfarin is an important example of a drug with a 
narrow therapeutic index and a significant risk of 
unwanted effects, as well as drug interactions.
• Major haemorrhage. An immediate coagulant effect 
is achieved by giving an intravenous injection of 
four-factor prothrombin complex concentrate (PCC, 
containing factors II, VII, IX, X as well as protein C 
and protein S) or, less effectively, an infusion of fresh 
frozen plasma. The most effective antidote to warfa-
rin is phytomenadione (vitamin K1), but used alone 
its onset of effect is too slow in major bleeding. 
Therefore the two treatments are combined, with 
PCC used to provide rapid reversal of warfarin, and 
intravenous phytomenadione adding durability to 
this effect. After giving a large dose of phytomena-
dione, it can be difficult to restore therapeutic anti-
coagulation with warfarin for up to 3 weeks.
• Minor haemorrhage and asymptomatic over-
warfarinisation. The INR can be raised above the 
therapeutic range without overt bleeding. If the INR 
is between 5 and 8, then withholding one or two 
doses of warfarin is sufficient, followed by a dose 
reduction. If the INR is greater than 8.0 but there is 
no bleeding or only minor bleeding, then a smaller 
dose of phytomenadione can be given intrave-
nously or orally with less disturbance of subsequent 
anticoagulation.
• Alopecia, skin necrosis and hypersensitivity reac-
tions occur rarely.
• Warfarin crosses the placenta and can have undesir-
able effects on the fetus. It is teratogenic and should 
be avoided whenever possible in the first trimester 
of pregnancy. It should not be used in the last tri-
mester, as it increases the risk of intracranial haem-
orrhage in the baby during delivery.
• Drug interactions are particularly important. The 
anticoagulant effect of warfarin may be increased by 
broad-spectrum antibacterial agents that suppress 
the production of vitamin K by gut bacteria. Drugs 
such as amiodarone (see Chapter 8) and cimetidine 
(see Chapter 33) inhibit CYP2C9-mediated metab-
olism of warfarin and enhance its effects. Drugs 
that induce CYP2C9 – for example, phenytoin (see 
Chapter 23) and alcohol (see Chapter 54) – reduce 
the effect of warfarin by increasing its elimination. 
Foods rich in vitamin K, such as some green veg-
etables, also reduce the effect of warfarin.
Direct-Acting (Non–Vitamin K-Dependent) Oral 
Anticoagulants
Direct factor Xa inhibitors
  Examples
apixaban, edoxaban, rivaroxaban
Mechanism of action.  Apixaban, edoxaban and ri-
varoxaban are orally active factor Xa inhibitors that 
bind reversibly to the active site of factor Xa. They in-
hibit both free factor Xa and factor Xa that is bound 
to the prothrombinase complex. Unlike warfarin, they 
produce a rapid onset of predictable anticoagulation. 
These drugs prolong the prothrombin time, but this is 
only useful to detect the presence of an anticoagulant 
effect, not the extent. The APTT is often normal.
Pharmacokinetics.  Apixaban, edoxaban and rivarox-
aban are partially metabolised in the liver and partially 
excreted by the kidneys. Their half-lives are around 10 
to 12 hours.
Unwanted effects
• Nausea, and less often other gastrointestinal upset.
• Haemorrhage. The risk of bleeding is less than with 
warfarin, especially intracerebral haemorrhage, but 
there is a higher risk of gastrointestinal bleeding. 
If bleeding occurs, the short half-life means that 
stopping treatment may be all that is required. The 
direct antidote for life-threatening or uncontrolled 
bleeding is intravenous andexanet alfa, a recombi-
nant modified form of human factor Xa that acts as 
a decoy receptor for factor Xa inhibitors. Although 
effective, it is not licenced for reversing the effect 
of edoxaban. Serious bleeding can also be reduced 
with intravenous prothrombin complex concen-
trates or recombinant factor VIIa.
• Drug interactions: rivaroxaban is a substrate for 
P-glycoprotein (P-gp), and its excretion is reduced 
by drugs that inhibit P-gp, such as ketoconazole.
Direct thrombin inhibitors
  Example
dabigatran etexilate
Mechanism of action.  Dabigatran is a selective direct 
competitive thrombin inhibitor that binds to and in-
hibits both circulating and thrombus-bound thrombin 
(factor IIa). It produces a rapid onset of predictable 
184	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
anticoagulation. It prolongs the APTT, but this is only 
useful to detect the presence of an anticoagulant effect, 
not the extent. The prothrombin time is often normal.
Pharmacokinetics.  Dabigatran etexilate is a prodrug 
that undergoes first-pass metabolism to its active de-
rivative dabigatran. The active metabolite has a short 
half-life of about 40 minutes.
Unwanted effects
• Nausea, dyspepsia, diarrhoea, abdominal pain.
• Haemorrhage, but with a lower risk than warfarin 
at equally effective doses. Idarucizumab is a mono-
clonal antibody fragment that is a specific antidote 
for dabigatran and rapidly reverses its anticoagu-
lant effect. It is reserved for serious haemorrhage 
caused by dabigatran.
CLINICAL USES OF ANTICOAGULANTS
The direct acting oral anticoagulants (DOACs) have a 
rapid onset of action, and in the case of rivaroxaban 
and apixaban, there is trial evidence that initial anti-
coagulation with heparin is not needed for immediate 
anticoagulation. Compared with warfarin, they have 
fewer drug interactions and do not need monitoring 
of their anticoagulant effect, which is predictable from 
standard doses. It is important to remember that the 
INR is unreliable as a guide to the extent of antico-
agulation when DOACs are taken. In most situations 
where warfarin is used, DOACs have similar or greater 
efficacy compared to warfarin, with a lower risk of 
intracranial bleeding. Therefore, there is increasing use 
of drugs such as apixaban, edoxaban, rivaroxaban and 
dabigatran in place of warfarin.
Rapid anticoagulation has for many years been 
achieved with LMWH or unfractionated heparin, with 
warfarin started simultaneously for long-term anti-
coagulation. The heparin is stopped when the INR 
reaches the desired therapeutic range. However, the 
rapid onset of action of DOACs has led to increasing 
use in place of heparin and warfarin in acute venous 
thrombosis.
Anticoagulants are not usually taken together with 
antiplatelet drugs, but there are situations where the 
combination may have additional benefit, such as sec-
ondary prevention of ischaemic heart disease in some-
one with atrial fibrillation. The main risk of combining 
anticoagulant and antiplatelet therapy is the much 
higher probability of bleeding. The annual incidence of 
significant bleeding with aspirin or warfarin is about 
4%. During triple therapy with aspirin, clopidogrel 
and warfarin, this increases to almost 16%.
VENOUS THROMBOEMBOLISM
Deep vein thrombosis usually arises following sta-
sis of blood in the deep venous circulation, although 
some episodes arise from excessive coagulability of 
blood. The most common sites are leg and pelvic veins, 
sometimes extending into the inferior vena cava. Less 
commonly, thrombus forms in veins in the arm, usually 
due to compression of venous outflow. Many episodes 
of deep vein thrombosis occur in hospital, particularly 
in people over 40 years of age following major illness, 
trauma or surgery. Factors predisposing to venous 
thromboembolism in a hospital setting (Table 11.1) 
include prolonged immobility and a variety of coex-
isting medical conditions such as cancer. Spontaneous 
venous thromboembolism can occur after long jour-
neys, such as by road or air, and in various inherited or 
acquired disorders of the coagulation system (such as 
protein C or protein S deficiency, factor V Leiden and 
antiphospholipid syndrome). Use of the combined oral 
hormonal contraceptive, especially in older women 
who smoke (see Chapter 45), also increases the risk.
After an initial spontaneous deep vein thrombosis, 
the risk of recurrence is about 25% after 4 years, but 
is much lower after postoperative thrombosis. Follow-
ing a deep vein thrombosis, chronic postphlebitic syn-
drome can develop, with pain, swelling and ulceration 
of the affected leg.
Pulmonary embolism is a major cause of morbidity 
and death. Most serious pulmonary emboli arise from 
deep vein thrombosis in the lower limb, particularly 
if the thrombus extends to the larger veins above the 
calf. Acute pulmonary embolism can present with a 
variety of symptoms. Massive pulmonary emboli pro-
duce shock or sustained hypotension, whereas smaller 
emboli can present with chest pain, dyspnoea or hae-
moptysis. Massive pulmonary emboli causing haemo-
dynamic instability are fatal in about 60% of cases if 
untreated. Mortality is much lower if the person is hae-
modynamically stable. Pulmonary embolism has been 
estimated to be responsible for up to 10% of all deaths 
Table 11.1  Risk of Thromboembolism in People 
Admitted to Hospital.
Risk
Procedure
Low
Minor surgery, no other risk factor
Major surgery, age <40 years, no other risk 
factors
Minor trauma or illness
Moderate
Major surgery, age ≥40 years or other risk 
factor
Heart failure, recent myocardial infarction, 
malignancy, inflammatory bowel disease
Major trauma or burns
Minor surgery, trauma or illness in patient 
with previous deep vein thrombosis or 
pulmonary embolism
High
Fracture or major orthopaedic surgery of 
pelvis, hips or lower limb
Major pelvic or abdominal surgery for cancer
Major surgery, trauma or illness in patient 
with previous deep vein thrombosis or 
pulmonary embolism
Lower limb paralysis
Major lower limb amputation
	
	
Haemostasis  CHAPTER 11	
185
in hospital. Chronic pulmonary embolic disease can 
lead to pulmonary arterial hypertension with progres-
sive dyspnoea (see Chapter 6).
Prevention of Deep Vein Thrombosis
In people who are relatively immobile in hospital, the 
most appropriate method to prevent deep vein throm-
bosis will depend on the degree of risk.
Mechanical methods
These are used for people who are at moderate risk of 
thromboembolism and include graduated elastic com-
pression stockings and intermittent pneumatic compres-
sion devices to improve venous flow and limit stasis in 
venous valve pockets. They can also be used to supple-
ment pharmacological prophylaxis in people at high risk.
Low-dose subcutaneous heparin
This is the treatment of choice for many people in a 
hospital setting who are at high or moderate risk of 
thromboembolism. Low-dose heparin reduces both 
initiation and extension of fibrin-rich thrombi at doses 
that have little effect on measurements of blood coag-
ulation; laboratory monitoring is therefore unneces-
sary. Low-dose unfractionated heparin reduces deep 
venous thrombosis and fatal pulmonary emboli by 
about two-thirds with minimal risk of serious bleed-
ing, although minor bleeding is increased. LMWHs or 
fondaparinux are more effective than unfractionated 
heparin for those at highest risk.
Oral anticoagulants
Low-dose dabigatran, apixaban and rivaroxaban are at 
least as effective as LMWHs for thromboprophylaxis in 
people undergoing hip and knee orthopaedic surgery. 
Bleeding rates are similar to LMWH. Prophylaxis should 
be started before surgery. Although a metaanalysis of 
several studies suggests that low-dose aspirin reduces 
the development of deep venous thrombosis, it is less 
effective than heparin.
Treatment of Established Venous 
Thromboembolism
The goals of treatment for deep vein thrombosis are to 
prevent pulmonary emboli and to restore patency of 
the occluded vessel, with preservation of the function 
of venous valves. In about 50% of people with deep 
venous thrombosis, the vein will recanalise within 
3 months if appropriately treated. There is no evidence 
that use of compression stockings after a deep venous 
thrombosis of the leg reduces the incidence of post-
phlebitic syndrome.
Therapeutic anticoagulation
This is the treatment of choice for deep vein thrombo-
sis and for most pulmonary emboli. The DOACs rivar-
oxaban and apixaban can be given alone, achieving full 
anticoagulation within 5 to 17 hours. When warfarin, 
dabigatran or edoxaban are used for long-term antico-
agulation, subcutaneous LMWH or fondaparinux are 
used for initial treatment. Dabigatran and edoxaban 
have a rapid onset of action but there are no studies to 
show that they can be used safely without heparin or 
fondaparinux. LMWH and fondaparinux have a rapid 
onset of effect and are preferred to unfractionated hepa-
rin because of their more predictable action. Unfraction-
ated heparin is used for people with significant renal 
impairment when LMWH and fondaparinux are con-
traindicated. Subcutaneous anticoagulation is usually 
given for 5 days, with concurrent initiation of treatment 
with warfarin or followed by dabigatran or edoxaban. 
If warfarin is used, the subcutaneous anticoagulant 
should only be stopped once warfarin has produced 
adequate anticoagulation (i.e. the INR is within the 
therapeutic range, as described previously). When 
deep vein thrombosis occurs in someone with cancer, 
there is a high risk of both bleeding and recurrence 
during treatment with warfarin. In this situation, pro-
longed treatment with LMWH (6 months, or lifelong if 
cancer remission is not achieved) is usually advocated. 
The optimal duration of anticoagulant therapy is 
based on expert opinion: suggested periods are shown 
in Table 11.2.
Surgical venous thrombectomy
Percutaneous mechanical thrombectomy (fragmenta-
tion and removal of the thrombus) may be required 
for massive iliofemoral thrombosis if it threatens the 
viability of the limb. Rarely, pulmonary embolectomy 
is carried out for large pulmonary emboli.
Thrombolysis
Pharmacological thrombolysis (discussed later) has 
no advantage over warfarin in uncomplicated deep 
venous thrombosis, except for some acute proximal 
Table 11.2  Suggested Duration of Anticoagulant 
Therapy for Venous Thromboembolism.
RISK OF 
RECURRENCE
CLINICAL SETTING
DURATION
Low
Temporary risk factors for 
thromboembolism
Unprovoked distal deep 
vein thrombosis
3 months
Intermediate
Continuing medical 
risk factors for 
thromboembolism
First unprovoked proximal 
deep vein thrombosis
Indefinite 
with 
annual 
review
High
Recurrent 
thromboembolism
Inherited thrombophilic 
tendency
Cancer-associated venous 
thromboembolism
Indefinite
186	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
deep vein thromboses. When appropriate, the fibrino-
lytic drug is directly infused into the affected vessel. 
Thrombolysis is used to disintegrate massive pul-
monary emboli (either intravenously or by infusion 
directly into the pulmonary artery) and reduces mor-
tality in haemodynamically unstable patients.
ANTICOAGULATION FOR ARTERIAL 
THROMBOEMBOLISM
Warfarin is used long term for the prevention of throm-
bosis on prosthetic heart valves. DOACs are ineffective 
for preventing thrombus on mechanical heart valves 
and should never be used.
Atrial fibrillation and mural thrombus in the left 
ventricle following a myocardial infarction predispose 
to arterial embolism and are indications for anticoagu-
lation. Dabigatran, apixaban, edoxaban and rivaroxa-
ban are at least as effective as warfarin for prevention 
of thromboembolism in nonvalvular atrial fibrillation 
and have a lower risk of serious intracranial haem-
orrhage (see Chapter 8). Atrial fibrillation associated 
with rheumatic valvular disease is treated with warfa-
rin rather than a DOAC.
When combined with dual antiplatelet therapy, 
apixaban reduces the composite endpoint of mortality, 
reinfarction and ischaemic stroke after an acute coro-
nary syndrome, but with the risk of more bleeding (see 
Chapter 5).
THE FIBRINOLYTIC SYSTEM
Fibrinolysis is the physiological mechanism for dis-
solving the fibrin meshwork in a thrombus. The pro-
cess is initiated by tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA) 
released from damaged vessels, which activates plas-
minogen, a circulating α2-globulin, to generate the 
fibrinolytic serum protease plasmin (Fig. 11.4). Exces-
sive fibrinolysis is prevented by plasminogen activator 
inhibitor 1 which rapidly inactivates circulating t-PA 
and also by inhibition of plasmin by α2-antiplasmin 
(plasmin inhibitor). t-PA binds to fibrin locally at the 
site of release and converts fibrin-bound plasmino-
gen to plasmin. Plasmin splits both fibrinogen and 
fibrin into degradation products, including fragments 
X and Y, with lysis of the thrombus. At the site of a 
thrombus, fragment X inhibits thrombin and frag-
ment Y inhibits fibrin polymerization. Thrombolytic 
therapy is achieved by using a plasminogen activator 
in such large quantities that the inhibitory controls are 
overwhelmed.
FIBRINOLYTIC (THROMBOLYTIC) AGENTS
  Examples
alteplase (recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator, 
rt-PA), streptokinase, tenecteplase
Plasminogen
Streptokinase
Streptokinase–plasminogen complex
Tissue
plasminogen
activator
(released on
tissue damage)
Tranexamic acid–
plasminogen complex
Degradation
products
Degradation
products
Thrombin
Fibrinogen
Fibrin
Plasmin
Alteplase (rt-PA)
Tenecteplase
Reteplase 
–
+
+
+
+
Fig. 11.4  The fibrinolytic system. The fibrinolytic system is linked closely to platelet function and the coagulation cas-
cade. When a clot is formed via the prothrombotic system, activation of plasminogen to the fibrinolytic enzyme plasmin is 
initiated by several tissue plasminogen activators, thus lysing the clot. The drugs promoting fibrinolysis act as plasmino-
gen activators (alteplase and analogues) or bind to plasminogen (streptokinase), promoting plasmin activity. The anti-
fibrinolytic drug tranexamic acid inhibits plasminogen activation. rt-PA, Recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator.
	
	
Haemostasis  CHAPTER 11	
187
Mechanism of Action
Fibrinolytic drugs enhance fibrinolysis by substituting 
for the naturally occurring tissue plasminogen activa-
tor (t-PA). They bind to and activate plasminogen to 
plasmin, which degrades fibrin thrombi. Alteplase is a 
genetically engineered copy of the naturally occurring 
t-PA that binds directly to fibrinogen and fibrin. It has 
a wide range of clinical uses. Tenecteplase is a geneti-
cally engineered modified form of t-PA with increased 
fibrin specificity, less sensitivity to plasminogen acti-
vator inhibitors and a longer duration of action than 
alteplase. Tenecteplase is only licensed for treatment of 
myocardial infarction.
Streptokinase is obtained from haemolytic strep-
tococci and is inactive until it forms a complex with 
circulating plasminogen; the resultant streptokinase–
plasminogen activator complex substitutes for t-PA in 
the fibrinolytic cascade, causing plasminogen activa-
tion. Streptokinase is now rarely used due to the avail-
ability of better-tolerated alternatives.
The effectiveness of any fibrinolytic agent is great-
est with fresh thrombus and if a large surface area of 
thrombus is exposed to the drug.
Pharmacokinetics
All fibrinolytic agents are given intravenously or 
intraarterially. Alteplase and related compounds are 
metabolised in the liver. They have a more rapid onset 
of action than streptokinase and the reperfusion of 
occluded vessels is faster. Infusions of alteplase are 
given over 1 to 3 hours, depending on the condition 
being treated. Tenecteplase is given as a single bolus. 
Because of a short duration of action, when alteplase 
or its derivatives have been used to lyse coronary 
artery thrombus, subsequent anticoagulation with 
heparin for 48 hours is necessary to reduce the risk of 
reocclusion.
The streptokinase–plasminogen activator complex 
is degraded enzymatically in the circulation. After the 
use of streptokinase, or following a streptococcal infec-
tion, neutralising antibodies can form and persist for 
several years. These antibodies combine with strep-
tokinase and clear it from the plasma before it forms 
an active complex, and substantially reduce its effec-
tiveness. For this reason, repeat use of streptokinase is 
not recommended. Streptokinase is usually given as a 
short (1 hour) infusion for the treatment of coronary 
artery occlusion, although longer infusions are usual 
for peripheral arterial occlusions or pulmonary embo-
lism. The long duration of action means that antico-
agulation is not necessary after streptokinase has been 
given.
Unwanted Effects
• Nausea and vomiting.
• Haemorrhage is usually minor, but serious bleed-
ing (e.g. intracerebral haemorrhage) occurs in about 
1% of those treated. Bleeding can be stopped by the 
antifibrinolytic drug tranexamic acid (discussed 
later) or by transfusion of fresh frozen plasma.
• Hypotension. This is dose-related and more com-
mon with streptokinase. It may be caused by enzy-
matic release of the vasodilator bradykinin from its 
circulating precursor. If the infusion of the fibrino-
lytic is stopped for a brief period, the blood pres-
sure usually recovers rapidly and treatment can be 
continued.
• Allergic reactions. These are rare but occur more fre-
quently with streptokinase as a consequence of its 
bacterial origin.
Clinical Uses of Fibrinolytic Agents
Fibrinolytic agents are used to treat the following:
• acute myocardial infarction (although this use has 
declined with the greater availability of primary 
coronary intervention (PCI); see Chapter 5);
• ischaemic stroke (alteplase only; see Chapter 9);
• pulmonary embolism or deep venous thrombosis, 
in a minority of cases (described previously);
• peripheral arterial thromboembolism with acute 
limb ischaemia (see Chapter 10);
• central venous catheters occluded by thrombus 
(alteplase, which is particularly useful to restore 
patency of ‘long lines’ inserted for intravenous 
nutrition or administration of cytotoxic drugs).
ANTIFIBRINOLYTIC AND HAEMOSTATIC AGENTS
Antifibrinolytic Agents
  Example
tranexamic acid
Mechanisms of action
Tranexamic acid is a lysine analogue that competitively 
binds to the lysine binding site on plasminogen and 
inhibits its activation, so that fibrinolysis is inhibited. 
The theoretical risk of creating a thrombotic tendency 
does not appear to be a clinical problem.
Pharmacokinetics
Tranexamic acid is a synthetic amino acid that can be 
given orally or intravenously. It is eliminated by the 
kidneys and has a short half-life (1–2 hours).
Unwanted effects
• Nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea.
Desmopressin
Desmopressin (see Chapter 43) briefly increases the 
plasma concentrations of clotting factor VIII and von 
Willebrand factor in blood vessel walls. Activated fac-
tor VIII accelerates the process of fibrin formation, and 
von Willebrand factor enhances platelet adhesion to 
subendothelial tissue.
188	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
CLINICAL USES OF ANTIFIBRINOLYTIC AND 
HAEMOSTATIC AGENTS
The use of haemostatic agents is limited, but includes 
the following:
• Tranexamic acid is used to reduce bleeding after 
surgery (e.g. prostatectomy or bladder surgery) 
or after dental extraction in individuals with hae-
mophilia. In major trauma, early administration of 
tranexamic acid (within 3 hours) reduces mortality. 
It also improves outcome in mild-to-moderate, but 
not severe, traumatic brain injury.
• Desmopressin is used in mild congenital bleed-
ing disorders such as haemophilia A or von Will-
ebrand’s disease; it is given to reduce spontaneous 
or traumatic bleeding, or as a prophylactic before 
surgery.
• Tranexamic acid is used for the treatment of menor-
rhagia and epistaxis, or for bleeding following an 
overdose of a fibrinolytic drug.
• Tranexamic acid is used for the treatment of heredi-
tary angioedema.
SELF-ASSESSMENT
TRUE/FALSE QUESTIONS
	 1.	 Unfractionated heparin and low-molecular-weight 
heparins (LMWH) directly inhibit thrombin in the 
coagulation cascade.
	 2.	 Heparin can be used to prevent clotting of blood 
collected in laboratory test tubes.
	 3.	 Once administered, the action of heparin cannot be 
reversed.
	 4.	 Fondaparinux is a pentapeptide activator of anti-
thrombin III.
	 5.	 Warfarin readily crosses the placenta.
	 6.	 Warfarin prevents the synthesis of vitamin 
K-dependent clotting factors.
	 7.	 The activity of warfarin is inhibited by broad-spec-
trum antibacterial agents.
	 8.	 Clopidogrel has its antithrombotic action by 
enhancing the action of ADP on platelets.
	 9.	 Aspirin is a reversible inhibitor of cyclooxygenase 
type 1 (COX-1).
10.	 Aspirin inhibits platelet aggregation at doses 
below those needed for an antiinflammatory effect.
11.	 Thrombolytic infusions of recombinant tissue-type 
plasminogen activator (rt-PA; alteplase) for myo-
cardial infarction are usually given over the course 
of 1 hour, whereas streptokinase is given for 3 to 
24 hours.
12.	 Tenecteplase is a modified form of t-PA with a lon-
ger half-life than alteplase.
13.	 Apixaban is a direct inhibitor of factor Xa.
14.	 Dabigatran inhibits thrombin in the plasma and 
within the thrombus.
15.	 Tranexamic acid enhances plasminogen activation.
ONE-BEST-ANSWER (OBA) QUESTION
1.	 Identify the most accurate statement about antico-
agulant drugs.
A.	INR needs to be regularly monitored in people 
treated with heparin.
B.	 Heparin is the drug of choice if an oral anticoag-
ulant is required for rapid anticoagulant activity 
before surgery.
C.	Dosage adjustment of warfarin is required if a 
person is prescribed concomitant treatment with 
the H2 receptor antagonist cimetidine.
D.	In overdose, the effects of warfarin cannot be 
reversed.
E.	 During treatment with a broad-spectrum anti-
bacterial, the anticoagulant effects of enoxaparin 
may be inhibited.
CASE-BASED QUESTIONS
A 51-year-old obese female is treated with oestrogen 
replacement therapy for 18 months because of peri-
menopausal symptoms. She is scheduled for a hip 
replacement.
1.	 Is prophylactic preoperative anticoagulant therapy 
necessary for this woman?
2.	 Should thromboprophylaxis be started before 
surgery?
3.	 Should a heparin or warfarin be chosen for pro-
phylaxis, and what routes of administration are 
appropriate?
4.	 The hip replacement was carried out success-
fully and the woman was discharged from hos-
pital after 5 days, although heparin therapy was 
continued for a further 5 days. Why is therapy 
continued for this extended period, and what 
out-of-hospital therapeutic prophylaxis could be 
considered?
ANSWERS
TRUE/FALSE ANSWERS
1.	 False. Heparins first form a complex with anti-
thrombin III; the complex then inactivates thrombin 
and other clotting factors, including factors IXa, Xa 
and XIa. Complexes of LMWH with antithrombin 
have a more selective action on factor Xa.
2.	 True. The complexing of heparin with antithrombin 
III in plasma means it can anticoagulate blood in 
vitro.
3.	 False. The action of unfractionated heparin (but not 
LMWH) can be reversed by the strongly basic pro-
tein protamine, which rapidly binds to it, forming 
an inactive complex.
4.	 False. All heparins are mucopolysaccharides, not 
polypeptides. Fondaparinux is similar in structure 
to the pentasaccharide sequence within heparin that 
binds to antithrombin III.
	
	
Haemostasis  CHAPTER 11	
189
	 5.	 True. Warfarin can cause fetal abnormalities and, 
unless essential, should not be given in early or 
late pregnancy.
	 6.	 True. Warfarin inhibits vitamin K epoxide reduc-
tase (VKOR); this reduces the regeneration of the 
active (hydroquinone) form of vitamin K required 
for gamma-carboxylation of clotting factors II 
(prothrombin), VII, IX and X in the liver.
	 7.	 False. Vitamin K is produced by gut bacteria, and 
their elimination by broad-spectrum antibacterials 
reduces vitamin K formation. This further impairs 
the synthesis of vitamin K-dependent clotting 
factors and enhances the anticoagulant activity of 
warfarin.
	 8.	 False. Clopidogrel and related drugs prevent the 
platelet aggregatory action of ADP by blocking its 
purinergic (P2Y12) receptors.
	 9.	 False. Aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) irreversibly 
inhibits COX-1 by acetylating its active site. At 
low doses, this produces a selective antiplatelet 
action, as the platelet is nonnucleated and unable 
to replace the COX-1 enzyme by gene transcrip-
tion and protein synthesis.
	10.	 True. Thromboxane A2 (TXA2) required for plate-
let aggregation is synthesised by COX-1, whereas 
prostaglandins are synthesised during inflamma-
tion predominantly by induced cyclooxygenase 
type 2 (COX-2). Aspirin is 160 times more active 
at inhibiting COX-1 than COX-2, so it has no anti-
inflammatory effect at the low doses required to 
inhibit TXA2 synthesis.
11.	 False. Streptokinase is usually infused for 1 hour 
and alteplase for 3 hours. Streptokinase has a lon-
ger half-life (1 hour, alteplase 0.5 hour), permitting 
a shorter infusion time.
12.	 True. Alteplase is identical to the naturally occur-
ring t-PA, whereas tenecteplase has been modified 
for greater fibrin specificity and a longer duration 
of action.
13.	 True. Apixaban, edoxaban and rivaroxaban are 
orally active direct inhibitors of factor Xa.
14.	 True. Unlike heparin, which only inhibits plasma 
thrombin (via antithrombin III), dabigatran 
directly inhibits both free thrombin and thrombus-
bound thrombin.
15.	 False. Tranexamic acid is an antifibrinolytic agent 
that inhibits plasminogen activation, reducing 
fibrin degradation and the risk of bleeding.
OBA ANSWER
1.	 Answer C is the accurate statement.
A.	Incorrect. Regular INR monitoring is required in 
people taking warfarin but not heparin, when the 
activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) is 
used. Monitoring is not required when LMWHs 
are used subcutaneously.
B.	 Incorrect. Heparin is inactive orally and must be 
given by intravenous or subcutaneous routes.
C.	Correct. Warfarin is metabolised by the liver cy-
tochrome P450 CYP2C9, and cimetidine inhibits 
this isoenzyme. A reduction in warfarin dose may 
be required, or the replacement of cimetidine 
with another H2 antihistamine or a proton pump 
inhibitor without an interaction with warfarin.
D.	Incorrect. The effects of warfarin can be reversed 
with vitamin K1.
E.	 Incorrect. Broad-spectrum antibacterials can sup-
press the production of vitamin K by gut bacteria 
and increase the activity of warfarin, but would 
not affect the actions of heparin.
CASE-BASED ANSWERS
1.	 Anticoagulant therapy is necessary. Postoperative 
venous thromboembolism occurs in 40% to 50% 
of people who undergo hip replacement, and fatal 
pulmonary embolism in 1% to 5%, if prophylactic 
anticoagulant therapy is not given. This woman is 
also at increased risk because of obesity.
2.	 This is controversial. Initiating prophylaxis postop-
eratively allows more effective haemostatic control 
during and immediately after surgery and does not 
reduce the effectiveness of treatment.
3.	 Heparins are active given intravenously or subcuta-
neously and their onset of action is rapid, whereas 
warfarin takes several days for full effectiveness 
but can be given orally. Heparin would therefore be 
chosen if started pre- or postoperatively.
4.	 The woman is obese, a risk factor for postoperative 
venous thrombosis. Daily self-administered subcuta-
neous prophylaxis with an LMWH or fondaparinux 
could be used. These drugs have more predictable 
anticoagulant activity, longer durations of action and 
a lower risk of producing thrombocytopenia than 
unfractionated heparin. Low doses of dabigatran, 
apixaban or rivaroxaban started before surgery are as 
effective as LMWHs for thromboprophylaxis in peo-
ple undergoing hip and knee orthopaedic surgery.
FURTHER READING
ANTIPLATELET AGENTS
Floyd, C.N., Ferro, A., 2013. Mechanisms of aspirin resistance. 
Pharmacol. Ther. 141, 69–78.
Mega, J.L., Simon, T., 2015. Pharmacology of antithrombotic 
drugs: an assessment of oral antiplatelet and anticoagulant 
treatments. Lancet 386, 281–291.
ANTICOAGULANTS
Burnett, A., Siegal, D., Crowther, M., 2017. Specific antidotes for 
bleeding associated with direct oral anticoagulants. BMJ 357, 
j2216.
Blann, A.D., Lip, G.Y.H., 2016. Non-vitamin K antagonist oral 
anticoagulants (DOACs) for the management of venous 
thromboembolism. Heart 102, 975–983.
Cayley, W.E., 2007. Preventing deep vein thrombosis in hospital 
inpatients. BMJ 335, 147–151.
Floyd, C.N., Ferro, A., 2017. Indications for anticoagulant and 
antiplatelet combined therapy. BMJ 358, j3782.
Hunt, B.J., Levi, M., 2018. Urgent reversal of vitamin K 
antagonists. BMJ 360, j5424.
190	
SECTION 2  The Cardiovascular System
Lapner, S.T., Kearon, C., 2013. Diagnosis and management of 
pulmonary embolism. BMJ 346, f757.
Stubbs, M.J., Mouyis, M., Thomas, M., 2018. Deep vein 
thrombosis. BMJ 360, k351.
FIBRINOLYTIC DRUGS
Bivard, A., Lin, L., Parsons, M.W., 2013. Review of stroke 
thrombolytics. J. Stroke 15, 90–98.
HAEMOSTATIC DRUGS
Mannucci, P.M., Levi, M., 2007. Prevention and treatment of 
major blood loss. N. Engl. J. Med. 356, 2301–2311.
The CRASH-3 Trial Collaborators, 2019. Effects of tranexamic 
acid on death, disability, vascular occlusive events and other 
morbidities in patients with acute traumatic brain injury 
(CRASH-3): a randomised, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 
394, 1713–1723.
Compendium of Drugs Used to Affect Haemostasis.
DRUG
CHARACTERISTICS
Antiplatelet Drugs
Inhibit platelet activation and aggregation by a range of mechanisms.
Aspirin (acetylsalicylic 
acid)
Acetylates cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1), leaving irreversibly inactivated COX-1 and salicylic acid. 
Low dose used for the secondary prevention of thrombotic cerebrovascular or cardiovascular 
disease. Given orally.
Cangrelor
Reversible antagonist of platelet adenosine diphosphate (ADP; P2Y12) receptors. Used with aspirin 
to prevent thrombosis during percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) when other oral ADP 
antagonists are not suitable (specialist use). Given intravenously. Very short half-life (2–4 min).
Clopidogrel
Prodrug of irreversible ADP (P2Y12) receptor antagonist. Used for the prevention of ischaemic 
events in people with a history of symptomatic ischaemic disease. Given orally.
Dipyridamole
Phosphodiesterase 3 and 5 inhibitor; also enhances antiplatelet and vasodilator activity of 
adenosine. Used as an adjunct to oral anticoagulants in people with prosthetic heart valves and 
for the secondary prevention of ischaemic stroke. Given orally, or by intravenous injection (for 
diagnostic purposes). Also available in combination with aspirin.
Epoprostenol
Prostacyclin (prostaglandin I2); platelet antiaggregatory and potent vasodilator actions via 
prostacyclin IP receptors. Used in combination with heparin during renal dialysis; also used with 
oral anticoagulants for resistant primary pulmonary hypertension. Given intravenously. Very short 
half-life (3 min).
Eptifibatide
Cyclic hexapeptide; inhibits glycoprotein IIb-IIIa receptor. Used as an adjunct to heparin and 
aspirin in high-risk people with unstable angina (specialist use only). Given intravenously.
Prasugrel
Prodrug of irreversible antagonist of platelet ADP (P2Y12) receptors. Uses similar to clopidogrel, but 
more rapid onset and greater inhibition of platelet aggregation. Given orally.
Ticagrelor
Reversible allosteric antagonist of platelet ADP (P2Y12) receptors. Used in combination with 
low-dose aspirin for the prevention of atherothrombotic events in people with acute coronary 
syndrome. Given orally.
Tirofiban
Nonpeptide inhibitor of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor. Used as an adjunct to heparin and aspirin in 
high-risk people with unstable angina (specialist use only). Given intravenously.
Injectable Anticoagulants
Heparin-like anticoagulants are polysaccharides that enhance the inhibitory action of antithrombin on thrombin and/or factor 
Xa. Low-molecular-weight heparins (LMWHs) and the pentasaccharide fondaparinux have more predictable anticoagulant 
activity, longer durations of action and fewer unwanted effects than unfractionated heparin; they do not usually require 
monitoring of clotting time and are commonly given by subcutaneous injection, or intravenously.
Dalteparin sodium
LMWH. Used for treatment and prevention of venous thromboembolism; also used in myocardial 
infarction, unstable angina and to prevent clotting in extracorporeal circuits.
Danaparoid sodium
Heparinoid substance. Used in prophylaxis of deep vein thrombosis on a named-patient basis 
only.
Enoxaparin
LMWH. Uses are similar to dalteparin.
Fondaparinux
Synthetic pentasaccharide; antithrombin-dependent anticoagulant action is selective for factor Xa. 
Used for prophylaxis of thromboembolism in people undergoing major orthopaedic surgery of 
the legs.
Heparin (unfractionated)
Antithrombin-dependent inhibitor of factor Xa and thrombin. LMWHs are preferred for routine 
use, but unfractionated heparin can be used in patients at high risk of bleeding. Given as an 
intravenous loading dose followed by an intravenous infusion or intermittent subcutaneous 
injection for initial treatment of deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism; also used for 
prophylaxis of venous thromboembolism in people with renal failure. Half-life (0.4–2.5 h) is dose-
dependent due to saturable metabolism in tissues.
Tinzaparin
LMWH. Uses are similar to dalteparin.
	
	
Haemostasis  CHAPTER 11	
191
DRUG
CHARACTERISTICS
Direct-Acting Anticoagulants
Vitamin K Antagonists
Inhibit reduction of vitamin K epoxide required for hepatic synthesis of clotting factors II (prothrombin), VII, IX and X. Warfarin 
is the drug of choice and the others are seldom required. Slow onset of action (48–72 h) necessitates combination with 
heparins if immediate action is required.
Acenocoumarol
Coumarin anticoagulant. Uses as for warfarin.
Phenindione
Synthetic anticoagulant. Uses as for warfarin.
Warfarin
Coumarin anticoagulant. Used for treatment of deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism, 
and for prophylaxis of embolism in rheumatic heart disease, atrial fibrillation and after insertion of 
prosthetic heart valves. Slow offset of action due to long half-life (up to 50 h).
Direct Factor Xa Inhibitors
Apixaban
Used for treatment and prevention of thromboembolism, particularly after hip and knee 
replacement surgery. Andexanet alfa is used for reversal of anticoagulant effect.
Edoxaban
Used for treatment and prevention of recurrent venous thromboembolism.
Rivaroxaban
Used for treatment and prevention of thromboembolism, particularly after hip and knee 
replacement surgery. Andexanet alfa is used for reversal of anticoagulant effect.
Direct Thrombin Inhibitors
Argatroban monohydrate
Nonpeptide inhibitor of thrombin. Used for anticoagulation in people with heparin-induced 
thrombocytopenia type II. Given intravenously.
Bivalirudin
Peptide related to hirudin (found in saliva of medicinal leeches). Used with aspirin and clopidogrel 
for people undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention, and in unstable angina and acute 
myocardial infarction. Given intravenously.
Dabigatran etexilate
Prodrug of dabigatran, a nonpeptide inhibitor acting on both free and clot-bound thrombin (factor 
IIa). Used for treatment and prophylaxis of thromboembolic events, particularly in orthopaedic 
surgery. Idarucizumab is used for rapid emergency reversal of dabigatran.
Fibrinolytic (Thrombolytic) Agents
Activate plasminogen to plasmin. Used in the treatment of myocardial infarction; all are macromolecules given intravenously 
and have short half-lives.
Alteplase
Recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator. Given by intravenous injection or infusion.
Reteplase
Recombinant plasminogen activator. Given by intravenous injection over not more than 2 min.
Streptokinase
Streptococcal plasminogen activator. Also used for life-threatening venous thrombosis and 
pulmonary embolism. Given by intravenous infusion.
Tenecteplase
Modified tissue-type plasminogen activator; higher selectivity than alteplase for fibrin. Given by 
intravenous injection over 10 s.
Urokinase
Human urokinase purified from urine. Used for deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism; 
also used for clearing occluded catheters and cannulas.
Antifibrinolytic Drugs and Haemostatic Agents
Desmopressin
Analogue of vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone, ADH). Used in haemophilia A and von Willebrand’s 
disease. Given intravenously, subcutaneously or intranasally.
Etamsylate
Reduces capillary bleeding, probably by affecting platelet adhesion. Given orally, but no longer 
recommended.
Tranexamic acid
Used in hereditary angioedema, epistaxis and after excessive thrombolytic dosage. Given orally or 
by slow intravenous injection.
Compendium of Drugs Used to Affect Haemostasis—cont’d.
192
SECTION 3  The Respiratory System
12
Asthma and Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease
Chapter Outline
Asthma  192
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease  194
Drugs for Asthma and Chronic Obstructive  
Pulmonary Disease  196
Drug Delivery to the Lung  196
Symptom-Relieving Drugs for Airflow Obstruction  
(Bronchodilators; ‘Relievers’)  197
Antiinflammatory Drugs for Airways Obstruction 
(‘Preventers’)  200
Management of Asthma  203
Acute Asthma  203
Prophylaxis of Chronic Asthma  204
Aspirin-Intolerant Asthma  204
Management of Chronic Obstructive  
Pulmonary Disease  204
Self-Assessment  205
Answers  206
Further Reading  208
Compendium of Drugs Used in Asthma or COPD  208
Asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) show several similarities in their clinical 
features but have some distinct pathophysiological – 
including immunological – differences. Both are inflam-
matory disorders of the airways. Clinically, they both 
present with airflow obstruction, defined as a ratio of 
forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) to forced 
vital capacity (FVC) of less than 0.7. The differentiation 
is further complicated by the recognition of an asthma-
COPD overlap syndrome (ACOS).
• Asthma is a heterogeneous disease, usually charac-
terised by chronic airway inflammation. It is defined 
by the history of respiratory symptoms such as 
wheezing, shortness of breath, chest tightness and 
cough that vary over time and in intensity, together 
with variable expiratory airflow limitation.
• COPD is characterised by persistent airflow limi-
tation that is usually progressive and associated 
with enhanced chronic inflammatory responses in 
the airways and the lungs to noxious particles and 
gases. Exacerbations and comorbidities contrib-
ute to the overall severity of COPD in individual 
people.
• ACOS is characterised by persistent airflow limi-
tation with several features usually associated 
with asthma, and several features usually associ-
ated with COPD. ACOS is therefore identified by 
the features that it shares with both asthma and 
COPD.
ASTHMA
The characteristic feature of asthma is reversible air-
flow obstruction. Asthma is often associated with 
an atopic disposition, and exposure to allergens or 
other environmental air pollutants may then result 
in expression of the condition. However, more severe 
asthma and adult-onset asthma is often nonallergic 
and accounts for 10% to 30% of cases.
The most common symptoms of asthma are chest 
tightness, wheezing, breathlessness and cough, 
although cough may be the only symptom in younger 
people, often occurring at night. Airflow obstruction 
in asthma typically shows marked variability over 
time and greater than 15% improvement in response 
to any inhaled bronchodilator (discussed later). The 
symptoms are due to a combination of smooth muscle 
constriction in the airway and bronchial inflammation.
The pathogenesis of asthma is complex and our 
knowledge is incomplete (Figs. 12.1 and 12.2). Immune 
dysfunction leads to airway inflammation in asthma 
and may result from impaired regulation and imbal-
ance between different T-lymphocyte subsets and epi-
thelial and airway dendritic cells. Inflammation of the 
bronchial mucosa is prominent, with infiltration of acti-
vated T-helper 2 lymphocytes, eosinophils and mast 
cells. These inflammatory cells release several power-
ful mediators that promote hyperplasia of bronchial 
smooth muscle, increased smooth muscle reactivity, 
	
	
Asthma and Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease  CHAPTER 12	
193
oedema of the bronchial wall, deposition of subepithe-
lial collagen and increased airway secretions. Dysregu-
lation of numerous inflammatory mediators appears to 
be involved in asthma, including cysteinyl-leukotrienes, 
histamine, proteases and a variety of cytokines and che-
mokines. However, unlike COPD, there is little evidence 
of an increase in reactive oxygen species.
Fig. 12.1 shows how exposure of atopic individuals 
to a relevant allergen (such as pollen or the faeces of 
house-dust mite) crosslinks immunoglobulin E (IgE) 
bound to mast cell membrane receptors and causes 
mast cell degranulation. Degranulation and the subse-
quent pathological processes can also occur in hyper-
sensitive nonatopic asthmatics with normal levels of 
IgE, when it is triggered by other factors such as upper 
respiratory tract infections, particularly with human 
rhinovirus. Degranulation of mast cells produces 
immediate bronchoconstriction (early phase) due to 
the synthesis and release of a number of spasmogens, 
of which the most potent are the cysteinyl-leukotrienes 
LTC4 and LTD4 (see Fig. 12.1). Chemotactic mediators 
are also synthesised and released, including pros-
taglandin (PG)D2, leukotriene E4, interleukins (IL-3, 
IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-8 and IL-13), and chemokines such 
as eotaxin, monocyte chemoattractant proteins (MCP) 
and RANTES (regulated on activation, normal T-cell 
expressed and secreted). These promote an influx of 
inflammatory cells which, 4 to 6 hours later, may result 
in a delayed bronchoconstrictor response (late phase) 
and the commencement of a cascade of other patho-
logical events in the airways. The persistent release 
of spasmogens and inflammatory mediators by these 
infiltrating cells can leave the bronchi hyperreactive to 
various irritants for several weeks. The inflammatory 
mediators produce mucosal oedema, which narrows 
the airways, and also stimulate smooth muscle contrac-
tion leading to bronchoconstriction. Excessive produc-
tion of mucus can cause further airways obstruction by 
plugging the bronchiolar lumen.
In mild to moderate asthma, both large and small air-
ways are involved in the inflammatory process, but the 
degree of submucosal fibrosis and mucus secretion is 
modest, with no parenchymal destruction.
In severe asthma, there is evidence of additional, 
greater infiltration of neutrophils or eosinophils, tissue 
destruction and airways remodelling, with progressive 
thickening and loss of elastic recoil, especially in the 
small airways.
• Specific allergens in atopic
  asthma cross-link IgE on mast cells
• Nonspecific degranulating agents
  in nonatopic asthma
Mast cell degranulation
and mediator release
Early phase
Late phase
Recruitment and activation of:
 Eosinophils 
   Basophils
 Monocytes
 T-lymphocytes
 Neutrophils (in severe asthma)
Chronic inflammation and airway remodelling:
Epithelial damage
Thickening of basement membrane
Mucus gland hyperplasia
Bronchial smooth muscle hyperplasia 
Vasodilation and oedema
Chemoattractant 
lipids (LTB4, PGD2), 
cytokines and 
chemokines 
(see Fig.12.2) 
Histamine
Leukotrienes
(LTC4, LTD4, LTE4)
PGD2
Tryptase
Bronchoconstriction
Mucus secretion
Increased vascular 
permeability
Fig. 12.1  Some aspects of the early- and late-phase responses to inhaled allergen challenge in people with 
allergic asthma. Allergen crosslinking of the IgE overexpressed on mast cells of atopic individuals, and nonimmunogenic 
stimuli in more severe nonatopic asthma, can degranulate mast cells, resulting in the release of preformed mediators 
such as histamine from mast cell granules, and de novo synthesis of lipid mediators such as cysteinyl-leukotrienes (LTC4, 
LTD4) and prostaglandin (PG) D2, which directly produce early-phase bronchoconstriction and initiate the acute inflam-
matory response. These mediators, together with inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, attract and activate cells 
including eosinophils, monocytes and T lymphocytes that are responsible for further inflammatory mediator production 
and persistent chronic inflammation. IgE, Immunoglobulin E.
194	
SECTION 3  The Respiratory System
CHRONIC OBSTRUCTIVE PULMONARY DISEASE
About 95% of people with COPD in the developed 
world are, or have been, cigarette smokers. There is 
wide variability in the rate of decline in pulmonary 
function in persistent smokers, with about 10% to 
20% showing an accelerated decline that may reflect 
a genetic susceptibility. Less common causes of COPD 
are exposure to air pollution (including biomass fuels, 
which are a common cause of COPD in the developing 
world) and inherited α1-antiprotease (α1-antitrypsin) 
deficiency (in about 1 in 3000 individuals in the UK).
COPD is a symptom complex characterised by per-
sistent airflow obstruction, with most people showing 
limited reversibility in response to a bronchodilator; 
however, up to 60% of people with COPD do show 
bronchial 
hyperresponsiveness 
and 
considerable 
bronchodilator-induced reversibility of the airflow 
obstruction. They have a mixed inflammatory pattern 
in the airways, which is now recognised as the asthma-
COPD overlap syndrome (ACOS).
The airflow obstruction in COPD is usually slowly 
progressive. It results from a combination of decreased 
Antigen (Ag)-presenting
dendritic cells in lungs
Ag
Pre-Th cell (CD4+)
IL-4, 
IL-13
Severe
asthma 
IL-12
Neutrophil
recruitment
Elevated IgE
production and
expression on mast 
cells and eosinophils
IL-4, IL-13
Airway
hyperreactivity
IL-9, IL-13
Mucus
overproduction
IL-4, IL-9, 
IL-13
Eosinophil,
basophil migration
IL-3, IL-4, IL-5, IL-9, 
IL-13, GM-CSF,
CC chemokines
(eotaxin, MCP)
Mast cell
development
IL-3, IL-4,
IL-9, IL-13
Th2
Th1
Mild/moderate
asthma
IFN-γ, IL-2, 
IL-8, TNFβ, 
TNFα
IL-4, 
IL-13
Fig. 12.2  T-cells and asthma. In allergic asthma there are complex and still poorly understood imbalances in the 
immune system. These include alterations in the functioning of several T-cell subsets and additional dysregulation in 
epithelial cells, fibroblasts and airway dendritic cells. In mild to moderate allergic asthma, the T-helper cell type 2 (Th2) 
response is amplified, and Th2 cytokines including interleukins (IL-) 4, 5 and 13 contribute to many of the pathophysi-
ological features of asthma. In severe asthma, there is an additional pathological role for T-helper type 1 (Th1) cytokines 
and neutrophils. GM-CSF, Granulocyte–macrophage colony stimulating factor; IFN, interferon; IgE, immunoglobulin E; 
IL, interleukin; MCP, monocyte chemoattractant proteins; TNF, tumour necrosis factor.
bronchial luminal diameter affecting small airways that 
is produced by wall thickening, intraluminal mucus 
and changes in the fluid lining, together with dynamic 
airways collapse due to emphysema (discussed later). 
It is often accompanied by chronic bronchitis (produc-
tion of mucoid sputum for at least 3 months of the year 
in each of two consecutive years).
The most frequent symptoms of COPD are gradu-
ally progressive breathlessness and cough. The cough 
is often productive and usually worse in the morning, 
but its severity is unrelated to the degree of airflow 
obstruction. Repeated respiratory infections are com-
mon and often associated with exacerbations of the air-
flow obstruction and symptomatic deterioration.
In COPD there is an inflammatory process that par-
ticularly affects the peripheral airways. The predomi-
nant infiltrating cells are neutrophils and macrophages, 
but ongoing damage to the lung even after the trigger 
is removed is probably due to CD8+ T-lymphocyte-
mediated inflammation (Fig. 12.3). There is increased 
oxidative stress due to reactive oxygen species (ROS) 
which are involved in the inflammatory process and 
produce oxidative stress in cells. Exogenous ROS are 
	
	
Asthma and Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease  CHAPTER 12	
195
derived from cigarette smoke and other pollutants and 
endogenous ROS are released from neutrophils and 
inflammatory macrophages. The airway inflammation 
produces a marked fibrotic reaction with parenchy-
mal destruction and excessive bronchial mucus secre-
tion. Corresponding histological changes include an 
increase in goblet cells in the bronchial mucosa and an 
increase in muscle mass in the bronchial wall, accom-
panied by interstitial fibrosis. Apoptosis of endothelial 
and alveolar cells reduces the ability of the lung to 
repair itself in response to sustained injury from the 
inhaled pollutants.
Emphysema is a pathological description, defined 
as enlargement of airways distal to the terminal bron-
chioles owing to destructive changes that may involve 
the entire acinus (panacinar) or the central part of the 
acinus (centriacinar). Lung parenchymal destruction 
is largely mediated by tissue proteases and cathepsins 
Increased
macrophages
Increased
neutrophils
Phenotypically
altered airway
epithelium,
increased
CD8+ T-cells
Chemoattractant
cytokines
Serine proteases (e.g. elastase)
Matrix metalloproteinases/cathepsins
Reactive oxygen species
Chemoattractant cytokines
LTB4
Elastin breakdown and
loss of elastic recoil
(inhibited by α1-antitrypsin)
Chronic inflammation
Tissue damage
Excessive mucus production
Emphysema
Fibrosis
Airway wall thickening
Chemoattractants,
peptides and peptide
fragments
Chemoattractants 
(IL-8, TNFα, LTB4, 
chemokines) 
Inhaled particles
mainly smoke;
exacerbations by
viruses and other
pathogens
Fig. 12.3  Pathophysiological factors in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Irritants and particles in cigarette 
smoke trigger mucus production and activation of macrophages, which release chemoattractants including leukotriene 
(LT) B4, interleukin (IL)-8 and chemokines that recruit neutrophil leucocytes to the airways. Neutrophils release elastase, 
which breaks down elastin, and other factors that cause tissue damage and promote chronic inflammation. A small num-
ber of people (about 1 in 3000) are particularly susceptible to the development of COPD due to variability in inflammatory 
or protective gene products, including α1-antitrypsin, which normally inhibits neutrophil elastase. Chronic alterations in 
the function of neutrophils, macrophages and subsets of T-cells result in parenchymal damage, loss of elastic recoil and 
episodes of infection. COPD, Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; TNFα, tumour necrosis factor alpha.
196	
SECTION 3  The Respiratory System
that are released by neutrophils and macrophages. 
Generation of excessive amounts of ROS inhibits the 
antiproteases that normally protect the lung against 
such attack. This explains the susceptibility of people 
with inherited α1-antiprotease deficiency to emphy-
sema. Tissue destruction leads to a loss of lung recoil 
on expiration, which is a major factor in reduced expi-
ratory airflow. Emphysema is probably the dominant 
factor in severe COPD.
DRUGS FOR ASTHMA AND CHRONIC OBSTRUCTIVE 
PULMONARY DISEASE
DRUG DELIVERY TO THE LUNG
For the treatment of airways disease, direct delivery 
of drug to the lung by inhalation allows the use of 
smaller doses than with systemic use and therefore 
reduces the incidence of unwanted systemic effects 
(Table 12.1). It also allows rapid onset of action of ‘res-
cue’ medication. The drug is usually delivered directly 
to the airways in an aerosol form or a dry powder. 
The size of the inhaled particle is an important factor 
that determines whether it will reach the airways and 
where in the airways it will be deposited. The optimal 
particle size is 2 to 5 µm. Particles larger than 10 µm 
impact on the upper airways and will be swallowed. 
Particles smaller than 1 µm are not deposited in the 
lower respiratory tract and will reach the alveoli where 
they will be absorbed into the blood or exhaled. Other 
factors that influence particle deposition include the 
pattern of inhalation, the properties of the carrier, and 
the type and severity of the lung disease. There are 
several methods for the delivery of inhaled drugs.
Pressurised Metered-Dose Inhaler
This is a common device for delivery of bronchodi-
lator and antiinflammatory drugs used in the treat-
ment of asthma and COPD. The propellant in the 
device is a pressurised hydrofluoroalkane (HFA) and 
activation delivers a measured dose of aerosol via an 
atomisation nozzle. One variant of this type of inhaler 
(soft-mist inhaler) generates two fine jets of liquid 
that converge and release a soft mist when they col-
lide, with 60% to 80% of the particles at optimal size. 
A pressurised metered-dose inhaler (pMDI) should 
be shaken before use. Optimal delivery of the drug 
requires:
• adequate inspiratory airflow rate;
• gentle, slow, long inspiration preceded by full 
expiration;
• a breath hold of at least 5 seconds.
Manually activated pMDIs depend on coordination 
of the timing of dose release and inspiration. About 
one-third of users find this coordination difficult, and 
even if it is optimal, up to 70% to 90% of the aerosol 
may be deposited in the oropharynx and swallowed. 
The need for coordination is avoided if a breath-actu-
ated pMDI is used. However, breath actuation requires 
air to be drawn through the mouthpiece at a flow rate 
of at least 30 L/min and people who have severe air-
flow obstruction cannot achieve this.
Pressurised Metered-Dose Inhaler with a Spacer
A spacer device (a plastic reservoir) can be attached 
to the pMDI to act as a chamber from which the sus-
pended aerosol particles can be inhaled. The use of a 
spacer removes the need to coordinate aerosol activa-
tion and inspiration. A spacer can be large volume, 
which retains more of the aerosol, or small volume, 
which is more convenient but in which the aerosol 
impacts to a greater extent on the wall of the spacer. 
The spacer can be designed as a holding chamber by 
incorporating a one-way valve that retains the aero-
sol in the chamber for longer. A spacer is essential 
for young children, and for very young children a 
holding chamber can be attached to a facemask. The 
inhaler is activated into the spacer, and tidal breathing 
Table 12.1  Comparison of Aerosol and Oral Routes of Administration for Respiratory Disease.
AEROSOL
ORAL
Ideal pharmacokinetics
Slow absorption from the lung surface and rapid 
systemic clearance
Good oral absorption and slow systemic 
clearance
Dose
Low dose delivered rapidly to target, with low 
systemic drug concentrations
High systemic dose necessary, which 
achieves appropriate concentration in the 
lung more slowly than by inhaled route
Incidence of unwanted 
effects
Usually low
High (but depends on drug)
Distribution in the lung
Rapid, but may be reduced in severe disease
Slow, but unaffected by airway disease
Adherence
Good with bronchodilators, but may be poor with 
prophylactic use of antiinflammatory drugs
Good
Ease of administration
May be difficult for small children and infirm peoplea
Good
Effectiveness
Good in mild to moderate disease
Good even in severe disease
aMay be improved by spacer devices. Nebulisers can be used for severe exacerbations.
	
	
Asthma and Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease  CHAPTER 12	
197
through the mouthpiece delivers the drug. Inhala-
tion of the contents of the spacer should be completed 
within 10 seconds of inhaler activation. The spacer 
allows evaporation of propellant and may create more 
droplets of the correct size to deposit in the airways. 
It also reduces drug deposition in the oropharynx, 
due to reduced particle velocity. Electrostatic charge 
on the plastic wall can attract particles and reduce 
drug delivery, so nonelectrostatic materials are pre-
ferred. The spacer device should be washed in mild 
detergent once a month and air-dried to minimise the 
electrostatic charge. The addition of a spacer makes 
a metered-dose inhaler system less portable and 
may reduce adherence to treatment. Breath-actuated 
metered-dose inhaler devices cannot be used with a 
spacer.
Dry-Powder Inhaler
Dry-powder inhalers produce drug-containing parti-
cles of optimal size for deposition. Inspiration through 
the device generates turbulence, which disperses the 
particles in the inspired air. Devices either use a single-
dose capsule that is loaded in the device and pierced, 
or the source is a bulk powder with the device meter-
ing the dose and a counter showing how many doses 
remain. Some devices produce an audible click to 
indicate successful activation. Optimal drug delivery 
requires:
• a deep, forceful, long inhalation over at least 
5 seconds;
• a breath hold for at least 10 seconds.
Nebulisers
Nebulisers are devices used with a facemask or mouth-
piece to deliver the drug from a reservoir solution. 
There are two types:
• Jet nebulisers use compressed air or oxygen pass-
ing through a narrow orifice at 6 to 8  L/min to 
suck drug solution from a reservoir into a feed 
tube (Venturi principle). There are fine ligaments 
in this tube and the impact of the solution on these 
ligaments generates droplets. Baffles trap the larger 
droplets.
• Ultrasonic nebulisers use a piezoelectric crystal 
vibrating at high frequency to create the aerosol, and 
do not require gas flow. The vibrations are transmit-
ted through a buffer to the drug solution and form 
a fountain of liquid in the nebulisation chamber. 
Ultrasonic nebulisers produce a more uniform par-
ticle size than jet nebulisers, but are less widely used 
due to greater cost.
Up to 10 times the amount of drug is required in a 
nebuliser to produce the same degree of bronchodila-
tion achieved by a metered-dose inhaler. Drug deliv-
ery is more efficient via a mouthpiece than via a mask 
from which more particles can be deposited in the 
nasal passages.
SYMPTOM-RELIEVING DRUGS FOR AIRFLOW 
OBSTRUCTION (BRONCHODILATORS; 
‘RELIEVERS’)
β2-Adrenoceptor Agonists
  Examples
short-acting: salbutamol, terbutaline  
long-acting: formoterol, salmeterol  
ultra-long-acting: indacaterol, olodaterol
Mechanism of action and effects
β2-Adrenoceptors are widely distributed in the lung 
and the receptor density is higher in bronchial smooth 
muscle than in other cell types such as epithelial cells, 
endothelial cells or mast cells. Stimulation of these 
receptors by an agonist stabilises the receptor in its 
active configuration, resulting in increased generation 
of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) by adeny-
lyl cyclase and activation of protein kinase A (PKA). 
This phosphorylates myosin light chain proteins that 
are central to the regulation of smooth muscle tone. 
β2-Adrenoceptor agonists also reduce Ca2+ entry into 
muscle cells and activate K+ channels that hyperpolar-
ise the smooth muscle cell. Major beneficial actions of 
a β2-adrenoceptor agonist are:
• bronchodilation due to relaxation of bronchial 
smooth muscle cells;
• inhibition of mediator release from mast cells and 
infiltrating leucocytes;
• enhanced airway mucociliary clearance.
However, in addition to their beneficial effects on 
the airway, frequent use of a β2-adrenoceptor agonist in 
asthma can enhance harmful Th2 inflammatory path-
ways and will downregulate β2-adrenoceptors. Mono-
therapy with a long-acting β2-adrenoceptor agonist 
(LABA) is associated with worse asthma control and 
more frequent exacerbations. LABAs should therefore 
not be used without an inhaled corticosteroid.
There is synergy between the actions of inhaled 
corticosteroids and inhaled β2-adrenoceptor agonists, 
with the latter enhancing the gene-transcription effects 
of corticosteroids, and corticosteroids increasing β2-
adrenoceptor gene transcription and enhancing cou-
pling of the receptor to adenylyl cyclase.
Some β2-adrenoceptor agonists such as salbutamol, 
terbutaline and salmeterol have about 60% partial 
agonist activity at the receptor (low-efficacy agonists), 
whereas formoterol, indacaterol and olodaterol have 
full agonist activity (high-efficacy agonists). The rel-
evance of these differences to treatment outcomes and 
unwanted effects is unclear.
Pharmacokinetics
The selectivity of β2-adrenoceptor agonists for the 
β2-adrenoceptor subtype is dose-dependent. Inhala-
tion of drug aids selectivity because it delivers small 
doses to the airways and minimises systemic exposure 
198	
SECTION 3  The Respiratory System
of β-adrenoceptors outside the lungs (see Table 12.1). 
The dose–response relationship for bronchodilation is 
log-linear, and a 10-fold increase in dose is required to 
double the bronchodilator response.
Short-acting β2-adrenoceptor agonists such as sal-
butamol have a rapid onset of action, often within 
5 minutes, and produce bronchodilation for up to 
about 6 hours. Their duration of action is far longer 
than the natural adrenoceptor agonists such as adrena-
line because they are not substrates for the norepi-
nephrine uptake transporter (NET) on the presynaptic 
neuron or for catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), 
which metabolises catecholamines outside adrenergic 
neurons.
Salmeterol and formoterol have a longer duration 
of action (up to 12 hours) because they are more lipo-
philic than short-acting agents and bind to the lipid 
of the cell membrane. Salmeterol has a slower onset 
of action than short-acting agents, but the onset with 
formoterol is rapid. Indacaterol and olodaterol have 
both rapid onset and ultralong duration of action (up 
to 24 hours), allowing once-daily dosing.
Salbutamol and terbutaline can also be given orally 
(as conventional or modified-release formulations), 
by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection, or by 
intravenous infusion. Much larger doses are required 
to deliver an adequate amount of drug to the lungs 
by any of these routes, compared with inhaled doses. 
This reduces the selectivity for β2-adrenoceptors, and 
systemic unwanted effects can be troublesome.
Unwanted effects
• Fine skeletal muscle tremor from stimulation of 
β2-adrenoceptors.
• Tachycardia and arrhythmias result from both β1- 
and β2-adrenoceptor stimulation in the heart when 
high doses of inhaled drug are used, or after oral or 
parenteral administration.
• Hypokalaemia with high doses, due to promo-
tion of cellular uptake of K+ by a cAMP-dependent 
action of β2-adrenoceptor agonists on the Na+/K+ 
pump. Nebulised salbutamol is used as a treatment 
for hyperkalaemia. Hypomagnesaemia and hyper-
glycaemia can also occur. These effects do not per-
sist during long-term use.
• Paradoxical bronchospasm has been reported with 
inhalation, usually when given for the first time or 
with a new canister.
• Headache.
• Nervous tension.
• Tolerance to the bronchodilator effects with prolonged 
use of β2-adrenoceptor agonists is modest, but desen-
sitisation and downregulation of β2-adrenoceptors 
does occur. The process of receptor desensitisation 
appears to be more rapid for mast cells than for bron-
chial smooth muscle, and the ability to prevent exer-
cise-induced bronchoconstriction is more affected 
than the symptom relief that these drugs produce.
• Regular use of high doses of short-acting or inhaled 
long-acting β2-adrenoceptor agonists has been 
linked with increased mortality in people with 
asthma, although a causal relationship remains con-
troversial. One possibility is that they precipitate 
serious cardiac arrhythmias when combined with 
hypoxaemia during severe asthma exacerbations. It 
is also possible that their use might allow people to 
tolerate initial exposure to larger doses of allergens 
or irritants, which then produce an enhanced late 
asthmatic response.
Antimuscarinics
  Examples
aclidinium, glycopyrronium, ipratropium, tiotropium, umecli-
dinium
Mechanism of action and effects
The main type of muscarinic receptor in the airways is 
the M3 receptor, which is involved in direct broncho-
constriction, glandular mucus secretion and mucocili-
ary clearance from the bronchi. M3 receptor stimulation 
activates phospholipase C with subsequent formation 
of inositol triphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (DAG), 
which are key events in the signalling pathway that 
increases intracellular Ca2+ (see Chapter 1 and Fig. 1.5).
Ipratropium binds nonselectively to all five sub-
types of muscarinic receptor (M1 to M5). The recom-
mended dose is determined by unwanted effects and is 
well below the dose that produces maximal broncho-
dilation. By contrast, tiotropium and other long-acting 
muscarinic antagonists (LAMA) are functionally selec-
tive for the M3 receptor due to a higher affinity for 
binding to the receptor or due to lower reversibility of 
binding at M3 than at other muscarinic receptors.
The main benefit of muscarinic antagonists is in 
COPD. They are of less value for bronchodilation in 
acute mild to moderate asthma, but ipratropium has 
a place when added to a β2-adrenoceptor agonist in 
severe exacerbations of asthma.
Pharmacokinetics
The antimuscarinic drugs are derived from atropine 
but are N-quaternary cations that are poorly absorbed 
orally and do not cross the blood–brain barrier. They 
are given exclusively by inhalation as a powder or 
aerosol or via a nebuliser. They have a slower onset of 
action (30–60 minutes) than salbutamol (5–10 minutes), 
probably due to slow absorption from the surface of 
the airways. The duration of action of antimuscarinics 
is related to the rate of removal locally from the air-
ways, not the half-life of elimination from the circula-
tion. LAMAs such as tiotropium and umeclidinium are 
active for 24 hours or more, allowing once-daily dos-
ing. Aclidinium does not have such a long duration of 
action and is more effective when taken twice daily.
	
	
Asthma and Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease  CHAPTER 12	
199
Unwanted effects
Direct delivery of antimuscarinic drugs to the lung is 
the main reason for the relative lack of unwanted sys-
temic effects.
• Dry mouth is the most common unwanted effect.
• Nausea, constipation.
• Headache.
• Cough.
• Tiotropium can cause urinary retention in men with 
prostatism.
• Exacerbation 
of 
angle-closure 
glaucoma 
(see 
Chapter 50).
Methylxanthines
  Examples
aminophylline, theophylline
Mechanism of action and effects
Methylxanthines are a group of naturally occur-
ring substances found in coffee, tea, chocolate and 
related foodstuffs. Naturally occurring theophylline 
(1,3-dimethylxanthine) and its ester derivative amino-
phylline are the only compounds in clinical use. They 
are chemically similar to caffeine. Methylxanthines have 
vasodilatory, antiinflammatory and immunomodula-
tory actions. The potential effects of methylxanthines 
are numerous, and some are of uncertain importance.
• Inhibition of phosphodiesterase (PDE), which 
degrades cyclic nucleotide second messengers, may 
partly explain the actions of methylxanthines. The-
ophylline preferentially inhibits the isoenzymes 
PDE3 (which degrades cAMP and cyclic guano-
sine monophosphate (cGMP)) and PDE4 (which 
degrades cAMP). PDE3 is found in bronchial 
smooth muscle and PDE4 in several inflammatory 
cell types, including mast cells. The rise in intracel-
lular cAMP in bronchial smooth muscle stimulates 
large-conductance voltage-gated, Ca2+-activated K+ 
channels (BKCa) in the cell membrane, leading to cell 
hyperpolarisation and muscle relaxation. However, 
theophylline only produces bronchodilation at rela-
tively high plasma concentrations, and drugs that 
are more effective PDE inhibitors (such as dipyri-
damole) do not bronchodilate. Prolonging the dura-
tion of action of cyclic nucleotides may potentiate 
the action of β2-adrenoceptor agonists and produce a 
synergistic dilator effect on bronchial smooth muscle. 
PDE inhibition also stimulates ciliary beat frequency 
in the airways and enhances water transport across 
the airway epithelium, which increases mucociliary 
clearance. Theophylline increases the force and rate 
of contraction of cardiac muscle by increasing cAMP 
(see Chapter 7), and also causes arterial vasodilation 
by inhibiting the breakdown of cGMP.
• Adenosine receptor antagonism may be relevant to 
some of the clinical effects of methylxanthines (see 
also the monograph on adenosine in Chapter 8). 
Adenosine releases histamine and leukotrienes from 
mast cells, which results in the constriction of hyper-
responsive airways in individuals with asthma. 
Theophylline is a potent antagonist at adenosine A1, 
A2 and A3 receptors (see Chapter 1 table of recep-
tors) and may reduce bronchoconstriction by this 
mechanism. Adenosine receptor antagonism is 
responsible for central nervous system (CNS) stim-
ulation, which improves mental performance and 
alertness, has positive inotropic and chronotropic 
effects on the heart, and in the kidney reduces tubu-
lar Na+ reabsorption, which leads to natriuresis and 
diuresis.
• Activation of histone deacetylases (HDAC): core 
histones form part of the structure of nuclear chro-
matin and their acetylation activates gene transcrip-
tion, whereas their deacetylation suppresses gene 
transcription, including transcription of proinflam-
matory genes. Theophylline at low concentrations 
activates HDAC in nuclear extracts, indicating an 
action independent of adenosine and other surface 
receptors, and also increases HDAC activity in bron-
chial biopsies from people with asthma. Antiinflam-
matory effects of theophylline occur at drug plasma 
concentrations similar to those that produce clinical 
benefit. The action of theophylline on HDAC may 
potentiate the antiinflammatory effects of cortico-
steroids (see Chapter 44).
• Increased diaphragmatic contractility and reduced 
fatigue have been reported at lower plasma theoph-
ylline concentrations than those required for bron-
chodilation. This may improve lung ventilation.
Pharmacokinetics
The extent of absorption of theophylline from the 
gut is unpredictable with considerable interindivid-
ual variation. This, and the short but highly variable 
plasma half-life, has resulted in the widespread use 
of modified-release formulations. Theophylline has a 
narrow therapeutic index and, as different formula-
tions vary in their release characteristics, they are not 
readily interchangeable. Theophylline is metabolised 
in the liver by cytochrome P450 (mainly CYP1A2), giv-
ing the potential for drug interactions. Aminophylline 
is a more water-soluble ester prodrug, which is hydro-
lysed rapidly after absorption from the gut to the-
ophylline and ethylenediamine. Aminophylline can 
also be given by intravenous infusion. Measurement 
of blood theophylline concentrations is valuable as a 
guide to effective dosing.
Unwanted effects
Most are dose-related and can arise within the accepted 
therapeutic plasma concentration range.
• Gastrointestinal upset, including nausea, vomit-
ing (PDE4 inhibition in the vomiting centre) and 
diarrhoea.
200	
SECTION 3  The Respiratory System
• CNS stimulation, including insomnia, irritability, 
dizziness, headache (PDE3 inhibition) and occasion-
ally seizures at high plasma concentrations (adenos-
ine receptor antagonism).
• Hypotension from peripheral vasodilation (PDE3 
inhibition). In contrast, cerebral arteries are con-
stricted by methylxanthines (adenosine receptor 
antagonism).
• Cardiac stimulation produces various arrhythmias.
• Hypokalaemia can occur acutely, especially after 
intravenous injection, which also promotes cardiac 
arrhythmias.
• Tolerance to the beneficial effects of methylxan-
thines can occur.
• Drug interactions can be troublesome, due to the 
narrow therapeutic index of theophylline. Hepatic 
CYP1A2 enzyme inhibitors such as ciprofloxacin, 
erythromycin, clarithromycin, fluconazole and 
ketoconazole (see Chapter 51 and Table 2.7) can pre-
cipitate theophylline toxicity.
Magnesium Sulfate
Mechanism of action and effects
Intravenous magnesium sulfate can be given for the 
treatment of severe asthma in adults if life-threatening 
features are present. Magnesium bronchodilates by 
blocking Ca2+ channels in smooth muscle cell mem-
branes, therefore reducing Ca2+ influx into the cell.
Pharmacokinetics
Magnesium sulfate is given by slow intravenous infu-
sion and it is widely distributed. Mg2+ ions are excreted 
by the kidney with a half-life of 4 hours.
Unwanted effects
• Atrioventricular block.
• Enhancement of neuromuscular blockade by neuro-
muscular blocking agents.
• Diarrhoea.
• Potentiates the hypotensive effects of calcium chan-
nel blockers.
ANTIINFLAMMATORY DRUGS FOR AIRWAYS 
OBSTRUCTION (‘PREVENTERS’)
Corticosteroids
  Examples
beclometasone dipropionate, budesonide, fluticasone 
propionate, hydrocortisone, mometasone, prednisolone
Mechanism of action and effects
Corticosteroids with powerful glucocorticoid activity 
suppress inflammation and the immune response, but 
they are not direct bronchodilators. Inhaled corticoste-
roids are the cornerstone of management of chronic 
asthma, and systemic corticosteroids are pivotal in the 
treatment of acute severe asthma. In COPD, inhaled 
corticosteroids reduce exacerbations and rate of symp-
tom progression but have no effect on lung function 
and mortality. Systemic corticosteroids are modestly 
effective in severe exacerbations of COPD.
Intracellular events involved in the antiinflamma-
tory action of corticosteroids are described in Chapters 
38 and 44. The inhibition of transcription of genes cod-
ing for the cytokines involved in inflammation is par-
ticularly important in asthma. Higher glucocorticoid 
concentrations also activate antiinflammatory genes 
and genes linked to glucocorticoid unwanted effects. 
Following a delay of 6 to 12 hours, corticosteroids 
reduce airway responsiveness to several broncho-
constrictor mediators and with chronic therapy, they 
inhibit both the early and late reactions to allergen.
Antiinflammatory effects of corticosteroids in 
asthma include:
• Reduced airway oedema and leucocyte recruitment 
by induction of tight junctions in vascular endothe-
lial cells.
• Reduced activation of inflammatory cells (includ-
ing macrophages, T-lymphocytes, eosinophils and 
airway epithelial cells), with reduced expression 
of inflammatory cytokines, chemokines, adhesion 
molecules and inflammatory enzymes (see Chapter 
38). In allergic disease, suppression of Th2 cells and 
their cytokines (type 2 inflammation) is particularly 
important.
• Reduced recruitment of inflammatory cells to the 
airways (particularly eosinophils, but also T-lym-
phocytes, mast cells and others) through reduced 
production of chemotactic mediators and adhe-
sion molecules and reduced cell survival (enhanced 
apoptosis).
• Decreased local generation of inflammatory pros-
taglandins and leukotrienes due to inhibition of 
phospholipase A2 by annexin 1 (lipocortin), which 
reduces mucosal oedema (see also Chapter 29).
• β2-Adrenoceptor upregulation and better coupling 
to adenylyl cyclase, which restores responsiveness 
to β2-adrenoceptor agonists.
• Enhanced activity of the M2 autoreceptors on acetyl-
choline nerve endings inhibits acetylcholine release 
and relieves vagally mediated bronchoconstriction.
• Suppression of the excess epithelial cell shedding 
and goblet cell hyperplasia found in the bronchial 
epithelium in asthma.
Inhaled corticosteroids produce some improvement 
in asthmatic symptoms after 24 hours and a maxi-
mum response after 1 to 2 weeks. Reduction in airway 
responsiveness to allergens and irritants occurs grad-
ually over several months, but many of the chronic 
structural changes in the airways in asthma are not 
affected by corticosteroids.
Although highly effective, corticosteroids are a blunt 
instrument with significant potential unwanted effects 
(see later and Chapter 44). Much effort has recently 
	
	
Asthma and Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease  CHAPTER 12	
201
been directed at the development of agents that target 
the asthma inflammatory response more precisely (see 
later) in the hope that reliance on systemic corticoste-
roids in people with severe disease can be minimised.
Pharmacokinetics
Whenever possible, corticosteroids are given by inhala-
tion of an aerosol or dry powder to minimise systemic 
unwanted effects, but they can be used intravenously 
or orally in severe asthma. Desirable properties of 
an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) include a low rate of 
absorption across mucosal surfaces (such as the lung, 
but also the gut for the swallowed fraction of the drug) 
and rapid inactivation once absorbed. Beclometasone 
dipropionate fulfils the former criterion, but it is only 
slowly inactivated once it reaches the systemic circu-
lation. Inhaled budesonide (which is inactivated by 
extensive first-pass metabolism in the liver following 
oral absorption) or fluticasone (which is very poorly 
absorbed from the gut) may be preferred if high doses 
of inhaled drug are needed, or for the treatment of 
children in whom the systemic effects can be more 
problematic.
Unwanted effects
The unwanted effects of oral and parenteral corticoste-
roids are described in Chapter 44. Inhaled corticoste-
roids only have systemic actions when given in high 
doses. The amount of the drug that is swallowed can be 
minimised by using a large-volume spacer (described 
previously); large aerosol particles, which would 
other­wise be deposited on the oropharyngeal mucosa, 
are trapped in the spacer, and only the smaller particles 
are inhaled.
There are some specific problems with inhaled 
corticosteroids:
• Dysphonia (hoarseness), caused by drug deposition 
on vocal cords and myopathy of laryngeal muscles, 
occurs in up to one-third of those using inhaled 
corticosteroids. This may be less troublesome with 
breath-actuated delivery because the method of 
inspiration leads to protection of the vocal cords by 
the false cords.
• Oral candidiasis can occur but can be prevented 
by using a spacer device or by gargling with water 
after use of the inhaler.
• Prolonged use of high doses of inhaled corticoste-
roid has been associated with systemic unwanted 
effects. These include adrenal suppression, osteo-
porosis and reduced growth velocity in children. In 
older people with COPD, there is an increased risk 
of pneumonia.
Leukotriene Receptor Antagonist
  Example
montelukast
Mechanisms of action and effects
Montelukast is a leukotriene receptor antagonist 
(LTRA) or leukotriene modifier taken orally that 
blocks the bronchoconstriction induced by locally 
released cysteinyl-leukotrienes (LTC4, LTD4 and LTE4; 
see Fig. 29.1). Cysteinyl-leukotrienes are released 
from various cells including activated mast cells and 
eosinophils in response to several airway insults, and 
their synthesis is increased by many mediators, such 
as cytokines. Cysteinyl-leukotrienes also contribute to 
airway oedema, enhanced secretion of mucus and air-
way eosinophilia (see Fig. 12.1).
Montelukast 
blocks 
the 
cysteinyl-leukotriene 
(CysLT1) receptors on bronchial smooth muscle and 
elsewhere. It reduces both the early and late broncho-
constrictor responses to inhaled allergen and may be 
most useful in mild and moderate asthma, exercise-
induced bronchoconstriction and hypersensitivity 
reactions provoked by nonsteroidal antiinflammatory 
drugs (NSAIDs; see Chapter 29). The effects are addi-
tive to those of inhaled corticosteroid.
Pharmacokinetics
Montelukast is well absorbed from the gut and metab-
olised in the liver. The half-life of montelukast is 3– 
5 hours.
Unwanted effects
• Headache.
• Gastrointestinal upset.
• Rarely, neuropsychiatric effects, including sleep dis-
turbance and irritability.
Phosphodiesterase Type 4 Inhibitor
  Example
roflumilast
Mechanism of action and effects
Phosphodiesterase type 4 (PDE4) is the main isoen-
zyme present in cells involved in the inflammatory 
process in COPD. PDE4 degrades the intracellular sec-
ond messenger cAMP and inhibition of this enzyme 
with roflumilast has several antiinflammatory actions:
• Decreased cytokine and chemokine release from 
neutrophils, 
eosinophils, 
macrophages 
and 
T-lymphocytes.
• Decreased expression of adhesion molecules on 
T-lymphocytes and other inflammatory cells. Along 
with the reduced chemokine release, this results in 
less accumulation of these cells in the airway.
• Decreased apoptosis of airway cells, which may 
assist in sputum clearance.
Roflumilast is highly selective for most isoforms of 
PDE4 found in inflammatory leucocytes but has little 
action in tissues that express other PDE isoenzymes. In 
people with COPD with chronic bronchitis (prominent 
202	
SECTION 3  The Respiratory System
cough and sputum production) who have frequent 
exacerbations, roflumilast improves lung function and 
reduces exacerbation frequency.
Pharmacokinetics
Roflumilast is well absorbed from the gut and is 
metabolised by the liver. It has a long but variable half-
life with an average of about 17 hours.
Unwanted effects
PDE4 has several isoforms that are found in the gut, 
adipose tissue and neurons, and inhibition of these is 
responsible for most unwanted effects with roflumi-
last, which often resolve with continued use:
• nausea, anorexia, abdominal pain, diarrhoea;
• weight loss;
• headache, insomnia.
Antibodies Targeting Type 2 Inflammatory 
Cytokines and IgE
  Examples
omalizumab (targets IgE), benralizumab (targets IL-5 
receptors), mepolizumab, reslizumab (both target IL-5), 
dupilumab (targets IL-4/IL-13 signalling)
Mechanism of action
The T-helper cell type 2 (Th2) inflammatory response 
in asthma involves the cytokines IL-4, IL-5 and IL-13 
and is characterised by high levels of antibodies (par-
ticularly IgE) and eosinophilia.
Omalizumab is a recombinant humanised IgG1k 
monoclonal antibody that binds selectively to IgE to 
form complexes, which are removed from the circula-
tion by the reticuloendothelial system and endothelial 
cells. This leads to a reduction in IgE receptor expres-
sion and reduced mediator release from mast cells 
and basophils. Treatment with omalizumab gradually 
reduces airway inflammation in asthma, with a peak 
response after 12 to 16 weeks. It reduces exacerbation 
frequency by about 25%. Omalizumab is used for the 
treatment of persistent severe allergic IgE-mediated 
asthma in adults and children over 12 years that can-
not be controlled with high-dose inhaled corticoste-
roids, long-acting β2-adrenoceptor agonists and other 
standard therapies for asthma.
Agents targeting the type 2 cytokines IL-4, IL-5 and 
IL-13 are indicated in eosinophilic asthma, a subtype 
characterised by an elevated blood eosinophil count 
(over 300 cells/microlitre), frequent exacerbations, and 
often a need for chronic systemic corticosteroid treat-
ment. Benralizumab is a humanised monoclonal anti-
body that specifically binds to the α subunit of the IL-5 
receptor, which is expressed on eosinophils and baso-
phils. This induces antibody-dependent, cell-mediated 
cytotoxicity, and rapidly and almost completely 
depletes eosinophils. Mepolizumab and reslizumab 
are anti–IL-5 antibody products that neutralise IL-5 
and prevent it binding with its receptor; they indirectly 
deplete eosinophils.
Dupilumab is a human recombinant monoclonal 
antibody directed against the α subunit of the IL-4 
receptor, interfering with both IL-4 and IL-13 signal-
ling involved in IgE production and eosinophilia.
Compared to placebo, the agents targeting type 2 
inflammatory cytokine pathways reduce corticosteroid 
use in eosinophilic asthma and exacerbation frequency 
(by about 50%). The drugs have not been compared 
directly against one another but are probably similarly 
effective.
Pharmacokinetics
Omalizumab, benralizumab and mepolizumab are 
given by subcutaneous injection. Reslizumab is given 
intravenously. They are all metabolised by widely dis-
tributed proteolytic enzymes and have long half-lives, 
allowing dosing at intervals between 2 and 8 weeks.
Unwanted effects
These drugs are generally safe and well tolerated, but 
occasionally cause injection site reactions and mild 
systemic symptoms (headache, cold-like symptoms). 
Anaphylaxis has been reported rarely (<1%) and also 
Churg-Strauss syndrome (with dupilimab).
Macrolide Antibiotics
  Example
azithromycin
Macrolide antibiotics are considered in detail in 
Chapter 51. In addition to their antimicrobial effects, 
macrolides may have an antiinflammatory effect of rel-
evance in airways disease. Experience is greatest with 
azithromycin. In people with COPD who have fre-
quent severe exacerbations despite optimal treatment, 
prophylactic use of azithromycin reduces exacerbation 
frequency. It may also reduce exacerbation frequency 
in people with asthma who have ongoing symptoms 
despite good adherence to high-dose inhaled cortico-
steroids. In prescribing long-term antibiotics, the risk 
of promoting resistance must be carefully considered.
Azithromycin has a long half-life (about 70 hours), 
allowing doses to be taken three times per week.
Cromones
  Examples
sodium cromoglicate, nedocromil sodium
The cromones are used to prevent asthma attacks, 
but they are usually less effective than inhaled cor-
ticosteroids and only about one-third of people ben-
efit from treatment. Cromones have no bronchodilator 
	
	
Asthma and Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease  CHAPTER 12	
203
activity and are of no use in acute attacks of asthma. 
The major use of cromones is as prophylactic agents in 
the treatment of mild to moderate antigen-, pollutant- 
and exercise-induced asthma. They are also used as 
nasal inhalants to treat seasonal allergic rhinitis (see 
Chapter 39) and in ophthalmic solutions to treat aller-
gic conjunctivitis (see Chapter 50).
Mechanisms of action and effects
• Mast cell stabilisation. Sodium cromoglicate was 
originally introduced as a mast cell stabiliser. It 
enhances the phosphorylation of a protein that 
normally forms a substrate for intracellular protein 
kinase C, and interferes with the signal transduc-
tion for inflammatory mediator release. This action 
may protect against immediate bronchoconstriction 
induced by allergens, exercise or cold air.
• Inhibition of sensory C-fibre neurons by antago-
nism of the effects of the tachykinins, substance P 
and neurokinin B, which are involved in generation 
of sensory stimuli. This is probably responsible for 
protection against bronchoconstriction produced by 
irritants such as sulfur dioxide.
• Inhibition of accumulation of eosinophils in the 
lungs, and reduced activation of eosinophils, neu-
trophils and macrophages in inflamed lung tissue. 
These actions may be important in preventing the 
late-phase response to allergen and the develop-
ment of bronchial hyper-reactivity.
• Inhibition of B-cell switching to IgE production 
probably also contributes to the long-term effects.
A single dose of either nedocromil sodium or 
sodium cromoglicate will prevent the early-phase 
bronchoconstrictor response to allergen, but treatment 
for 1 to 2 months may be necessary to block the late-
phase reaction.
Pharmacokinetics
Both sodium cromoglicate and nedocromil sodium are 
highly ionised and poorly absorbed across biological 
membranes. They are therefore largely retained at the 
site of action on bronchial mucosa after inhalation as a 
powder or from a metered-dose aerosol inhaler. Swal-
lowed drug is voided in the faeces.
Unwanted effects
• Cough, wheeze and throat irritation may be pro-
voked transiently following inhalation.
• Headache.
• Nausea, vomiting, dyspepsia and abdominal pain 
with nedocromil sodium.
MANAGEMENT OF ASTHMA
Treatment of asthma has two aims:
• relief of symptoms;
• reduction of airway inflammation.
ACUTE ASTHMA
Mild infrequent attacks of asthma can often be con-
trolled by occasional use of a short-acting inhaled β2-
adrenoceptor agonist. Antimuscarinic agents are less 
effective unless asthma coexists with COPD (ACOS; see 
later). More severe attacks of asthma require prompt 
treatment with bronchodilators and systemic cortico-
steroids, often in hospital. The features of severe and 
life-threatening acute asthma are shown in Table 12.2.
Treatment of severe acute asthma should include:
• supplemental oxygen to achieve an oxygen satura-
tion (SpO2) of 94% to 98%;
• inhaled short-acting β2-adrenoceptor agonist such 
as salbutamol, preferably via an oxygen-driven neb-
uliser, or via a metered-dose inhaler with a large-
volume spacer if a nebuliser is not available;
• high-dose oral prednisolone or initial intravenous 
hydrocortisone followed by oral prednisolone.
If response to treatment is poor after 15 to 30 min-
utes, or if there are life-threatening features, additional 
treatment should be given:
• inhaled ipratropium via an oxygen-driven nebuliser.
If response is poor after a further 15 to 30 minutes, 
then consider:
• intravenous aminophylline,
• intravenous magnesium sulfate,
• invasive ventilation in life-threatening asthma with 
a deteriorating trajectory.
Table 12.2  Signs of Severe and Life-Threatening 
Acute Asthma.
SEVERE ACUTE ASTHMAa
LIFE-THREATENING ACUTE 
ASTHMA
Any one of the following:
Any one of the following in a 
person with severe acute 
asthma:
PEF 33%–50% of 
predicted or previous 
best
PEF <33% of predicted or 
previous best
Pulse ≥110 beats/min
Arterial oxygen saturation 
(SpO2) <92%
Respiratory rate ≥25/min
Partial arterial pressure of 
oxygen (PaO2) <8 kPa
Inability to complete 
a sentence in one 
breath
Normalb partial arterial pres-
sure of carbon dioxide 
(PaCO2) 4.6–6.0 kPa
Arrhythmia or hypotension
Exhaustion, altered con-
sciousness level, poor 
respiratory effort
Silent chest
Cyanosis
aModerate acute asthma is defined as worsening symptoms with PEF 50%–
75% of predicted or previous best, but no features of severe acute asthma.
bRaised PaCO2, or a requirement for mechanical ventilation with raised inflation 
pressures, or both, is a sign of near-fatal acute asthma.
PEF, Peak expiratory flow.
204	
SECTION 3  The Respiratory System
After recovery from a severe asthma attack, pred-
nisolone should be continued for at least 5 days or 
until there are no residual symptoms, especially at 
night, and the peak expiratory flow is at least 80% of 
the person's previous best. High doses of prednisolone 
can be stopped abruptly if used for 3 weeks or less, but 
should be reduced gradually if they have been used for 
a longer period (see Chapter 44).
PROPHYLAXIS OF CHRONIC ASTHMA
An initial attempt should be made to identify and 
exclude precipitating factors – for example, allergens, 
occupational precipitants, NSAIDs (described later) 
and β-adrenoceptor antagonists (including eye drops; 
see Chapter 5). Long-term treatment is guided by a step-
wise treatment plan. Inhaled medication is the mainstay 
of treatment, and it is central to successful management 
that an appropriate inhaler device is selected after care-
ful assessment of the person's preferences and abilities.
Step 1. Intermittent reliever therapy. An inhaled 
short-acting β2-adrenoceptor agonist, such as sal-
butamol, taken as required. For those who are in-
tolerant to this treatment, inhaled ipratropium and 
oral theophylline are alternative options, but there 
is a higher risk of unwanted effects with the latter. 
Step 2 treatment should be considered if more than 
two doses of short-acting β2-adrenoceptor agonist 
are required in a week, there are night-time symp-
toms at least once a week or if there has been an 
exacerbation of asthma in the previous 2 years.
Step 2. Regular inhaled preventer therapy. For adults, 
a regular low-dose inhaled corticosteroid such as 
beclometasone is used in addition to step 1 therapy. 
If control is inadequate, adherence and inhaler tech-
nique should be checked before progressing beyond 
this step.
Step 3. Initial add-on therapy. If symptoms in an adult 
are not controlled by a low-dose inhaled corticoste-
roid, addition of a long-acting β2-adrenoceptor ago-
nist such as salmeterol or formoterol is usually more 
effective than increasing the dose of corticosteroid. An 
inhaled short-acting β2-adrenoceptor agonist can still 
be used as required. If there is no response to the long-
acting β2-adrenoceptor agonist, it should be stopped.
Step 4. Additional controller therapies. Options at 
this stage include increasing the corticosteroid dose 
or adding montelukast, an LTRA.
Step 5. Specialist therapies. Under specialist direction, 
alternative treatments for severe disease include 
high-dose inhaled corticosteroids, continuous oral 
corticosteroids, biologic therapies targeting type 2 
inflammation or IgE, chronic macrolide antibiotic 
therapy, and methylxanthines.
ASPIRIN-INTOLERANT ASTHMA
About 5% to 15% of people with asthma experience 
acute exacerbations when they take aspirin or other 
NSAIDs in a laboratory setting (see Chapter 29), and 
the syndrome may be poorly recognised clinically. 
Individuals with the full clinical syndrome of aspirin-
intolerant asthma (or aspirin-exacerbated respiratory 
disease; AERD) usually have an eosinophilic rhinosi-
nusitis and nasal polyposis in addition to asthma. The 
condition may be initiated by priming of the respira-
tory mucosa by an immune reaction to a viral infec-
tion or other insult, which chronically upregulates 
the cysteinyl-leukotriene biosynthetic pathway. The 
production of bronchoconstrictor leukotrienes nev-
ertheless remains under partial inhibitory control of 
prostaglandin (PG)E2.
Aspirin is an irreversible cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1) 
and COX-2 inhibitor with selective action on COX-1. 
COX inhibition reduces PGE2 synthesis, which removes 
its inhibition of leukotriene synthesis, provoking acute 
bronchospasm (see Fig. 29.1). Other NSAIDs that 
inhibit COX-1 also induce bronchoconstriction, but the 
selective COX-2 inhibitors very rarely provoke asthma. 
In sensitive individuals, asthma symptoms begin 
within 3 hours of ingesting aspirin, accompanied by 
profuse rhinorrhoea, conjunctival injection and some-
times flushing or urticaria. Airway inflammation can 
persist for many weeks after an aspirin challenge.
A cysteinyl-leukotriene receptor antagonist (LTRA) 
produces symptom relief in some people with aspirin-
intolerant asthma. Treatment of acute aspirin-intolerant 
asthma is the same as for any other episode. Sometimes 
long-term use of an oral corticosteroid is the only way 
to control persistent symptoms; in such cases, desensi-
tisation to aspirin should be attempted. Nasal polypec-
tomy may be necessary to control rhinosinusitis.
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC OBSTRUCTIVE 
PULMONARY DISEASE
There are two goals in the treatment of COPD: to mini-
mise symptoms (including a reduction in acute exacer-
bations) and to preserve lung function.
• Cessation of smoking (see Chapter 54) is the only 
effective way to alter the natural history of COPD. 
Smoking cessation slows the rate of decline in lung 
function to that naturally seen with ageing, although 
any loss of lung function due to smoking cannot be 
restored. Occupational exposure to inhaled pollut-
ants should also be minimised.
• Pneumococcal and annual influenza vaccination. 
These can reduce infective exacerbations in people 
with COPD.
• Inhaled treatments. The principles are similar to 
those for asthma, although the limited reversibility 
of the airway obstruction means that the benefit is 
less marked, except during an acute exacerbation 
of symptoms. Some improvement in symptoms 
and functional capacity can occur without changes 
in standard lung function tests, and the main ben-
efit is improved lung emptying during expiration, 
with reduced hyperinflation at rest. Short-acting 
	
	
Asthma and Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease  CHAPTER 12	
205
bronchodilators, such as salbutamol, are used for 
initial treatment of breathlessness and exercise 
limitation. A long-acting muscarinic antagonist 
(LAMA), such as tiotropium, combined with a 
long-acting β2-adrenoceptor agonist (LABA), such 
as salmeterol, is recommended for people with 
COPD who have symptoms despite using a short-
acting bronchodilator. Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) 
are reserved for people with frequent exacerba-
tions (two or more per year) or features of asthma-
COPD overlap syndrome (ACOS). These features 
may include a previous history of asthma or atopy, 
substantial variation in peak expiratory flow rate 
or FEV1, or an elevated blood eosinophil count. In 
this context, ICS reduce the number and severity of 
exacerbations and produce some symptomatic ben-
efit for people with more severe disease. However, 
ICS are also associated with an increased risk of 
pneumonia.
• Systemic treatments. An oral corticosteroid is mod-
estly effective in acute exacerbations of COPD and 
should be given alongside inhaled bronchodilators. 
A 5-day course of prednisolone (40 mg daily or 
equivalent) is as effective as a 10-day course. Antibi-
otics (see Chapter 51) are given if there is evidence of 
bacterial infection (purulent sputum or severe exac-
erbation). For the management of chronic symptoms 
and frequent exacerbations that are not adequately 
treated by inhaled triple therapy (LAMA, LABA 
and ICS), phosphodiesterase type 4 inhibitors, long-
term macrolide antibiotics and methylxanthines 
may be used under specialist direction.
• Mucolytic agents. For people with chronic produc-
tive cough, erdosteine or carbocisteine (see Chapter 
13) can be given orally to reduce sputum viscosity.
• Oxygen therapy. Controlled supplemental oxygen 
therapy should be given in severe acute exacer-
bations of COPD, targeting an oxygen saturation 
(SpO2) level of 88% to 92% if the person has chronic 
hypercapnic respiratory failure. Exposure to a high 
inspired oxygen concentration in these people may 
disturb their finely-balanced ventilatory state, lead-
ing to accumulation of CO2, respiratory acidosis, and 
reduced level of consciousness. The mechanisms 
underlying this are complex, involving ventilation–
perfusion mismatching and reduction of the hypoxic 
ventilatory drive. To avoid this, supplemental oxy-
gen should be started at a low level (e.g. 28%) and 
carefully titrated to achieve the SpO2 target. Long-
term domiciliary oxygen treatment, usually from 
an oxygen concentrator which removes nitrogen 
from air and delivers via nasal cannulae, improves 
symptoms and survival in COPD with respiratory 
failure (with an arterial oxygen tension less than 
7.3 kPa, or less than 8.0 kPa if accompanied by fea-
tures of right ventricular failure). This should only 
be considered if respiratory failure persists for 3 to 
4 weeks despite optimal drug therapy and without 
a clinical exacerbation. Those in the household must 
be warned of the risk of fire if people smoke when 
receiving oxygen therapy. To improve survival in 
COPD with respiratory failure, oxygen must be 
used for at least 15 hours per day.
• Ventilatory support. This may be required during 
exacerbations. Noninvasive ventilation with a tight-
fitting face mask or hood is preferred. It is indi-
cated in exacerbations complicated by respiratory 
acidosis.
• Pulmonary rehabilitation. This improves exercise 
capacity and reduces the sensation of breathless-
ness, and can substantially improve morale.
SELF-ASSESSMENT
TRUE/FALSE QUESTIONS
	 1.	 Asthma is defined as irreversible airflow obstruc-
tion resulting from chronic airway inflammation.
	 2.	 Th2 lymphocytes in the airway mucosa are impor-
tant in eosinophilic allergic asthma.
	 3.	 The β2-adrenoceptor agonists are effective in pre-
venting exercise-induced asthma.
	 4.	 The β2-adrenoceptor agonists have no effect on 
mucus clearance.
	 5.	 Tolerance to β2-adrenoceptor agonists can occur.
	 6.	 The mechanisms of action of theophylline are 
unclear.
	 7.	 The plasma concentration of theophylline is 
increased by simultaneous administration of 
erythromycin or ciprofloxacin.
	 8.	 Methylxanthines cause drowsiness.
	 9.	 An unwanted effect of theophylline is stimulation 
of the heart.
10.	 Ipratropium is more effective than salbutamol in 
asthma for preventing bronchospasm following a 
challenge with an allergen.
11.	 Tiotropium is a selective antagonist of muscarinic 
M2 receptors.
12.	 Ipratropium causes bradycardia.
13.	 Aclidinium is poorly absorbed from the bronchi 
into the systemic circulation.
14.	 Leukotriene C4 is an important bronchodilator 
released from eosinophils.
15.	 Cysteinyl-leukotrienes are important in the pre-
cipitation of asthma in people who are intolerant 
to NSAIDs.
16.	 Montelukast inhibits 5-lipoxygenase that converts 
arachidonic acid to leukotrienes.
17.	 Montelukast is only given prophylactically in 
asthma.
18.	 Glucocorticoids reduce eosinophil recruitment to 
the bronchial mucosa.
19.	 Roflumilast is a nonselective inhibitor of PDE 
isoenzymes.
20.	 Omalizumab binds to IgE receptors on mast cell 
membranes, preventing binding of allergen.
206	
SECTION 3  The Respiratory System
ONE-BEST-ANSWER (OBA) QUESTIONS
1.	 What is the most likely unwanted effect of high-
dose salbutamol?
A.	Bradycardia
B.	 Hypokalaemia
C.	Hypoglycaemia
D.	Mydriasis
E.	 Hypermagnesaemia
2.	 What is the mechanism of action of corticosteroids 
in asthma therapy?
A.	They reduce airway inflammation by inhibiting 
eosinophil apoptosis.
B.	 They reduce airway narrowing by relaxing bron-
chial smooth muscle.
C.	They reduce release of mast cell mediators by 
blocking allergen–IgE interaction.
D.	They downregulate β2-adrenoceptors on bron-
chial smooth muscle.
E.	 They reduce oedema by inducing endothelial 
tight junctions.
3.	 Which monoclonal antibody therapy for severe 
eosinophilic asthma targets interleukin-4 receptors?
A.	Benralizumab
B.	 Dupilumab
C.	Mepolizumab
D.	Omalizumab
E.	 Reslizumab
EXTENDED-MATCHING-ITEM QUESTION
Match each question statement (1–5) to the most appro-
priate answer option (A–G).
A.	Theophylline
B.	 Celecoxib
C.	Prostaglandin D2
D.	Salbutamol
E.	 Montelukast
F.	 Indometacin
G.	Interleukin-5
1.	 It increases the synthesis of cAMP.
2.	 It decreases the breakdown of cAMP.
3.	 It results in an increase in leukotriene synthesis in 
susceptible people with asthma.
4.	 It inhibits NSAID-induced bronchoconstriction.
5.	 It causes bronchoconstriction.
CASE-BASED QUESTIONS
Which option (A–H) is the most appropriate for add-
on treatment to the current medication prescribed in 
each case scenario (1–5)?
A.	Tiotropium
B.	Ciprofloxacin
C.	Salmeterol
D.	A spacer device
E.	Modified-release theophylline
F.	 Intravenous magnesium sulfate
G.	Oral prednisolone
H.	Modified-release theophylline
Case 1. A 25-year-old woman was admitted to the 
emergency department with an acute exacerbation 
of asthma. Her peak expiratory flow was 150 L/min. 
Her pulse rate was 145 beats/min, her respiratory 
rate was 30 per minute, her respiration was shallow 
and she was confused. She was treated with 60% 
oxygen, nebulised salbutamol, nebulised ipratro-
pium, intravenous aminophylline and intravenous 
hydrocortisone. Arterial blood gases on admission, 
breathing air, showed PaO2 8.4 kPa, PaCO2 7.2 kPa 
and pH 7.29. There was little clinical improvement, 
and she was transferred to the intensive care unit.
Case 2. A 64-year-old man had mild asthma that was 
well controlled, taking salbutamol up to twice a 
week and inhaled beclometasone twice daily. He 
complained of soreness of the mouth and hoarse-
ness and was advised about oral hygiene.
Case 3. A 67-year-old man had COPD with a ­chronic 
productive cough, breathlessness and exercise 
limitation. The cough and sputum production 
had not recently changed. He had stopped smok-
ing 3 months previously because of his dyspnoea. 
­Prior to that time, he had smoked 20 cigarettes a day 
for 50 years. He had no other significant medical 
illnesses. His FEV1 was 1.34 L (about 45% of predict-
ed). He was taking salbutamol and salmeterol, and a 
trial of inhaled beclometasone 3 months ­previously 
had provided no benefit and it had been stopped.
Case 4. A 60-year-old woman attended the ­emergency 
department with increasing shortness of breath and 
production of green–yellow sputum and fever over 
the previous four days. She was known to have 
COPD.
Case 5. A 30-year-old man had mild-moderate asthma 
and allergic rhinitis. He was taking inhaled beclo-
metasone twice daily and using his salbutamol in-
haler several times a week. Recently he had been 
waking most nights with a persistent cough. He was 
a non-smoker and had no other medical history.
ANSWERS
TRUE/FALSE ANSWERS
1.	 False. Airflow obstruction in asthma is mostly 
reversible, either spontaneously or as a result of 
treatment.
2.	 True. Th2 lymphocyte infiltration generates cyto-
kines and chemokines that promote activation, 
recruitment and survival of eosinophils and other 
leucocytes, and increase the expression of IgE recep-
tors on mast cells and basophils.
3.	 True. Salbutamol is effective if taken before exercise, 
but the longer-acting β2-adrenoceptor agonists are 
slower in onset. Cromoglicate taken prophylacti-
cally may also be effective.
4.	 False. β2-Adrenoceptor agonists increase ciliary 
action and mucus clearance.
	
	
Asthma and Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease  CHAPTER 12	
207
	 5.	 True. Tolerance to β2-adrenoceptor agonists may 
occur due to downregulation of their target recep-
tor, an effect counteracted by use of corticosteroids.
	 6.	 True. Methylxanthines may bronchodilate by 
inhibiting PDE or blocking adenosine receptors in 
airway smooth muscle, whereas inhibition of his-
tone deacetylation may account for reported anti-
inflammatory effects at low doses.
	 7.	 True. Erythromycin and ciprofloxacin inhibit liver 
cytochrome P450 enzymes, resulting in slower 
metabolism of theophylline.
	 8.	 False. Methylxanthines present in tea and coffee 
beverages increase alertness and can cause irrita-
bility and headache.
	 9.	 True. All methylxanthines have positive inotropic 
and chronotropic activity and a narrow therapeu-
tic index, with other unwanted effects including 
nausea.
10.	 False. Ipratropium is less effective as a bron-
chodilator in asthma but can be used as add-on 
therapy, whereas long-acting muscarinic antago-
nists (LAMA) are central to the management of 
COPD.
11.	 False. Tiotropium and other LAMA are selective 
antagonists of M3 receptors in airway smooth mus-
cle, with less antagonism of inhibitory M2 auto­
receptors found on parasympathetic nerves than 
ipratropium.
12.	 False. Ipratropium can cause a modest tachycardia 
owing to blockade of muscarinic receptors in the 
heart.
13.	 True. Aclidinium and other antimuscarinics have 
quaternary ammonium structures so are only 
poorly absorbed, minimising unwanted systemic 
effects.
14.	 False. Leukotriene C4 (and its extracellular metab-
olite LTD4) released by mast cells and eosinophils 
are potent bronchoconstrictors; they also increase 
mucus secretion, oedema and eosinophilia in the 
airway.
15.	 True. In susceptible individuals, NSAIDs that 
inhibit COX-1 may cause acute bronchospasm 
either by shunting arachidonic acid from the 
COX pathway to the leukotriene pathway or, 
more probably, by liberating the leukotriene path-
way from partial inhibition by COX-1-derived 
prostaglandin E2.
16.	 False. Montelukast is an antagonist of the cysteinyl-
leukotriene receptor type 1 (CysLT1), not an inhibi-
tor of leukotriene synthesis by 5-lipoxygenase.
17.	 True. Montelukast is taken once daily for prophy-
laxis of asthma; it may also benefit allergic rhinitis, 
but is not effective for treatment of acute severe 
asthma or COPD.
18.	 True. Glucocorticoids act at the transcriptional 
level to inhibit numerous steps in the inflamma-
tory pathways involved in the pathogenesis of 
asthma, including the proliferation, recruitment, 
activation and survival of eosinophils and other 
leucocytes.
19.	 False. Roflumilast is a highly selective inhibitor of 
PDE4, which is found in inflammatory cells.
20.	 False. Omalizumab binds to circulating and tissue 
IgE, leading to its clearance by endothelial cells. 
This results in a reduction in the numbers of IgE 
receptors on mast cells and other cells.
OBA ANSWERS
1.	 Answer B is correct. Salbutamol is a β2-adrenoceptor 
agonist that can produce hypokalaemia by increas-
ing cellular uptake of K+. At high doses it may cause 
tachycardia not bradycardia (answer A), hypergly-
caemia not hypoglycaemia (answer C) and hypo-
magnesaemia not hypermagnesaemia (answer E), 
whereas mydriasis (answer D) is not likely with a 
β-adrenoceptor agonist, as adrenergic control of 
pupil diameter is mediated by α-adrenoceptors.
2.	 Answer E is correct. Corticosteroids induce endothe-
lial tight junctions, which reduces vascular permeabil-
ity and leucocyte migration into tissue. They reduce 
airway inflammation by promoting eosinophil apopto-
sis (answer A). They are not bronchodilators (answer 
B) and do not block allergen–IgE interaction (answer 
C). They may also upregulate β2-adrenoceptors on 
bronchial smooth muscle (answer D).
3.	 Answer B is correct. Dupilumab targets the IL-4 
receptor to block IL-4/IL-13 signalling. Benrali-
zumab (answer A) targets the IL-5 receptor, whereas 
mepolizumab (answer C) and reslizumab (answer 
E) neutralise IL-5 itself and omalizumab (answer D) 
targets IgE.
EXTENDED-MATCHING-ITEM ANSWERS
1.	 Answer D is correct. Salbutamol acts selectively on 
the β2-adrenoceptors in airways, activating adenylyl 
cyclase and increasing cAMP.
2.	 Answer A is correct. Theophylline inhibits the 
breakdown of cAMP by PDE.
3.	 Answer F is correct. Indometacin (and other NSAIDs 
that inhibit COX-1) can induce bronchoconstriction 
in aspirin-intolerant asthma. Celecoxib, a selective 
COX-2 inhibitor, is unlikely to cause this reaction 
but should still be used with care.
4.	 Answer E is correct. Montelukast is a selective 
antagonist of CysLT1 receptors for the bronchocon-
strictor cysteinyl-leukotrienes (LTC4/D4/E4), syn-
thesis of which is triggered by nonselective NSAIDs.
5.	 Answer C is correct. Prostaglandin D2 is a minor 
bronchoconstrictor released by mast cells.
CASE-BASED ANSWERS
Case 1. Answer F is correct. This woman is being 
­treated according to the British Thoracic Society 
guidelines; an appropriate add-on medication for 
use in this life-threatening situation is intravenous 
magnesium sulfate.
208	
SECTION 3  The Respiratory System
Case 2. Answer D is correct. This man should be ad-
vised to use a spacer with all inhaled drugs. This im-
proves the effectiveness of the medication and will 
reduce deposition of corticosteroid in the mouth 
and oropharynx, reducing the occurrence of fungal 
growth and hoarseness.
Case 3. Answer A is correct. He has continued symp-
toms despite smoking cessation, salbutamol (a 
short-acting bronchodilator) and salmeterol (a long-
acting beta agonist, LABA). Combination treatment 
with a LABA and a long-acting muscarinic antago-
nist (LAMA), such as tiotropium, is recommended 
at this stage. Inhaled corticosteroids are of benefit 
in some people with COPD, but are also associated 
with an increased risk of pneumonia.
Case 4. Answer B is correct. This woman has an infec-
tion-related exacerbation of her COPD and should 
be treated with an appropriate antibacterial drug.
Case 5. Answer C is correct. Approximately 80% of 
severe asthmatic attacks occur between midnight 
and 8 a.m. Salbutamol is a short-acting beta-ago-
nist (SABA), providing relief for only 2 to 6 hours. 
A longer-acting drug (LABA) such as salmeterol 
or formoterol, which provide bronchodilation for 
12 hours or longer, should be considered for his noc-
turnal symptoms. The LABA should not be used for 
relief of acute asthma episodes or without a concur-
rent inhaled corticosteroid.
FURTHER READING
GENERAL
Dolovich, M.B., Dhand, R., 2011. Aerosol drug delivery: 
developments in device design and clinical use. Lancet 377, 
1032–1045.
Compendium of Drugs Used in Asthma or COPD.
DRUG
CHARACTERISTICS
β2-Adrenoceptor Agonists
Bronchodilators, most commonly given by inhalation. Short-acting beta-agonists (SABA) are used for acute asthma 
exacerbations; long-acting drugs (LABA), some with ultralong durations of action, are used for chronic management of 
reversible airways obstruction in asthma and COPD.
Bambuterol
Prodrug slowly converted to terbutaline in plasma. Used rarely for asthma; not recommended for 
children or in pregnancy. Given orally.
Ephedrine
Direct- and indirect-acting nonselective sympathomimetic; converted to norephedrine. Given orally, 
but not recommended.
Formoterol
LABA. Given by inhalation for management of chronic asthma in people using an inhaled 
corticosteroid. Available in combination with beclometasone, fluticasone, or budesonide, or with 
beclometasone and glycopyrronium, or with aclidinium.
Indacaterol
Ultra-long-acting (half-life 40–52 h). Used for maintenance treatment of COPD. Given by inhalation. 
Also available combined with glycopyrronium.
Olodaterol
Ultra-long-acting. Used for maintenance treatment of COPD. Also available combined with 
tiotropium.
Salbutamol
SABA. Given by inhalation, orally, intravenously or subcutaneously. Also available combined with 
ipratropium.
Smith, D., Du Rand, I., Addy, C.L., et al., 2020. British Thoracic 
Society guideline for the use of long-term macrolides in 
adults with respiratory disease. Thorax 75, 370–404.
ASTHMA
Bradding, P., Arthur, G., 2016. Mast cells in asthma - state of the 
art. Clin. Exp. Allergy 46, 194–263.
Edris, A., De Feyter, S., Maes, T., et  al., 2019. Monoclonal 
antibodies in type 2 asthma: a systematic review and network 
meta-analysis. Respir. Res. 20, 179. 
Laidlaw, T.M., Boyce, J.A., 2016. Aspirin-exacerbated respira-
tory disease—new prime suspects. N. Engl. J. Med. 374, 
484–488.
McGregor, M.C., Krings, J.G., Nair, P., Castro, M., 2019. Role 
of biologics in asthma. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care. Med. 199, 
433–445.
National Institute of Health and Care Excellence, 2017. Asthma: 
diagnosis, monitoring and chronic asthma management (NICE  
guideline NG80). https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng80. 
Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network, British Thoracic 
Society, 2019. BTS/SIGN British guideline for the manage-
ment of asthma. https://www.brit-thoracic.org.uk/quality- 
improvement/guidelines/asthma/. 
CHRONIC OBSTRUCTIVE PULMONARY DISEASE
Agustí, A., Hogg, J.C., 2019. Update on the pathogenesis of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 381, 
1248–1256.
Celli, B.R., Wedzicha, J.A., 2019. Update on clinical aspects of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 381, 
1257–1266.
Postma, D.S., Rabe, K.F., 2015. The asthma-COPD overlap 
syndrome. N. Engl. J. Med. 373, 1241–1249.
Wedzicha, J.A., Calverley, P.M., Rabe, K.F., 2016. Roflumilast: 
a review of its use in the treatment of COPD. Int. J. Chron. 
Obstruct. Pulmon. Dis. 11, 81–90.
Woodruff, P.G., Agusti, A., Roche, N., et  al., 2015. Current 
concepts in targeting chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
pharmacotherapy: making progress towards personalized 
management. Lancet 385, 1789–1798.
	
	
Asthma and Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease  CHAPTER 12	
209
DRUG
CHARACTERISTICS
Salmeterol
LABA. Given by inhalation for management of chronic asthma only in people using an inhaled 
corticosteroid. Also available in combination with fluticasone.
Terbutaline
SABA. Given by inhalation, orally, intravenously or subcutaneously.
Vilanterol
Ultra-long-acting. Given by inhalation. Available only in combination with fluticasone, or with 
umeclidinium, or with both fluticasone and umeclidinium.
Antimuscarinics
Muscarinic antagonists reduce mucus secretion and bronchoconstriction. Given by inhaler; little drug is absorbed from the 
airway. Long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA) are selective for M3 receptors, allowing higher doses.
Aclidinium bromide
Long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA). Used for maintenance treatment of COPD. Also available 
combined with formoterol.
Glycopyrronium
LAMA, used for maintenance treatment of COPD. Also available combined with indacaterol, or with 
formoterol and beclometasone.
Ipratropium bromide
Nonselective, short-acting muscarinic antagonist (SAMA). Used by inhaler for short-term relief in 
asthma and COPD, and intranasally in rhinitis. Also available combined with salbutamol.
Tiotropium
LAMA, used for COPD in adults, and with inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting β2-agonist (LABA) 
bronchodilators in poorly controlled asthma. Also available combined with olodaterol. Very long 
half-life (5–6 days).
Umeclidinium
LAMA, used for maintenance treatment of people with COPD. Also available in combination with 
vilanterol, or with vilanterol and fluticasone.
Methylxanthines
Reduce bronchoconstriction by nonselective inhibition of PDE and adenosine receptor antagonism.
Aminophylline
Mixture of theophylline and ethylenediamine improves solubility. Given orally, or by intravenous 
injection for acute severe asthma.
Theophylline
Given orally, usually as a modified-release preparation, for asthma prophylaxis.
Magnesium Sulfate
Magnesium sulfate
Smooth muscle relaxant. Given intravenously in life-threatening acute asthma in adults.
Corticosteroids
Given by inhalation for chronic asthma and COPD. See Chapter 44 for other corticosteroids such as prednisolone and 
hydrocortisone given orally or intravenously in acute asthma.
Beclometasone 
dipropionate
Converted to highly active monopropionate. Inhaled using aerosol or powder formulation; also 
available in combination with formoterol, or with formoterol and glycopyrronium.
Budesonide
Inhaled using aerosol or powder formulation. Also available in combination with formoterol.
Ciclesonide
Prodrug converted by intracellular esterases to its active metabolite. Inhaled using powder 
formulation.
Fluticasone propionate
Inhaled using aerosol or powder formulation; any swallowed dose undergoes 100% first-pass 
hepatic metabolism. Also available combined with salmeterol, or with formoterol, or with vilanterol 
and umeclidinium, and as a nasal spray with azelastine for allergic rhinitis.
Mometasone furoate
Inhaled using powder formulation (not recommended for children under 12 years) and intranasally for 
rhinitis.
Leukotriene Receptor Antagonist
Bronchodilator and antiinflammatory drug used prophylactically in chronic asthma.
Montelukast
Leukotriene D4 receptor (CysLT1) antagonist. Given orally at bedtime.
Phosphodiesterase Type 4 Inhibitor
Roflumilast
Selective PDE4 inhibitor used in bronchitic exacerbations of severe COPD. Given orally.
Antibodies Targeting Type 2 Inflammatory Cytokines or IgE
Used as add-on therapy in severe eosinophilic asthma poorly-controlled by other medications. Helminthic infections should be 
treated before use.
Benralizumab
Humanised monoclonal antibody targeted against IL-5 receptor subunit. Given subcutaneously at 
4-week intervals then at 8-week intervals, for severe eosinophilic asthma uncontrolled by high-
dose inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting beta-2 agonists.
Dupilumab
Recombinant human anti–IL-4/IL-13 receptor monoclonal antibody. Given subcutaneously at 2-week 
intervals for severe asthma with type 2 inflammation.
Compendium of Drugs Used in Asthma or COPD—cont’d.
Continued
210	
SECTION 3  The Respiratory System
DRUG
CHARACTERISTICS
Mepolizumab
Humanised anti–IL-5 monoclonal antibody. Given subcutaneously at 4-week intervals, for severe 
refractory eosinophilic asthma.
Omalizumab
Recombinant monoclonal antibody; binds to human IgE and prevents activation of IgE receptors 
on mast cells and other cells. Given by subcutaneous injection every 2–4 weeks in severe, 
uncontrolled allergic asthma.
Reslizumab
Humanised anti–IL-5 monoclonal antibody. Given by intravenous infusion for severe refractory 
eosinophilic asthma in adults.
Macrolide Antibiotic (see Chapter 51)
Azithromycin
Unlicensed prophylactic use. Given orally. Reduces exacerbation frequency in COPD, and possibly in 
asthma unresponsive to high-dose inhaled corticosteroids. Long duration of action.
Cromones
Antiallergic drugs (‘mast cell stabilisers’). Given by inhaler; minimal absorption from lung.
Nedocromil sodium
Used for asthma prophylaxis.
Sodium cromoglicate
Used for asthma prophylaxis.
Compendium of Drugs Used in Asthma or COPD—cont’d.
COPD, Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; IgE, immunoglobulin E; IL, interleukin; PDE, phosphodiesterase.
211
13
Respiratory Disorders: Cough, Respiratory 
Stimulants, Cystic Fibrosis, Idiopathic Pulmonary 
Fibrosis and Neonatal Respiratory Distress Syndrome
Chapter Outline
Cough  211
Drugs for Treatment of Cough  212
Management of Cough  212
Respiratory Stimulants (Analeptic Drugs)  213
Cystic Fibrosis  213
CFTR Modulators  213
Treatment of Lung Disease  214
Treatment of Malabsorption  214
Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis  214
Neonatal Respiratory Distress Syndrome  215
Self-Assessment  215
Answers  216
Further Reading  216
Compendium of Drugs Used to Treat Cough 
and Other Respiratory Disorders  216
COUGH
Cough is a protective mechanism that removes exces-
sive mucus, abnormal substances such as fluid or pus, or 
inhaled foreign material from the upper airways. Epithe-
lial ciliary action and bronchial peristalsis initially move 
foreign material from smaller airways to the main bron-
chi and the bifurcation of the trachea, from where it can 
be more easily expelled. A cough is initiated by a short 
inspiration, followed by brief closure of the glottis. Forced 
expiration against the closed glottis raises intrathoracic 
pressure, and sudden opening of the glottis expels air at 
a rate up to 85% of the speed of sound, which is sufficient 
to dislodge secretions and debris from the airway surface. 
The high flow rates produce vibration of upper airway 
structures and the typical sound of coughing. Coughing 
is under both voluntary and involuntary control.
The cough reflex is initiated by irritant receptors 
located at the epithelial surface of the airway mucosa, 
which can be activated by either chemical or mechani-
cal stimuli. Rapidly adapting pulmonary stretch recep-
tors that respond mainly to mechanical stimuli may be 
of primary importance in producing the cough reflex. 
Receptors responsible for cough are mainly found on 
the pharynx, trachea and where the trachea branches 
into the main bronchi, although they are also present in 
lesser numbers in other parts of the upper airway and 
external ear. Peptides such as bradykinin produced fol-
lowing viral infection or allergen challenge probably 
sensitise the sensory arm of the cough reflex.
Afferent fibres from the cough receptors travel via 
the vagus and superior laryngeal nerves to a loose 
medullary ‘cough network’. Neuronal pathways con-
nect this network to the respiratory pattern generator, 
from where efferent fibres travel in the vagus nerve to 
the glottis and pharynx and in various somatic nerves 
to respiratory muscles to initiate the cough. Projections 
from the cerebral cortex to the medulla can also initiate 
cough in response to a sensation of airway irritation 
(voluntary cough) and also modulate the cough reflex.
Numerous mediators are involved in the cough 
reflex pathways in the medulla. Opioid receptors have 
an inhibitory action on the cough reflex, but do not 
appear to be involved in voluntary cough. The com-
plexity of these pathways is illustrated by the number 
of mediators and antagonists that can experimentally 
initiate or inhibit cough.
Coughing has several diverse causes (Box 13.1). A 
cough is considered useful if it aids clearing excess 
secretions or inhaled foreign matter from the airway, 
but an unproductive cough has no useful function. An 
effective cough that can clear the airway depends on 
the ability to generate high airflow and the presence of 
loose secretions. An ineffective cough may result from 
respiratory muscle weakness, or when the mucus on 
the airway wall is thick and adhesive.
There are three clinical categories of cough:
• acute cough, lasting less than 3 weeks;
• subacute cough, lasting 3 to 8 weeks;
• chronic cough, lasting more than 8 weeks.
Acute cough is most often caused by acute viral 
upper respiratory tract infection (the common cold), 
and most subacute cough also follows an initial viral 
infection. Chronic productive cough is usually related 
to smoking or bronchiectasis. A new, persistent cough 
with no obvious cause may be due to lung cancer. 
The most common causes of a chronic nonproductive 
cough in nonsmokers are upper airway cough syn-
drome (also called postnasal drip syndrome), asthma 
and gastro-oesophageal reflux disease. Persistent dry 
cough occurs in 10% to 30% of people who take an 
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor (see 
Chapter 6). In some cases, no cause can be found for 
cough reflex hypersensitivity.
212	
SECTION 3   The Respiratory System
DRUGS FOR TREATMENT OF COUGH
Antitussives (Cough Suppressants)
Cough suppressants fall into three classes.
Centrally acting drugs (opioids)
Opioids increase the threshold for stimulation of neu-
rons in the medullary cough network and probably 
modulate a gating mechanism in the brain analogous 
to that identified for pain reception. They are most 
effective for cough arising from the lower airways. 
Weak opioid analgesics (see Chapter 19) are most com-
monly used, especially codeine. Morphine is used for 
cough in terminal conditions. Dextromethorphan is an 
antitussive that is structurally related to opioids, but 
is a glutamate N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor 
antagonist with no analgesic or sedative action.
Peripherally acting drugs
Local anaesthetics such as lidocaine (see Chapter 18) 
are used as an oropharyngeal spray to reduce the 
cough and gag reflexes during bronchoscopy. Antihis-
tamines (see Chapter 39) reduce postnasal drip from 
allergic rhinitis, which can stimulate cough, but they 
have no direct antitussive activity. Nevertheless, seda-
tive antihistamines such as diphenhydramine are com-
monly used in compound cough preparations on sale 
direct to the public.
Locally acting drugs
Demulcents line the surface of the upper airway above 
the larynx, reducing local irritation. Many cough lozenges 
and the syrup in simple linctus act by this mechanism.
Expectorants
Expectorants such as guaifenesin and squill are often 
included in compound cough preparations (sometimes 
together with a cough suppressant!), with the intention 
of making cough more effective by increasing the vol-
ume of mucus secretion. There is no evidence that they 
have any clinical value.
Mucolytics
Mucolytics such as erdosteine and carbocisteine reduce 
the viscosity of bronchial secretions by breaking disul-
fide crosslinks between mucin monomers, but there is 
no evidence that they improve the ability to expecto-
rate sputum. Taken orally, mucolytics may reduce the 
frequency of exacerbations in chronic obstructive pul-
monary disease and bronchiectasis, but this is prob-
ably more related to their antioxidant properties in 
scavenging reactive oxygen species (ROS).
Dornase alfa (recombinant human deoxyribonucle-
ase I, or rhDNase I) is an enzyme that digests extracel-
lular DNA. In cystic fibrosis, there is almost no mucin 
in the airway secretions, which largely comprises a 
polymeric network of DNA from degraded inflamma-
tory cells and F-actin. Dornase alfa is given to people 
with cystic fibrosis by inhalation using a jet nebu-
liser and reduces sputum viscosity and adhesiveness. 
Unwanted effects such as transient pharyngitis and 
hoarseness can occur.
Hypertonic sodium chloride (typically in a concentra-
tion of 5%–7%, given by nebuliser) reduces sputum 
viscosity by increasing Na+ concentration in the air-
way surface liquid, which draws water into the airway. 
In addition, it disrupts ionic bonds in the mucus gel, 
which may reduce cross-linking and entanglement. It 
is used in conditions associated with impaired airway 
clearance, including cystic fibrosis, bronchiectasis, and 
in critically ill people receiving invasive mechanical 
ventilation.
MANAGEMENT OF COUGH
An acute cough should be treated only if it is unpro-
ductive or excessive. A self-limiting nonproductive 
acute cough, such as that caused by a viral illness, can 
be suppressed by simple linctus or a weak opioid given 
for a maximum of 5 days. Sedative antihistamines in 
compound cough preparations should not be given to 
children under the age of 6 years. Codeine should be 
avoided in children under the age of 12 years as it is 
variably metabolised to morphine and rapid metabo-
lisers may develop unpredictable excessive respiratory 
depression.
In chronic cough, treatment should be directed at 
the underlying cause. Specific treatment for cough-
variant asthma, postnasal drip and gastro-oesophageal 
reflux will often resolve cough associated with these 
conditions. Cough is a common unwanted effect of 
ACE inhibitors (see Chapter 6). It sometimes appears 
only a few hours after starting treatment, but can first 
arise after several months of treatment. A trial of sub-
stituting the ACE inhibitor for an angiotensin receptor 
blocker should always be undertaken before pursuing 
alternative treatments or invasive investigations.
Box 13.1  Common Causes of Cough.
Acute respiratory infection
Upper respiratory tract infection
Pneumonia, including aspiration
Chronic respiratory infection
Cystic fibrosis
Bronchiectasis
Postnasal drip (upper airway cough syndrome)
Airway disease
Asthma
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Parenchymal lung disease
Interstitial fibrosis
Irritants
Cigarette smoke
Inhaled foreign body
Bronchopulmonary malignancy
Drug-induced
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
Inhaled drugs
	
	
Respiratory Disorders  CHAPTER 13	
213
Chronic nonproductive cough in terminal lung can-
cer can be treated with a powerful opioid such as mor-
phine. If an underlying cause for a chronic cough is not 
found, symptomatic therapy is frequently ineffective.
RESPIRATORY STIMULANTS (ANALEPTIC DRUGS)
Doxapram stimulates the medullary respiratory centre 
both by a direct action and by peripheral stimulation 
of the carotid body. It increases respiratory drive and 
arousal, and increases both rate and depth of ventila-
tion. Given by intravenous injection, its action is very 
brief owing to rapid metabolism by the liver, and a 
continuous infusion is needed for a more prolonged 
effect. Restlessness, muscle twitching and vomiting are 
common unwanted effects. Seizures can occur due to 
generalised stimulation of the central nervous system. 
With noninvasive ventilation now being widely avail-
able, and with its clear benefits and well-established 
place in therapy, there is little role for doxapram in the 
management of hypercapnoeic respiratory failure.
Acetazolamide is a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor 
that stimulates the respiratory centre by creating a 
mild metabolic acidosis. It is used in the prevention 
and management of acute altitude sickness (see also 
Chapter 14).
CYSTIC FIBROSIS
Cystic fibrosis is an autosomal recessive disorder 
caused by a single gene mutation on the long arm of 
chromosome 7. This gene encodes the cystic fibro-
sis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), a 
cAMP-regulated Cl− and HCO3
− channel in the api-
cal membranes of many epithelial cells. The channel 
requires adenosine triphosphate to open it, and then 
permits passive movement of ions out of the cell along 
electrochemical gradients. In the airway epithelium, 
CFTR also inhibits nearby Na+ channels. If the CFTR 
gene is faulty, then the function of the transporter is 
impaired or absent and Cl− transport is defective in 
epithelial cells in many organs, including the respira-
tory, hepatobiliary, gastrointestinal and reproductive 
tracts, and the pancreas. As a result of the defective ion 
flows, secretions become thicker. This causes obstruc-
tion in (and destruction of) exocrine glandular ducts, 
and in the lungs, it clogs respiratory cilia with mucus. 
There are six classes of CFTR gene mutations, grouped 
according to their known or putative effects on the 
CFTR protein, and around 2000 individual gene muta-
tions have been found. The various classes of mutation 
confer different severities of disease. Other genes also 
modify the effects of the CFTR gene and contribute to 
the phenotypic variability of the condition.
The major cause of morbidity and mortality in cystic 
fibrosis is lung disease. The airway epithelium normally 
protects against infection and toxins by providing a 
mechanical barrier, participating in the innate immune 
system and initiating the adaptive immune response. 
The mucus secreted onto the respiratory epithelium in 
healthy lungs has an inner, low viscosity layer to per-
mit free ciliary motion and a thicker outer layer that 
traps pathogens and particles. In cystic fibrosis, the 
periciliary liquid layer of the mucus is defective, which 
makes it more viscous and renders the cilia ineffective. 
The resulting stasis permits accumulation of mucus, 
debris and pathogens, and creates an environment for 
bacterial colonisation. The consequence is persistent 
endobronchial bacterial infection and a chronic inflam-
matory response in the airway, punctuated by recurrent 
episodes of acute infection. Together, these lead to pro-
gressive bronchiectasis and chronic airflow obstruction.
The other most common and disabling clinical con-
sequence of cystic fibrosis, affecting about 90% of those 
with the condition, is pancreatic exocrine insufficiency. 
Viscous secretions obstruct the pancreatic ductules and 
prevent pancreatic enzymes from reaching the gut, 
leading to fat malabsorption. About 30% also develop 
pancreatic fibrosis and replacement of pancreatic tis-
sue with fat that produces endocrine insufficiency and 
type 1 diabetes mellitus. Less commonly, people with 
cystic fibrosis develop meconium ileus in infancy or 
obstructive biliary tract disease in adult life.
Death in 90% of people with cystic fibrosis is due to 
progressive lung disease, but median life expectancy 
has risen steadily to about 41 years due to improved 
treatment.
CFTR MODULATORS
  Examples
elexacaftor, ivacaftor, lumacaftor, tezacaftor
Mechanism of Action and Uses
Treatment of cystic fibrosis in early years would ideally 
be directed at improving the function of the CFTR chan-
nel. Ivacaftor is a CFTR potentiator. It increases the time 
that the activated CFTR channel remains open, enhanc-
ing chloride ion transport in those with class III (defec-
tive channel regulation) gene mutations (about 5% of 
those with cystic fibrosis). It improves lung function, 
reduces exacerbations of lung disease and promotes 
weight gain. CFTR correctors, such as lumacaftor and 
tezacaftor, increase trafficking of CFTR protein to the 
cell surface. Although these might be expected to be ben-
eficial in people with defects of CFTR trafficking (class 
II, including the most common F508del mutation), they 
are not effective because the mutant CFTR is also poorly 
functional. Using a corrector and potentiator together 
may have a synergistic effect in both increasing CFTR 
trafficking to the cell surface and potentiating its func-
tion. The combination of tezacaftor and ivacaftor has 
been shown to reduce the frequency of exacerbations 
of lung disease and improve lung function and quality 
of life in people who are homozygous for the F508del 
214	
SECTION 3   The Respiratory System
mutation. It appears to be modestly effective in people 
who are heterozygous for the F508del mutation (where 
the second CFTR mutation does not respond to CFTR 
modulators). The addition of the next-generation cor-
rector elexacaftor (i.e. elexacaftor–tezacaftor–ivacaftor 
triple therapy) may be more efficacious, but elexacaftor 
is not licensed in the UK at the time of writing. Recent 
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence rec-
ommendations limiting the use of CFTR correctors 
mean that the place of these drugs in cystic fibrosis 
management in the UK remains to be defined.
Pharmacokinetics
The CFTR modulators tezacaftor and ivacaftor are 
taken orally. They are metabolised in the liver by 
cytochrome P450 (CYP)3A4/5 to active metabolites. 
The parent drug and its metabolites are excreted pri-
marily in faeces. They have long half-lives of 15 to 
30 hours that permit once-daily dosing. Lumacaftor is 
not metabolised and mostly eliminated unchanged in 
faeces. It is a strong inducer of CYP3A4 and thus inter-
acts with the other CFTR modulators (and other drugs) 
when given in combination.
Unwanted effects
The CFTR modulators are generally well tolerated. 
Headache, diarrhoea and upper respiratory tract infec-
tion are the most common unwanted effects. The com-
bination of lumacaftor–ivacaftor is associated with 
increased respiratory adverse events in a subset of 
people, and drug–drug interactions caused by strong 
CYP3A4 induction.
TREATMENT OF LUNG DISEASE
Use of a CFTR modulator should be considered in 
people with responsive CFTR genotypes. Beyond this, 
much of the treatment for cystic fibrosis remains sup-
portive, including physiotherapy. Nebulised hyper-
tonic sodium chloride improves mucociliary clearance 
and reduces the frequency of infective exacerbations. 
It can sometimes produce bronchospasm, which can 
be prevented by prior use of an inhaled b2-adrenocep-
tor agonist such as salbutamol (see Chapter 12). Air-
way obstruction is treated in the same way as chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (see Chapter 12).
DNA released from dying neutrophils in the airways 
contributes to the increased sputum viscosity in cystic 
fibrosis. Inhaled dornase alfa improves lung function 
in the short- to medium-term (although long-term ben-
efits are much less certain) and results in fewer exacer-
bations of lung disease. Improved lung function should 
be measurable after 2 weeks in responders. Hypertonic 
sodium chloride is an alternative option to improve 
sputum clearance, the action of which may be comple-
mentary to the effect of dornase alfa. A short-acting 
bronchodilator such as salbutamol (see Chapter 12) 
should be administered immediately before hyper-
tonic sodium chloride to mitigate bronchospasm.
Prevention of infection and cross-infection (espe-
cially from other people with cystic fibrosis and during 
hospital admission) is a key element in the management 
of cystic fibrosis. Rapid and intensive treatment of clin-
ical infection slows the decline in lung function and is 
the main reason for the prolongation of life expectancy 
in recent years. The most common lung pathogens in 
the very young person with cystic fibrosis are Staphy-
lococcus aureus (50%), Haemophilus influenzae (30%) and 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (20%). In the first three years of 
life, prophylactic antistaphylococcal therapy with flu-
cloxacillin is usually given to reduce exacerbations of 
lung disease (see Chapter 51). By adolescence, P. aeru-
ginosa becomes the predominant pathogen. Colonisa-
tion with P. aeruginosa can be prevented or reduced by 
regular treatment with inhaled nebulised tobramycin 
or nebulised colistimethate sodium combined with 
oral ciprofloxacin. Exacerbations of infection require 
oral or intravenous antimicrobials (see Chapter 51).
Because inflammation is a major component of the 
airway disease, several antiinflammatory therapies 
have been studied. Oral corticosteroids reduce the 
rate of decline in lung function and reduce the fre-
quency of infections, but unwanted effects preclude 
their long-term use. Inhaled corticosteroids do not 
improve lung function unless there is associated air-
way hyper-reactivity.
TREATMENT OF MALABSORPTION
Nutritional supplements are important because of the 
frequency of fat malabsorption and impaired absorption 
of fat-soluble vitamins. Pancreatic enzyme supplements 
(Pancreatin) are used from the diagnosis of pancreatic 
insufficiency. Pancreatin contains protease, lipase and 
amylase, enzymes which are inactivated by gastric acid 
and by heat. Supplements should be taken with food 
(but not mixed with very hot food) and either with gas-
tric acid suppression therapy (e.g. given 1 hour after a 
histamine H2 receptor antagonist such as ranitidine; see 
Chapter 33) or as enteric-coated formulations to pro-
tect them from gastric acid. Pancreatin preparations in 
clinical use are all of porcine origin. Dosage is adjusted 
according to the size, number and consistency of stools. 
Unwanted effects include irritation of the mouth and 
perianal skin, nausea, vomiting and abdominal discom-
fort. Some higher-strength formulations of pancreatin 
should be avoided in children under 15 years of age 
with cystic fibrosis because they have been associated 
with the formation of large bowel strictures.
Pancreatin is also used for pancreatic exocrine insuf-
ficiency following pancreatectomy, gastrectomy or 
chronic pancreatitis.
IDIOPATHIC PULMONARY FIBROSIS
Pulmonary fibrosis is a form of interstitial lung dis-
ease. It has a characteristic histological finding of usual 
interstitial pneumonia (fibrotic foci surrounded by 
	
	
Respiratory Disorders  CHAPTER 13	
215
normal lung tissue), which may result from aberrant 
wound healing following repetitive alveolar cell epi-
thelial injury. Median survival after diagnosis varies 
from 2 to 3.5 years, with a slow progressive decline in 
respiratory function.
There are no curative therapies. Pirfenidone has 
antiinflammatory and antifibrotic actions, and when 
used in mild to moderate disease, slows progression 
of the fibrosis. It may act by inhibition of transform-
ing growth factor-b and altering collagen synthesis. 
Gastrointestinal unwanted effects and photosensitive 
rash are the most common problems encountered 
with treatment. Nintendanib is an orally administered 
tyrosine kinase inhibitor that targets growth factor 
receptors that are involved in the fibrotic process (see 
Chapter 52). It slows the progression of fibrosis and 
may reduce acute exacerbations. The most common 
unwanted effects are diarrhoea, nausea and vomit-
ing, abdominal pain, decreased appetite and weight 
loss.
Acute exacerbations of symptoms are treated with 
a corticosteroid. When there is hypoxaemia at rest or 
desaturation with physical activity, supplemental oxy-
gen therapy can improve symptoms and quality of life. 
Lung transplantation may be considered.
NEONATAL RESPIRATORY DISTRESS SYNDROME
Pulmonary surfactant is responsible for reducing sur-
face tension at the air–liquid interface in the alveoli, 
preventing lung collapse at resting lung pressures. 
Surfactant is a macromolecular complex largely com-
posed of phospholipids (80%–85%), mainly phospha-
tidylcholine of which dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine 
is the major surface-active component, in addition to 
neutral lipids (5%–10%) and surfactant-specific pro-
teins A–D (5%–10%). The phospholipid forms a mono-
layer at the air–liquid interface which displaces water 
and reduces the force of attraction between the water 
molecules that promotes collapse of alveoli at end-
expiration. This stabilises the alveoli by reducing the 
deflating force during expiration. Surfactant proteins 
B and C are hydrophobic and involved in spreading 
of the surfactant layer at the air–liquid interface. The 
hydrophilic surfactant proteins A and D are involved 
in surfactant metabolism and in host defence by 
enhancing phagocytosis of pathogens.
Surfactant is synthesised by type II alveolar epi-
thelial cells and is normally present in substantial 
amounts in the lungs at full-term delivery. However, 
preterm infants (especially those born at or before 28 
weeks’ gestation) have immature lungs which may 
produce too little surfactant. These infants develop 
difficulty breathing within minutes or hours of deliv-
ery, a condition called neonatal respiratory distress 
syndrome.
Mortality is high in neonatal respiratory distress 
syndrome. In women at risk of preterm delivery, a 
corticosteroid such as betamethasone (see Chapter 44) 
given to the mother at least 12 hours, and preferably 
48 hours, before delivery can enhance pulmonary 
maturity in the neonate which may prevent neonatal 
respiratory distress syndrome.
Surfactant is given as soon as possible after delivery 
to infants with neonatal respiratory distress syndrome, 
or to those considered to be at high risk of develop-
ing it. Surfactant combined with noninvasive ventila-
tion reduces the risk of death by 40%. Treatment also 
reduces the risk of pneumothorax and of subsequent 
chronic lung disease. Delivery of surfactant was origi-
nally via an endotracheal tube, but techniques that 
avoid intubation such as aerosols or delivery via a 
thin plastic endotracheal catheter are becoming more 
common.
There are two natural therapeutic surfactants: ber-
actant (bovine lung extract) and poractant alfa (porcine 
lung phospholipid fraction). Synthetic compounds 
have been developed with peptides that mimic the 
natural surfactant proteins, but these appear to be less 
effective. Therapeutic use of pulmonary surfactants 
has been associated with intrapulmonary haemor-
rhage in neonates.
Pulmonary surfactant is also useful in neonates with 
meconium aspiration syndrome and in acute neonatal 
respiratory distress due to group B streptococcal sepsis. 
There is some evidence of improved outcomes when 
pulmonary surfactant is given to children with acute 
respiratory distress syndrome due to acute lung injury.
SELF-ASSESSMENT
TRUE/FALSE QUESTIONS
	 1.	 Postviral cough can last for 3 to 6 weeks.
	 2.	 Angiotensin II receptor antagonists frequently 
cause cough.
	 3.	 Many compound cough preparations sold over-
the-counter contain sedating antihistamines.
	 4.	 Dextromethorphan is a synthetic opioid with 
cough suppressant, sedative and analgesic activity.
	 5.	 There is little evidence that any preparation can 
specifically facilitate expectoration.
	 6.	 Pulmonary surfactant increases surface tension in 
the alveoli.
	 7.	 Therapeutic surfactant is identical to natural 
human surfactant.
	 8.	 Doxapram is a widely used treatment for type 2 
respiratory failure.
	 9.	 The mucolytic carbocisteine acts by inhibiting the 
production of mucus.
10.	 Dornase alfa breaks down extracellular DNA in 
sputum.
11.	 Ivacaftor improves CFTR function in over 90% of 
people with cystic fibrosis.
12.	 Pirfenidone is used in idiopathic pulmonary fibro-
sis (IPF).
216	
SECTION 3   The Respiratory System
ANSWERS
TRUE/FALSE ANSWERS
1.	 True. Treatment of postviral cough should include 
increased humidity of inspired air and cough sup-
pressants; other drugs are of little value.
2.	 False. Angiotensin II receptor antagonists do not 
cause cough. However, inhibitors of ACE, which 
reduce the formation of angiotensin II, also prevent 
the breakdown of bradykinin and this causes cough 
in up to 30% of people.
3.	 True. Diphenhydramine and chlorphenamine are 
common constituents of over-the-counter cough 
mixtures.
4.	 False. Dextromethorphan has the same cough-
suppressant potency as codeine but does not share 
its sedative or analgesic effects; dextromethorphan 
may act by blocking N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) 
receptors.
5.	 True. Expectorants may nevertheless serve a useful 
placebo function.
6.	 False. Surfactant has a detergent-like action to lower 
surface tension, enabling the alveoli to expand and 
retain an expanded shape.
7.	 False. Therapeutic surfactants such as beractant and 
poractant alfa are animal products lacking the two 
hydrophilic surfactant proteins, SP-A and SP-D.
8.	 False. Doxapram is rarely used. Noninvasive ven-
tilation is preferred in most cases of acute type 2 
respiratory failure. Occasionally, doxapram is used 
to treat transient hypoventilation during emergence 
from general anaesthesia. It stimulates the respira-
tory centre and the carotid chemoreceptors.
9.	 True. Mucolytics such as erdosteine and carbociste-
ine reduce mucus viscosity by breaking the disul-
phide cross-bridges that maintain the polymeric 
gel-like structure of mucus, but scavenging of oxi-
dants may also be important.
10.	 True. Dornase alpha is a recombinant deoxyribonu-
clease that digests DNA released by dying neutro-
phils in sputum; it is given by nebuliser to reduce 
viscosity of lung secretions in cystic fibrosis.
11.	 False. Ivacaftor improves CFTR function only in 
the 4% to 5% of people with cystic fibrosis with the 
G551D mutation.
12.	 True. Pirfenidone has antiinflammatory and antifi-
brotic activity in IPF.
FURTHER READING
COUGH
Dicpinigaitis, P.V., Morice, A.H., Birring, S.S., et  al., 2014. 
Antitussive drugs—past, present, and future. Pharmacol. 
Rev. 66, 468–512.
Smith, J.A., Woodcock, A., 2016. Chronic cough. N. Engl. J. Med. 
375, 1544–1551.
CYSTIC FIBROSIS
Bell, S.C., Mall, M.A., Gutierrez, H., et al., 2020. The future of 
cystic fibrosis care: a global perspective. Lancet Respir. Med. 
8, 65–124.
Grasemann, H., 2017. CFTR modulator therapy for cystic 
fibrosis. N. Engl. J. Med. 377, 2085–2088.
Castellani, C., Duff, A.J.A., Bell, S.C., et  al., 2018. ECFS best 
practice guidelines: the 2018 revision. J. Cyst. Fibros. 17, 
153–178.
IDIOPATHIC PULMONARY FIBROSIS
Lederer, D.J., Martinez, F.J., 2018. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. 
N. Engl. J. Med. 378, 1811–1823.
NEONATAL RESPIRATORY DISTRESS SYNDROME
Banerjee, S., Fernandez, R., Fox, G.F., et  al., 2019. Surfactant 
replacement therapy for respiratory distress syndrome 
in preterm infants: United Kingdom national consensus. 
Pediatr. Res. 86, 12–14.
Ramanathan, R., Kamholz, K., Fujii, A.M., 2013. Is there a 
difference in surfactant treatment of respiratory distress 
syndrome in premature neonates? A review. J. Pulmon. Resp. 
Med. S13, 004.
Compendium of Drugs Used to Treat Cough and Other Respiratory Disorders.
DRUG
CHARACTERISTICS
Cough Suppressants
Cough suppressants listed here are opioid derivatives (see Chapter 19), usually given orally as a linctus. Sedating 
antihistamines (see Chapter 39) are also sometimes given for cough suppression.
Codeine
Use is associated with constipation.
Dextromethorphan
Fewer unwanted effects than codeine.
Methadone
Used mainly in palliative care for the distressing cough of terminal lung cancer (but less than other 
opioids).
Morphine
Used in palliative care for the distressing cough of terminal lung cancer.
Pholcodine
Fewer unwanted effects than codeine. Mild sedative activity. Not recommended in children under 
6 years.
	
	
Respiratory Disorders  CHAPTER 13	
217
DRUG
CHARACTERISTICS
Mucolytics
Carbocisteine
Reduces mucus viscosity and inhibits goblet cell hyperplasia; used in COPD and bronchiectasis, given 
orally.
Dornase alfa
Recombinant human deoxyribonuclease preparation used for cystic fibrosis, given by nebuliser. Not 
detectable in blood, but sputum activity persists for at least 6 hours.
Erdosteine
Reduces mucus viscosity by breaking cross-links in mucus glycoproteins. Used in COPD and 
bronchiectasis; given orally as a prodrug.
Respiratory Stimulant
Doxapram
Stimulates carotid chemoreceptors; used only under expert supervision for short-term treatment of 
ventilatory failure, given by intravenous injection (over 30 s) or by continuous intravenous infusion.
CFTR Modulators
CFTR potentiators enhance Cl− transport in patients with class II mutations in the CFTR gene; CFTR correctors in combination 
with ivacaftor may increase trafficking of CFTR protein to the cell surface.
Elexacaftor
Next-generation CFTR corrector (not currently listed in BNF, Nov 2020).
Ivacaftor
CFTR potentiator; given orally. Used in cystic fibrosis associated with the G551D mutation.
Lumacaftor
CFTR corrector; available only in combination with ivacaftor; given orally. Developed for those aged 
12 years and older who are homozygous for the F508del mutation in the CFTR gene. Not currently 
recommended for cystic fibrosis (CF) in UK.
Tezacaftor
CFTR corrector; available only in combination with ivacaftor; given orally. Developed for those aged 
12 years and older who are homozygous for the F508del mutation or a number of other CFTR 
mutations). Not currently recommended for CF in Scotland.
Pancreatic Enzyme Supplement
Pancreatin
Mixture of porcine lipase, amylase and protease enzymes that break down fat, starch and proteins. 
Used for pancreatic insufficiency in CF; given orally with food and an H2 receptor antagonist to 
suppress gastric acid.
Antifibrotics
Pirfenidone
Antiinflammatory and antifibrotic drug; reduces fibroblast proliferation and collagen deposition. Given 
orally for mild-to-moderate idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis in adults.
Nintendanib
Tyrosine kinase inhibitor (see Chapter 52); blocks multiple growth factor receptors involved in fibrosis. 
Given orally for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis in adults.
Pulmonary Surfactants
Used for respiratory distress in preterm infants.
Beractant
Bovine surfactant lipids, given by endotracheal tube; alveoli are stabilised against collapse by reduction 
of surface tension, without systemic absorption of the surfactant.
Poractant alfa
Porcine surfactant lipids; see beractant.
Compendium of Drugs Used to Treat Cough and Other Respiratory Disorders—cont’d.
CFTR, Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
218
SECTION 4  The Renal System
14
Diuretics
Chapter Outline
Functions of the Kidney  218
The Kidney and Maintenance of Salt and  
Water Balance  218
Diuretic Drugs  221
Loop Diuretics  221
Thiazide and Related Diuretics  222
Potassium-Sparing Diuretics  223
Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitors  224
Osmotic Diuretics  224
Management of Diuretic-Induced Hypokalaemia  224
Major Uses of Diuretics  225
Self-Assessment  226
Answers  227
Further Reading  228
Compendium of Diuretic Drugs  228
Almost all diuretics act on the kidney to increase the 
tubular concentration and elimination of Na+ ions 
(natriuresis), with a concurrent excretion of water. 
Loss of water with the Na+ ions depletes intravascular 
volume.
FUNCTIONS OF THE KIDNEY
The kidney has several important functions:
• regulation of plasma fluid volume, electrolyte con-
centrations and osmolarity;
• regulation of acid–base balance;
• elimination of waste products (mainly nitrogen-
containing compounds);
• conservation of essential nutrients, such as glucose 
and amino acids;
• production and secretion of hormones;
• gluconeogenesis.
A basic knowledge of the mechanisms of electrolyte 
and fluid handling by the kidney is essential for under-
standing the uses and unwanted effects of diuretics. 
The following account is simplified to emphasise the 
functions relevant to the actions of diuretics.
THE KIDNEY AND MAINTENANCE OF SALT AND 
WATER BALANCE
Each day the renal glomeruli of a healthy adult filter 
about 140 to 170 L of fluid from plasma, along with ions 
and small molecules. This is about 20% of the volume 
of plasma that enters the glomerular capillaries. As the 
urine output is only 2 to 3 L/day, it is clear that most 
of the filtered fluid and solutes are reabsorbed from the 
tubule into the blood. Different regions of the tubule 
and collecting duct vary in their capacity to reabsorb 
water and solutes (Figs. 14.1 and14.2).
The Proximal Convoluted Tubule
In the proximal convoluted tubule, up to 65% of the 
filtered Na+ is reabsorbed together with an equivalent 
(iso-osmotic) amount of water. Therefore, on leav-
ing the proximal tubule, the tubular fluid still has the 
same osmolality as plasma. Reabsorption of ions from 
the proximal tubule into the renal tubular cells is pas-
sive (see Fig. 14.1, site 1). The activity of the Na+/K+-
ATPase pump on the basolateral surface of the tubular 
cell (transporting three Na+ ions out of the tubular cell 
in exchange for two K+ ions) helps establish the electro-
chemical gradient for passive Na+ reabsorption from 
the tubular lumen into the tubule cell. Water reabsorp-
tion occurs via transmembrane aquaporin (AQP) 1 and 
7 channels. The passage of water through these chan-
nels from the lumen of the proximal renal tubule is 
driven by the osmotic gradient across the tubular cells, 
driven by the high osmotic pressure in peritubular cap-
illaries following filtration of protein free plasma fluid 
at the glomerulus. The extent of the proximal tubular 
reabsorption of Na+ and water is also influenced by 
various neural and hormonal influences, such as the 
sympathetic nervous system, angiotensin II, endothe-
lin and dopamine. Most of the filtered K+ and Cl− ions 
are also reabsorbed by the proximal tubule.
The proximal tubule has organic anion ­transporters 
(OATs) that secrete organic anions into the tubular lumen 
(see Fig. 14.1, site 1; see also Table 2.1) and other trans-
porters that reabsorb water-soluble essential nutrients, 
such as water-soluble vitamins, glucose and amino acids, 
	
	
Diuretics  CHAPTER 14	
219
from the lumen. The OATs are important for the trans-
port of many drugs and their metabolites from the blood 
into the tubule. Bicarbonate is also reabsorbed from the 
proximal tubule by a mechanism dependent on the enzy-
matic activity of carbonic anhydrase (see Fig. 14.1, site 2).
The Loop of Henle
The descending limb of the loop of Henle has AQP 
channels and is permeable to water, but is imperme-
able to Na+. The interstitial fluid surrounding the loop 
of Henle is hypertonic as a result of ion transport in 
the thick portion of the ascending limb of the loop of 
Henle (discussed later). Water therefore passes from 
the tubule into the interstitium of the renal medulla 
along a concentration gradient. Approximately 10% to 
15% of the total filtered water is absorbed at this site. 
As a result, tubular fluid reaching the ascending limb 
of the loop of Henle is hypertonic.
The thick portion of the ascending limb of the 
loop of Henle is relatively impermeable to water but 
Fig. 14.1  Transport mechanisms for solutes in the kidney. In all segments of the renal tubule, there is active trans-
port of Na+ out of and K+ into the cell across the basolateral membrane using Na+/K+-ATPase proton pumps. This sets 
up electrochemical gradients for the transport of other ions. In the proximal tubule (sites 1 and 2), considerable amounts 
of Na+, glucose and amino acids are taken up from the lumen, along with water which crosses via aquaporin (AQP) chan-
nels. The principal function of the organic anion transporters (OATs) at site 1 is the elimination of metabolites of ingested 
xenobiotics (see Chapter 2). Transport by OATs also enables diuretic drugs such as furosemide and bendroflumethiazide 
to gain access to their sites of action on apical membranes in the tubule. Hydrogen ions are excreted in exchange for 
Na+ uptake and this, in part, depends upon the activity of carbonic anhydrase (site 2). In the ascending limb of the loop 
of Henle (site 3), the luminal membrane has a Na+/K+/2Cl− co-transporter (NKCC2) but is impermeable to water. In the 
proximal part of the distal tubule (cortical diluting segment; site 4) Na+ and Cl− ions are reabsorbed by the Na+/Cl− co-
transporter (NCC), but water is not reabsorbed. Ca2+ also exchanges with three Na+ ions at the basolateral border at this 
site. In the distal part of the distal tubule and collecting duct (site 5), Na+ is reabsorbed from the lumen via an epithelial 
Na+ channel (ENaC), in exchange for loss of K+ into the lumen. The expression and activity of ENaC and the basolateral 
Na+/K+-ATPase pump are regulated by aldosterone acting via mineralocorticoid receptors (MR). Water is reabsorbed in 
the collecting duct under the influence of antidiuretic hormone (ADH, vasopressin), acting through vasopressin receptors 
in the basolateral membrane.
+
+
3Na+
Organic anion
transporters
(OATs)
Glucose
Amino acids
3Na+
Cl– K+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Basolateral
membrane
Basolateral
membrane
Luminal or apical
membrane
Luminal or apical
membrane
2K+
K+
Na+
H2O
Cl–
Carbonic
anhydrase
2K+
2K+
3Na+
3Na+
3Na+
H+
Na+
Na+
Cl–
2Cl–
HCO3
CO2 + H2O
CO2 + H2O
H2CO3
H2CO3
HCO3
NaHCO3
–
–
HCO3
–
K+
K+
ATP
ase
ATP
ase
ATP
ase
Carbonic
anhydrase
2
1
3
2K+
Na+ Cl–
NCC
ATP
ase
4
5
MR
Aldosterone
H2O
(vasopressin 
action required)
2K+
3Na+
Na+
ENaC
K+
ATP
ase
Na+
Ca2+
Mg2+
NKCC2
220	
SECTION 4  The Renal System
has an active Na+/K+/2Cl− co-transporter complex 
(NKCC2) in the luminal (apical) membrane (see Fig. 
14.1, site 3). Na+ is transported from the tubular cells 
to the interstitium by the Na+/K+-ATPase pump in 
the basolateral membrane. This creates a low intra-
cellular Na+ concentration in the tubular cells and 
generates the Na+ ion gradient that drives the lumi-
nal NKCC2 co-transporter. The thick portion of the 
ascending limb of the loop of Henle can reabsorb up 
to 25% of the Na+ filtered at the glomerulus. K+ that is 
carried from the tubule into the cells by the NKCC2 
co-transporter is recycled back into the tubular lumen, 
which ensures that there is always enough tubular K+ 
to continue to favour Na+ reabsorption. K+ recycling 
creates a lumen-positive transepithelial voltage gra-
dient, which drives a paracellular ionic current that 
is responsible for Ca2+ and Mg2+ reabsorption. Fluid 
leaving the thick portion of the ascending limb of the 
loop of Henle and entering the distal tubule is hypo-
tonic with respect to plasma.
The reabsorption of Na+, but not water, by the thick 
portion of the ascending limb of the loop of Henle 
establishes the hypertonicity of the medullary intersti-
tium, which is maintained in part because the medulla 
has a very low blood flow. This hypertonicity gener-
ates the corticomedullary concentration gradient that 
drives water reabsorption from the descending limb of 
the loop of Henle. The interstitial hypertonicity in the 
renal medulla is also responsible for an osmotic gradi-
ent across the collecting ducts, which permits the for-
mation of hypertonic urine (discussed later).
The Distal Convoluted Tubule
The hypotonic filtrate leaving the loop of Henle passes 
into the distal convoluted tubule, which is imperme-
able to water but has a luminal thiazide-sensitive 
Na+/Cl− co-transporter (NCC; see Fig. 14.1, site 4). 
The driving force for this co-transporter is again gen-
erated by the Na+/K+-ATPase pump in the basolateral 
membrane. About 10% to 15% of the filtered Na+ load 
can be reabsorbed at this site. The rich blood supply 
to this region allows rapid diffusion of the reabsorbed 
ions into the plasma and prevents the interstitium 
from becoming hypertonic. Reabsorption of Ca2+ is 
also regulated at this site under the influence of para-
thyroid hormone and calcitriol (see Chapter 42). The 
rate of Ca2+ transport is inversely related to that of 
Na+ transport.
The Connecting Tubule and the Collecting Ducts
The tubular fluid has become yet more hypoosmolar 
with respect to plasma while in the distal convoluted 
tubule, and is delivered to the connecting tubule and 
then to the collecting ducts. The connecting tubule has 
properties intermediate between the distal convoluted 
tubule and the collecting ducts. There are two main cell 
types in this region, the principal cells and the interca-
lated cells.
Fig. 14.2  Sites of action of diuretics. For location of these sites in 
the tubule, see Fig. 14.1. Osmotic diuretics increase osmotic pres-
sure through the tubule, reducing electrolyte reabsorption across the 
luminal membrane. Other drugs gain access to their sites of action 
after secretion into the tubule by the organic anion transporters 
(OATs) in the proximal tubule. Acetazolamide inhibits carbonic anhy-
drase (site 2) and is a weak self-limiting diuretic, now largely used 
for other conditions such as glaucoma. Loop diuretics such as furo-
semide block the luminal Na+/K+/2Cl− co-transporter (NKCC2) and 
inhibit up to 20% to 25% of filtered Na+ reabsorption (site 3). The thia-
zide diuretics inhibit the luminal Na+/Cl− co-transporter (NCC; site 4) 
and reduce reabsorption of 3% to 5% of filtered Na+. The aldosterone 
antagonists spironolactone and eplerenone compete with aldoste-
rone for the mineralocorticoid receptor (MR), blocking the induction 
by aldosterone of the expression and activity of the epithelial Na+ 
channel (ENaC) and the basolateral Na+/K+-ATPase pump (site 5). 
Amiloride and triamterene act directly on ENaC to block Na+ reab-
sorption. Potassium-sparing diuretics inhibit the reuptake of less than 
2% of filtered Na+.
+
+
Interstitium
Interstitium
Carbonic
anhydrase
Tubule lumen
Tubule lumen
2K+
2K+
3Na+
3Na+
3Na+
H+
Na+
Na+
H+
Cl–
2Cl–
HCO3
CO2 + H2O
Ca2+
CO2 + H2O
H2CO3
H2CO3
HCO3
NaHCO3
–
–
HCO3
–
K+
K+
       Carbonic
       anhydrase
       inhibitors:
e.g. acetazolamide
Loop diuretics
ATP
ase
ATP
ase
NKCC2
Carbonic
anhydrase
–
Site 2
Site 3
Site 4
Site 5
Interstitium
Tubule lumen
2K+
3Na+
Na+
Cl–
Cl–
K+
Thiazide diuretics
MR
Spironolactone
Eplerenone
K+-sparing diuretics
Aldosterone
ATP
ase
NCC
–
Interstitium
Tubule lumen
2K+
3Na+
Na+
ENaC
K+
Amiloride
Triamterene
ATP
ase
–
–
	
	
Diuretics  CHAPTER 14	
221
The principal cells predominate in the cortical 
portion of the collecting duct. They reabsorb Na+ 
through a highly specific amiloride-sensitive epithe-
lial Na+ channel (ENaC) accompanied by obligatory 
K+ loss into the urine (see Fig. 14.1, site 5). Aldoste-
rone acts in the principal cells at cytosolic mineralo-
corticoid receptors (MRs), inducing transcription of 
gene-encoding components of ENaC and the baso-
lateral Na+/K+-ATPase pump. Aldosterone there-
fore increases reabsorption of Na+ from the tubule, 
with the concomitant loss of K+ into the lumen. The 
natriuretic peptides, atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) 
and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP), decrease Na+ 
reabsorption at this site by receptor-mediated phos-
phorylation of ENaC. Overall, only about 3% to 5% 
of filtered Na+ is reabsorbed at the distal part of the 
distal tubule. The distal renal tubule is the primary 
site in the kidney responsible for maintenance of K+ 
homeostasis.
The principal cell is also the site of action of vaso-
pressin (antidiuretic hormone, ADH; see Chapter 43). 
Vasopressin is secreted by the posterior pituitary gland, 
binds to receptors on principal cells, and increases the 
expression of luminal AQP 2 channels. This increases 
the permeability of the cell to water. In the absence 
of vasopressin, the collecting duct is impermeable to 
water and the tubular fluid remains hypoosmolar with 
respect to plasma. In the presence of vasopressin, water 
reabsorption is increased down the osmotic gradient 
established by the thick ascending limb of the loop of 
Henle into the hypertonic medullary interstitium. This 
concentrates the tubular fluid as it passes through the 
collecting duct.
Intercalated cells are more prominent in the med-
ullary collecting duct (not illustrated in Figs. 14.1 and 
14.2). They express H+-ATPases that help regulate 
acid–base balance by secreting or reabsorbing H+ and 
HCO3
−.
Autoregulation of Glomerular Perfusion by Tubulo-
Glomerular Feedback And Hormonal Control
There are additional regulatory mechanisms that 
control overall function of the nephrons. The first is 
autoregulation of glomerular perfusion pressure in 
response to changes in blood pressure through a myo-
genic reflex that constricts the afferent arteriole when 
blood pressure increases. The second is tubulo-glomer-
ular feedback, in which the macula densa senses the 
concentration of NaCl in the loop of Henle. When the 
NaCl concentration rises due to a rise in glomerular 
filtration rate, the macula densa secretes ATP, which 
binds to purinergic receptors on afferent arteriole 
smooth muscle to produce vasoconstriction. Tubulo-
glomerular feedback is also linked to secretion of renin 
from the juxtaglomerular apparatus. This enhances 
the release of aldosterone from the adrenal cortex and 
increases Na+ reabsorption at the connecting tubule 
and cortical segment of the collecting duct.
DIURETIC DRUGS
LOOP DIURETICS
  Examples
bumetanide, furosemide
Mechanism of Action and Effects
Loop diuretics are powerful natriuretic drugs which 
can inhibit reabsorption of up to 20% to 25% of the 
Na+ that appears in the glomerular filtrate. They 
are secreted into the proximal kidney tubule by the 
tubular OATs and act at the luminal surface of cells 
in the thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle. The 
extent of the natriuresis and diuresis is dependent on 
the rate of delivery of the drug to the renal tubule 
via this secretory mechanism. Once these transport-
ers have been saturated, increasing the dose of the 
diuretic further will not enhance its effect. Loop 
diuretics bind to the Na+/K+/2Cl− co-transporter 
complex (NKCC2) at the luminal border of the thick 
ascending limb of the loop of Henle and inhibit Cl− 
reabsorption. This diminishes the electrochemical 
gradient across the cell and reduces Na+ reabsorption 
from the tubular fluid (see Fig. 14.2, site 3). The Na+ 
concentration in the tubular fluid leaving the loop of 
Henle is therefore increased. By reducing Na+ reab-
sorption, loop diuretics impair the creation of the 
corticomedullary ionic concentration gradient. This 
reduces the ability of the kidney to generate con-
centrated urine in the collecting duct and enhances 
water loss in urine.
The dose–response curves of loop diuretics 
are steep, but the oral doses required for maximal 
inhibition of Na+ reabsorption show wide inter­
individual variation. Because they have a short 
duration of action, there is partial compensation for 
the natriuresis by subsequent rebound Na+ uptake 
from the tubular fluid after their tubular action is 
complete. Loop diuretics remain effective even in 
advanced renal failure, but larger doses are neces-
sary to deliver an effective concentration of drug to 
the remaining renal tubules, as the reduced tubular 
secretion allows more time for metabolism of the 
drug in the liver.
When injected intravenously, furosemide releases 
vasodilator prostaglandins such as prostacyclin into 
the circulation and produces a short-lived venodila-
tion. Pooling of blood in these capacitance vessels 
reduces central blood volume, which can be useful 
in the treatment of acute left ventricular failure (see 
Chapter 7). Loop diuretics also produce arterial vaso-
dilation. However, because of their short duration of 
action they are not widely used to treat hypertension, 
except in renal failure or when there is plasma volume 
expansion (such as in drug-resistant hypertension), 
when their diuretic action can be useful.
222	
SECTION 4  The Renal System
Pharmacokinetics
Furosemide is incompletely and erratically absorbed 
from the gut, with considerable inter- and intra­
individual (day to day) variation. Bumetanide is more 
completely and reliably absorbed. Furosemide and 
bumetanide can also be given intravenously. Natri-
uresis and diuresis begin about 30 minutes after an 
oral dose and last up to 6 hours; intravenous injection 
produces a more rapid effect, with an onset of diuresis 
within minutes. Loop diuretics are partially metabo-
lised in the liver. They are highly protein bound in 
plasma and little drug is filtered at the glomerulus. In 
renal failure, there is reduced delivery of drug to the 
tubular fluid as other retained substrates compete with 
the diuretic for the remaining OATs.
Unwanted Effects
• Excessive Na+ and water loss can cause intravascular 
volume depletion, hypotension and renal impairment.
• Hypokalaemia is dose-related, but is usually less 
marked than with thiazide diuretics, which have a 
longer duration of action. The reasons for hypoka-
laemia include:
• Increased delivery of Na+ to the distal convoluted 
tubule, where Na+ reabsorption is then enhanced. 
This creates a negative ionic gradient from tubu-
lar cells to the tubular lumen that promotes K+ 
diffusion into the tubular lumen.
• Diuretic-induced hypovolaemia and increased 
tubular Cl− concentration stimulate release of 
renin and therefore aldosterone. Aldosterone 
further enhances Na+ reabsorption in the distal 
tubule at the expense of increased K+ excretion.
• Obligatory urinary loss of Cl− with the increased 
K+ loss creates a mild metabolic alkalosis in the 
plasma. To counteract the alkalosis, H+ is shifted 
out of cells in exchange for intracellular accumu-
lation of K+, which exacerbates the hypokalaemia.
• The consequences and treatment of hypokalaemia 
produced by loop diuretics are considered later.
• Hyponatraemia, due to loss of Na+ in excess of water, 
is uncommon with loop diuretics. Because they 
reduce the osmotic gradient in the renal medulla, 
the collecting ducts become less responsive to ADH. 
This limits the extent to which compensatory ADH 
secretion is able to produce relative water retention.
• Hypomagnesaemia. Paracellular diffusion of fil-
tered Mg2+ in the thick ascending limb of the loop of 
Henle is impaired by loop diuretics, which inhibit the 
electrical gradient necessary for Mg2+ reabsorption. 
Hypomagnesaemia predisposes to cardiac arrhyth-
mias. Hypokalaemia often cannot be corrected unless 
co-existent hypomagnesaemia has been treated.
• Increased urinary Ca2+ excretion from inhibition of 
paracellular reabsorption of Ca2+ at the thick ascend-
ing limb of the loop of Henle. It does not produce 
hypocalcaemia, but this action can be helpful in the 
management of hypercalcaemia (see Chapter 42).
• Hyperuricaemia arises from reduced glomerular fil-
tration of uric acid following the reduction of plasma 
volume. There may be an additional reduction of 
proximal tubular uric acid secretion as a result of 
competition between uric acid and the diuretic for 
OATs. Clinical gout is unusual and much less com-
mon with loop diuretics than with thiazide diuretics.
• Incontinence can result from the rapid increase in 
urine volume. In older males with prostatic hyper-
trophy, retention of urine can occur.
• Ototoxicity. Deafness can result from cochlear toxic-
ity, or tinnitus and vertigo from vestibular toxicity, 
especially when renal failure reduces the rate of drug 
excretion or when very large doses of a loop diuretic 
are used. Ototoxicity is more common with furose-
mide than bumetanide and is usually reversible.
THIAZIDE AND RELATED DIURETICS
  Examples
bendroflumethiazide, chlortalidone, hydrochlorothiazide, 
indapamide
Mechanisms of Action and Effects
Thiazides and related diuretics have a lower efficacy 
than loop diuretics, achieving a maximum natriuresis 
of about 3% to 5% of the filtered Na+ load, and have 
shallow dose–response curves. Thiazides (such as ben-
droflumethiazide and hydrochlorothiazide) are struc-
turally related to sulfonamides. Several structurally 
unrelated thiazide-like drugs, such as chlortalidone 
and indapamide, share the same site of action and are 
considered to be thiazides in the following discussion. 
All these drugs are highly protein-bound, and there-
fore little drug is filtered at the glomerulus and they 
are secreted by OATs into the proximal tubule. All 
these drugs act at the luminal surface of the distal con-
voluted tubule and inhibit the NCC (see Fig. 14.2, site 
4); this inhibits transport of Na+ and Cl− into the tubu-
lar cell. The concentration of Na+ in fluid leaving the 
distal convoluted tubule is therefore increased.
Thiazides produce arterial vasodilation during 
long-term use, which appears to be the basis of their 
hypotensive effect (see Chapter 6), but the mechanism 
of vasodilation is unclear. It may involve an action on 
the arterial wall as the vasodilator action occurs at 
lower dosages than required for significant diuresis. 
However, an indirect vasodilator effect arising from 
salt depletion may be important as thiazides do not 
lower blood pressure in end-stage renal disease.
Pharmacokinetics
Thiazide and related diuretics are fairly well absorbed 
from the gut and most are metabolised in the liver. The 
onset of diuresis is slow, but they have a longer dura-
tion of action than loop diuretics, which varies among 
the drugs; for example, bendroflumethiazide produces 
	
	
Diuretics  CHAPTER 14	
223
a natriuresis for up to 6 to 12 hours and chlortalidone 
for 48 to 72 hours. Thiazide and related diuretics are 
less effective when the glomerular filtration rate is 
below 20 mL/min.
Unwanted Effects
• Hypokalaemia. This is due to greater delivery of Cl− 
to the connecting tubule, eliciting a release of renin 
and therefore aldosterone. A reduced intracellular 
Ca2+ concentration (discussed later) also activates 
epithelial Na+ channels (ENaC) in the distal convo-
luted tubule, which promotes K+ secretion into the 
tubule. Hypokalaemia is more frequent with thia-
zides than with loop diuretics, partly due to their 
longer duration of action. The greatest reduction in 
plasma K+ usually occurs within 2 weeks of start-
ing treatment. The management of thiazide-related 
hypokalaemia is considered later.
• Hyponatraemia. This is more common with thiazide 
diuretics than with loop diuretics because thiazides 
impair urine-diluting ability but, unlike loop diuret-
ics, do not impair concentrating ability. Prolonged 
block of Na+/Cl− co-transport in the distal convo-
luted tubule (a cortical diluting site where water 
cannot be reabsorbed) and vasopressin release in 
response to reduced plasma volume impairs free 
water clearance. The combination of a thiazide with 
amiloride (discussed later) is particularly associated 
with dilutional hyponatraemia. Hyponatraemia 
can present with lethargy, impaired consciousness, 
and eventually coma and seizures. It usually occurs 
within 2 weeks of starting treatment, but can be 
delayed. Rapid recurrence of hyponatraemia with 
reexposure to thiazides suggests a genetic predispo-
sition in some individuals.
• Hyperuricaemia (see the section on loop diuretics). 
Gout occurs infrequently and is less common in 
women.
• Decreased urinary Ca2+ excretion, in contrast to 
increased excretion with loop diuretics. Reduced 
Na+ concentration in the tubular cell activates the 
Na+/Ca2+ antiporter in the basolateral membrane of 
the distal convoluted tubule. This exchanger uses 
the electrochemical gradient for Na+ created by Na+/
K+-ATPase across the cell membrane to transport 
Ca2+ from the cell into the interstitium, which then 
promotes Ca2+ reabsorption from the tubular lumen. 
Hypercalcaemia does not usually occur, unless there 
is another underlying disturbance of Ca2+ metabo-
lism, such as hyperparathyroidism. The reduction 
in urinary Ca2+ loss is useful for the prevention of 
renal stones resulting from hypercalciuria.
• Glucose intolerance. This is dose-related, with a 
progressive increase in plasma glucose over several 
months. The major cause is prolonged hypokalaemia 
and the consequent reduced intracellular K+ concen-
tration which inhibits insulin release and impairs tis-
sue uptake of glucose in response to insulin. A direct 
action of thiazides producing hyperpolarisation of 
islet cell membranes and inhibiting insulin release 
may also contribute. The glucose intolerance usually 
reverses over several months if the thiazide is stopped.
• Hyperlipidaemia. There is a dose-related increase 
in low-density lipoprotein cholesterol and triglycer-
ides. The long-term effects (>1 year) are small unless 
high doses of thiazides are used.
• Erectile dysfunction. This is reported by up to 10% 
of middle-aged men with hypertension who are 
treated with high doses of thiazides (see Chap-
ter 16).
• Nocturia and urinary frequency can result from pro-
longed diuresis.
POTASSIUM-SPARING DIURETICS
  Examples
amiloride, eplerenone, spironolactone, triamterene
Mechanism of Action and Effects
Drugs in this class produce a diuresis while preventing 
urinary K+ loss. The maximum natriuresis achieved by 
potassium-sparing diuretics is small (usually 1%–2% 
of filtered Na+). All potassium-sparing diuretics act at 
the late distal convoluted tubule and cortical collect-
ing duct. Spironolactone (and its active metabolite can-
renone) and eplerenone are the only diuretics that do 
not act at the luminal membrane of the tubular cells. 
They compete with aldosterone for the cytoplasmic 
mineralocorticoid receptor in the distal convoluted 
tubular cells and block transcriptional upregulation of 
ENaC and the basolateral Na+/K+-ATPase pump. They 
therefore antagonise the effects of aldosterone on Na+ 
reabsorption and K+ excretion (see Fig. 14.2, site 5). Spi-
ronolactone and eplerenone only work in the presence 
of aldosterone, and their natriuretic effect is enhanced 
in primary and secondary hyperaldosteronism.
Amiloride and triamterene have a different mecha-
nism of action: they directly block ENaC at the luminal 
surface of the renal tubule (see Fig. 14.2). Their action is 
independent of the presence of aldosterone.
With potassium-sparing diuretics, Na+ and water 
loss is accompanied by preservation of K+, because the 
reduced Na+ reabsorption limits ATP-dependent Na+ 
exchange with K+ at the basolateral membrane (see 
Fig. 14.2, site 5). When used together with a thiazide or 
a loop diuretic, potassium-sparing diuretics reduce or 
eliminate the excess urinary K+ loss.
Pharmacokinetics
All potassium-sparing diuretics are taken orally. Spi-
ronolactone is metabolised in the wall of the gut and 
the liver to canrenone, which has a longer half-life and 
is probably responsible for most of the diuretic effect. 
Eplerenone is metabolised predominantly in the liver 
and has a half-life of 3 to 5 hours. The onset of action of 
224	
SECTION 4  The Renal System
spironolactone and eplerenone is slow, starting after 1 
day and becoming maximal by 3 to 4 days, largely a con-
sequence of their transcriptional mechanism of action.
Triamterene is extensively metabolised in the liver, 
and tubular secretion of the sulfate ester metabolite 
is responsible for the diuretic action. Amiloride is 
secreted unchanged into the proximal renal tubule. 
The onset of action of both drugs is rapid.
Unwanted Effects
• Hyperkalaemia. This is more common in the pres-
ence of preexisting renal disease, in the elderly and 
during combination treatment with angiotensin-
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin 
II receptor antagonists (see Chapter 6). Retention of 
Mg2+ also occurs, in contrast to the loss of Mg2+ with 
thiazides and loop diuretics.
• Hyponatraemia. This is more common with ­thiazide/
amiloride combinations.
• Spironolactone has an antiandrogenic effect, a con-
sequence of its ability to bind to androgen receptors 
and prevent their interaction with dihydrotestoster-
one. This can cause gynaecomastia and impotence 
in males, and menstrual irregularities in women. 
The antiandrogenic effect is sometimes used in 
women to treat hirsutism (such as in polycystic 
ovary syndrome), male-pattern hair loss and acne. 
Eplerenone has greater aldosterone receptor selec-
tivity and does not have antiandrogenic actions.
• Gastrointestinal disturbances.
CARBONIC ANHYDRASE INHIBITORS
  Example
acetazolamide
Mechanism of Action and Uses
Acetazolamide inhibits carbonic anhydrase, an enzyme 
which is responsible for the small amount of active 
Na+ reabsorption in the proximal tubule in exchange 
for H+ secretion into the tubule (see Fig. 14.2, site 2). 
Acetazolamide increases HCO3
−, Na+ and K+ loss into 
tubular fluid, producing alkaline urine. H+ is retained 
in plasma, producing a mild acidosis. However, the fall 
in plasma HCO3
− concentration stimulates carbonic 
anhydrase activity, which rapidly leads to tolerance 
to the diuretic action of acetazolamide. The diuretic 
action of acetazolamide is therefore weak and not clin-
ically useful. Acetazolamide has a role in prevention 
and treatment of altitude sickness (discussed later) and 
in glaucoma (see Chapter 50).
Pharmacokinetics
Acetazolamide is secreted into the proximal renal 
tubule by organic anion transporters (OATs) and 
works at the luminal surface of the proximal tubule. It 
is eliminated unchanged in the urine.
Unwanted Effects
• Nausea, vomiting, anorexia, taste disturbance.
• Paraesthesia, dizziness, fatigue, irritability, ataxia, 
depression.
• Hypokalaemia (see the discussion on loop diuretics 
for mechanisms).
OSMOTIC DIURETIC
  Example
mannitol
Mechanism of Action and Uses
Mannitol is a polyol (sugar alcohol) with a low molec-
ular weight that is filtered at the glomerulus but not 
reabsorbed from the renal tubule. It exerts osmotic 
activity within the proximal convoluted tubule and 
the descending limb of the loop of Henle, which lim-
its passive tubular reabsorption of water. Water loss 
produced by mannitol is accompanied by a variable 
natriuresis.
Mannitol can be used in the management of raised 
intracranial pressure. Initially, the osmotic action of 
mannitol produces an expansion of plasma and extra-
cellular fluid volume, reducing blood viscosity and 
improving cerebral blood flow. Mannitol does not 
readily cross the blood–brain barrier, and therefore, 
provided the blood–brain barrier is largely intact, it 
establishes a concentration gradient between plasma 
and brain tissue. The resulting flow of water from 
brain into plasma reduces brain volume and intra-
cranial pressure. Subsequently, the osmotic diuresis 
causes volume contraction and hypernatraemia, which 
also promotes dehydration of brain tissue.
Pharmacokinetics
Mannitol is given by intravenous infusion and is 
excreted unchanged at the glomerulus. It has a half-
life of 2 hours, which is substantially increased in renal 
impairment.
Unwanted Effects
• Initial expansion of plasma volume can precipitate 
oedema and heart failure (particularly in the context 
of significant renal impairment, when it should be 
avoided).
• Subsequently, hypovolaemia, hypotension and 
hypernatraemia can occur due to osmotic diuresis.
• Urinary K+ loss can lead to hypokalaemia (see the 
discussion on loop diuretics).
MANAGEMENT OF DIURETIC-INDUCED 
HYPOKALAEMIA
A modest reduction in plasma K+ concentration is 
common during treatment with loop or thiazide 
diuretics. Marked hypokalaemia (below 3.0 mmol/L) 
predisposes to cardiac rhythm disturbances (including 
	
	
Diuretics  CHAPTER 14	
225
ventricular arrhythmias), particularly in the presence 
of acute myocardial ischaemia, during treatment with 
digoxin (see Chapter 7), or with antiarrhythmic agents 
that prolong the Q–T interval on the electrocardiogram 
(see Chapter 8). It may also precipitate encephalopathy 
in people with liver failure. The risk of hypokalaemia 
is greatest with:
• thiazide diuretics rather than loop diuretics, because 
of their longer duration of action;
• low oral intake of K+;
• high doses of diuretic;
• hyperaldosteronism, for example in hepatic cirrho-
sis or nephrotic syndrome.
The addition of a potassium-sparing diuretic will 
prevent and treat diuretic-induced hypokalaemia, but 
it is unnecessary to routinely prescribe a potassium-
sparing diuretic with a thiazide or loop diuretic. A 
pragmatic approach is to use combination treatment 
for those at high risk for hypokalaemia, or those who 
develop significant hypokalaemia during regular 
diuretic treatment.
Oral K+ supplements should not be given to prevent 
hypokalaemia but can be used to correct hypokalae-
mia. They are less effective than a potassium-sparing 
diuretic unless used in large quantities (>30  mmol 
daily), which often cause gastric irritation. Modified-
release tablets and effervescent formulations of K+ are 
available to improve tolerability. Oral K+ supplements 
should not be used together with potassium-sparing 
diuretics.
Intravenous K+ replacement is rarely needed unless 
there is severe K+ depletion. Rapid intravenous admin-
istration of K+ can produce potentially lethal hyperka-
laemia (provoking asystole), and a maximum infusion 
rate of 10 mmol/hour is recommended for K+ replace-
ment. Continuous ECG monitoring and hourly mea-
surement of the plasma K+ concentration is advisable 
if a high infusion rate is necessary. Hypomagnesaemia 
often coexists with diuretic-induced hypokalaemia 
and it is usually impossible to correct the hypokalae-
mia unless the serum Mg2+ is corrected first with either 
intravenous magnesium sulfate or an oral preparation 
such as magnesium-l-aspartate.
MAJOR USES OF DIURETICS
Diuretics can be used to treat a number of conditions.
Diuretics for Treatment of Oedema in Heart 
Failure, Nephrotic Syndrome and Hepatic 
Cirrhosis
Oedema in heart failure is discussed in Chapter 7. Spi-
ronolactone and eplerenone play an important role in 
heart failure as they are the only diuretics that improve 
prognosis.
For nephrotic syndrome a loop diuretic is usu-
ally used. Modest doses of a loop diuretic provide a 
near-maximal response if renal function is normal, 
but large doses are sometimes necessary if there is 
renal impairment. Once the glomerular filtration rate 
(GFR) falls below 10 mL/min, then the effect of a loop 
diuretic is minimal.
Spironolactone is the diuretic of choice in ascites 
associated with liver disease, due to the marked sec-
ondary hyperaldosteronism. It is also important to 
avoid hypokalaemia, which can precipitate hepatic 
encephalopathy. A loop diuretic can be added to a high 
dose of spironolactone if the loss of fluid is inadequate 
(see Chapter 36).
Management of oedema resistant to diuretics
Resistance to loop diuretics can result from several 
mechanisms:
• reduced GFR due to low perfusion or abnormal glo-
merular haemodynamics;
• postdiuretic effect with avid proximal tubular reab-
sorption of Na+ after the effect of the diuretic has 
worn off;
• ‘braking phenomenon’ due to upregulation of the 
Na+/K+/2Cl− co-transporters in the loop of Henle;
• rebound Na+ retention in the distal renal tubule due 
to renin-aldosterone system activation;
• tolerance with long-term diuretic use due to hyper-
trophy of epithelial cells of the cortical collecting 
duct, which increases Na+ reabsorption at this site.
There are various strategies that can be considered if 
fluid retention is resistant to oral furosemide:
• Salt restriction and avoidance of salt-retaining 
drugs, such as nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDS; see Chapter 29). Water restriction may 
be necessary if there is dilutional hyponatraemia 
as raising the serum Na+ concentration improves 
diuretic responsiveness.
• Divided oral doses of a loop diuretic can be used 
to give more prolonged drug delivery to the kid-
ney. This also reduces postdiuretic rebound Na+ 
retention.
• Oral bumetanide can be used rather than furose-
mide because of its more consistent oral absorption.
• A loop diuretic can be given by continuous intra-
venous infusion to cause sustained natriuresis and 
diuresis. Slow intravenous infusion of higher drug 
doses will also help avoid ototoxicity.
• The addition of a thiazide or related diuretic to a 
loop diuretic. Sequential inhibition of tubular Na+ 
reabsorption can produce a dramatic diuresis and 
natriuresis. However, hyponatraemia, hypokalae-
mia, hypovolaemia and renal impairment are all 
more frequent with such combinations.
• Secondary hyperaldosteronism can develop with 
high doses of a loop diuretic, and the addition of 
spironolactone can be particularly useful.
Diuretics for Treatment of Hypertension
Low doses of a thiazide or related diuretic are usually 
used for treatment of hypertension for their vasodila-
tor action, rather than the diuretic effect. Spironolactone 
226	
SECTION 4  The Renal System
can be added for treatment of resistant hypertension. A 
loop diuretic is used instead of a thiazide diuretic for 
drug-resistant hypertension as there is often expansion 
of plasma volume. Loop diuretics are also more effective 
than thiazides when there is renal impairment (espe-
cially a GFR below 20 mL/min). See also Chapter 6.
Diuretic Use in Hypercalciuria with Renal Stone 
Formation
Thiazides reduce urinary Ca2+ excretion and this can 
be exploited to prevent recurrence of Ca2+-containing 
kidney stones (usually calcium oxalate). Increased 
urinary Ca2+ excretion often occurs when the serum 
Ca2+ is normal (idiopathic hypercalciuria) and reflects 
abnormally high Ca2+ absorption from the gut. Thia-
zide diuretics are effective in conjunction with a low-
Na+ and low-protein diet for preventing further stone 
formation. High dietary Na+ enhances Ca2+ excretion 
in urine because less Ca2+ is reabsorbed in the proximal 
convoluted tubule.
Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitors for Glaucoma
Acetazolamide and other topical carbonic anhydrase 
inhibitors are used to reduce intraocular pressure in 
glaucoma (see Chapter 50). Tolerance does not occur to 
this effect, unlike the diuretic action.
Acetazolamide for Altitude Sickness
An unlicensed use for acetazolamide is the prevention 
and treatment of the symptoms of altitude sickness. 
This occurs when a person rapidly ascends to altitude 
before the body has acclimatised to the low inspired 
oxygen concentration. It produces headache, nausea, 
dizziness and fatigue. Symptoms are initially worse 
at night, with periodic breathing leading to disturbed 
sleep. Slow ascent to altitude is the most important 
way to prevent acute mountain sickness, and symp-
toms generally subside within 2 to 4 days. Acetazol-
amide works by inducing a mild metabolic acidosis 
that drives ventilation and should be taken for 2 days 
before ascending to altitude. It is continued for 3 days 
once the highest altitude is reached.
Mannitol for Acute Brain Injury
Osmotherapy with mannitol is used as a temporising 
measure in severe traumatic brain injury to reduce 
intracranial hypertension. Hypertonic sodium chlo-
ride is an alternative. There is no evidence that prophy-
lactic osmotherapy is beneficial, or that it exerts any 
effect beyond the acute control of intracranial pressure.
SELF-ASSESSMENT
TRUE/FALSE QUESTIONS
	 1.	 A fall in plasma K+ concentration can affect cardiac 
muscle function.
	 2.	 The main renal site of K+ loss in the urine is from 
the proximal convoluted tubule.
	 3.	 The Na+/K+-ATPase pump is only found on the 
basolateral membrane of the loop of Henle.
	 4.	 The thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle is 
impermeable to water.
	 5.	 The osmotic diuretic mannitol is poorly reabsorbed 
from the renal tubule.
	 6.	 Mannitol should not be given in heart failure.
	 7.	 The carbonic anhydrase inhibitor acetazolamide is 
used in the treatment of glaucoma.
	 8.	 All thiazide diuretics are shorter acting than loop 
diuretics.
	 9.	 Thiazide diuretics act by inhibiting Na+/Cl− co-
transport in the basolateral membrane.
10.	 Thiazide diuretics increase urinary Ca2+ excretion.
11.	 Thiazide diuretics may exacerbate diabetes mellitus.
12.	 Spironolactone and amiloride act by the same 
mechanism to reduce K+ loss.
13.	 Potassium-sparing diuretics and ACE inhibitors 
can cause a harmful interaction.
14.	 Thiazide or loop diuretics should not be given 
together with potassium-sparing diuretics.
15.	 NSAIDs reduce the response to diuretics.
ONE-BEST-ANSWER (OBA) QUESTIONS
1.	 What is the mechanism of action of triamterene?
A.	Antagonism of a cytosolic receptor.
B.	 Blockade of a Na+/K+/2Cl− co-transporter.
C.	Blockade of a selective Na+ channel.
D.	Blockade of a Na+/Cl− symporter.
E.	 Reduction in HCO3
− reabsorption.
2.	 Which is the most accurate statement about loop 
diuretics?
A.	They are useful in the treatment of acute pulmo-
nary oedema.
B.	 They should not be taken together with thiazides.
C.	They do not produce hypokalaemia.
D.	They increase the hypertonicity of the intersti-
tium in the medullary region.
E.	 They reduce the risk of ototoxicity with amino-
glycoside antibacterial drugs.
EXTENDED-MATCHING-ITEM QUESTION
Choose the most likely option (A–F) related to each of 
the case scenarios 1–3 below.
A.	Raised serum K+ concentration.
B.	 Lowered serum K+ concentration.
C.	Increased natriuresis.
D.	Reduced natriuresis.
E.	 Raised plasma glucose.
F.	 Lowered plasma glucose.
Case 1. A 58-year-old woman was taken to the ­emergency 
department with dyspnoea and bradycardia (40 
beats/min). She previously had a myocardial infarc-
tion and coronary stenting. She was taking the diuret-
ics bendroflumethiazide and eplerenone, and recently 
had her dose of the ACE inhibitor lisinopril increased.
Case 2. A 48-year-old man has been treated for 4 years 
with the thiazide-like diuretic chlortalidone for his 
	
	
Diuretics  CHAPTER 14	
227
hypertension and was seeking medical advice about 
his increased tiredness and lethargy.
Case 3. A 55-year-old man with congestive heart failure 
was treated with digoxin and lisinopril. Furosemide 
was added because of oedema and he subsequently 
complained of palpitations. He was admitted to 
hospital, and the electrocardiogram showed atrial 
tachycardia.
ANSWERS
TRUE/FALSE ANSWERS
	 1.	 True. Hypokalaemia can also affect brain and skel-
etal muscle function.
	 2.	 False. Much of the filtered K+ is reabsorbed in the 
proximal tubule and loop of Henle, and its loss 
into the urine occurs mainly in the collecting ducts.
	 3.	 False. The basolateral Na+/K+-ATPase pump is 
present throughout the renal tubule.
	 4.	 True. Impermeability to water, and the NKCC2 
transporter which co-transports Na+, K+ and Cl− 
ions from the lumen into the tubular cell in the 
thick ascending limb, together generate the hyper-
osmotic interstitium important in concentrating 
urine in the collecting duct.
	 5.	 True. The osmotic diuretic mannitol is retained 
within the tubule where its osmotic activity reduces 
passive reabsorption of water in the proximal tubule 
and descending limb of the loop of Henle.
	 6.	 True. By extracting water from intracellular com-
partments and expanding extracellular and intra-
vascular fluid volumes, mannitol can precipitate 
congestive heart failure and pulmonary oedema.
	 7.	 True. Acetazolamide reduces the formation of 
aqueous humour.
	 8.	 False. Some thiazide diuretics such as chlortalidone 
can produce a diuresis for 48 to 72 hours, whereas the 
action of most loop diuretics is relatively short-lived.
	 9.	 False. Thiazide diuretics act from within the renal 
tubular lumen on the thiazide-sensitive NCC on 
the luminal (apical) membrane.
10.	 False. Thiazide diuretics do not increase urinary 
Ca2+ excretion, unlike the loop diuretics.
11.	 True. Thiazide diuretics may exacerbate diabetes 
mellitus, probably through hypokalaemia reduc-
ing insulin release from pancreatic β-cells.
12.	 False. Amiloride blocks the tubular epithelial Na+ 
channel (ENaC) directly, whereas spironolactone 
competes with aldosterone at its mineralocorticoid 
receptor (MR), thus reducing the transcriptional 
expression of ENaC. The reduced Na+ reabsorp-
tion produced by either drug in the collecting duct 
reduces the loss of K+ into the urine.
13.	 True. ACE inhibitors, by reducing angiotensin-
induced aldosterone secretion, will reduce K+ 
excretion and hence increase plasma K+ concentra-
tion, particularly when combined with potassium-
sparing diuretics.
14.	 False. Thiazides and loop diuretics increase Na+ 
concentrations in the tubular fluid reaching the 
collecting duct; the excessive loss of K+ that results 
can be reduced by combining the thiazide or loop 
diuretic with a potassium-sparing diuretic.
15.	 True. NSAIDs inhibit prostaglandin E synthesis in 
the kidney and this reduces renal blood flow, lead-
ing to reduced natriuretic responses to thiazide 
and loop diuretics.
OBA ANSWERS
1.	 Answer C is correct. Triamterene is a potassium-
sparing diuretic that directly blocks a selective 
Na+ channel (ENaC) on the luminal membrane of 
tubule cells in the collecting duct. Answer A is the 
mechanism of action of aldosterone (mineralocor-
ticoid) receptor antagonists such as spironolactone. 
Answers B, D and E are the mechanisms of action of 
loop diuretics, thiazide-related drugs and carbonic 
anhydrase inhibitors, respectively.
2.	 Answer A is the most accurate.
A.	Correct. Loop diuretics are widely used in the 
control of oedema in heart failure for the elimina-
tion of excessive salt and water load. The direct 
venodilator activity of furosemide after intrave-
nous injection reduces central blood volume.
B.	 Incorrect. A thiazide diuretic can be added to a 
loop diuretic to act sequentially at different sites 
in the nephron, thus producing a marked natri-
uresis and diuresis.
C.	Incorrect. Delivery of greater concentrations of 
Na+ to the collecting ducts increases the exchange 
for K+ at that site, thus increasing K+ loss.
D.	Incorrect. By inhibiting the Na+/K+/2Cl− co-
transporter (NKCC2), the medullary interstitial 
hypertonicity falls and this reduces the reabsorp-
tion of water in the collecting ducts (in the pres-
ence of ADH).
E.	 Incorrect. Loop diuretics alone can cause ototox-
icity (especially at high doses or in renal impair-
ment), and also when taken with other ototoxic 
drugs such as aminoglycosides.
EXTENDED-MATCHING-ITEM ANSWERS
Case 1. Answer A. The combination of a potassium-
sparing diuretic (eplerenone) and an ACE inhibitor 
(lisinopril) may have reduced renal K+ excretion, 
causing hyperkalaemia, and this may have been the 
cause of the profound bradycardia. Bradycardia is 
a feature of severe hyperkalaemia, which requires 
emergency treatment.
Case 2. Answer E. Thiazide-like diuretics can worsen in-
sulin resistance, resulting in an increased plasma glu-
cose concentration within weeks. In the longer term, 
there is a small increase in the risk of diabetes mellitus.
Case 3. Answer B. The loop diuretic may cause hypo-
kalaemia. This enhances the toxicity of digoxin, re-
sulting in arrhythmias.
228	
SECTION 4  The Renal System
FURTHER READING
Asmar, A., Mohandas, R., Wingo, C.S., 2012. A physiologic-based 
approach to the treatment of a patient with hypokalaemia. 
Am. J. Kidney Dis. 60, 492–497.
Ellison, D.H., 2019. Clinical pharmacology in diuretic use. Clin. 
J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 14, 1248–1257.
Ellison, D.H., Felker, G.M., 2017. Diuretic treatment in heart 
failure. N. Engl. J. Med. 377, 1964–1975.
Roush, G.C., Kaur, R., Ernst, M.E., 2014. Diuretics: a review and 
update. J. Cardiovasc. Pharmacol. Ther. 19, 5–13.
ter Maaten, J.M., Valente, M.A.E., Damman, K., et  al., 2015. 
Diuretic response in acute heart failure—pathophysiology, 
evaluation and therapy. Nat. Rev. Cardiol. 12, 184–192.
Whittaker, C.F., Miklich, M.A., Patel, R.S., Fink, J.C., 2018. 
Medication safety principles and practice in CKD. Clin. J. 
Am. Soc. Nephrol. 13, 1738–1746.
Compendium of Diuretic Drugs.
DRUG
CHARACTERISTICS
Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitor
Acetazolamide
Little clinical value as a diuretic due to rapid tolerance; used orally in glaucoma (see 
­Chapter 50) and in altitude sickness.
Osmotic Diuretic
Mannitol
Given by rapid intravenous infusion in cerebral oedema; not used in heart failure or renal 
failure due to expansion of extracellular volume
Loop Diuretics
Used for heart failure and oedema, and oliguria due to renal failure.
Bumetanide
Given orally or by intravenous or intramuscular injection.
Furosemide
Given orally or by intravenous or intramuscular injection.
Torasemide
Given orally. Known as torsemide in the USA; little used in the UK.
Thiazide and Related Diuretics
Given orally; used for heart failure, oedema and, in lower doses, hypertension.
Bendroflumethiazide
Complete absorption from gut; 30% excreted in urine unchanged.
Chlortalidone
Thiazide-like diuretic with long half-life (50–90 h)
Hydrochlorothiazide
Now used in the UK only in combined formulations with an ACE inhibitor, an angiotensin II 
receptor antagonist, or with other antihypertensive drugs (see BNF), but available as a 
single formulation in continental Europe.
Indapamide
Thiazide-like diuretic.
Metolazone
Thiazide-like diuretic; effective even in advanced renal failure.
Xipamide
Thiazide-like diuretic.
Potassium-Sparing Diuretics
Given orally; used for prevention of diuretic-induced hypokalaemia, hyperaldosteronism and ascites associated with liver cirrhosis.
Amiloride
Potassium-sparing diuretic used in combination with thiazides and loop diuretics to 
conserve K+.
Eplerenone
Aldosterone antagonist with greater selectivity than spironolactone for mineralocorticoid 
receptor; reduced antiandrogenic effects; used in heart failure.
Spironolactone
Aldosterone antagonist used in primary hyperaldosteronism (Conn’s syndrome), liver 
­cirrhosis (ascites), acne, female hirsutism. Active metabolite (canrenone).
Triamterene
Potassium-sparing diuretic used in combination with thiazides and loop diuretics to 
conserve K+.
ACE, Angiotensin-converting enzyme; BNF, British National Formulary.
229
15
Disorders of Micturition
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF MICTURITION
The urinary bladder is surrounded by a smooth muscle 
called the detrusor muscle, which relaxes to allow blad-
der filling up to 500 to 600 mL. The detrusor contracts 
in response to stimulation by the parasympathetic ner-
vous system (via muscarinic M3 receptors), which emp-
ties the urine contained in the bladder into the urethra. 
Sympathetic nervous system tone inhibits contraction 
of the detrusor (via β2- and β3-adrenoceptors). There is 
a smaller muscle, the trigone, between the ureteric ori-
fices and bladder neck. The trigone is particularly sen-
sitive to stretch and has an important role in the reflex 
that initiates bladder emptying.
The urethra has several mechanisms that aid con-
tinence and prevent the involuntary leakage of urine. 
The submucosal layer of the urethra is a highly vascular 
tissue that creates a ‘washer’ effect when compressed. 
The urethra is surrounded by an external urethral 
sphincter of skeletal muscle that is innervated by the 
pudendal nerve and is under voluntary control. Addi-
tional smooth muscle bundles pass either side of the 
urethra to form the internal urethral sphincter, which 
is constricted by sympathetic nervous stimulation (via 
α1A- and to a lesser extent α1B-adrenoceptor subtypes). 
Pelvic floor muscles also support and compress the ure-
thra when abdominal pressure increases, particularly 
in women. The internal and external urethral sphinc-
ters combine with the pelvic floor muscles to constrict 
the urethra, which prevents bladder emptying and 
maintains continence by keeping the urethral closure 
pressure above the pressure in the bladder (Fig. 15.1). 
The coordination of bladder filling, maintaining conti-
nence and bladder emptying is a complex process.
Chapter Outline
Pathophysiology of Micturition  229
Disorders of Micturition  230
Overactive Bladder and Urge Urinary  
Incontinence   230
Drugs for Treatment of Overactive Bladder   230
Management of Overactive Bladder  231
Hypotonic Bladder  231
Urethral Sphincter Incompetence  231
Lower Urinary Tract Symptoms in Men 
and Benign Prostate Enlargement   232
Drugs for Benign Prostate Enlargement  232
Treatment of Lower Urinary Tract Symptoms 
with Benign Prostate Enlargement  233
Self-Assessment  233
Answers  234
Further Reading  234
Compendium of Drugs Used to Treat Disorders  
of Micturition  234
During bladder filling (storage phase), sympathetic 
nervous system stimulation relaxes the detrusor mus-
cle and contracts the smooth muscle of the internal 
urethral sphincter. Voluntary stimulation of the stri-
ated muscle of the external urethral sphincter, aided 
by pelvic muscle control, contributes to maintenance 
of continence. The urge to micturate occurs in adults 
at a bladder volume of 200 to 300 mL when the signals 
from stretch receptors in the bladder reach a frequency 
to initiate reflex bladder contraction. Higher centres 
can then inhibit the micturition reflex.
Bladder emptying (voiding phase) is initiated by 
myogenic stretch receptor activity produced by dis-
tention of the trigone and by sensory signals from 
the urothelium (the epithelial cell lining of the blad-
der). Release of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) from 
the urothelium stimulates P2X purinoceptors which, 
together with other modulators of bladder recep-
tor activity, initiate sensory impulses in the afferent 
nerves. Conscious sensations of bladder fullness are 
processed by the cerebral cortex, which then sends 
signals to the micturition centre when it is appropri-
ate to empty the bladder. The pontine micturition cen-
tre initiates activity in efferent motor pathways to the 
detrusor muscle, producing bladder contraction and 
voiding. At the same time, stimulation of muscarinic 
M2 receptors on presynaptic nerve terminals opposes 
the effects of sympathetic activity on the bladder. 
Non–cholinergic-mediated efferent impulses (ATP 
neurotransmission acting via P2X purinoceptors) also 
contribute to bladder contraction and this component 
becomes more prominent in overactive bladders. Con-
traction of the detrusor is coordinated with inhibition 
of the tonic control of the urethral sphincters, thus 
230	
SECTION 4  The Renal System
relaxing the bladder outflow tract. Bladder emptying 
may be augmented by contraction of the diaphragm 
and abdominal muscles.
DISORDERS OF MICTURITION
Disorders of micturition can arise from a disturbance 
of bladder function or from abnormalities affecting 
the bladder outflow tract and urethra. They produce 
a constellation of symptoms known as lower urinary 
tract symptoms (LUTS; see Fig. 15.1). When someone 
presents with LUTS, it is important to consider revers-
ible contributory factors such as urinary tract infection, 
use of diuretics (which increase urinary flow rates), use 
of α1-adrenoceptor antagonists for treatment of hyper-
tension (which affect bladder neck function), and stool 
impaction (which inhibits sacral parasympathetic 
neurotransmission).
Urinary incontinence is the involuntary leakage 
of urine. This affects up to 50% of women older than 
20 years and becomes more common with increas-
ing age in both women and men. There are four main 
types of urinary incontinence:
• Urge urinary incontinence or overactive bladder.
• Stress urinary incontinence due to urethral sphinc-
ter incompetence.
• Mixed urinary incontinence (both stress and urge 
urinary incontinence).
• Overflow incontinence with continuous urine leak-
age. This results from hypotonic bladder or bladder 
outlet obstruction, both of which produce urinary 
retention.
Fig. 15.1  Aspects of the bladder/prostate structures and the innervation involved in the micturition reflex. 
Bladder filling provides neuronal signals to the micturition centre via sensory input from purinoceptors on neurons in the 
urothelium. To accommodate filling and continence, sympathetic stimulation both relaxes the smooth muscle of the blad-
der via β2- and β3-adrenoceptors and stimulates sphincter mechanisms through α1-adrenoceptor subtypes. Somatic 
control of the external sphincter also aids continence. Voluntary urination involves parasympathetic stimulation of bladder 
smooth muscle through M3 and M2 muscarinic receptor subtypes (M), and inhibition of the sympathetic and somatic out-
flow. Aspects of bladder control may involve other less understood transmitter substances. For example, γ-aminobutyric 
acid (GABA) interneurons inhibit bladder contraction. ATP, Adenosine triphosphate; P2X, purinergic receptors.
Pontine micturition
centre
Hypogastric (sympathetic)
Sensory pathways from urothelium
L2–T4
S2–S4
Pelvic (parasympathetic)
Pudendal (somatic)
Cerebral cortex
ATP stimulates
sensory neurons (P2X)
Bladder
Detrusor
Internal sphincter
(
1-adrenoceptor)
Prostate
Urethral (external)
sphincter (voluntary)
Urethra
3
M
M
OVERACTIVE BLADDER AND URGE URINARY 
INCONTINENCE
Detrusor instability produces uncontrolled bladder 
contractions during normal filling. ‘Overactive blad-
der’ is defined as urinary urgency (a sudden compel-
ling desire to urinate) with or without urge urinary 
incontinence (the associated involuntary leakage of 
urine). Other symptoms can include urinary frequency 
(the need to urinate many times) and nocturia (the 
need to urinate at night). Most cases of overactive 
bladder in women are idiopathic but probably have a 
neurogenic component, whereas in men, bladder out-
flow obstruction is the most common initiating factor 
(discussed later). Upper motor neuron lesions, such as 
those produced by stroke, spinal cord injuries or mul-
tiple sclerosis, can also produce an overactive bladder.
DRUGS FOR TREATMENT OF OVERACTIVE 
BLADDER
Increased understanding of the neural pathways 
involved in initiating micturition is opening up new 
avenues for drug therapy to augment the relatively 
ineffective treatments currently available.
Muscarinic Receptor Antagonists
  Examples
darifenacin, fesoterodine, oxybutynin, solifenacin, tolterodine, 
trospium
	
	
Disorders of Micturition  CHAPTER 15	
231
Oxybutynin is a selective antagonist of M1 and M3 
receptors and has additional weak muscle-relaxant 
properties through calcium channel blockade and local 
anaesthetic activity. It is rapidly absorbed from the gut 
and metabolised in the liver to an active metabolite. 
Oxybutynin has a short half-life (1–3 hours) and use of 
standard formulations can result in large fluctuations 
in plasma drug concentrations and increase the severity 
of unwanted effects. Modified-release and transdermal 
formulations prolong the duration of action. Oxybu-
tynin is lipophilic and crosses the blood–brain barrier, 
where it can produce sedation, insomnia, confusion 
and cognitive problems by M1 receptor blockade. M3 
receptor blockade in salivary glands causes dry mouth.
Tolterodine, fesoterodine and trospium are non-
selective muscarinic receptor antagonists with no 
additional properties. They are less lipophilic than 
oxybutynin and do not readily cross the blood–brain 
barrier, producing fewer cognitive unwanted effects. 
Both tolterodine and trospium have short half-lives. 
Tolterodine is better tolerated in a modified-release 
formulation.
Darifenacin and solifenacin are more selective 
antagonists of M3 receptors and also have fewer central 
nervous system actions than oxybutynin.
β3-Adrenoceptor Agonist
  Example
mirabegron
Stimulation of β3-adrenoceptors in the bladder trigone 
by mirabegron flattens and lengthens the bladder base, 
which facilitates urine storage. Mirabegron reduces 
symptoms of urinary frequency and urgency with effi-
cacy similar to that of muscarinic receptor antagonists. 
The main adverse effects are an increase in blood pres-
sure and heart rate, and mirabegron is contraindicated 
in people with severe hypertension.
MANAGEMENT OF OVERACTIVE BLADDER
First-line approaches to management include reduc-
tion in excessive fluid intake, weight loss, smoking 
cessation and behavioural training that includes pelvic 
floor muscle rehabilitation and suppression of urge. If 
this is not sufficient, then a muscarinic receptor antag-
onist is usually used. Transdermal delivery should be 
considered if oral treatment is poorly tolerated. Oxy-
butynin should not be given to frail older people with 
cognitive impairment. The need for continued use of 
muscarinic receptor antagonists should be reviewed 
after 6 months. Mirabegron is an option for those who 
fail to respond to muscarinic receptor antagonists, or 
who cannot tolerate them.
Oral desmopressin, a synthetic vasopressin (ADH) 
analogue (see Chapter 43), is sometimes helpful to 
reduce nocturia in overactive bladder syndrome. The 
nasal spray formulation is no longer licensed for this 
indication because of the risk of water intoxication.
Intravesical botulinum toxin type A (see Chapter 27) 
can be considered if conservative treatment is ineffec-
tive, but intermittent bladder catheterisation may be 
needed for urinary retention. Options for intractable 
symptoms include percutaneous sacral nerve stimula-
tion or surgery.
HYPOTONIC BLADDER
Hypotonic bladder is often a result of lower motor 
neuron lesions or can arise from bladder distension 
following chronic urinary retention. Hypotonic blad-
der leads to incomplete bladder emptying, with uri-
nary retention and overflow incontinence. Muscarinic 
receptor antagonists discussed previously and drugs 
with antimuscarinic properties (such as tricyclic anti-
depressants; see Chapter 22) make the symptoms 
worse.
Treatment depends on the cause.
• Chronic urinary retention is often caused by blad-
der outlet obstruction. If renal function is impaired, 
it should initially be managed by bladder catheteri-
sation. Correction of the underlying cause is the 
mainstay of treatment if a long-term urinary cath-
eter is to be avoided.
• Neurogenic problems usually require long-term 
bladder catheterisation.
URETHRAL SPHINCTER INCOMPETENCE
Urethral sphincter incompetence produces the clini-
cal syndrome of stress urinary incontinence (urine 
leakage with effort, exertion, sneezing or coughing). 
Urethral hypermobility is the usual pathology, and 
the most common cause in women is loss of col-
lagenous support in the pelvic floor or perineum 
resulting from trauma or hormonal changes. Inter-
nal urethral sphincter dysfunction is less common, 
arising from pelvic trauma, childbirth, radiation or 
following prostatectomy in males. Drugs such as 
α1-adrenoceptor antagonists can make stress incon-
tinence worse.
Pelvic floor muscle training for at least 8 to 12 weeks 
is the recommended treatment. Minimal access surgi-
cal sling procedures or colposuspension in women 
to provide urethral support are among the surgical 
options.
Drug therapy is limited and only recommended if 
surgical treatment is not suitable. In postmenopausal 
women, topical oestrogen (see Chapter 45) may be 
helpful. Oestrogen stimulates urethral mucosal pro-
liferation and enhances the internal urethral sphincter 
response to neural stimulation. Duloxetine is a sero-
tonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor (SNRI; 
see Chapter 22) that augments sympathetic nervous 
system activity. It relaxes the detrusor and enhances 
232	
SECTION 4  The Renal System
Selective α1-adrenoceptor antagonists such as doxa-
zosin inhibit contraction of hypertrophied smooth 
muscle in prostatic tissue and also the internal ure-
thral sphincter, without affecting the detrusor. Relax-
ation of these muscles improves both urine flow rate 
and symptoms of benign prostate enlargement. Tam-
sulosin and alfuzosin have modest selectivity for the 
α1A-adrenoceptor subtype in the smooth muscle of the 
prostate, but they can still cause postural hypotension 
by an effect on arterial smooth muscle. More informa-
tion about α1-adrenoceptor antagonists is found in 
Chapter 6.
5α-Reductase Inhibitors
  Examples
dutasteride, finasteride
Inhibition of 5α-reductase reduces the enzymatic con-
version of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone (DHT) 
in prostatic cells but does not affect circulating tes-
tosterone levels. DHT is involved in prostate growth, 
and inhibition of its production can reduce prostate 
volume by up to 30%. There are two isoenzymes of 
5α-reductase, both found in the prostate. Finasteride 
only inhibits the type 2 isoenzyme, whereas dutas-
teride inhibits both the types 1 and 2 isoenzymes. 
Despite the different patterns of isoenzyme inhibition, 
the efficacy of these drugs is similar.
Pharmacokinetics
Both finasteride and dutasteride are well absorbed 
after oral administration and eliminated by hepatic 
metabolism. Finasteride has a half-life of about 6 hours, 
whereas the half-life of dutasteride is extremely long, 
at about 4 weeks.
Unwanted effects
• Reduced libido.
• Erectile impotence or decreased ejaculation.
• Breast tenderness or enlargement.
• Reduction of the plasma concentration of prostate-
specific antigen by an average of 50%, which should 
be considered when screening for prostate cancer.
Plant Extracts
  Examples
saw palmetto plant extracts, β-sitosterol plant extract
Plant extracts are available over the counter but their 
composition is not standardised. There is little con-
vincing evidence that they are effective for symptoms 
of LUTS in benign prostate enlargement. It is uncer-
tain how they might work, but they may reduce the 
synthesis of DHT or inhibit expression of prostatic 
external urethral sphincter activity by increasing effer-
ent impulses in the motor neurons of the pudendal 
nerve when the bladder is placed under stress. Dulox-
etine significantly reduces the frequency of incon-
tinence episodes in about half of those treated. It is 
recommended for people who are averse to surgery or 
who are poor candidates for surgery.
LOWER URINARY TRACT SYMPTOMS IN MEN AND 
BENIGN PROSTATE ENLARGEMENT
LUTS is a broad term that refers to any combination 
of symptoms arising from the lower urinary tract, 
including urgency, frequency, hesitancy (trouble ini-
tiating urination), poor flow and terminal dribbling. 
Most LUTS in men are caused by prostatic hyper-
trophy; there are a large number of other possible 
causes including urethral stricture, prostate cancer 
and overactive bladder syndrome. Benign pros-
tate enlargement (also known as benign prostatic 
hypertrophy; BPH) usually produces mixed storage 
symptoms, voiding symptoms and postmicturition 
symptoms (Box 15.1). The storage symptoms result 
from functional changes in the detrusor. Isolated 
storage symptoms in men are usually due to overac-
tive bladder.
Symptoms of benign prostate enlargement are pres-
ent in more than 25% of men older than 60 years, and 
up to 70% of men older than 70 years. Left untreated, 
spontaneous improvement occurs or symptoms 
remain stable in up to half of those affected. Acute uri-
nary retention occurs at a rate of 1% to 2% per year. 
Scoring systems can reliably quantify the extent to 
which symptoms affect the quality of life and therefore 
guide treatment.
DRUGS FOR BENIGN PROSTATE ENLARGEMENT
Alpha1-Adrenoceptor Antagonists
  Examples
alfuzosin, doxazosin, tamsulosin
Box 15.1  Lower Urinary Tract Symptoms (LUTS).
VOIDING 
SYMPTOMS
POST-MICTURITION 
SYMPTOMS
STORAGE 
SYMPTOMS
Hesitancy
Slow stream
Intermittent 
stream
Straining to pass 
urine
Splitting or 
spraying of 
stream
Terminal dribbling
Feeling of 
incomplete 
bladder emptying
Urinary retention
Post-micturition 
dribble
Urgency
Frequency
Nocturia
Urgency 
incontinence
	
	
Disorders of Micturition  CHAPTER 15	
233
long-term consequences, although they produce fewer 
immediate postoperative complications.
SELF-ASSESSMENT
TRUE/FALSE QUESTIONS
1.	 Urinary bladder function is controlled by both vol-
untary and involuntary nervous pathways.
2.	 The antimuscarinic drug darifenacin causes urinary 
frequency and urge incontinence.
3.	 The antidepressant drug duloxetine can be used to 
treat stress incontinence.
4.	 Blockade of α1-adrenoceptors in the bladder neck 
smooth muscle improves urine flow rates.
5.	 Finasteride reduces prostate volume by blocking 
testosterone receptors.
EXTENDED-MATCHING-ITEM QUESTIONS
Choose the most appropriate pharmacological option 
A–E for each of the case scenarios (1–3) provided 
below.
A.	Tamsulosin
B.	 Finasteride
C.	Duloxetine
D.	Amitriptyline
E.	 Oxybutynin
1.	 A 50-year-old man with a 2-year history of difficulty 
in urinating and hesitancy was found to have benign 
prostate enlargement with a significantly enlarged 
prostate. He was given a 1-month trial of treatment 
with an α1-adrenoceptor antagonist, which did not 
improve his symptoms. He did not, at this stage, 
want to undergo surgery. What pharmacological 
treatment might be of benefit?
2.	 A 30-year-old woman with normal bladder function 
complained of difficulty in urination after being 
prescribed new medication for neuropathic pain. 
She was found to have urinary retention. What class 
of medicine could cause this effect?
3.	 A 60-year-old woman had severe urge incontinence. 
She urinated 16 to 20 times a day and had leakage 
two to three times a day and at night. What treat-
ment could she be given?
CASE-BASED QUESTION
A 65-year-old man developed progressive urinary 
problems over a 5-year period. He had difficulty pass-
ing urine and was getting up three times in the night to 
pass urine. A rectal examination by his general practi-
tioner (GP) showed an enlarged prostate. Ultrasound, 
flow tests and a normal prostate-specific antigen mea-
surement suggested benign prostate enlargement.
1.	 What pharmacological approaches to the treatment 
of benign prostate enlargement could be considered?
2.	 What are the unwanted effects of these treatments?
3.	 What are the possible outcomes of not giving 
treatment?
growth factors. Plant extracts are well tolerated, with 
unwanted effects mainly confined to gastrointestinal 
upset.
TREATMENT OF LOWER URINARY TRACT 
SYMPTOMS WITH BENIGN PROSTATE 
ENLARGEMENT
Many symptomatic individuals do not require or want 
treatment, and a policy of ‘watchful waiting’ will be 
appropriate.
Selective α1-adrenoceptor antagonists are the first-
choice drugs for improving symptoms and urinary 
flow rates. Symptoms improve within a few days, 
but maximum benefit may take several weeks. About 
two-thirds of those treated will respond, but selective 
α1-adrenoceptor antagonists do not reduce the risk of 
urinary retention or the subsequent need for surgery 
for prostatic enlargement.
5α-Reductase inhibitors usually take 6 months to 
improve LUTS, but the improvements are maintained. 
These drugs may be more effective with larger-volume 
prostates as they reduce prostatic volume by about 
25%. Unlike α1-adrenoceptor antagonists, 5α-reductase 
inhibitors reduce both the risk of urinary retention and 
the need for surgery.
Additional symptomatic benefit can be obtained 
from combining an α1-adrenoceptor antagonist with 
finasteride or dutasteride. If storage symptoms persist 
despite use of an α1-adrenoceptor antagonist, then a 
muscarinic receptor antagonist can be added. Tadalafil, 
a phosphodiesterase inhibitor used for erectile dys-
function (see Chapter 16), also marginally improves 
symptoms of LUTS and increases urinary flow rate 
in men with benign prostate enlargement. However, 
there does not appear to be additional benefit to add-
ing tadalafil to an α-blocker or 5α-reductase inhibitor. 
It may be an option for those with mild or moderate 
LUTS together with erectile dysfunction.
Surgical treatment is usually required for severe 
LUTS or for complications of prostatic enlargement 
(Box 15.2). Transurethral resection of the prostate 
improves symptoms in 70% to 90% of those treated. 
Long-term sequelae of this procedure include impo-
tence (5%–10%), retrograde ejaculation (80%–90%) and 
incontinence (<5%). Several less invasive procedures 
are now available, but they may be less successful 
for relieving symptoms and do not reduce the risk of 
Box 15.2  Indications for Surgery in Patients with 
Benign Prostate Enlargement.
Acute retention of urine
Chronic retention of urine
Recurrent urinary tract infection
Bladder stones
Renal impairment owing to benign prostatic hypertrophy
Large bladder diverticula
Severe symptoms
234	
SECTION 4  The Renal System
ANSWERS
TRUE/FALSE ANSWERS
1.	 True. Bladder function is controlled by involuntary 
parasympathetic and sympathetic innervation of 
the detrusor and sphincter muscles, and by volun-
tary control via the somatic nervous system.
2.	 False. Darifenacin blocks muscarinic receptors with 
some selectivity for the M3 subtype, inhibiting the 
parasympathetic effects on the detrusor muscle. It is 
used for treatment of overactive bladder.
3.	 True. Duloxetine inhibits the reuptake of serotonin 
and noradrenaline and increases the contractility of 
the urethral sphincters.
4.	 True. Selective antagonism by tamsulosin of the α1A-
adrenoceptor subtype in bladder smooth muscle 
may reduce unwanted vasodilator effects.
5.	 False. Finasteride and dutasteride block the con-
version of testosterone to DHT by inhibiting 
5α-reductase in the prostate.
EXTENDED-MATCHING-ITEM ANSWERS
1.	 Answer B. Finasteride inhibits the conversion of 
testosterone to DHT, which is a promoter of pros-
tatic cell growth. A reduction of up to 30% in pros-
tate size can be obtained. Symptomatic benefit may 
be increased if finasteride and an α1-adrenoceptor 
antagonist are given together.
2.	 Answer D. The tricyclic antidepressant amitripty-
line is also an antagonist at muscarinic receptors 
and may inhibit the micturition reflex.
3.	 Answer C. Duloxetine could be tried if the condition 
were caused by sphincter incompetence. Duloxetine 
increases the levels of noradrenaline and serotonin in 
the synapse and the activity of the motor neurons in 
the pudendal nerve. Pelvic floor exercises should also 
be suggested, as drug therapy is of limited benefit.
CASE-BASED ANSWERS
1.	 Drugs may be used in mild disease and while await-
ing a transurethral resection of the prostate. Selec-
tive α1-adrenoceptor antagonists increase urine 
flow to a limited extent but also decrease urgency, 
frequency and hesitancy. The 5α-reductase inhibitor 
finasteride slowly reduces prostate size.
2.	 α1-Adrenoceptor antagonists can cause postural 
hypotension, especially with the first dose. They 
cause dizziness and can interact with other drugs to 
lower blood pressure. Finasteride can reduce libido 
and cause impotence.
3.	 The outcome is variable; symptoms may not worsen 
appreciably for many years, but moderate symp-
toms can lead to a poor quality of life. Complica-
tions include urinary retention, incontinence and 
renal insufficiency owing to hydronephrosis.
FURTHER READING
Aoki, Y., Brown, H.W., Brubaker, L., et  al., 2017. Urinary 
incontinence in women. Nat. Rev. Dis. Primers. 3, 17042.
Madersbacher, S., Sampson, N., Culig, Z., 2019. Pathophysiology 
of benign prostatic hyperplasia and benign prostatic 
enlargement: a mini-review. Gerontology 65, 458–464.
Marinkovic, S.P., Rovner, E.S., Moldwin, R.M., et al., 2012. The 
management of overactive bladder syndrome. Br. Med. J. 344, 
e2365.
Myers, D.L., 2014. Female mixed urinary incontinence: a clinical 
review. J. Am. Med. Assoc. 311, 2007–2014.
Nygaard, I., 2010. Idiopathic urgency urinary incontinence. N. 
Engl. J. Med. 363, 1156–1162.
Rees, J., Bultitude, M., Challacombe, B., 2014. The management 
of lower urinary tract symptoms in men. BMJ 348, g3861.
Robinson, D., Cardozo, L., 2012. Antimuscarinic drugs to treat 
overactive bladder. BMJ 344, e2130.
Sanna, A.V., Wei, J.T., 2012. Benign prostatic hyperplasia and 
lower urinary tract symptoms. N. Engl. J. Med. 367, 248– 
257.
Weiss, J.P., Everaert, K., 2019. Management of nocturia and 
nocturnal polyuria. Urology 133S, 24–33.
Compendium of Drugs Used to Treat Disorders of Micturition.
DRUG
CHARACTERISTICS
Drugs for Urinary Retention
All drugs taken orally.
α1-Adrenoceptor Antagonists
Relax internal sphincter smooth muscle to improve urinary flow; may cause hypotension. See Chapter 6 for more information.
Alfuzosin
Similar to doxazosin but selectivity for α1A-adrenoceptors in the urinary tract; may 
reduce vasodilator effects at α1B- and α1D-adrenoceptors.
Doxazosin
May cause postural hypotension, especially with first dose.
Indoramin
Similar to doxazosin.
Prazosin
Similar to doxazosin.
Tamsulosin
Relatively selective for α1A-adrenoceptors in the urinary tract. Also available in 
combination with solifenacin (muscarinic M3 antagonist).
Terazosin
Similar to doxazosin.
	
	
Disorders of Micturition  CHAPTER 15	
235
DRUG
CHARACTERISTICS
Parasympathomimetic
Bethanechol
Muscarinic agonist increases bladder detrusor activity; largely superseded by bladder 
catheterisation.
5α-Reductase Inhibitors
Used as alternative to α1-adrenoceptor antagonists, particularly in men with benign prostate enlargement.
Dutasteride
Similar profile to finasteride but blocks 5α-reductase types 1 and 2. Very long half-life 
(3–5 weeks), requiring about 6 months to reach steady state. Also available in 
combination with tamsulosin.
Finasteride
Reduces prostate growth by blocking synthesis of dihydrotestosterone by 5α-reductase 
type 2.
Drugs for Urinary Frequency, Enuresis and Incontinence
All drugs taken orally.
Muscarinic Receptor Antagonists
Nonselective drugs given as extended-release or transdermal formulations may have fewer antimuscarinic effects. Newer drugs 
are selective for muscarinic receptor subtypes.
Darifenacin
Selective M3 receptor antagonist used for urinary frequency, urgency and incontinence.
Flavoxate
Nonselective muscarinic antagonist; fewer unwanted effects than oxybutynin, but also 
weaker clinical action
Fesoterodine
Nonselective muscarinic antagonist used for urinary frequency, urgency and 
incontinence; prodrug converted to an active metabolite of tolterodine.
Oxybutynin
Nonselective muscarinic antagonist used for urinary frequency, urgency and 
incontinence, and for nocturnal enuresis in children. Antimuscarinic side-effects at M1 
receptors in central nervous system limit the use of higher doses.
Propantheline
Quaternary amino compound; rarely used.
Propiverine
Nonselective muscarinic antagonist used for urinary frequency, urgency and 
incontinence.
Solifenacin
Selective M3 receptor antagonist used for urinary frequency, urgency and incontinence. 
Also available in combination with tamsulosin (α1A-adrenoceptor antagonist).
Tolterodine
Selective M2/M3 muscarinic antagonist used for urinary frequency, urgency and 
incontinence, and for nocturnal enuresis in children.
Trospium
Nonselective muscarinic antagonist used for urinary frequency, urgency and 
incontinence.
Serotonin and Noradrenaline Reuptake Inhibitor
Duloxetine
Used for moderate to severe stress incontinence in women.
β3-Adrenoceptor Agonist
Mirabegron
Used for overactive bladder syndrome in adults.
Compendium of Drugs Used to Treat Disorders of Micturition—cont’d.
236
16
Erectile Dysfunction
Chapter Outline
Physiology of Erection  236
Erectile Dysfunction  236
Drugs for Erectile Dysfunction  237
Oral Phosphodiesterase Inhibitors  237
Alprostadil  238
Management of Erectile Dysfunction  238
Premature Ejaculation  239
Self-Assessment  239
Answers  240
Further Reading  240
Compendium of Drugs Used to Treat Erectile 
Dysfunction and Premature Ejaculation  241
PHYSIOLOGY OF ERECTION
Achieving and maintaining an erection is a spinal 
reflex that involves a complex series of interactions 
among the central nervous system (CNS), the auto-
nomic nervous system and local mediators. Mechani-
cal stimulation produces erection with little input 
from the CNS. The CNS can initiate erection in the 
absence of direct mechanical stimulation, when psy-
chological, visual, olfactory, auditory and tactile 
stimuli are all important. Nocturnal erections mainly 
occur during rapid eye movement sleep, and are initi-
ated by brainstem activation. The primary innervation 
that initiates penile erection is the parasympathetic 
nervous system through the sacral plexus. There are 
several components involved in achieving full penile 
erection:
• Parasympathetic stimulation (via release of ace-
tylcholine) relaxes smooth muscle in the trabecu-
lar arteries supplying the vascular erectile tissues 
of the penis, the corpora cavernosa and to a lesser 
extent the corpus spongiosum. These tissues run 
the length of the penis and contain sinusoids that 
fill with blood (Fig. 16.1).
• Pressure rises within the corpora cavernosa as they 
become engorged and the sinusoids expand. The 
penis elongates and widens (tumescence).
• The rise in pressure in the sinusoids compresses the 
venous plexus and reduces venous outflow, thus 
enhancing the erection (the corporeal veno-occlu-
sive mechanism).
• The pudendal nerve (carrying parasympathetic 
innervation) stimulates the ischiocavernosus and 
bulbospongiosus muscles at the base of the penis. 
This further compresses the veins of the corpora cav-
ernosa against the tunica albuginea, reduces venous 
outflow from the penis and maintains full erection. 
Muscle fatigue eventually permits venous outflow 
and detumescence. Basal tone in the sympathetic 
nervous system produces vasoconstriction in the 
penile arteries and inhibits erection.
Many locally produced mediators are involved in 
achieving and maintaining an erection. Nitric oxide 
(NO) is crucial for the smooth muscle relaxation 
in penile arteries. It is synthesised by blood vessel 
endothelial cells and released in response to para-
sympathetic stimulation, and also generated from 
nonadrenergic noncholinergic nerves in the corpora 
cavernosa. NO generates intracellular cyclic guano-
sine monophosphate (cGMP), which activates pro-
tein kinase G and causes vasodilation. Cyclic GMP is 
degraded to GMP in the vascular smooth muscle by 
phosphodiesterase type 5 (PDE5; see Table 1.1), which 
terminates its effects. Inhibition of PDE5 is a primary 
target for the pharmacological treatment of erectile 
dysfunction (discussed later).
Other vasodilators are involved in penile vascular 
smooth muscle relaxation, including vasoactive intes-
tinal peptide (VIP), calcitonin gene-related peptide 
(CGRP) and prostaglandin E1, but their precise roles 
are less understood. Numerous CNS facilitatory medi-
ators have been identified, including dopamine, acetyl-
choline and a variety of peptides. These are involved in 
the psychological preparedness that is essential for an 
erection to occur.
ERECTILE DYSFUNCTION
Erectile dysfunction is defined as the consistent inabil-
ity to achieve or sustain an erection of sufficient rigid-
ity for sexual intercourse. It is a common problem, 
affecting up to 50% of adult men, with up to 10% over 
the age of 40 years having complete erectile dysfunc-
tion. Any disease process that affects penile neural 
supply, arterial inflow or venous outflow can pro-
duce erectile dysfunction. There is a physical cause 
in about 80% of cases (Box 16.1), but a psychological 
component often coexists. Psychogenic erectile dys-
function is more common in younger men. Drugs are 
	
	
Erectile Dysfunction  CHAPTER 16	
237
an important cause of erectile dysfunction, particu-
larly many antihypertensive, psychotropic and ‘recre-
ational’ drugs (including alcohol), which account for 
up to 25% of cases. Drugs can also affect libido and 
therefore arousal, or inhibit ejaculation in those who 
achieve an erection (Table 16.1).
DRUGS FOR ERECTILE DYSFUNCTION
ORAL PHOSPHODIESTERASE INHIBITORS
  Examples
avanafil, sildenafil, tadalafil, vardenafil
Mechanism of Action and Uses
Avanafil, sildenafil, tadalafil and vardenafil are orally 
active analogues of cGMP that selectively inhibit PDE5 
and inhibit degradation of cGMP generated by NO 
release in penile tissue. PDE5 is also found in lower 
concentrations in other vascular and visceral smooth 
muscles, and in skeletal muscle and platelets.
Sexual stimulation to initiate release of NO is essential 
for these drugs to produce an erection, and the drug will 
then prolong the vasodilator effect of NO on penile arterial 
smooth muscle. If an appropriate dose of the drug is used, 
about 60% of men with erectile dysfunction will achieve 
erections sufficient to permit intercourse. The response is 
often better if precipitating factors are also treated, such 
as depression or excess alcohol consumption.
Sildenafil and tadalafil are also used to treat pulmo-
nary hypertension (see Chapter 6).
Pharmacokinetics
The median time to onset of action is 30 to 45 minutes. 
The absorption of avanafil, sildenafil and vardenafil 
is delayed by a fatty meal, whereas the absorption of 
tadalafil is unaffected by food. All are eliminated by 
hepatic metabolism, mediated primarily by CYP3A4. 
Avanafil, sildenafil and vardenafil have durations of 
action from about 6 hours up to 8 or 12 hours. The 
elimination of tadalafil is slower and its duration of 
action is up to about 24 to 36 hours; therefore the tim-
ing of sexual activity in relation to drug intake is less 
relevant with this drug.
Unwanted Effects
• Dyspepsia, nausea, vomiting.
• Hypotension, dizziness, flushing, headache and 
nasal congestion from systemic vasodilation.
Fig. 16.1  Cross-section of the penis, showing structures involved in erection. This diagram shows only part of the 
rich nervous and vascular filling and drainage system in the penis. The left-hand side shows the situation in the flaccid 
penis, and the right-hand side shows the erect penis. The rising pressure during erection limits the venous outflow, thus 
maintaining the erection. The penis contains three cylinders of erectile tissue: two corpora cavernosa, and the corpus 
spongiosum, which contains the urethra. The cylinders of erectile tissue are divided into spaces known as sinusoids 
or lacunae, which are lined by vascular epithelium. The walls of these spaces are made up of thick bundles of smooth 
muscle cells within a framework of fibroblasts, collagen and elastin (trabeculae). The erectile tissues are supplied with 
blood from the cavernosal and helicine arteries, which drain into the sinusoidal spaces. Blood is drained from the sinu-
soidal spaces through emissary veins. The venules join together to form larger veins that drain into the deep dorsal vein 
or other veins at different parts of the penis. Arterial and sinusoid dilation is important for erection, while swelling is limited 
by the inelastic tunica albuginea.
Dilated drainage
veins
Flaccid state
Contracted arteries and
unengorged sinusoids
Erect state
Cavernosal
artery
Urethra
Corpus spongiosum
erectile tissue
Tunica albuginea
Corpus cavernosum erectile
tissue, smooth muscle bands
and connective tissue 
(trabeculae)
Expanded arteries and
engorged sinusoids
Compressed drainage
veins
Dorsal nerves
Deep dorsal vein
and arteries
Box 16.1  Common Causes of Erectile Dysfunction.
Diabetes mellitus
Vascular disease
Prostate surgery
Drugs and substance abuse (see Table 16.1)
Testosterone deficiency
Neurological disease (e.g. multiple sclerosis, Alzheimer’s 
disease, epilepsy)
Spinal cord injury
Psychological factors (20% as a primary cause; more 
commonly secondary to physical problems)
238	
SECTION 4  The Renal System
• Myalgia, back pain.
• PDE6 (involved in phototransduction in the eye) 
is inhibited by high doses of sildenafil, but less so 
by avanafil, tadalafil or vardenafil. PDE6 inhibition 
can cause visual disturbance (enhanced perception 
of bright lights, or a ‘blue halo’ effect) and raised 
intraocular pressure. Ischaemic optic neuropathy 
can cause sudden visual impairment.
• Priapism, a painful and sustained erection, is a rare 
consequence of PDE5 inhibitor use.
• Drug interactions: Oral PDE5 inhibitors should not 
be used together with nitrates or nicorandil (see 
Chapter 5), because of a synergistic effect on vascu-
lar NO with exaggerated vasodilator effects. Several 
antiviral drugs, such as saquinavir (see Table 2.7 and 
Chapter 51), inhibit the CYP3A4 isoenzyme that 
metabolises oral PDE5 inhibitors and can potentiate 
their effects.
ALPROSTADIL
Alprostadil is a synthetic prostaglandin E1 analogue. 
It vasodilates by acting on smooth muscle cell surface 
receptors to increase intracellular cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate (cAMP), which in turn reduces the 
intracellular Ca2+ concentration. Intracavernosal injec-
tion of alprostadil can enhance erections if penile arte-
rial flow is normal, such as occurs with neurogenic and 
psychogenic impotence. It should not be used if the 
person has bleeding tendencies and may be problem-
atic if there is poor manual dexterity or morbid obesity. 
The injection is made into the side of the penis directly 
into the corpus cavernosum. Local pain after injection 
is a common unwanted effect reported by one-third 
of users and can be reduced by the addition of a local 
anaesthetic such as procaine (see Chapter 18) to the 
injected fluid. Rapid local metabolism of alprostadil 
minimises unwanted systemic effects, but headache 
and dizziness can occur. Priapism is the most worrying 
complication which may require aspiration and lavage 
of the corpora cavernosa.
Alprostadil is also available as a cream for appli-
cation to the tip of the penis (formulated to enhance 
dermal penetration) or for intraurethral applica-
tion using a small pellet. These formulations are less 
effective than the injection. In responders, an erec-
tion develops within 30 minutes of local application 
of alprostadil and lasts for 1 to 2 hours. Alprostadil 
has uterine-stimulant activity, and when the cream or 
pellet is used, a condom is recommended if the partner 
is pregnant.
MANAGEMENT OF ERECTILE DYSFUNCTION
Initial management of erectile dysfunction involves 
assessment and treatment of any underlying psy-
chological cause or physical disease or, if possible, 
LOSS OF LIBIDO
ERECTILE DYSFUNCTION
EJACULATORY DYSFUNCTION
Antihypertensives
Beta-adrenoceptor antagonists
+
Alpha-adrenoceptor antagonists
+
Methyldopa
+
+
+
Thiazide diuretics
+
Psychotropic Drugs
Phenothiazines
+
+
+
Benzodiazepines
+
+
+
Tricyclic antidepressants
+
+
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
+
+
Other Prescription Drugs
Spironolactone
+
Digoxin
+
Cimetidine/ranitidine
+
+
Metoclopramide
+
+
Carbamazepine
+
+
Recreational Drugs
Alcohol
+
+
Marijuana
+
Cocaine
+
+
Amphetamines
+
+
+
Anabolic steroids
+
+
Table 16.1  Drugs That Commonly Cause Male Sexual Dysfunction.
	
	
Erectile Dysfunction  CHAPTER 16	
239
withdrawal of a causative drug. A psychogenic cause 
is most common in younger men and should be sus-
pected if nocturnal and early morning erections are 
maintained, or an erection can be achieved through 
masturbation. Causes and treatment options for per-
sistent organic erectile dysfunction include:
• Lifestyle changes such as exercise, stopping smok-
ing and weight loss which can be effective for mild 
dysfunction.
• Testosterone-replacement 
therapy 
for 
hypo­
gonadism (see Chapter 46), an uncommon cause­  
of impotence.
• Hyperprolactinaemia impairs erection and is most 
commonly caused by drug therapy (e.g. with phe-
nothiazines); it can be improved by oral dopamine 
agonists (see Chapter 43) if the cause cannot be 
treated.
• Herbal remedies are widely promoted but lack 
good-quality evidence to support their use. They 
include Panax ginseng (stimulates NO release), Butea 
superba (action unknown) and yohimbine (CNS pre-
synaptic α2-adrenoceptor agonist).
• An oral PDE5 inhibitor. Alprostadil is used as a 
second-line treatment if a PDE5 inhibitor is contra-
indicated or poorly tolerated.
• Mechanical aids, such as the vacuum constriction 
device, are usually advised for older people who do 
not respond to pharmacological treatment and do 
not wish to have surgery.
• Penile implants using a malleable or inflatable 
prosthesis.
PREMATURE EJACULATION
Premature ejaculation is orgasm with expulsion of 
semen following minimal penile stimulation. It is 
usually defined as ejaculation that occurs less than 1 
minute after the onset of stimulation or vaginal pen-
etration, and can produce significant psychological 
distress.
Ejaculation begins with emission of fluid from 
the ampullary vas deferens, seminal vesicles and 
prostate into the urethra under control of the sym-
pathetic nervous system. Expulsion of the resulting 
semen from the urethra is due to a spinal reflex that 
produces rhythmic urethral contractions through 
pudendal nerve stimulation of the bulbospongiosus 
muscle.
Dapoxetine is a short-acting selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) that prolongs intravagi-
nal latency time from less than a minute to an aver-
age of over 3 minutes. The mechanism of action is 
unclear but may involve increased serotonin in the 
brainstem, modulating pudendal nerve activity 
via descending pathways. Dapoxetine is taken ‘on 
demand’ 1 to 3 hours before sexual activity. The 
most common adverse effects are dizziness, head-
ache and nausea.
SELF-ASSESSMENT
TRUE/FALSE QUESTIONS
	 1.	 Sildenafil should not be taken by men already tak-
ing nitrates.
	 2.	 Sexual stimulation is a prerequisite for sildenafil to 
cause an erection.
	 3.	 Phosphodiesterase 5 (PDE5) is only found in the 
vasculature in the penis.
	 4.	 Increased parasympathetic outflow to the penis 
causes a failure of erection.
	 5.	 Erections caused by injected drugs such as alprosta-
dil are not easy to control.
	 6.	 Dapoxetine is a PDE5 inhibitor used for erectile 
dysfunction.
	 7.	 Diabetes can cause erectile dysfunction.
	 8.	 The durations of action of PDE5 inhibitors used for 
erectile dysfunction are similar.
	 9.	 PDE5 inhibitors inhibit the breakdown of cAMP.
10.	 Alprostadil reduces prostaglandin synthesis by 
inhibiting cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1).
ONE-BEST-ANSWER (OBA) QUESTIONS
1.	 Which class of drugs used in hypertension is associ-
ated with erectile dysfunction and/or loss of libido?
A.	ACE inhibitors
B.	 Angiotensin II receptor antagonists
C.	β-Adrenoceptor antagonists
D.	Calcium channel blockers
E.	 Potassium-sparing diuretics
2.	 Which statement concerning drug action and erec-
tile dysfunction is the least accurate?
A.	Alcohol can cause erectile and ejaculatory 
difficulties.
B.	 Cimetidine can exacerbate the potential for silde-
nafil to cause headache.
C.	Nicorandil is safe when taken together with tadalafil.
D.	Amitriptyline can cause impotence.
E.	 Sildenafil prevents the breakdown of cGMP.
CASE-BASED QUESTIONS
Mr J.A., aged 56 years, presented with erectile dys-
function of gradual onset over the last 2 to 3 years. 
He has type 2 diabetes mellitus and was hypertensive 
with a blood pressure of 160/105  mm Hg. He was 
being treated with enalapril and bendroflumethiazide. 
Mr J.A. also reported chest pain on strenuous exer-
tion that was relieved by rest. He has a family his-
tory of coronary artery disease, smokes 30 cigarettes a 
day and drinks 4 pints of beer each night. Investiga-
tion showed that he had hypercholesterolaemia and 
there were signs of peripheral arterial disease. Tests 
for liver function and testosterone were normal and 
no organic reason for the dysfunction was found. Mr 
J.A. also has recurrent heartburn, for which he is tak-
ing over-the-counter cimetidine on most days. It was 
decided not to prescribe a pharmacological agent for 
his erectile dysfunction at this stage, but a number of 
240	
SECTION 4  The Renal System
suggestions and recommendations were made. After 3 
months, during which time Mr J.A. followed the advice 
he was given, his blood pressure was near normal lim-
its and his cholesterol was lower. He was still regularly 
taking cimetidine. However, his erectile dysfunction 
persisted. Following discussions it was decided that 
Mr J.A. should try sildenafil.
1.	 Which of these factors could contribute to his erec-
tile dysfunction, and what recommendations would 
you suggest?
2.	 From his history, what precautions should be taken 
in prescribing sildenafil and what advice should Mr 
J.A. be given?
ANSWERS
TRUE/FALSE ANSWERS
	 1.	 True. Nitrates result in increased nitric oxide (NO) 
production and this elevates cGMP. Sildenafil also 
elevates cGMP by blocking its breakdown and 
the combination with nitrates can lead to additive 
unwanted effects – particularly hypotension.
	 2.	 True. Sildenafil and other PDE5 inhibitors prolong 
the vasodilator action of NO produced as a result 
of sexual stimulation.
	 3.	 False. PDE5 is found in some other blood vessels 
and tissues, which can result in unwanted effects 
when sildenafil is given, such as a ‘blue halo’ effect 
caused by inhibition of PDE6 in the retina.
	 4.	 False. Parasympathetic stimulation enhances erec-
tion, and drugs known to inhibit the parasympa-
thetic outflow (e.g. tricyclic antidepressants) can 
cause erectile failure.
	 5.	 True. Painful priapism with erections lasting many 
hours can occur with intracavernosal drugs.
	 6.	 False. Dapoxetine is a short-acting SSRI used for 
premature ejaculation.
	 7.	 True. Diabetes mellitus probably causes erectile 
problems through vascular dysfunction.
	 8.	 False. Tadalafil has a much longer biological half-
life than sildenafil, allowing it to be taken up to 36 
hours before sexual activity.
	 9.	 False. Sildenafil inhibits the breakdown of cGMP, 
not cAMP.
10.	 False. Alprostadil is a synthetic prostaglandin E1 
analogue, which vasodilates by increasing cAMP.
OBA ANSWERS
1.	 Answer C is correct. β-Adrenoceptor antagonists used 
in resistant hypertension and other cardiovascular 
conditions are associated with erectile dysfunction.
2.	 Answer C is the least accurate.
A.	True. Alcohol use is a recognised cause of erectile 
and ejaculatory dysfunction.
B.	 True. Cimetidine inhibits the isoenzyme CYP3A4 
that metabolises sildenafil, enhancing its vasodi-
lator effects, including headache.
C.	False. Nicorandil is a K+ channel opener (see 
Chapter 5) that also has a nitrate structure; this 
increases cGMP formation and would add to 
the effects of tadalafil, with the potential for in-
creased unwanted effects.
D.	True. Amitriptyline has antimuscarinic actions 
that could decrease blood vessel dilation in the 
penis, thereby inhibiting erection.
E.	 True. Blocking the breakdown of cGMP is the 
main mechanism of action of sildenafil, leading 
to vasodilation.
CASE-BASED ANSWERS
1.	 The contribution of psychological factors to Mr 
J.A.’s erectile dysfunction needs to be assessed and 
dealt with if they are present. Smoking and alco-
hol consumption may also contribute and Mr J.A. 
should be helped to manage these. Because of the 
evidence of peripheral arterial disease and coronary 
artery disease, which are known to be associated 
with erectile dysfunction, it would be advisable to 
be more intensive in treating his high blood pres-
sure and reducing his cholesterol levels. Although 
this is unlikely to restore erectile function, it may 
improve his well-being and have a psychological 
benefit. His ACE inhibitor is an appropriate antihy-
pertensive drug as he has type 2 diabetes mellitus, 
but thiazide diuretics such as bendroflumethiazide 
can contribute to erectile problems (see Table 16.1). 
Mr J.A.’s thiazide could be replaced with a calcium 
channel blocker, which have not been shown to con-
tribute to erectile dysfunction.
2.	 Cimetidine is an inhibitor of hepatic CYP3A4 
(see Table 2.7) that metabolises sildenafil, so the 
initial dose of sildenafil should be reduced or Mr 
J.A. could use ranitidine, which does not inhibit 
CYP3A4. However, all H2 receptor blockers are 
associated with erectile dysfunction and loss of 
libido, so a proton pump inhibitor might be prefera-
ble for his heartburn. Studies of sildenafil in patients 
with a history of cardiovascular disease have shown 
that the simultaneous use of nitrates is an absolute 
contraindication. Mr J.A. should be told about the 
dangers of drug interactions and possible unwanted 
effects.
FURTHER READING
European Association of Urology, 2014. Guidelines on male 
sexual dysfunction: erectile dysfunction and premature 
ejaculation. https://uroweb.org/wp-content/uploads/EAU- 
Guidelines-Male-Sexual-Dysfunction-2016-3.pdf.
Gur, S., Kadowitz, P.J., Sikka, S.C., 2016. Current therapies for 
premature ejaculation. Drug Discov. Today 21, 1147–1154.
Muneer, A., Kalsi, J., Nazareth, I., et al., 2014. Erectile dysfunction. 
BMJ 348, g129.
Shamloul, R., Ghanem, H., 2013. Erectile dysfunction. Lancet 
381, 153–165.
	
	
Erectile Dysfunction  CHAPTER 16	
241
DRUG
CHARACTERISTICS
Drugs Used for Erectile Dysfunction
All drugs for erectile dysfunction should be used with caution in people with cardiovascular disease.
Phosphodiesterase Type 5 Inhibitors
All the PDE5 inhibitors are given orally for erectile dysfunction. The time to onset of drug action is typically 30–60 minutes and 
the duration of action is typically 4–8 hours unless otherwise stated.
Avanafil
Rapid onset of action (15–30 min).
Sildenafil
Also used for pulmonary arterial hypertension (see Chapter 6).
Tadalafil
Long duration of action means tadalafil can be taken up to 24 h before 
sexual activity. Also used for pulmonary arterial hypertension (see 
Chapter 6).
Vardenafil
Usually taken within 30–60 minutes before sexual activity.
Other Drugs Used for Erectile Dysfunction
Alprostadil
Prostaglandin E1 analogue. Can cause priapism. Given by intracavernosal 
injection, dermal cream or urethral application. Very short half-life (30 s).
Aviptadil with phentolamine
Aviptadil (a vasoactive intestinal polypeptide) is a smooth muscle relaxant and 
phentolamine is an α1-adrenoceptor antagonist. Given by intracavernosal 
injection.
Drug for Premature Ejaculation
Dapoxetine
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor; may cause postural hypotension. 
Given orally 1–3 h before sexual activity.
Compendium of Drugs Used to Treat Erectile Dysfunction and Premature Ejaculation.
242
SECTION 5  The Nervous System
17
General Anaesthetics
General anaesthetics act in the brain to induce revers-
ible unconsciousness and amnesia. Other drugs are 
given to provide analgesia and, where necessary, skel-
etal muscle relaxation. This allows surgical or other 
painful procedures to be undertaken without the per-
son being aware. General anaesthesia was introduced 
into clinical practice in the 19th century with the inha-
lation of vapours such as diethyl ether and chloroform. 
Major drawbacks with such compounds included the 
time taken to cause loss of consciousness, slow recov-
ery, unpleasant taste, irritant properties and their 
potential to explode. Cardiac and hepatic toxicity also 
limited the usefulness of chloroform.
The ideal general anaesthetic would possess the 
properties shown in Box 17.1, but no single anaesthetic 
agent has all of these. Therefore, to produce general 
anaesthesia, it is usual to administer a combination of 
several drugs which contribute in different degrees to 
sedation, analgesia and muscle relaxation, an approach 
known as ‘balanced anaesthesia’ (Table 17.1). Full gen-
eral anaesthesia not only produces loss of conscious-
ness but also depresses brainstem reflexes with loss of 
spontaneous respiration and depression of heart rate 
and blood pressure, a state that is comparable to coma.
General anaesthesia for surgical procedures involves 
several steps, although not all are essential for success-
ful anaesthesia:
• premedication,
• induction,
• muscle relaxation and endotracheal intubation,
• maintenance of anaesthesia,
• analgesia,
• reversal.
Premedication with a benzodiazepine such as 
diazepam or midazolam (see Chapter 20) is offered 
in selected cases to attenuate preoperative anxiety. 
However, benzodiazepines can cause paradoxical 
agitation, so wherever possible the anxiety should be 
managed by nonpharmacological means.
Induction of general anaesthesia is usually achieved 
with a bolus of intravenous anaesthetic. Less com-
monly, but of value in children and adults with needle 
phobia, anaesthesia may be induced with an inhaled 
anaesthetic (gaseous induction). With this approach, 
in adults several stages of general anaesthesia are 
observed during induction (Table 17.2).
General anaesthesia is maintained with an infusion 
of intravenous anaesthetic, or with an inhaled anaes-
thetic introduced into the breathing circuit.
Full general anaesthesia produces depression of 
spontaneous respiration and blood pressure, requiring 
mechanical ventilation and perhaps circulatory sup-
port. Some short procedures do not need full general 
anaesthesia and can be carried out under sedation pro-
duced by an anaesthetic, with preserved respiratory 
and cardiovascular function.
A primary goal of successful anaesthesia is to avoid 
awareness during surgery (‘anaesthetic awareness’). 
The adequacy of general anaesthesia in this regard is 
assessed by monitoring the heart rate, blood pressure 
and other physiological functions. For example, it can 
be inferred that the level of anaesthesia is inadequate 
and that pain is being experienced if the heart rate rises, 
or the person develops perspiration, tearing (lacrima-
tion), return of muscle tone, movement, or pupillary 
dilatation. This may be augmented by electroencepha-
lographic (EEG) measurement of cerebral activity. Pro-
prietary devices have been developed to simplify the 
application of EEG in routine anaesthesia, by distilling 
the complex EEG waveforms into a numerical param-
eter that relates to the depth of anaesthesia (e.g. bispec-
tral index). The extent to which this augments clinical 
Chapter Outline
Mechanisms of Action of General Anaesthetics  243
Drugs Used in Anaesthesia  244
Intravenous Anaesthetics  244
Intravenous Opioids  246
Inhalational Anaesthetics  247
Self-Assessment  249
Answers  249
Further Reading  251
Compendium of General Anaesthetic Drugs  251
~
	
	
General Anaesthetics  CHAPTER 17	
243
Box 17.1  Properties of an Ideal Inhalational 
Anaesthetic.
Nonflammable and nonexplosive when mixed with air, 
oxygen or nitrous oxide
Minimal interactions with other drugs
Lack of unwanted effects on respiratory, cardiovascular 
and other systems
High lipid solubility, providing potency and allowing use of 
high inspired oxygen concentration
Inherent stability at room temperature in contact with 
soda lime (used in anaesthesia to absorb CO2), metals 
and plastic
Low blood solubility, allowing rapid induction and rapid 
emergence from anaesthesia, and rapid adjustment of 
the depth of anaesthesia
No hangover effects
Nontoxic, nonirritant to the airways, and no unpleasant 
taste or odour
Analgesic activity
Inexpensive; long shelf life; safe for operating theatre staff
(see Chapter 18) to provide regional analgesia, such as 
administration into the epidural space (epidural anal-
gesia) or infiltration around peripheral nerves.
At the end of an operation, resumption of conscious-
ness (reversal of anaesthesia) occurs when intravenous 
anaesthetics are redistributed or metabolised, or when 
inhalational anaesthetics are redistributed or exhaled. 
Residual neuromuscular blockade by competitive 
blocking agents may need reversal. Traditionally, this is 
achieved with an anticholinesterase such as neostigmine 
(see Chapter 27). Sugammadex is a selective relaxant-
binding agent, which forms a complex with steroidal 
competitive neuromuscular blocking drugs and prevents 
them interacting with the nicotinic N2 receptor. It pro-
duces more rapid and reliable reversal of rocuronium.
Attentiveness, and therefore the ability to drive 
safely, may be impaired for up to 24 hours after gen-
eral anaesthesia.
MECHANISMS OF ACTION OF GENERAL 
ANAESTHETICS
General anaesthesia can be produced by compounds 
of widely differing chemical structure: simple gases 
such as nitrous oxide, volatile liquids such as sevoflu-
rane and nonvolatile solids such as propofol (Fig. 17.1).
The strong relationship between lipid solubility 
and the potency of general anaesthetic drugs led to 
the Meyer–Overton hypothesis that they act by incor-
poration into neuronal cell membranes and disrup-
tion of their function. However, this does not account 
Table 17.1  The Concept of ‘Balanced Anaesthesia’.
SEDATION
ANALGESIA
MUSCLE RELAXATION
Drugs exerting a major effect
Intravenous anaesthetics
Opioids
Neuromuscular blocking  
drugs (see Chapter 27)
Inhalational anaesthetics
Local anaesthetics
Premedicant benzodiazepines
Drugs exerting a minor effect
Opioids
Nitrous oxide
Inhalational anaesthetics
Nitrous oxide
Drugs are used in combination to produce the appropriate balance of sedation, analgesia and muscle relaxation while minimising unwanted effects; at particular doses 
and concentrations, each contributes minor or major effects to achieve this balance. Excessive or inadequate doses of any one agent could disturb the balance.
judgement and reduces anaesthetic awareness remains 
a matter of debate.
In some forms of surgery, particularly abdominal 
and thoracic surgery, skeletal muscle tone can hinder 
surgical access and manipulation. Full skeletal muscle 
paralysis is produced in these cases by giving neuro-
muscular blocking drugs (see Chapter 27), in which 
case mechanical ventilation is also essential.
Analgesia can be provided by an intravenous opi-
oid for systemic analgesia, or by a local anaesthetic 
Table 17.2  The Stages of Anaesthesia.
STAGE
DESCRIPTION
EFFECTS PRODUCED
I
Analgesia
Analgesia without amnesia or loss of touch sensation; disorientation, but consciousness retained
II
Excitation
Excitation and delirium with struggling; coughing and vomiting may occur; respiration rapid 
and irregular; frequent eye movements with increased pupil diameter; amnesia
III
Surgical anaesthesia
Loss of consciousness; subdivided into four levels or planes of increasing depth:
Plane I: Decrease in eye movements and some pupillary constriction
Plane II: Loss of corneal reflex; increased tear secretion
Plane III: Increasing loss of laryngeal reflex; pupils dilated and light reflex lost
Plane IV: Progressive decrease in thoracic breathing and general muscle tone
IV
Medullary depression
Loss of spontaneous respiration and progressive depression of cardiovascular reflexes; 
requires respiratory and circulatory support
244	
SECTION 5  The Nervous System
Fig. 17.1  (A–C) Examples of general anaesthetics of different chemical 
natures.
F
C
C
O
C
H
F
F
Cl
F
F
H
Nitrous oxide (gas)
N2O
Isoflurane (organic liquid)
Propofol (oil in water emulsion)
CH(CH3)2
(CH3)2HC
OH
A
B
C
Table 17.3  Possible Sites of Action of Inhalation and 
Intravenous General Anaesthetics.
DRUG GROUP
PROPERTIES OF 
GROUP
RECEPTOR AND 
CHANNEL TARGETS
Etomidate, 
propofol, 
thiopental
Potent amnesics
Enhance activity at 
GABAA receptors
Potent sedatives
Weak muscle 
relaxants
Nitrous oxide, 
ketamine
Potent 
analgesics
Inhibit glutamate 
NMDA receptors
Weak sedatives
Inhibit ACh nicotinic 
receptors
Weak muscle 
relaxants
Open two-pore 
domain K+ 
channels
Sevoflurane, 
isoflurane, 
desflurane
Potent amnesics
Enhance activity at 
GABAA receptors
Potent sedatives
Dose-
dependent 
relaxation 
of skeletal 
muscle
Enhance activity at 
glycine receptors
Inhibit glutamate 
NMDA receptors
Inhibit ACh nicotinic 
receptors
Open two-pore K+ 
channels
ACh, Acetylcholine; GABA, γ-aminobutyric acid; NMDA, N-methyl-d-aspartate.
For further information see Solt K, Forman SA., 2007, in the Further Reading 
section.
for many of the properties of general anaesthetics; for 
example, the differing anaesthetic potencies of the ste-
reoisomers of some anaesthetic agents suggest stereo-
specific interaction with target receptors. The general 
relationship between lipid solubility and anaesthetic 
potency is important for determining pharmacoki-
netic access to the brain, but there is increasing evi-
dence for selective interactions of general anaesthetic 
drug molecules with lipophilic binding sites on the 
intramembrane portions of the ligand-gated ion chan-
nels that control neuronal activity in the central ner-
vous system (CNS) (Table 17.3). This may enhance the 
activity of inhibitory receptors, particularly GABAA 
receptors for γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), and mem-
bers of a family of two-pore domain potassium leak 
channels (K2P) that regulate the membrane resting 
potential. Other agents such as ketamine may act by 
inhibiting excitatory receptors, particularly N-methyl-
d-aspartate (NMDA) receptors for glutamate and gly-
cine, and nicotinic cholinergic receptors involved in 
wakefulness and arousal. These receptors are found 
in the cortex, thalamus, striatum and the brainstem.
The initial effect of a general anaesthetic is to 
decrease spontaneous neuronal firing in the cerebral 
cortex, which slows cortical oscillatory activity (rhyth-
mic, coordinated spontaneous firing). Anaesthetics 
reduce thalamic activity due to decreased excitatory 
cortico-thalamic feedback to the thalamus, which in 
turn may trigger a ‘thalamic consciousness switch’. 
Effects on connections between the basal ganglia and 
cortex also appear to be important in the mechanism 
of general anaesthesia. Numerous other complex 
neuronal pathways are involved in the maintenance 
of unconsciousness, and the effect of anaesthetics on 
functional integration among neuronal circuits is the 
subject of intensive research. The many types of intra-
venous and inhalational anaesthetic agents differ in 
the profile of their interactions with specific receptors, 
and they target different regions of the brain, which 
probably explains the differences in their capacities 
to produce unconsciousness, amnesia, analgesia and 
muscle relaxation.
The various stages of anaesthesia (see Table 17.2) 
probably arise as a result of the progressive effects of 
anaesthetic agents on different neurons. A rapid action 
on small neurons in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord 
(nociceptive impulses; see Chapter 19) and inhibitory 
cells in the brain (see the discussion on the effects of 
alcohol in Chapter 54) explains the early analgesic and 
excitation phases. By contrast, neurons of the medul-
lary integration centres are less sensitive.
DRUGS USED IN ANAESTHESIA
General anaesthetics are usually grouped according to 
their route of administration, which is typically intra-
venous or inhalational.
INTRAVENOUS ANAESTHETICS
  Examples
propofol, thiopental, ketamine, etomidate
Intravenous anaesthetics can be given by slow intrave-
nous injection for rapid induction of anaesthesia and 
	
	
General Anaesthetics  CHAPTER 17	
245
then replaced by inhalational anaesthetics for longer-
term maintenance of anaesthesia. Both propofol and 
ketamine, but not etomidate or thiopental, can also 
be given by continuous infusion without inhalational 
anaesthesia for short operations (total intravenous 
anaesthesia) or for prolonged sedation. Ketamine has 
several distinctive properties, detailed later, which 
restrict its suitability to selected cases. Notably, in con-
trast to most other anaesthetic agents, it has sympa-
thomimetic effects that may be advantageous in those 
with haemodynamic instability (e.g. emergency intu-
bation in trauma) or bronchospasm (e.g. acute severe 
asthma). Some properties of commonly used intrave-
nous anaesthetics are shown in Table 17.4.
Pharmacokinetics
In general, when given by injection or as a short infusion 
(up to a few hours), the clinical effects of intravenous 
anaesthetic agents are terminated by redistribution of 
drug from the central nervous system to muscle and 
adipose tissue. After prolonged infusion (e.g. in criti-
cal illness), however, adipose tissue becomes saturated 
and offset of effect depends on the rate of systemic 
clearance, counterbalanced by the rate at which the 
drug leaches from other tissue. This complex interplay 
of factors gives rise to a variable rate of clearance from 
the central compartment, termed the context-sensitive 
half-time (where ‘context’ refers to the duration of 
infusion). A useful guiding principle is that the longer 
the duration of infusion, the longer it will take for the 
drug to be cleared.
Thiopental is a thiobarbiturate that has a very rapid 
onset of action (within 30 seconds), owing to its high 
lipid solubility and ease of passage across the blood–
brain barrier. The duration of action after a bolus dose 
is very short (about 2–5 minutes) and blood concentra-
tions fall rapidly, initially because of distribution into 
lean muscle tissue (because of its high blood flow). 
With continuous infusion, distribution occurs more 
slowly into adipose tissue, which has poor blood flow 
(Fig. 17.2). With thiopental, total intravenous anaesthe-
sia is not practicable, as during a lengthy procedure 
the brain and blood and slowly equilibrating tissues 
would reach equilibrium. Recovery from anaesthe-
sia on cessation of anaesthetic administration would 
then depend on the elimination half-life of thiopental 
(3–8 hours due to hepatic metabolism), not the distri-
bution half-life (about 3 minutes). Therefore, following 
induction of anaesthesia with thiopental, an inhala-
tional agent is used for maintenance of anaesthesia.
Propofol is a lipophilic agent that is insoluble in 
water. It is formulated as an oil-in-water emulsion 
which can cause pain during injection. It has a slightly 
Table 17.4  Properties of Some Common Intravenous Anaesthetics.
DRUG
TYPE
SPEED OF 
INDUCTION
RECOVERY
HANGOVER 
EFFECT
ANALGESIC
COMMENT
Thiopental
Barbiturate
Rapid
Slow
Yes
No
Causes tissue necrosis if extravasation at 
the site of injection; cannot be given by 
continuous infusion due to accumulation
Propofol
Phenol
Rapid
Rapid
Low
No
Does not accumulate; continuous infusion can 
be used for total intravenous anaesthesia or 
for sedation of adults in intensive care
Etomidate
Imidazole
Rapid
Fairly 
rapid
Low
No
Not infused continuously, because repeated 
doses suppress adrenocortical function
Ketamine
Cyclohex-
anone
Slower
Slower
No
Yes
Can be given by continuous infusion; produces 
analgesia that outlasts anaesthesia; usually 
used for children
Fig. 17.2  The amounts of thiopental in blood, brain (and other rap-
idly equilibrating tissues), muscle and adipose tissue (and other slowly 
equilibrating tissues) after an intravenous infusion over 10 seconds. 
Note: The time axis is not linear. The continued uptake into muscle 
between 1 and 30 minutes lowers the concentrations in the blood and 
in all rapidly equilibrating tissues, including the brain, hence terminating 
its anaesthetic action by distribution within minutes.
30
1
1
0
0.5
24
Min
Min
Hours
Blood
Brain and rapidly equilibrating tissues
Muscle
Fat and slowly equilibrating tissues
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Dose (%)
246	
SECTION 5  The Nervous System
slower onset of action (about 30 seconds) compared 
with thiopental, but its duration of action is similarly 
limited by redistribution (distribution half-life 2–8 min-
utes) after a bolus dose. It can be given as an infusion 
for total intravenous anaesthesia (TIVA), often with an 
opioid such as remifentanil for analgesia, or for seda-
tion in intensive care, when its duration of action is 
determined by hepatic clearance (half-life 4–7 hours). 
If infused for less than 8 hours, propofol returns to the 
circulation from fatty tissue at a sufficiently slow rate 
that blood concentrations do not increase dramatically, 
so its context-specific half-time remains short. There-
fore propofol is particularly useful for day surgery, 
because of the absence of hangover effects.
Ketamine can be given by intramuscular injection 
or intravenously by bolus injection or infusion. When 
used for induction or for total intravenous anaesthesia, 
the anaesthetic action is terminated largely by redistri-
bution (distribution half-life about 15 minutes). With 
prolonged infusion the duration of action becomes 
dependent on hepatic metabolism (half-life 2–4 hours). 
Ketamine produces dissociative anaesthesia in which 
the person appears conscious, with eye opening, swal-
lowing and muscle contraction, but is unresponsive to 
pain.
Etomidate is highly lipid-soluble and has a rapid 
onset of action after intravenous injection. Its action 
is terminated by rapid hydrolysis by plasma ester-
ases and hepatic microsomal enzymes, so that the 
duration of action is about 6 to 10 minutes with mini-
mal hangover. It is not used to maintain anaesthesia, 
because prolonged infusion can suppress adrenocorti-
cal function.
Unwanted Effects
• Central nervous system (CNS): General depres-
sion of the CNS can produce respiratory and car-
diovascular depression. Slow release of thiopental 
distributed into tissues may result in some sedation 
for up to 24 hours after use. Ketamine has minimal 
effects on ventilatory drive. Hallucinations and 
vivid dreams are common during recovery from 
ketamine in adults (emergence reactions, which can 
be minimised by coadministration of a benzodiaz-
epine), but are less frequent in children.
• Skeletal muscles: Extraneous muscle movement 
is common with etomidate, and to a lesser degree 
with propofol. They can be reduced by a benzo-
diazepine or opioid analgesic given before induc-
tion. Ketamine increases muscle tone and can cause 
laryngospasm.
• Cardiovascular system: Thiopental and propo-
fol depress the heart, producing bradycardia and 
reducing blood pressure. Etomidate has little effect 
on the heart or systemic vascular resistance. By con-
trast, ketamine more often produces tachycardia 
and an increase in blood pressure through sympa-
thetic nervous system stimulation.
• Nausea and vomiting during recovery are expe-
rienced by up to 40% of people but rarely persist 
for more than 24 hours. Propofol has an antiemetic 
action.
• Pain on injection with etomidate and propofol. This 
can be reduced by injecting into a large vein, by giv-
ing an opioid analgesic just before induction, or giv-
ing intravenous lidocaine with propofol. Thiopental 
is an alkaline solution that is irritant; if it extrava-
sates outside the vein, it can cause tissue necrosis.
• When propofol is used for prolonged sedation, for 
example in critical illness, the dosage should be lim-
ited to a maximum of 4 mg/kg per hour to reduce 
the risk of ‘propofol infusion syndrome’, which 
includes metabolic acidosis, cardiac dysfunction 
and rhabdomyolysis.
INTRAVENOUS OPIOIDS
  Examples
fentanyl, alfentanil, remifentanil
Rapid-onset, short-acting intravenous opioids are usu-
ally given at induction for intraoperative analgesia, 
which reduces the dose requirement for anaesthetic 
agents. They can also be used for sedation and respi-
ratory depression during assisted ventilation in inten-
sive care. In high doses, opioids stimulate the vagus 
nerve and produce bradycardia; this can be helpful to 
reduce the tachycardia and hypertension produced by 
sympathetic nervous system activation during sur-
gery. Details of the mechanism of action of opioids can 
be found in Chapter 19.
Pharmacokinetics
After intravenous injection, fentanyl has a rapid onset 
of action, within 4 to 6 minutes. After a single dose, 
the drug is distributed rapidly into skeletal muscle and 
then into adipose tissue (half-life about 15 minutes), 
and its duration of action is about 30 to 60 minutes. 
The effect can be maintained by repeated injections or 
infusion, but with prolonged use, tissue stores are sat-
urated and fentanyl then has a long duration of action 
determined by its hepatic metabolism (half-life about 
4 hours). After repeated injections, respiratory depres-
sion may become apparent during recovery from an 
anaesthetic.
Alfentanil has a more rapid onset (1–3 min) than 
fentanyl, and a shorter duration of action (5–10 min). 
Like fentanyl, after a single dose, its effect is termi-
nated by distribution into highly-perfused tissues. It 
is eliminated by hepatic metabolism (half-life about 
1.5 hours).
Remifentanil is an opioid ester that has a very rapid 
onset (1–2 min) and a very short half-life (about 5 min) 
due to metabolism by tissue and plasma esterases. 
Continuous intravenous infusion is necessary for sus-
tained effect. Because tissue stores do not accumulate, 
	
	
General Anaesthetics  CHAPTER 17	
247
its duration of action is not affected by the duration of 
infusion.
Unwanted Effects
• Muscle rigidity. This particularly affects the chest 
wall and jaw, and can be prevented during surgery 
with neuromuscular blocking drugs (see Chapter 27). 
Myoclonus and rigidity can persist after recovery 
and can be reversed with the opioid antagonist nal-
oxone (see Chapter 19).
• Respiratory depression. This may be profound and 
means that assisted ventilation is invariably neces-
sary during surgery when large doses have been 
used.
• Nausea and vomiting. This can be reduced with an 
antiemetic drug (see Chapter 32).
INHALATIONAL ANAESTHETICS
  Examples
desflurane, isoflurane, sevoflurane, nitrous oxide
Inhalational anaesthetics are either volatile liquids, 
which must be vaporised before administration, or 
gases. All inhalational anaesthetics must be given 
together with adequate oxygen to avoid hypoxia dur-
ing anaesthesia.
Sevoflurane is a volatile liquid anaesthetic that 
can be used for both induction and maintenance of 
anaesthesia in children, as it has a pleasant smell and 
is nonirritant. It is used in adults for maintenance of 
anaesthesia following induction with an intravenous 
anaesthetic. Recovery is rapid after sevoflurane, and 
therefore early postoperative analgesia may be neces-
sary. Other volatile liquid anaesthetics such as des-
flurane and isoflurane irritate mucous membranes, 
which makes them less suitable for induction. These 
agents also give a slower recovery at the end of a 
procedure.
Nitrous oxide is a gaseous anaesthetic that is not 
sufficiently potent to be used alone (Table 17.5), but it 
has the advantage of producing analgesia (unlike the 
other inhalational anaesthetics). It is most often used 
in combination with other inhalational anaesthet-
ics and reduces the required dose of the other agent. 
Nitrous oxide can only be used as the sole inhalational 
agent when combined with an intravenous opioid and 
a neuromuscular blocking drug (see Chapter 27), but 
there is a risk of awareness during surgery. Nitrous 
oxide is also used alone as an analgesic, in suban-
aesthetic doses (50% nitrous oxide mixed with 50% 
oxygen).
Pharmacokinetics
The amount and duration of administration of inhaled 
anaesthetic required to give a sufficient concentration 
of the drug in the CNS for general anaesthesia will 
depend on the relationships shown in Fig. 17.3 and 
Table 17.5. The key factors are the alveolar concentra-
tion of the drug and its uptake from the lungs. Alveo-
lar concentration is affected by three factors:
• The inspired concentration of the drug, which 
affects the rate of increase of alveolar concentration 
towards the inspired concentration and contributes 
to the speed of onset of anaesthesia.
• Alveolar ventilation (rate and depth of inspiration), 
which directly determines replacement of the drug 
in the alveoli after its removal by the pulmonary 
circulation. This is most important if an inhaled 
agent is used for induction, but less significant 
Table 17.5  Inhalational Anaesthetics.
COMPOUND
BLOOD:GAS PARTITION 
COEFFICIENT
INDUCTION TIME
OIL:GAS PARTITION  
COEFFICIENT
MAC (%)
METABOLISM (%)
Nitrous oxide
0.5
Fast
1.4
>100
0
Isoflurane
1.4
Medium
91
1.12
0.2
Sevoflurane
0.6
Fast
53
2.1
≈5
The blood:gas partition coefficient correlates closely with the time to induction when the drug is used as the sole anaesthetic. The oil:gas partition correlates with the 
potency of the anaesthetic, which correlates inversely with the minimal alveolar concentration (MAC) necessary for surgical anaesthesia. Nitrous oxide cannot produce 
anaesthesia alone, so it has a theoretical MAC of >100%. Metabolism is the percentage of drug eliminated as urinary metabolites, with the remainder mainly eliminated 
unchanged by exhalation.
Fig. 17.3  Equilibration of inhalational general anaesthetics 
between air, blood and brain. The concentration ratio between blood 
and air at equilibrium is estimated from in vivo studies of the blood:gas 
partition coefficient and correlates with the induction time of the drug 
(see Table 17.5). The concentrations in brain and blood at equilibrium 
reflect the different affinities of the two body compartments for general 
anaesthetics, with a brain to blood ratio of 1–3 to 1 for all commonly 
used anaesthetics. The concentration in the inspired air required to 
give the necessary concentration in brain membranes (minimum alveo-
lar concentration, MAC) correlates inversely with the blood:gas parti-
tion coefficient, which is an indication of the potency of the compound.
Brain
(= lipid)
Blood
(= water)
Inhaled air
(= gas)
248	
SECTION 5  The Nervous System
once equilibrium has been established between the 
inhaled concentration and that in the brain.
• Functional residual capacity of the lungs. If this is 
large, then the alveolar concentration of the drug 
will be diluted and the onset of action will be slower. 
The rate of induction of anaesthesia with an inhaled 
drug is more rapid in children as they have higher 
alveolar ventilation relative to functional residual 
capacity.
Drug uptake from the lungs into the blood is then 
determined by three factors:
• The blood-gas partition coefficient, which indicates 
the relative solubilities of the drug in blood and air. 
A high solubility in blood, and therefore in all rap-
idly equilibrating body tissues, means that more of 
the agent will need to be administered before its par-
tial pressure in the blood reaches that in the inspired 
air. The blood-gas partition coefficient therefore cor-
relates with the time to induction of anaesthesia (see 
Table 17.5).
• The cardiac output, which determines pulmonary 
alveolar blood flow. A high cardiac output removes 
anaesthetic more quickly from the alveoli and 
speeds equilibrium with tissues.
• Alveolar-venous partial pressure gradient and tis-
sue uptake. Tissue uptake will depend on blood 
flow, the difference in partial pressure of the drug in 
the blood and tissue, and the blood-tissue solubility 
coefficient of the drug (which determines the affin-
ity of the tissue for the drug). The brain has a high 
perfusion, allowing rapid equilibration.
These factors determine the relatively slow onset 
of action of inhalational anaesthetics. As most volatile 
inhalational anaesthetics (except sevoflurane) are also 
irritant or unpleasant, they are typically used for main-
tenance after anaesthesia is induced by an intravenous 
drug. The anaesthetic potency of inhalation anaesthet-
ics used in maintenance is defined by the minimum 
alveolar concentration (MAC) of the agent necessary 
to prevent movement in response to a noxious surgical 
stimulus in 50% of people. The MAC is therefore the 
equivalent of the ED50 (the 50% effective dose) for other 
drugs (see Chapter 1); it is inversely proportional to the 
lipid solubility (oil:gas partition coefficient) of the drug 
and its potency, meaning that a potent inhalational 
anaesthetic agent has a low MAC (see Table 17.5).
The major route of elimination of most inhalational 
anaesthetics is via the airways in expired air, with some 
also undergoing hepatic metabolism as a minor route. 
Factors including ventilation rate and the blood-gas 
partition coefficient determine the time taken to elimi-
nate the anaesthetic by exhalation. Sevoflurane has a 
short recovery time due to its low blood-gas partition 
coefficient (see Table 17.5). The recovery time may also 
depend on the duration of inhalation, which deter-
mines the extent to which the drug has entered slowly 
equilibrating tissues. Removal of the drug from these 
tissues is also slow, which can maintain the plasma 
concentration of the drug and delay recovery. During 
recovery, the depth of anaesthesia reverses through 
the stages discussed previously (see Table 17.2) to con-
sciousness; a rapid recovery which minimises stage II 
of anaesthesia is beneficial.
Unwanted Effects
A number of unwanted effects are common to most 
inhalational anaesthetics; however, each agent also has 
a unique profile of additional unwanted effects.
• Cardiovascular system. Isoflurane, desflurane and 
sevoflurane reduce blood pressure mainly by arte-
rial vasodilation. They also depress myocardial 
contractility and predispose to bradycardia by inter-
fering with transmembrane Ca2+ flux, with a resul-
tant decrease in cardiac output. Nitrous oxide has 
less depressant effect on the heart and circulation, 
and its use in combination with other agents that 
depress the heart may permit reduction in their dos-
age. Inhalational anaesthetics often increase cerebral 
blood flow, which can exacerbate elevated intracra-
nial pressure. Arrhythmias occasionally occur with 
volatile liquid anaesthetics.
• Respiratory system. All anaesthetic agents depress 
the response of the respiratory centre in the medulla 
to hypercapnoea and hypoxia. They also decrease 
tidal volume and increase respiratory rate. Desflu-
rane and isoflurane irritate mucous membranes and 
can cause coughing, apnoea and laryngospasm if 
used for induction. Sevoflurane has a bronchodila-
tor action.
• Liver. All inhaled anaesthetics decrease liver blood 
flow, but in contrast to previous generations of halo-
genated anaesthetics (such as halothane), hepatotox-
icity is rare with modern inhalational anaesthetics.
• Uterus. Relaxation of the uterus may increase the 
risk of haemorrhage when anaesthesia is used in 
labour. Nitrous oxide has less effect on uterine mus-
cle than the volatile liquid anaesthetics.
• Skeletal muscle. Most agents produce some muscle 
relaxation, which enhances the activity of neuro-
muscular blocking drugs (see Chapter 27).
• Chemoreceptor trigger zone. Inhalational anaes-
thetics trigger postoperative nausea and vomiting. 
This is most pronounced with nitrous oxide.
• Postoperative shivering. This occurs in up to 65% 
of those recovering from general anaesthesia. The 
aetiology is unclear.
• Malignant hyperthermia. This is a rare but poten-
tially fatal complication of volatile liquid anaesthet-
ics. It is genetically determined, and results from a 
defect in the ryanodine receptor (RyR1) that regu-
lates release of Ca2+ from the sarcoplasmic reticulum 
in skeletal muscle cells (see Chapter 5, Fig. 5.4). A 
sudden increase in intracellular Ca2+ provoked by 
an anaesthetic produces tachycardia, unstable blood 
pressure, hypercapnoea, fever and hyperventilation, 
followed by hyperkalaemia and metabolic acidosis. 
	
	
General Anaesthetics  CHAPTER 17	
249
Muscle rigidity may occur. Treatment is with dan-
trolene, a RyR1 receptor antagonist (see Chapter 24).
SELF-ASSESSMENT
TRUE/FALSE QUESTIONS
	 1.	 General anaesthetics modify neuronal func-
tion without interacting with specific membrane 
proteins.
	 2.	 Inhalational anaesthetics are gases at room tem- 
perature.
	 3.	 The risk of hangover effects with inhalational 
anaesthetics increases if the operation is long.
	 4.	 The minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) of an 
inhalational anaesthetic required to produce surgi-
cal anaesthesia correlates inversely with its oil:gas 
partition coefficient.
	 5.	 Nitrous oxide administered alone at a concentra-
tion of 50% in inspired air reaches the MAC neces-
sary for surgical anaesthesia.
	 6.	 Nitrous oxide may be given with oxygen and an 
inhalational anaesthetic agent to produce effective 
surgical anaesthesia.
	 7.	 Remifentanil used for analgesia can produce per-
sistent respiratory depression postoperatively.
	 8.	 The short duration of action of thiopental is due to 
its distribution into richly perfused tissues such as 
muscles.
	 9.	 The elimination half-life of thiopental is similar to 
its distribution half-life.
10.	 Propofol can be given alone by continuous intrave-
nous infusion to maintain anaesthesia.
11.	 Accidental injection of thiopental into an artery 
can have serious consequences.
12.	 Ketamine is a sedative but without analgesic action.
13.	 With modern anaesthetics, the classic stages of 
anaesthesia induction are rarely seen.
14.	 Most inhalational anaesthetics have a depressant 
effect on the cardiovascular system.
15.	 Sevoflurane has the advantage of a fast onset of 
action and rapid elimination.
16.	 Total intravenous anaesthesia (TIVA) can be 
achieved with propofol and remifentanil.
ONE-BEST-ANSWER (OBA) QUESTIONS
1.	 What is an undesirable property of an inhalation 
anaesthetic?
A.	Analgesic action
B.	 High MAC (minimal alveolar concentration)
C.	Low blood:gas partition coefficient
D.	Nonflammability
E.	 Stability at room temperature
2.	 Identify the most accurate statement concerning 
general anaesthetic drugs.
A.	The medullary respiratory centre is ­particularly 
sensitive to the depressant action of general 
anaesthetics.
B.	 The major route of elimination of most inhala-
tional anaesthetics is via the liver.
C.	An antiemetic such as ondansetron is often given 
as part of general anaesthesia.
D.	The intravenous opioid alfentanil should not be 
administered together with sevoflurane.
CASE-BASED QUESTION
Atropine is a commonly administered preoperative 
agent.
A 40-year-old woman is scheduled for a surgery for 
acute appendicitis. She has not had a previous opera-
tion and is otherwise healthy, with normal cardiovas-
cular and respiratory function. No premedication was 
given. (Refer to Chapter 27 for information on neuro-
muscular junction blockers.)
1.	 Why is the muscarinic antagonist atropine now little 
used as preanaesthetic medication in adults?
2.	 Do the muscarinic receptor antagonists atropine 
and hyoscine have the same properties?
	
  The woman was intubated after the administra-
tion of propofol, alfentanil and suxamethonium 
(succinylcholine).
3.	 Why has the routine use of suxamethonium to facili-
tate endotracheal intubation been reduced?
	
  Following intubation, pancuronium was given 
and she was ventilated with nitrous oxide, sevoflu-
rane and oxygen. The operation took 40 minutes.
4.	 Is pancuronium the most suitable choice of muscle 
relaxant? What alternatives are available?
	
  After the operation, she did not breathe spontane-
ously despite the administration of neostigmine and 
glycopyrronium.
5.	 What are the possible reasons for the apnoea, and 
how could they be treated?
6.	 Would mivacurium have been a preferable neuro-
muscular blocking drug in this person?
7.	 What is the reason for administering glycopyrro-
nium with neostigmine at the end of the operation 
and is there a simpler alternative?
ANSWERS
TRUE/FALSE ANSWERS
1.	 False. General anaesthetics act at lipophilic intra-
membrane binding sites on a number of excitatory 
and inhibitory ion channels (see Table 17.3).
2.	 False. Most inhalational anaesthetics are volatile 
liquids at room temperature and must be vaporised 
for inhalation.
3.	 True. In prolonged anaesthesia, lipid-soluble agents 
such as thiopental may accumulate in body fat 
stores and be slowly released after the operation; 
this does not occur with a rapidly metabolised drug 
such as etomidate.
4.	 True. A high oil:gas ratio indicates high lipid solu-
bility and anaesthetic potency, meaning that only a 
250	
SECTION 5  The Nervous System
   low alveolar concentration of anaesthetic (MAC) is 
required to produce anaesthesia.
	 5.	 False. Even at concentrations higher than 50%, 
nitrous oxide is not potent enough to produce 
effective surgical anaesthesia on its own. NO 
can be used with an opioid and a neuromuscu-
lar blocker to produce anaesthesia, but the risk of 
‘anaesthetic awareness’ is high. Entonox (50% NO, 
50% oxygen) is used as an analgesic.
	 6.	 True. Nitrous oxide (60%–70%) provides addi-
tional analgesic activity in combination with a 
low concentration of inhalational anaesthetic (and 
oxygen).
	 7.	 False. Remifentanil is an opioid with very rapid 
metabolism by esterases in blood and tissues and 
this minimises the risk of postoperative respira-
tory depression.
	 8.	 True. Rapid redistribution of thiopental from the 
CNS terminates its anaesthetic action.
	 9.	 False. The half-life of thiopental redistribution 
is about 3 minutes, but its elimination from the 
body is much slower (half-life 3–8 hours), partially 
accounting for the hangover effect seen with this 
drug.
10.	 True. Propofol can be given by continuous infusion 
for maintenance anaesthesia, such as in intensive 
care units, because it is extensively distributed into 
fatty tissues and its rate of hepatic metabolism is 
sufficient to maintain low plasma concentrations.
11.	 True. Inadvertent extravascular or intraarterial 
injection of thiopental can be damaging due to its 
alkaline pH (approximately 9–10).
12.	 False. Ketamine does have analgesic action, unlike 
other available intravenous anaesthetics. It can 
also produce transient psychotic effects including 
nightmares and hallucinations.
13.	 True. The classic stages of anaesthetic induc-
tion were originally described following the use 
of slower-acting anaesthetics than those used 
today.
14.	 True. Most are negatively inotropic; they depress 
myocardial function by interfering with Ca2+ 
fluxes.
15.	 True. Sevoflurane has a rapid onset of action and is 
more rapidly eliminated than isoflurane.
16.	 True. TIVA can be achieved by target-controlled 
infusion (TCI) of propofol and remifentanil and is 
useful in people at risk of malignant hyperthermia 
or other unwanted effects with volatile inhala-
tional anaesthetics.
OBA ANSWERS
1.	 Answer B (high MAC) is an undesirable property 
of an inhalational anaesthetic as it would indicate a 
drug with low lipid solubility and low anaesthetic 
potency.
2.	 Answer C is correct, as an antiemetic such as 
cyclizine or ondansetron is often used to reduce 
the risk of vomiting caused by general anaesthet-
ics and opioid analgesics. Medullary neurons are 
relatively insensitive to anaesthetics (answer A). 
Inhalation anaesthetics are eliminated mainly by 
exhalation, not hepatic metabolism (answer B). 
Fentanyl is often used as an analgesic together 
with inhalational anaesthetics (answer D). With 
modern anaesthetic practice, atropine is seldom 
needed to reduce bronchial and salivary secretions 
(answer E).
CASE-BASED ANSWERS
1.	 Atropine (and hyoscine) block muscarinic recep-
tors, reducing bronchial and salivary secretions, but 
modern anaesthetics have less irritant effect, thus 
reducing this problem. Muscarinic antagonists can 
reduce the bradycardia caused by some inhalation 
anaesthetics and by suxamethonium.
2.	 Atropine can cause CNS excitation, whereas hyo-
scine causes sedation and has antiemetic properties.
3.	 Relatively minor but frequent complications occur 
with suxamethonium, including bradycardia, post-
operative myalgia, transient hyperkalaemia, and 
raised intraocular, intracranial and intragastric 
pressures. A rare but potentially fatal complication 
is malignant hyperthermia. Other rapid-onset neu-
romuscular blocking drugs, such as rocuronium, 
are increasingly used in preference to suxametho-
nium in emergency anaesthesia. If necessary, the 
effect of rocuronium can be reversed rapidly with 
sugammadex.
4.	 Pancuronium is not the best choice of neuromuscular 
blocker as it can cause tachycardia and hyperten-
sion and is long-acting (see Chapter 27). An alterna-
tive would be rocuronium, which has a rapid onset 
and short duration of action and a low risk of car-
diovascular effects.
5.	 There are at least three possible reasons for the 
postoperative apnoea: (a) She could be experienc-
ing opioid-induced respiratory depression, which 
could be reversed by the opioid antagonist nalox-
one. (b) The dose of neostigmine given may have 
been insufficient to reverse the competitive block-
ade induced by long-acting pancuronium. (c) She 
could have a genetic deficiency of plasma cholines-
terase (butyrylcholinesterase), found in about 1 in 
3000 individuals, which would normally metabolise 
suxamethonium rapidly. Administration of neostig-
mine would exacerbate the respiratory depression. 
Fresh frozen plasma (containing pseudocholinester-
ase) could be given.
6.	 Although mivacurium is a short-acting muscle 
relaxant (see Chapter 27), it is metabolised by 
pseudo­cholinesterase and its effect would be greatly 
prolonged in a person with a genetic deficiency of 
this enzyme. Rocuronium would be preferable.
7.	 Neostigmine inhibits acetylcholinesterase, increas-
ing ACh concentrations at cholinergic synapses. 
	
	
General Anaesthetics  CHAPTER 17	
251
It partially or fully reverses the actions of com-
petitive blockers of neuromuscular junction N2 
receptors, but also enhances cholinergic activity 
at muscarinic receptors, causing bradycardia and 
bronchoconstriction. Glycopyrronium is a selec-
tive muscarinic receptor antagonist used to pre-
vent these muscarinic effects. If rocuronium (or 
vecuronium) had been used for neuromuscular 
block, it could be reversed simply with the chelat-
ing agent sugammadex.
FURTHER READING
Bailey, J.M., 2002. Context-sensitive half-times. Clin. Pharma­
cokin. 41, 793–799.
Litman, R.S., Griggs, S.M., Dowling, J.J., Riazi, S., 2018. 
Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility and related diseases. 
Anesthesiology 128, 159–167.
Solt, K., Forman, S.A., 2007. Correlating the clinical actions and 
molecular mechanisms of general anesthetics. Curr. Opin. 
Anaesthesiol. 20, 300–306.
Uhrig, L., Dehaene, S., Jarraya, B., 2014. Cerebral mechanisms of 
general anaesthesia. Ann. Fr. Anesth. Reanim. 33, 72–82.
Compendium of General Anaesthetic Drugs.
DRUG
CHARACTERISTICS
Intravenous Anaesthetics
General anaesthesia is typically induced with an intravenous agent, followed by intubation and neuromuscular blockade. 
Anaesthesia is maintained by intravenous infusion or by an inhalational anaesthetic. Short-acting opioids may also be used.
Etomidate
Used for rapid induction (<30 s) without hangover. Not used for maintenance anaesthesia because it 
suppresses adrenocortical function on continuous dosage. Causes less hypotension than either propofol 
or thiopental but may cause involuntary movements, minimised by an opioid analgesic or short-acting 
benzodiazepine. Its action is terminated by rapid metabolism in the blood and liver.
Ketamine
Dissociative anaesthetic used (rarely) for paediatric and emergency anaesthesia for short procedures. 
Analgesic activity at subanaesthetic doses. Transient psychotic effects (hallucinations, nightmares) may 
occur, minimised by benzodiazepines such as midazolam (see Chapter 20). Slower onset than other 
induction agents (2–5 min); action is terminated by rapid distribution. Given by intravenous injection or 
infusion or by intramuscular injection.
Propofol
Most widely used intravenous anaesthetic, particularly for day surgery; can be used for rapid induction 
(<30 s) or for maintenance (total intravenous anaesthesia). Rapid recovery with little hangover. Duration of 
action is terminated by redistribution, with low blood concentrations being maintained by slow return from 
fatty tissues.
Thiopental 
sodium
Rapid induction (<30 s) and recovery but may cause sedation up to 24 h. May cause cardiovascular and 
respiratory depression. Action is terminated by rapid distribution; on repeated dosing, slow hepatic 
metabolism can cause accumulation. Reconstituted solution is highly alkaline and may cause tissue 
necrosis if extravasation occurs.
Intravenous Opioids
Provide analgesia and enhance anaesthesia.
Alfentanil
Used especially during short procedures and for outpatient surgery; respiratory depression may persist after 
the end of the procedure if repeated doses are given.
Fentanyl
Dose-dependent rate of elimination may cause respiratory depression to persist after the end of the 
procedure if repeated doses are given.
Remifentanil
Given intraoperatively as an intravenous infusion. Very rapid elimination in blood and tissues minimises 
postoperative respiratory depression.
Inhalational Anaesthetics
Volatile liquid agents inhaled via a specially calibrated vaporiser in a nitrous oxide/oxygen mixture, or oxygen, or 
oxygen-enriched air, typically for the maintenance of general anaesthesia.
Desflurane
Not recommended for induction in children. Irritant, causing cough, laryngospasm and increased secretions. 
Eliminated by exhalation; very rapid recovery (minutes).
Isoflurane
Preferred inhalational anaesthetic for obstetric use. May decrease peripheral vascular resistance. Muscle 
relaxation potentiates effects of neuromuscular blocker drugs. Eliminated mainly by exhalation.
Methoxyflurane
Only used for moderate-severe pain following trauma; given by hand-held inhaler device.
Nitrous oxide 
(NO)
Inhaled gas (not a volatile liquid) used for maintenance of general anaesthesia and analgesia. Low potency 
precludes use as a sole anaesthetic agent. Rapid recovery owing to low potency and low tissue affinity. 
Eliminated rapidly by exhalation. For analgesia without loss of consciousness, 50% NO / 50% oxygen 
(Entonox) is used.
Sevoflurane
Potent maintenance anaesthetic with rapid recovery. Nonirritant so can also be used for inhalational 
induction. Eliminated rapidly by exhalation.
Various other drugs such as local anaesthetics (see Chapter 18), analgesics (see Chapters 19 and 29), anxiolytics (see Chapter 20), neuromuscular blockers (see 
Chapter 27) and antiemetics (see Chapter 32) may be used in the perioperative period.
252
18
Local Anaesthetics
Local anaesthetics are drugs that reversibly block the 
transmission of pain stimuli locally at their site of 
administration.
  Examples
bupivacaine, lidocaine, ropivacaine, chloroprocaine
PHARMACOLOGY
MECHANISM OF ACTION
Local anaesthetics produce a reversible blockade of 
nerve conduction by inhibiting the influx of Na+ across 
neuronal cell membranes, which prevents depolarisa-
tion of the cell. At rest, the neuronal cell membrane 
has only limited permeability to Na+, but about 50 to 
70 times greater permeability to K+ because of the 
large number of channels that are open for passive 
transport of K+ out of the cell. The maintenance of a 
negative internal resting membrane electrical poten-
tial is largely determined by the K+ gradient across the 
cell membrane. Conduction of a nerve action poten-
tial results from the opening of voltage-dependent 
Na+ channels and rapid influx of Na+ to depolarise 
the cell (Fig. 18.1). Na+ channels cycle between three 
states:
• Resting, when the channel is closed but able to open 
in response to a change in transmembrane potential.
• Open, when the channel opens in response to an 
action potential and allows the rapid influx of Na+ 
ions through to the cytoplasm and a rapid change in 
membrane voltage.
• Inactivated due to a conformational change at the 
cytoplasmic end of the channel that occurs very 
soon after the action potential has passed. During 
this stage the channel is resistant to depolarising 
influences, but sensitivity returns when the mem-
brane potential is restored to the resting level by 
return of Na+ ions to the exterior of the cell.
There is considerable redundancy in membrane 
Na+ channels; as a consequence, nerve conduction 
can continue even when 90% of the channels are 
inactivated.
Local anaesthetics block the voltage-dependent Na+ 
channels that depolarise the cell. They bind to the Na+ 
channel at a site on the inner surface of the membrane 
and hold them in their inactivated state. They progres-
sively interrupt Na+ channel-mediated depolarisation 
until impulse conduction fails. The probability that 
propagation of a nerve impulse will fail at a particular 
segment of the nerve is related to:
• the local concentration of the anaesthetic drug,
• the size of the nerve fibre,
• whether the nerve is myelinated,
• the length of the nerve exposed to the drug.
Nerve transmission is blocked in smaller-diameter 
rapid-firing fibres before that in larger fibres (Table 
18.1). The myelinated Aδ and small nonmyelinated 
C fibres that transmit pain (nociceptive fibres) are 
blocked first, followed by larger sensory fibres (carry-
ing pressure and proprioception) and finally somatic 
motor fibres. Therefore pain pathways are most rap-
idly and intensely blocked by local anaesthetics (see 
Table 18.1) and also show the longest duration of local 
anaesthetic effect. In myelinated nerves, the drug 
penetrates at the nodes of Ranvier and must block at 
Chapter Outline
Pharmacology  252
Mechanism of Action  252
Pharmacokinetics  254
Unwanted Effects  254
Techniques of Administration  255
Surface Administration  255
Infiltration Anaesthesia  255
Peripheral Nerve Block Anaesthesia  255
Epidural Anaesthesia  255
Spinal Anaesthesia  256
Intravenous Regional Anaesthesia  256
Self-Assessment  256
Answers  256
Further Reading  257
Compendium of Local Anaesthetic Drugs  257
	
	
Local Anaesthetics  CHAPTER 18	
253
Na+ Action 
potential 
blocked by 
anaesthetic
on inner 
side of
Na+ channel
Na+
Action
potential
Na+ Closed 
channel,
no action 
potential
EXTRACELLULAR
INTRACELLULAR
Closed Na+ channel
Open Na+ channel
Blocked Na+ channel
LA H+
LA H+
LA
LA
LA
LA H+
Fig. 18.1  Site and mechanism of action of local anaesthetics. 
Local anaesthetics are weak bases and exist in an equilibrium between 
ionised (LA + H+) and nonionised (LA) forms. The nonionised form is 
lipid-soluble and crosses the axonal membrane, but only the ionised 
form produced inside the cell binds to the intracellular end of the open 
Na+ channel; this holds it in an inactivated state and prevents further 
action potentials.
least three consecutive nodes to produce a conduction 
block. Unmyelinated nerves must be blocked over a 
sufficient length and around the full circumference of 
the nerve.
Structural Requirements of Local Anaesthetics
All local anaesthetics have a lipid-soluble hydro-
phobic aromatic ring structure that is connected 
to a hydrophilic amine group either by an ester 
­intermediate linkage or an amide (peptide) linkage 
(Fig. 18.2). The length of the intermediate bonding 
chain is critical for local anaesthetic activity and is 
optimal between three and seven atoms. The action 
of local anaesthetics results mainly from binding of 
the ionised form of the drug to a site on the inside 
C2H5
CH3
H
N
O
C
CH2
N 
C2H5
Lidocaine
Lipid-
soluble
(aromatic)
centre
CH3
Amide
bond
Hydrophilic 
(polar)
centre
O
C-O-CH2CH2N
CH3
CH3
CH3CH2CH2CH2NH
Lipid-
soluble
centre
Ester
bond
Hydrophilic
centre
Tetracaine
Fig. 18.2  General structure of local anaesthetics. All local anaes-
thetic structures contain a lipophilic (aromatic) centre and a hydrophilic 
(polar) centre linked by an amide (peptide) or ester bond. Local anaes-
thetics with an ester bond are susceptible to rapid hydrolysis at the 
injection site and in the plasma. The length of the intermediate bonding 
chain is optimal between three and seven atoms for local anaesthetic 
activity.
Table 18.1  Nerve Fibres and their Responsiveness to Local Anaesthetics.
FIBRE TYPE
SITE OR FUNCTION
MYELINATION
DIAMETER (µM)
SENSITIVITY TO LOCAL 
ANAESTHESIA
A FIBRES
Alpha
Motor
Muscle sense
Yes
12–20
+
Beta
Motor (muscle spindle)
Touch, proprioception
Yes
5–12
+
Gamma
Motor (muscle spindle)
Yes
3–6
++
Delta
Pain, temperature, crude 
touch, pressure
Yes
2–5
+++
B FIBRES
Preganglionic autonomic
Yes
1–3
+++
C FIBRES
Pain, temperature, touch, 
pressure, itch
No
0.4–1.2
+++
Postganglionic autonomic
No
0.3–1.3
+++
