Mount Sinai  
Expert Guides
Allergy and Clinical Immunology
MOUNT SINAI EXPERT GUIDES
Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology
Edited by
Hugh A. Sampson, MD
Kurt Hirschhorn Professor of Pediatrics
Dean for Translational Biomedical Sciences
Director, Elliot and Roslyn Jaffe Food Allergy Institute
Division of Allergy/Immunology; Department of Pediatrics
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
New York, NY, USA
This edition first published 2015 © 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Registered Office
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
Editorial Offices
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030‐5774, USA
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services and for information about how to apply for 
permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com/wiley‐blackwell
The right of the authors to be identified as the authors of this work has been asserted in accordance with the UK 
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any 
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted by the UK 
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of the publisher.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand names 
and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their 
respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book. It is sold 
on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. If professional advice or 
other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional should be sought.
The contents of this work are intended to further general scientific research, understanding, and discussion only 
and are not intended and should not be relied upon as recommending or promoting a specific method, diagnosis, 
or treatment by health science practitioners for any particular patient. The publisher and the author make no 
representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and 
specifically disclaim all warranties, including without limitation any implied warranties of fitness for a particular 
purpose. In view of ongoing research, equipment modifications, changes in governmental regulations, and the 
constant flow of information relating to the use of medicines, equipment, and devices, the reader is urged to 
review and evaluate the information provided in the package insert or instructions for each medicine, equipment, or 
device for, among other things, any changes in the instructions or indication of usage and for added warnings and 
precautions. Readers should consult with a specialist where appropriate. The fact that an organization or Website 
is referred to in this work as a citation and/or a potential source of further information does not mean that the 
author or the publisher endorses the information the organization or Website may provide or recommendations 
it may make. Further, readers should be aware that Internet Websites listed in this work may have changed or 
disappeared between when this work was written and when it is read. No warranty may be created or extended 
by any promotional statements for this work. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for any damages 
arising herefrom.
Library of Congress Cataloging‐in‐Publication Data
Mount Sinai expert guides. Allergy & clinical immunology / edited by Hugh A. Sampson.
    p. ; cm.
  Allergy & clinical immunology
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 978-1-118-60916-3 (pbk.)
I.  Sampson, Hugh A., editor.  II.  Title: Allergy & clinical immunology. 
[DNLM: 1.  Hypersensitivity.  2.  Allergens.  3.  Immune System Diseases.  4.  Immune System Phenomena.   
WD 300]
  RC584
  616.97–dc23
	
2014049390
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not be 
available in electronic books.
Cover image: Stock Photo File #6124416 © David Marchal 
Cover design by Ruth Bateson
Set in 8.5/12pt Frutiger by SPi Publisher Services, Pondicherry, India
1  2015
  v
Contents
Contributors, ix
Series Foreword, xi
Preface, xii
List of Abbreviations, xiii
About the Companion Website, xvii
Part 1: Allergy
  1	 Atopic Dermatitis in Infants and Young Children, 3
Jean‐Christoph Caubet and Anna Nowak‐Węgrzyn
  2	 Atopic Dermatitis in Teenagers and Adults, 15
Saakshi Khattri and Emma Guttman‐Yassky
  3	 Contact Dermatitis, 25
Mariya Rozenblit and Emma Guttman‐Yassky
  4	 Allergic Rhinitis, 36
Supinda Bunyavanich
  5	 Non‐Allergic Rhinitis, 44
Beth E. Corn
  6	 Sinusitis, 52
Yan W. Ho and Satish Govindaraj
  7	 Allergic Diseases of the Eye, 66
Amanda L. Cox
  8	 Tests for Assessing Asthma, 77
Gwen S. Skloot
  9	 Asthma in Infants and Children, 82
Kate Welch and Jennifer S. Kim
10	 Asthma in Teenagers and Adults, 91
Supinda Bunyavanich
11	 Evaluation of Cough, 98
Paula J. Busse
12	 Exercise‐Induced Asthma, 107
Supinda Bunyavanich
vi  Contents
13	 Occupational Asthma, 114
Paula J. Busse
14	 Status Asthmaticus and Pending Pulmonary Failure, 123
Jacob D. Kattan
15	 Evaluation of Food Allergy, 132
Scott H. Sicherer
16	 Oral Allergy Syndrome, 140
Julie Wang
17	 Food Allergy and Atopic Dermatitis, 148
Kate Welch and Hugh A. Sampson
18	 Food Protein‐Induced Enterocolitis Syndrome, 155
Elizabeth J. Feuille and Anna Nowak‐Węgrzyn
19	 Food Protein‐Induced Proctocolitis Syndrome, 165
Jean‐Christoph Caubet and Anna Nowak‐Węgrzyn
20	 Eosinophilic Esophagitis, 173
Mirna Chehade
21	 Eosinophilic Gastroenteritis, 183
Mirna Chehade
22	 Food Allergy‐Induced Anaphylaxis, 191
Kate Welch and Hugh A. Sampson
23	 Adverse Reactions to Food and Drug Additives, 200
Julie Wang
24	 Celiac Disease, 208
Mirna Chehade
25	 Oral Food Challenges (Procedure), 217
Hugh A. Sampson
26	 Acute Urticaria, 222
Amanda L. Cox
27	 Chronic Urticaria, 235
Julie Wang
28	 Hereditary Angioedema, 245
Paula J. Busse
29	 Anaphylaxis, 256
Jacob D. Kattan
30	 Mastocytosis, 267
Amanda L. Cox
31	 Insect Sting Allergy, 278
Scott H. Sicherer
Contents  vii
32	 Latex Allergy, 288
Jennifer S. Kim
33	 Allergy to Antibiotics, 294
Jennifer S. Kim
34	 Allergy to Non‐Antibiotic Drugs, 301
Jacob D. Kattan
35	 Drug Desensitization, 308
Julie Wang
36	 Immunotherapy (Procedure), 314
Beth E. Corn
37	 Allergy Testing (Procedures: Skin Testing; Blood Tests), 319
Scott H. Sicherer
Part 2: Clinical Immunology
38	 Evaluating the Child with Recurrent Infections, 327
Shradha Agarwal
39	 Evaluating the Adult with Recurrent Infections, 335
Charlotte Cunningham‐Rundles
40	 Antibody Deficiencies, 341
Charlotte Cunningham‐Rundles
41	 Selective IgA Deficiency, 348
Shradha Agarwal
42	 Severe Combined Immunodeficiency, 355
Kate Welch and Elena S. Resnick
43	 Wiskott–Aldrich Syndrome, 362
Elena S. Resnick
44	 DiGeorge Syndrome, 368
Kate Welch and Elena S. Resnick
45	 Chronic Mucocutaneous Candidiasis, 375
Shradha Agarwal
46	 X‐linked Immune Dysregulation with Polyendocrinopathy (IPEX) Syndrome, 382
Elena S. Resnick
47	 Autoimmune Lymphoproliferative Syndrome, 388
Charlotte Cunningham‐Rundles
48	 Hyper IgE Syndrome, 393
Shradha Agarwal
viii  Contents
49	 Deficiencies of Complement, 402
Paula J. Busse
50	 Phagocytic Cell Disorders, 408
Charlotte Cunningham‐Rundles
51	 Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection in Infants, Children, and Adolescents, 415
Gail F. Shust and Roberto Posada
52	 Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection in Adults, 426
Timothy Sullivan and Michael Mullen
53	 Infections in the Compromised Host, 435
Charlotte Cunningham‐Rundles
Index, 441
A color plate section appears between pages 206 and 207
  ix
Contributors
Shradha Agarwal MD
Assistant Professor of Medicine
Division of Allergy/Immunology
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
New York, NY, USA
Supinda Bunyavanich MD, MPH
Assistant Professor
Elliot and Roslyn Jaffe Food Allergy Institute
Division of Allergy/Immunology
Department of Pediatrics
Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
New York, NY, USA
Paula J. Busse MD
Associate Professor
Department of Medicine
Division of Clinical Immunology
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
New York, NY, USA
Jean‐Christoph Caubet MD
Chef de clinique
Division of Allergy
Department of Pediatrics
University Hospitals of Geneva
Geneva, Switzerland
Mirna Chehade MD, MPH
Associate Professor of Pediatrics and Medicine
Elliot and Roslyn Jaffe Food Allergy Institute
Division of Allergy/Immunology
Department of Pediatrics
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
New York, NY, USA
Beth E. Corn MD
Assistant Professor of Medicine
Department of Clinical Immunology
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
New York, NY, USA
Amanda L. Cox MD
Assistant Professor of Pediatrics
Elliot and Roslyn Jaffe Food Allergy Institute
Division of Allergy/Immunology 
Department of Pediatrics
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
New York, NY, USA
Charlotte Cunningham‐Rundles  
MD, PhD
Professor of Medicine
Departments of Medicine and Pediatrics
The David S. Gottesman Professor
The Immunology Institute
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
New York, NY, USA
Elizabeth J. Feuille MD
Clinical Fellow
Division of Allergy/Immunology
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
New York, NY, USA
Satish Govindaraj MD
Associate Professor
Department of Otolaryngology–Head 
and Neck Surgery
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
New York, NY, USA
Emma Guttman‐Yassky MD, PhD
Associate Professor of Dermatology  
and Immunology
Departments of Dermatology and Immunology
Director, Center for Excellence in Eczema
Director, Occupational and Contact 
Dermatitis Clinic
Director, Laboratory for Investigation of 
Inflammatory Skin Diseases
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
New York, NY, USA
Yan W. Ho MD
Resident of Otolaryngology Program
Department of Otolaryngology–Head 
and Neck Surgery
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
New York, NY, USA
x  Contributors
Jacob D. Kattan MD
Assistant Professor of Allergy and Immunology
Elliot and Roslyn Jaffe Food Allergy Institute
Division of Allergy/Immunology
Department of Pediatrics
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
New York, NY, USA
Saakshi Khattri MD
Research Associate 
Laboratory of Investigative Dermatology
Rockefeller University
New York, NY, USA
Jennifer S. Kim MD
Attending Physician
NorthShore University HealthSystem
Evanston, IL, USA;
Elliot and Roslyn Jaffe Food Allergy Institute
Division of Allergy/Immunology
Department of Pediatrics
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
New York, NY, USA
Michael Mullen MD
Professor of Medicine
Director, Institute of Advanced Medicine
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
New York, NY, USA
Anna Nowak‐Węgrzyn MD
Associate Professor of Pediatrics
Elliot and Roslyn Jaffe Food Allergy Institute
Division of Allergy/Immunology
Department of Pediatrics
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
New York, NY, USA
Roberto Posada MD
Associate Professor of Pediatrics (Infectious 
Diseases) and Medical Education
Director Pediatric, Adolescent and Young 
Adult HIV Program
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
New York, NY, USA
Elena S. Resnick MD
Assistant Professor of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
New York, NY
Mariya Rozenblit
Medical Student
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
New York, NY, USA
Hugh A. Sampson MD
Kurt Hirschhorn Professor of Pediatrics
Dean for Translational Biomedical  
Sciences
Director, Elliot and Roslyn Jaffe Food  
Allergy Institute
Division of Allergy/Immunology
Department of Pediatrics
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
New York, NY, USA
Gail F. Shust MD
Assistant Professor
Department of Pediatrics and Medical 
Education
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
New York, NY, USA
Scott H. Sicherer MD
Elliot and Roslyn Jaffe Professor of Pediatrics, 
Allergy/Immunology
Jaffe Food Allergy Institute
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
New York, NY, USA
Gwen S. Skloot MD
Associate Professor of Medicine
Division of Pulmonary, 
Critical Care and Sleep Medicine
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
New York, NY, USA
Timothy Sullivan MD
Instructor
Division of Infectious Diseases
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
New York, NY, USA
Julie Wang MD
Associate Professor of Pediatrics
Elliot and Roslyn Jaffe Food  
Allergy Institute
Division of Allergy/Immunology
Department of Pediatrics
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
New York, NY, USA
Kate Welch MD
Clinical Fellow
Division of Allergy/Immunology
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
New York, NY, USA
  xi
Series Foreword
Now more than ever, immediacy in obtaining accurate and practical information is the coin of the 
realm in providing high quality patient care. The Mount Sinai Expert Guides series addresses this 
vital need by providing accurate, up‐to‐date guidance, written by experts in formats that are 
accessible in the patient care setting: websites, smartphone apps and portable books. The Icahn 
School of Medicine, which was chartered in 1963, embodies a deep tradition of pre‐eminence in 
clinical care and scholarship that was first shaped by the founding of the Mount Sinai Hospital in 
1855. Today, the Mount Sinai Health System, comprised of seven hospitals anchored by the Icahn 
School of Medicine, is one of the largest health care systems in the United States, and is revolution-
izing medicine through its embracing of transformative technologies for clinical diagnosis and 
treatment. The Mount Sinai Expert Guides series builds upon both this historical renown and 
contemporary excellence. Leading experts across a range of disciplines provide practical yet sage 
advice in a digestible format that is ideal for trainees, mid‐level providers and practicing physicians. 
Few medical centers in the USA could offer this type of breadth while relying exclusively on its 
own physicians, yet here no compromises were required in offering a truly unique series that is 
sure to become embedded within the key resources of busy providers. In producing this series, 
the editors and authors are fortunate to have an equally dynamic and forward‐viewing partner in 
Wiley Blackwell, which together ensures that health care professionals will benefit from a unique, 
first‐class effort that will advance the care of their patients.
Scott Friedman MD
Series Editor
Dean for Therapeutic Discovery
Fishberg Professor and Chief, Division of Liver Diseases
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
New York, NY, USA
xii 
Preface
In the past 60 years, allergic disorders have increased dramatically in “westernized” countries, 
especially in North America, Europe and Australia/New Zealand. In the last half of the twentieth 
century, increases in respiratory allergies, i.e. asthma and allergic rhinitis, largely accounted for 
the rise in prevalence. However, in the last 15 years the prevalence of food allergies/anaphylaxis 
and atopic dermatitis have increased over two‐ to three‐fold while the prevalence of respiratory 
allergies have leveled‐off. Allergic disorders now affect about one‐third of the US population and 
cost the health care system several billions of dollars each year in medical expenses and lost 
wages. Drug allergy is estimated to affect about 10% of the world’s population and 20% of 
hospitalized patients. Over the past two decades, scientists and clinicians have made great strides 
in the diagnosis and management of allergic disorders. The past several decades have also wit-
nessed tremendous advances in our recognition of immunodeficiency disorders and our under-
standing of the human immune system. Advances in molecular genetic techniques and other 
technical advances have led to the identification and characterization of many new immunodefi-
ciency disorders that have enabled clinicians to more appropriately treat patients afflicted with 
these disorders. Early recognition and initiation of therapy is key to preserving a more normal life 
for children afflicted with these disorders. In addition, investigators have now recognized that 
adults also develop various forms of primary and secondary immunodeficiency diseases and 
require timely evaluation and management of their disorder.
In this book, members of the pediatric and adult Divisions of Allergy and Immunology at the 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai have teamed‐up to provide a clinician‐friendly manual 
outlining the diagnosis and management of a wide variety of allergic and immunodeficient disor-
ders. Members of the Allergy/Immunology group have provided a brief outlines on the etiology 
and pathogenesis of various disorders, succinct guidelines on the relevant historical and labora-
tory information necessary for establishing a timely and accurate diagnosis, guidelines on the 
most current forms of therapy to manage the various disorders, and a brief discussion of antici-
pated natural history and outcomes. Each chapter author provides her/his perspective on evaluat-
ing and managing various allergic and immunologic disorders based on years of experience 
dealing with allergic and immunodeficient patients. This book is not meant to be an exhaustive 
discussion of allergic/immunologic conditions (although references are provided to satisfy the 
most inquisitive reader), but a useful guidebook enabling the busy clinician to recognize patients 
afflicted with allergic or immunologic disorders and provide them with the most current manage-
ment strategies.
Hugh A. Sampson, MD
Kurt Hirschhorn Professor of Pediatrics
Dean for Translational Biomedical Sciences
Director, Elliot and Roslyn Jaffe Food Allergy Institute
Division of Allergy/Immunology; Department of Pediatrics
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
New York, NY, USA
  xiii
List of Abbreviations
ABG	
arterial blood gas
ACD	
allergic contact dermatitis
ACE‐I	
angiotensin‐converting enzyme inhibitor
AD	
atopic dermatitis
ADA	
adenosine deaminase
AD‐HIES	
autosomal dominant hyper IgE syndrome
AGEP	
acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis
AHR	
airway hyper‐responsiveness
AKC	
atopic keratoconjunctivitis
ALPS	
autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome
APECED	
autoimmune polyendocrinopathy, candidiasis, and ectodermal dystrophy (syndrome)
APT	
atopy patch test
ASM	
aggressive systemic mastocytosis
BMP	
basic metabolic panel 
BP	
blood pressure
cART	
combination antiretroviral therapy
CBC	
complete blood count
CD	
celiac disease
CDC	
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
CGD	
chronic granulomatous disease
CLL	
chronic lymphocytic leukemia
CM	
cow’s milk
CM	
cutaneous mastocytosis
CMC	
chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis
CMV	
cytomegalovirus
COPD	
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
CRP	
C‐reactive protein
CSF	
cerebrospinal fluid
CT	
computed tomography
CU	
chronic urticaria
CVID	
common variable immunodeficiency
DAF	
decay accelerating factor
DBPCFC	
double‐blind, placebo‐controlled oral food challenge
DCM	
diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis
DGP	
deamidated gliadin peptide
DLCO	
diffusion capacity for carbon monoxide
DRESS	
drug reaction or rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptom
EASI	
Eczema Area and Severity Index
EG	
eosinophilic gastroenteritis
EGD	
esophagogastroduodenoscopy
xiv  List of Abbreviations
EIA	
enzyme immunoassay
EoE	
eosinophilic esophagitis
ESR	
erythrocyte sedimentation rate
FDA	
Food and Drug Administration
FDEIA	
food‐dependent, exercised‐induced anaphylaxis
FeNO	
fractional exhaled nitric oxide
FESS	
functional endoscopic sinus surgery
FEV1	
forced expiratory volume in 1 second
FISH	
fluoroescence in situ hybridization
FPIES	
food protein‐induced enterocolitis syndrome
FPIP	
food protein‐induced proctocolitis
FVC	
forced vital capacity
G‐CSF	
granulocyte colony‐stimulating factor
GERD	
gastroesophageal reflux disease
GI	
gastrointestinal
GM‐CSF	
granulocyte macrophage colony‐stimulating factor
GPC	
giant papillary conjunctivitis
HAE	
hereditary angioedema
H&E	
hematoxylin and eosin
HEENT	
head, eyes, ears, nose, and throat
HEPA	
high‐efficiency particulate air
HES	
hypereosinophilic syndrome
5‐HIAA	
5‐hydroxyindoleacetic acid
HIES	
hyper IgE syndrome
HLA	
human leukocyte antigen
HMW	
high molecular weight
HPF	
high power field
HSCT	
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
HUS	
hemolytic uremic syndrome
HVAC	
heating, ventilating, and air conditioning
IFA	
immunofluorescent antibody
IFN	
interferon
Ig	
immunoglobulin
IL	
interleukin
IPEX	
immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, X‐linked
ISM	
indolent systemic mastocytosis
ITP	
immune thrombocytopenia
IVIg	
intravenous immunoglobulin
LAD	
leukocyte adhesion deficiency
LFT	
liver function test
LMW	
low molecular weight
LTC4	
leukotriene C4
LTP	
lipid transfer protein
MAC	
membrane attack complex
MASP	
mannan‐binding lectin‐associated protease
MBL	
mannose‐binding lectin
MBP	
mannose‐binding protein
MCAS	
mast cell activation syndrome
List of Abbreviations  xv
MCL	
mast cell leukemia
MHC	
major histocompatibility complex
MMAS	
monoclonal mast cell activation syndrome
MRI	
magnetic resonance imaging
MRSA	
methicillin‐resistant Staphylococcus aureus
MSG	
monosodium glutamate
NARES	
non‐allergic rhinitis with eosinophilia
NIH	
National Institutes of Health
NRTI	
nucleoside reverse‐transcriptase inhibitor
NSAID	
non‐steroidal anti‐inflammatory drug
OA	
occupational asthma
OAS	
oral allergy syndrome
OFC	
oral food challenge
OMC	
osteomeatal complex
PAC	
perennial allergic conjunctivitis
pd	
plasma‐derived
PE	
pulmonary embolism
PEFR	
peak expiratory flow rate
PEP	
post‐exposure prophylaxis
PGD2	
prostaglandin D2
PLE	
protein‐losing enteropathy
PMTCT	
prevention of mother‐to‐child transmission
PNH	
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
ppb	
parts per billion
PPI	
proton pump inhibitor
PrEP	
pre‐exposure prophylaxis
RADS	
reactive airway dysfunction syndrome
RAST	
radioallergosorbent test
RSV	
respiratory syncytial virus
SAC	
seasonal allergic conjunctivitis
SCF	
stem cell factor
SCID	
severe combined immunodeficiency
SCIT	
subcutaneous immunotherapy
SCORAD	
Severity Scoring of Atopic Dermatitis
SJS	
Stevens–Johnson syndrome
SLE	
systemic lupus erythematosus
SLIT	
sublingual immunotherapy
SM	
systemic mastocytosis
SM‐AHNMD	
systemic mastocytosis with an associated hematologic non‐mast cell lineage 
disorder
SNOT	
sinonasal outcome test
TEN	
toxic epidermal necrolysis
TMEP	
telangiectasia macularis eruptiva perstans
TNF	
tumor necrosis factor
TREC	
T‐cell receptor excision circle
Treg	
regulatory T‐cell
TSH	
thyroid stimulating hormone
TTG	
tissue transglutaminase
xvi  List of Abbreviations
UACS	
upper airway cough syndrome
UP	
urticaria pigmentosa
URI	
upper respiratory infection
URTI	
upper respiratory tract infection
VIP	
vasoactive intestinal peptide
VIT	
venom immunotherapy
VKC	
vernal keratoconjunctivitis
VL	
viral load
WAS	
Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome
WASp	
Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome protein
WB	
Western blot
WHIM	
warts, hypogammaglobulinemia, infections, and myelokathexis (syndrome)
WHO	
World Health Organization
WIP	
WASp‐interacting protein
XLN	
X‐linked neutropenia
XLT	
X‐linked thrombocytopenia
  xvii
About the Companion Website
This series is accompanied by a companion website:
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
The website includes:
• Case studies
• ICD codes
• Interactive MCQs
• Patient advice
Part 1
Allergy
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
  3
Atopic Dermatitis in Infants 
and Young Children
Jean‐Christoph Caubet1 and Anna Nowak‐Węgrzyn2
1 Division of Allergy, Department of Pediatrics, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
2 Department of Pediatrics, Division of Allergy/Immunology, Jaffe Food Allergy Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 
New York, NY, USA
Chapter 1
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• AD is a familial, common, inflammatory skin disorder characterized by chronically relapsing 
course and intensely pruritic eczematous flares. The term “eczema” alone generally refers to 
AD and these terms are often used interchangeably.
Disease classification
• Although clinically indistinguishable, AD has been categorized into an immunoglobulin E (IgE) 
associated form (true AD, formerly called extrinsic AD) and a non‐IgE‐associated form (“non‐
atopic” dermatitis, formerly called intrinsic AD). However, this classification is controversial 
as the absence of sensitization to common food allergens and aeroallergens may be only a 
transient factor.
Incidence/prevalence
• AD affects an estimated 18 million people in the United States.
• The estimated lifetime prevalence in children ranges from 10–30%.
• Wide variations in prevalence have been observed between countries, suggesting that environ-
mental factors determine AD expression.
Overall Bottom Line
• Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a common, chronic, relapsing, inflammatory skin disorder and may 
be the initial step of the so‐called atopic march.
• Pathogenesis is complex and not fully understood, but recent investigations have highlighted 
two cornerstone features of AD: defective epidermal barrier and cutaneous inflammation 
involving both IgE‐ and T‐cell‐mediated responses.
• Diagnosis of AD is based on clinical features.
• A complete allergy investigation is required in patients with moderate to severe AD or a 
history of exacerbation after food ingestion. The younger the age of onset and the more 
severe the rash, the more likely foods are to trigger AD in children.
• Although there is no cure for AD, the goals of treatment are to reduce symptoms, prevent 
exacerbations, minimize side effects, and provide adequate psychological support.
4  Part 1: Allergy
Economic impact
• The economic impact of AD is important and will likely increase in proportion to increasing 
disease prevalence. The current estimates range widely, from $364 million to $3.8 billion ­dollars 
per year.
Etiology
• The exact etiologic factors leading to AD are not well defined.
• Genetically predisposed patients with AD have an epidermal barrier dysfunction, linked to 
decreased or impaired function of essential barrier proteins (i.e. filaggrin and ceramide).
• Common triggers in AD include food proteins, aeroallergens, stress, climate, irritants, and 
microbes.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• AD is mainly characterized by a defective epidermal barrier and cutaneous inflammation.
• Genetically predisposed patients with AD have an epidermal barrier dysfunction; contributing 
factors include decreased ceramide levels and loss of function of crucial protein (e.g. filaggrin). 
This can result in enhanced transepidermal water loss and facilitated penetration of environ-
mental allergens, promoting allergic skin inflammation.
• The complex underlying immune response of AD involves both IgE‐mediated and T‐cell‐medi-
ated delayed immune responses. Acute skin lesions of AD are characterized by cells containing 
Th2 cytokines (i.e. IL‐4, IL‐5, IL‐13 and IL‐22), whereas Th1 cells expressing γ‐interferon (IFN‐γ) 
are most commonly found in more chronic lesions.
• Although elevated serum total IgE levels can be found in 80–85% of patients with AD, the 
clinical relevance of associated sensitizations has been difficult to ascertain.
• Foods can cause exacerbation in a subset of patients (i.e. approximately one‐third of young 
children with a moderate or severe AD). Similarly, exacerbation of AD can occur with exposure 
to aeroallergens such as house dust mites, animal danders, and pollens.
• Most patients with AD have an inadequate innate immune response to epicutaneous microbes, 
in part responsible for increased susceptibility to infections (bacteria, yeast, viruses) and coloni-
zation with Staphylococcus aureus. These microbes contribute, at least partially, to the skin 
inflammation and can potentially lead to exacerbations of the disease.
Predictive/risk factors
Section 2: Prevention
Risk factor
Odds ratio
Genetic factors (filaggrin mutation)
3.73–7.1
Breastfeeding
Controversial
Tobacco
1.97
Familial history of atopy
2–6
Bottom line/clinical pearl
• For infants at high risk of atopy, exclusive breastfeeding for at least 4 months and/or feeding 
with extensively hydrolyzed formula decreases cumulative incidence of AD in the first 2 years 
of life. There is no prevention strategy proven to protect beyond the first few years of life.
Atopic Dermatitis in Infants and Young Children  5
Screening
Not applicable for this topic. Studies on screening for filaggrin mutations are ongoing.
Primary prevention
• Exclusive breastfeeding for at least 4 months and/or feeding with extensively hydrolyzed 
formula decreases cumulative incidence of AD in the first 2 years of life.
• Although several studies support a preventative effect of treating with probiotics during preg-
nancy or early infancy to delay the onset of AD, controversy persists and more studies are 
needed to confirm these data.
Secondary prevention
• Optimal skin care remains the cornerstone of the management of AD.
• Avoidance of common irritants and specific allergen triggers (foods and/or aeroallergens) in 
selected patients constitute a large part of secondary prevention of AD.
• Other important measures include control of household temperature and humidity; use of mild 
soaps for bathing (neutral pH and minimal defatting capabilities); bathing in warm water once 
a day for 15–20 minutes, pat dry and immediate application of emollients; nails trimming to 
decrease abrasion to skin; use of clothing made of cotton instead of synthetic fibers and wool.
Section 3: Diagnosis (Algorithm 1.1)
Skin manifestations consistent with AD
e.g. an eczematous pruritic dermatitis
Assessment of the severity of AD
(e.g. SCORAD)
Consider other conditions
(see differential diagnosis)
Clinical history and physical 
examination consistent with
diagnosis of AD 
An allergy investigation is recommended in cases of:
• Moderate–severe AD
• History of AD exacerbation by specific foods
No
No elimination diet
Diagnostic elimination diet over a period of
4–6 weeks and, in case of improvement,
physician-supervised oral food challenge to confirm or 
exclude an associated food allergy
Positive allergy tests with a 
possible clinical relevance
Negative allergy
tests
Yes
Medical management
Algorithm 1.1  Diagnosis of atopic dermatitis
6  Part 1: Allergy
Differential diagnosis
Typical presentation
• Atopic dermatitis occurs in the first year of life in 60% of cases, and by the age of 5 years in nearly 
85% of cases. Patients typically present with pruritus and chronically relapsing/remitting eczema-
tous lesions having a typical morphology and distribution related to the age of the patient.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• The diagnosis of AD is based on a constellation of clinical features, pruritus being the cardinal 
symptom of this disorder.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• The diagnosis of AD is based on a constellation of clinical features.
• Recurrent pruritus is the only symptom of AD.
• Physical examination reveals xerosis and typical eczematous lesions with different morphologic 
aspects and locations depending on the age of the patient. Eczematous rashes tend to be 
generalized and affect the face and extensor surfaces of the limbs in infants and toddlers, 
while in older children and adults rashes localize to the peri‐orbital area, flexor surfaces of the 
joints, and about the wrists and ankles.
• Allergic investigations are usually not indicated for patients with mild AD.
• In patients with moderate–severe atopic dermatitis or with a positive history of exacerbation 
after exposure to a specific allergen, an allergy investigation including skin tests, specific IgE 
measurement, and/or an oral provocation test are indicated.
Differential diagnosis
Features
Scabies
Papules, finger web involvement, positive scraping for 
scabies mite
Allergic contact dermatitis
Positive exposure history, rash in area of exposure, absence of 
family history
Seborrheic dermatitis
Greasy, scaly lesions, absence of family history
Zinc and biotin deficiency
Eczematous lesions localized in peri‐oral area and rectum 
(oral, anal)
Psoriasis
Localized patches on extensor surfaces, scalp, buttocks, 
pitted nails
Ichthyosis
Usually non‐pruritic, not the typical distribution pattern 
seen in AD, no inflammatory lesions (except in Netherton’s 
syndrome)
Netherton’s syndrome (severe, 
autosomal recessive form of ichthyosis 
associated with mutations in the 
SPINK5 gene)
Chronic skin inflammation, universal pruritus, severe 
dehydration and stunted growth, hair shaft defect 
(trichorrhexis invaginata), also known as “bamboo hair”
Immunodeficiency: severe combined 
immunodeficiency syndrome, hyper‐IgE 
syndrome, Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome
Severe eczema, positive history of multiple infections, 
growth failure
Atopic Dermatitis in Infants and Young Children  7
• One of the major clinical features of AD is its chronicity, characterized by an intermittent course 
with flares and remission.
• A careful allergy history is of major importance to identify potential allergen triggers (e.g. 
­aeroallergens and foods), particularly in patients with moderate–severe AD. Identification of 
common irritants is also an important part of the history.
• The clinician should evaluate the impact on quality of life, particularly sleeping and psychologic 
aspects.
Physical examination
• Characteristic skin findings in AD include primarily xerosis and eczematous lesions with ­different 
morphologic aspects and locations depending on the age of the patient.
• Acute and subacute eczematous skin lesions are typically found in infants and young children, 
with intensely pruritic, erythematous, papulo‐vesicular lesions, excoriation, and serous exudate. 
The lesions are typically localized on the scalp, face (cheeks and chin), and extensor surfaces 
of the extremities. In older children, lesions are more commonly found in the flexor surfaces 
(antecubital and popliteal fossa), neck, wrists, and ankles.
• Lichenification is rarely seen in infancy but is characteristic of childhood AD.
• Of note, peri‐orbital hyperpigmentation and Dennie–Morgan folds (prominent folds of skin 
under the lower eyelid) are common peri‐ocular findings in patients with AD.
Useful clinical decision rules and calculators
• The UK diagnostic criteria are the most extensively validated for AD and are based on the classic 
diagnostic criteria of Hanifin and Rajka.
• The patient must have an itchy skin condition in the last 12 months plus three or more of the 
following criteria:
• Onset below age 2 (not used in children under 4 years);
• History of flexural involvement;
• History of a generally dry skin;
• Personal history of other atopic disease (in children aged under 4 years, history of atopic 
disease in a first degree relative may be included); and
• Visible flexural dermatitis as per photographic protocol.
Disease severity classification
• There are many tools to evaluate the severity of AD, although they have been used mainly in 
clinical research trials. The most well known:
• Severity Scoring of Atopic Dermatitis (SCORAD): uses the “rule of 9’s” to assess disease 
extent and evaluates five clinical characteristics to determine disease severity; and
• Eczema Area and Severity Index (EASI): assesses extent of diseases at four body sites and 
measures four clinical signs on a scale of 0–3.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• Skin prick tests and/or specific IgE to common food allergens should be restricted to patients 
with moderate–severe AD or to patients having a positive history of exacerbation after specific 
food ingestion.
• The most common food allergens in childhood AD are hen’s egg, cow’s milk, peanut, soybean, 
wheat, tree nuts, fish, and shellfish. Hen’s egg, cow’s milk, and peanut account for about 80% 
of food allergy diagnosed by food challenge in children with AD.
8  Part 1: Allergy
• Skin prick tests and/or specific IgE to aeroallergens (i.e. pollens, animal danders, and dust mites) 
should be performed according to the history and the age of the patient.
• Atopy patch testing is an additional tool in selected cases in which skin prick tests or specific 
IgE fail to identify a suspected food. It is not recommended as a routine diagnostic test in AD.
• Oral food challenges are considered the gold standard to diagnose an associated food allergy.
• Scraping to exclude tinea corporis is occasionally helpful.
• A swab of infected skin may help with the isolation of a specific organism and antibiotic sensi-
tivity assessment.
• Skin biopsy is usually not required to confirm the diagnosis of AD but in rare difficult cases it 
can be useful to exclude other causes.
Lists of imaging techniques
Not applicable for this topic.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis of disease
• Positive skin prick tests or specific IgE to food(s) should only lead to a restrictive elimination diet 
in selected patients with moderate–severe AD or a positive history of exacerbation after food 
ingestion. Elimination diets based on positive skin prick tests or food‐specific IgE levels should 
be of ­limited duration unless there is clear evidence of clinical food allergy.
• Scabies should always be excluded in patients with severe pruritus.
• In patients with severe AD, poor growth, and/or frequent or severe infection, an immunodefi-
ciency should be suspected.
Section 4: Treatment (Algorithm 1.2)
Treatment rationale
• The first line therapy is based on restoring skin hydration (e.g. hydrating baths and emollient 
creams) and reducing inflammation (e.g. topical corticosteroids and/or calcineurin inhibitors).
• Rarely, patients need systemic treatments with oral corticosteroids or immunosuppressive 
agents. These treatments should be re‐evaluated and adapted regularly in order to minimize 
potential side effects.
• Antibacterial or antiviral drugs are indicated only in patients with clinical signs of active infec-
tion, particularly resulting from Staphylococcus aureus and herpes simplex virus infection. 
In addition, the role of allergens, irritants, physical environment, and emotional stressors 
need to be considered, as controlling these factors is of major importance in optimizing 
management.
• Food elimination diets should be restricted to selected patients with a positive allergy investi-
gation and the potential benefits (decreased AD severity and improved quality of life) and 
potential disadvantages (decreased quality of life because of food avoidance and risk of 
­anaphylactic reactions to a food) need to be discussed with the patient and his/her family.
• A 4–6 week trial of food elimination may be followed by food reintroduction (oral food 
­challenge) under physician supervision to document reappearance of eczematous lesions. In a 
subset of children with persistent AD and no prior history of acute allergic reactions upon food 
ingestion, following food elimination, classic acute allergic symptoms may be observed 
­following food reintroduction including hives or even anaphylaxis.
• Oral non‐sedating antihistamines have a minor effect on the control of pruritus associated with 
AD. The first generation, sedating antihistamines (e.g. hydroxyzine) can be helpful when used 
at bedtime to facilitate falling asleep.
Atopic Dermatitis in Infants and Young Children  9
• Patients should understand that therapy is not curative but that avoidance of exacerbating fac-
tors together with proper daily skin care can result in control of symptoms and improve the 
long‐term outcome. The clinician should take into account the impact of AD on quality of life 
and correctly manage the associated stress that can be responsible for acute exacerbations.
When to hospitalize
• Hospitalization is rarely required for patients with AD.
• Patients with severe AD who do not improve with correct outpatient therapy might require 
hospitalization.
• Patients with cellulitis or severe secondary infection (e.g. eczema herpeticum caused by primary 
infection with herpes simplex virus) may need intravenous antibiotics and sedation.
• Hospitalization is sometimes necessary to clear the patient’s skin before skin testing and/or oral 
food challenge.
Managing the hospitalized patient
• Appropriate antimicrobial agent therapy.
• Intensive skin care may include soaking bath or wet wraps.
• Oral food challenges to the suspected food can be carried out during hospitalization.
Education
(chronic nature of the disease, importance of treatment
adherence, appropriate use and application of topical therapy)
Psychological aspects
Assessment of the severity of AD
(e.g. SCORAD)
Moderate AD
Non-active eczema
Mild AD
Severe AD
• Emollients
• Moderate potency 
   topical corticosteroid
• Topical calcineurin 
   inhibitors
• Wet wraps
• Emollients
• Emollients
• Mild potency topical 
  corticosteroid
• Emollients
• Moderate potency 
   topical corticosteroid
• Topical calcineurin 
   inhibitors
• Wet wraps
• Phototherapy
• Systemic therapy
Evidence of infection?
(fever, pustules, oozing, crust, erosion,
lymphadenopathy)
Mild or limited infection
Topical bacitracin, mupirocin,
or retapamulin
Moderate infection
Oral cephalexin or clindamycin for
empiric therapy unless
sensitivities indicate otherwise
Severe infection
Hospital admission for IV
antistaphylococcal 
antibiotic therapy with
clindamycin or vancomycin
Identiﬁcation and elimination of 
potential triggers
(irritants, proven food and environmental
allergens)
No
Yes
Step-up or step-down treatment according to the symptoms control 
Algorithm 1.2  Management of atopic dermatitis
10  Part 1: Allergy
• Hospitalization is beneficial in selected patients by removing the patient from environmental 
triggers (irritants, allergens) and by intensifying treatment.
• Adequate educational information should be provided to the patient and their family in order 
to improve adherence with the treatment regimen.
• Psychological issues are also more easily addressed during a hospitalization.
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comment
Identification and 
elimination of triggering 
factors
Avoidance of common irritants (e.g. soaps, toiletries, wool, and chemicals) 
are recommended as well as a correct control of temperature and humidity 
that may trigger the itch–scratch cycle
Elimination diets should only be recommended in selected patients based 
on a positive allergy investigation
Emollients
An effective moisturizer constitutes the cornerstone of the treatment 
of AD as it helps to restore and preserve the skin barrier (e.g. CeraVe®, 
Vanicream®, Vaseline®)
Topical corticosteroids
Used primarily to control acute exacerbation of AD
Seven classes ranked according to their potency. The choice and the duration 
will be based on the severity of the lesions and should be re‐evaluated 
regularly. In general, the least potent steroid that is effective should be used
Topical calcineurin 
inhibitors
Currently indicated as second line treatment for intermittent use in children 
aged 2 years and older with moderate–severe AD (tacrolimus ointment 
0.03%) and mild–moderate AD (pimecrolimus cream 1%). Of note, 
tacrolimus ointment 1% is indicated for patients 16 years and older
Systemic corticosteroids
Rarely indicated, but a short course of oral prednisone can be used in 
severe acute exacerbation of AD
Antistaphylococcal 
antibiotics
In patients with extensive skin infection, a course of systemic antibiotics 
is indicated: cephalosporin (e.g. cephalexin twice daily for 14–21 days) or 
penicillinase‐resistant penicillins are usually beneficial
Topical mupirocin is useful for the treatment of localized impetigo lesions
Antiviral therapy
In patients with disseminated herpes simplex virus infection, acyclovir 
is indicated, orally for less severe infection and intravenously for widely 
disseminated disease (30 mg/kg/day)
• Cyclosporine
• Mycophenolate 
mofetil
• Azathioprine
• IFN‐γ
These drugs have multiple potential severe side effects and should be used 
only in selected patients with persistent severe AD
Psychological
Psychological evaluation or counseling should be considered in patients 
with AD due to the main impact on their quality of life and as stress is a 
potential trigger
Phototherapy
UV therapy can be a useful treatment for recalcitrant AD. The most effective 
phototherapy option that is available in the United States is narrow band UVB
Wet dressing
This tool can be used in combination with topical corticoids
Prevention/management of complications
• Patients should be carefully instructed in the used of topical corticosteroids (i.e. avoidance of 
face, genital, and intertriginous areas). Although the systemic effects of topical corticosteroids 
Atopic Dermatitis in Infants and Young Children  11
are minor, corticophobia is one of the main limiting factors in the treatment of patients with 
AD. The clinician should provide full explanations to achieve good adherence.
• Although there was a Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Black Box warning in 2005, it 
seems that the benefits of using calcineurin inhibitors in the appropriately selected patient 
population outweighs the theoretical risk of increased malignancy.
• Use of systemic immunosuppressive drugs may be associated with several, potentially severe, 
side effects and these drugs should be restricted to patients with severe and uncontrolled AD 
unresponsive to standard treatment.
Section 5: Special populations
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 6: Prognosis
Natural history of untreated disease
Not applicable for this topic.
Prognosis for treated patients
Not applicable for this topic.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
• The patients and/or parents should be instructed on the specific aspects of the disease (i.e. 
mainly its chronicity and exacerbating factors) and on appropriate treatment options to control 
the symptoms. A treatment plan for skin care should be provided and re‐evaluated regularly 
during follow‐up visits.
• As the diagnosis is only based on clinical criteria, it is important to reassess if the diagnosis 
is correct, particularly in patients with uncontrolled symptoms despite an optimal 
treatment.
Clinical pearls
• Clinicians should use a systematic approach that includes skin hydration, topical anti‐
inflammatory medications, antipruritic therapy, and antibacterial measures.
• Elimination of exacerbating factors, including allergens, is a cornerstone of AD management.
• The clinician should recognize that AD has a significant effect on the patient’s and family’s 
quality of life.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• AD typically manifests in early childhood, with onset before 5 years of age in approximately 
90% of patients.
• Although it was initially reported that more than 80% of children outgrow their AD by 
adolescence, more recent studies present less optimistic outcomes with AD persisting into 
adulthood, even if the relapses are often less common and mild.
• Adults with a history of childhood AD are at an increased risk for occupational hand 
dermatoses.
• AD is usually considered as the first step of the so‐called atopic march and it is estimated that 
30–60% of patients with AD will develop allergic rhinitis or asthma.
12  Part 1: Allergy
Section 7: Reading list
Boguniewicz M, Leung DYM. Atopic dermatitis. In Adkinson NF, Busse WW, Bochner BS, et al. (eds) Middleton’s 
Allergy: Principles and Practice, 8th edn. Saunders; 2013, 540–58
Brenninkmeijer EE, Schram ME, Leeflang MM, Bos JD, Spuls PI. Diagnostic criteria for atopic dermatitis: a 
­systematic review. Br J Dermatol 2008;158:754–65
Caubet JC, Eigenmann PA. Allergic triggers in atopic dermatitis. Immunol Allergy Clin North Am 
2010;30:289–307
Hanifin JM, Cooper KD, Ho VC, Kang S, Krafchik BR, Margolis DJ, et al. Guidelines of care for atopic dermatitis, 
developed in accordance with the American Academy of Dermatology (AAD)/American Academy of 
Dermatology Association. Administrative Regulations for Evidence‐Based Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am 
Acad Dermatol 2004;50:391–404
Leung DY, Bieber T. Atopic dermatitis. Lancet 2003;361:151–60
Mancini AJ, Kaulback K, Chamlin SL. The socioeconomic impact of atopic dermatitis in the United States: a 
systematic review. Pediatr Dermatol 2008;25:1–6
Schneider L, Tilles S, Lio P, Boguniewicz M, Beck L, LeBovidge J, et al. Atopic dermatitis: a practice parameter 
update 2012. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2013;131:295–9, e1–27
Suggested websites
A website to evaluate the SCORAD: http://adserver.sante.univ‐nantes.fr/Scorad.html
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Atopic dermatitis: A practice 
parameter update 2012
J Allergy Clin Immunol
2013
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/23374261)
Guidelines for the diagnosis and 
management of food allergy 
in the United States: Summary 
of the NIAID‐Sponsored Expert 
Panel Report
J. Allergy Clin Immunol
2010
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/21134568)
International society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Eczematous reactions to food in 
atopic eczema: position paper 
of the EAACI and GA2LEN
European Academy of Allergy 
and Clinical Immunology 
(EAACI)
2007
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/17573718)
Diagnosis and treatment of 
atopic dermatitis in children 
and adults: European 
Academy of Allergy and 
Clinical Immunology/American 
Academy of Allergy, Asthma 
and Immunology/PRACTALL 
Consensus Report
European Academy of Allergy 
and Clinical Immunology/
American Academy of Allergy, 
Asthma and Immunology/
PRACTALL Consensus Group
2006
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/16867052)
Atopic Dermatitis in Infants and Young Children  13
Section 9: Evidence
Type of evidence
Title, comment
Date
Prospective study
Prevalence of IgE‐mediated food allergy 
among children with atopic dermatitis
Comment: This study demonstrates that 
approximately one‐third of children with 
refractory, moderate–severe AD have 
IgE‐mediated clinical reactivity to food 
proteins
1998
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/9481027)
Prospective study
Common loss‐of‐function variants of the 
epidermal barrier protein filaggrin are 
a major predisposing factor for atopic 
dermatitis
Comment: This work establishes a key role 
for impaired skin barrier function in the 
development of atopic disease
2006
(http://www.nature.com/ 
ng/journal/v38/n4/abs/
ng1767.html)
Prospective study
Loss‐of‐function variants in the filaggrin 
gene are a significant risk factor for 
peanut allergy
Comment: Filaggrin mutations represent 
a significant risk factor for IgE‐mediated 
peanut allergy, indicating a role for 
epithelial barrier dysfunction in the 
pathogenesis of this disease
2011
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/21377035)
Section 10: Images
Figure 1.1  A child with multiple food allergies and severe persistent atopic dermatitis (AD) with acute 
exacerbation due to Staphylococcus aureus superinfection. Note the diffuse erythroderma and open sores. 
See color plate 1.1.
14  Part 1: Allergy
Figure 1.2  AD chronic lesions of skin hypertrophy, lichenification, hyperpigmentation, and xerosis. See color 
plate 1.2.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at:
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for  
patients, and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
  15
Atopic Dermatitis in Teenagers and Adults
Saakshi Khattri1 and Emma Guttman‐Yassky2
1 Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA
2 Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 2
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a chronic, erythematous, eczematous, pruritic rash that generally 
begins in childhood; however, late AD can occur in adults.
• It is characterized by remissions and exacerbations.
Disease classification
• Acute atopic dermatitis: characterized by erythematous, eczematous, weeping lesions in 
the acute stage. Secondary infection with Staphylococcus aureus can give rise to 
impetiginization.
• Chronic atopic dermatitis: lichenification (thickening of skin markings) is a prominent feature of 
the disease.
Another classification is based on age at onset:
• Childhood AD or early onset AD: starts in children and is the most common form. Lesions are 
generally located in the antecubital and popliteal fossae, the face and neck. The lesions are 
typically exudative.
• Adult onset AD or late onset AD: distribution can be the same as that seen in the childhood 
type; however, lichenification and excoriations are more common and exudative lesions are less 
commonly seen.
Overall Bottom Line
• Most common inflammatory skin disease affecting 15–25% children and 2–7% adults.
• Characterized by pruritic, erythematous plaques with oozing and crusting in the acute stages 
and lichenification in chronic stages.
• Characterized by remissions and exacerbations.
• Mild atopic dermatitis can be treated with emollients and topical medications such as 
corticosteroids and calcineurin inhibitors. Moderate to severe disease requires systemic 
treatment (UV therapy, systemic steroids, cyclosporine).
• Recent research suggests immune basis of disease with involvement of Th2, Th22, and some 
involvement of Th17 lymphocytes.
16  Part 1: Allergy
The third classification is based on level of the IgE:
• Extrinsic AD: 80% of AD patients and is characterized by high levels of IgE in the serum; these 
patients are more likely to have other atopic diseases. Activation of Th2 cytokines including 
IL‐4, IL‐5, and IL‐13 resulting in increased production of IgE by B cells and increased levels of 
eosinophils.
• Intrinsic AD: remaining 20% cases of AD. These patients have normal levels of IgE. There is 
a mixed response with both Th2 and Th1 activation.
Incidence/prevalence
• 15–25% of children.
• 2–7% of adults.
• Approximately 75% of children will outgrow the disease by the age of 10 years.
Economic impact
Huge economic impact which includes:
• Co‐payment for doctor’s office visits;
• Cost of over‐the‐counter emollients and moisturizers;
• Cost of prescription medications;
• Incidental expenses such as buying air purifiers to remove aeroallergens, dietary changes;
• Cost incurred due to missing work (for adults with AD and of parents who need to take their 
children with AD for doctor visits).
Etiology
• Genetic factors may have a role such as mutations in the filaggrin (FLG) gene (a loss of function 
mutation). Filaggrin regulates epidermal terminal differentiation and helps create a cornified 
envelope.
• Environmental factors such as allergen exposure, changes in weather, and temperature 
changes.
• Some food allergies may have a role in disease flares, particularly in children.
• Stress exacerbates atopic dermatitis.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• Immune activation with up‐regulation of T cells, dendritic cells, several cytokines, chemokines, 
and other inflammatory molecules produced by distinct T‐cell subsets (primarily Th2, 
Th22).
• Disrupted skin barrier (decreased filaggrin, and other barrier proteins) and increased trans­
epidermal water loss which may trigger abnormal keratinocyte hyperplasia and secondary 
inflammation.
• Th2 and Th22 cytokines are responsible for key disease features such as down‐regulation of 
barrier proteins and epidermal hyperplasia.
Predictive/risk factors
Not applicable for this topic.
Atopic Dermatitis in Teenagers and Adults  17
Section 2: Prevention
• No intervention has been demonstrated to prevent the development of disease. However, if 
trigger factors are determined, then avoidance of trigger factors can help prevent flares or 
relapses of the disease.
Screening
Not applicable for this topic.
Primary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Secondary prevention
• If trigger factors are determined then their avoidance can help prevent flares.
• Avoidance of stressful situations that trigger AD may be useful.
• Some infants and children have AD flares from ingestion of certain foods (e.g. eggs, milk, 
peanuts, and wheat). If these foods are found to exacerbate AD, then avoidance can help 
reduce flares of the disease.
• Some patients have flares of AD caused by aeroallergens such as dust mites, pollen, birch, and 
so on. Using an air purifier may help reduce flares.
Section 3: Diagnosis (Algorithm 2.1)
History: Erythematous, pruritic lesions that come and go. May or may not have history of asthma,
hay fever, or allergic rhinitis. Any family history of atopy? Any secondary infection of skin lesions? 
Does the patient have any trigger factors (e.g. food, stress, humidity)?
Physical examination: Are the lesions around mouth and on cheeks in young children? Are the
lesions on ﬂexor surfaces (antecubital and popliteal fossae)? Are the lesions erythematous,
papules, patches, or plaques? Any associated edema, dryness of surrounding skin? Any crusting? 
Any skin thickening or licheniﬁcation? 
Diagnosis– atopic dermatitis
Tests:
Serum IgE
Eosinophil count
Skin biopsy is not required as diagnosis is 
clinical but can be carried out
Algorithm 2.1  Diagnosis of atopic dermatitis
18  Part 1: Allergy
Differential diagnosis
Typical presentation
• The disease presents with erythematous, pruritic papules, patches, and plaques with superficial 
erosions from scratching.
• There can be some associated edema.
• Dry skin is also a prominent feature.
• Lichenification is noted in chronic cases of AD. Sometimes, the lesions are secondarily infected 
with S. aureus, and appropriate treatment is mandated. The lesions are typically seen in flexural 
regions, as well as the face and neck; however, any part of the body can be involved.
• There could be a history of asthma, allergic rhinitis, or hay fever.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• Diagnosis is based on clinical features.
• A personal or family history of atopy should be sought.
• Any trigger factors such as changes in weather, stress, allergens such as food, aeroallergens 
(e.g. dust mite), or seasonal pollens that exacerbate the disease should be determined.
• Any history of superimposed infection by S. aureus should be sought.
Physical examination
• Since the diagnosis is clinical, it is important to look at the skin in its entirety including nape of 
neck and behind the ears. The physician should look for erythematous papules, patches, or 
plaques. Scaling and crusting is noted if the patient is a child. Look for typical distribution pat­
tern (antecubital and popliteal fossae, face, and neck in children). Edema can also be seen and 
Differential diagnosis
Features
Acute irritant contact 
dermatitis
Confined to localized area exposed to irritant
Lichenification is not seen
Lasts days to weeks
Not remitting or relapsing in nature unless irritant exposure occurs again
Allergic contact dermatitis
Systemic disease with a delayed cell‐mediated hypersensitivity 
reaction to an allergen
Constitutional symptoms including fever can be seen in severe cases
Acute, subacute, and chronic forms
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Relapsing, remitting pattern.
• Typical morphology and distribution in flexural areas, acute cases begin with erythematous 
papules and erythema and in chronic forms there is lichenification. Impetiginization is seen in 
children with AD.
• Associated with pruritus, dry skin.
• Lichenification of antecubital and/or popliteal fossae seen in chronic cases.
• History of atopy: asthma, allergic rhinitis, hay fever.
• May or may not have elevated IgE (increased IgE in 80% of cases), eosinophilia.
Atopic Dermatitis in Teenagers and Adults  19
dryness, especially of uninvolved skin, is commonly seen in adults. Due to the pruritic nature of 
the lesions, superficial erosions can be seen as a result of scratching. In chronic cases, lichenifi­
cation is noted.
Useful clinical decision rules and calculators
Not applicable for this topic.
Disease severity classification
SCORAD (Scoring AD) is a useful scoring system to help calculate disease severity and monitor 
response (if any) to treatment. It has three components:
1.	 Body surface area: Rule of 9’s (see Figure 2.1).
2.	 Intensity: choose a representative lesion and calculate intensity score ranging 0–3 (0 being 
none and 3 being severe). Dryness is scored on an area without active inflammation.
3.	 Subjective symptoms: average loss of sleep and degree of pruritus based on 0–10 scale over the 
last 72 hours (0 no itch or no loss of sleep and 10 being most severe itch and total loss of sleep).
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• Blood tests looking at eosinophil count, total and allergen‐specific IgE levels.
• Diagnosis is usually clinical and skin biopsy is generally not required.
• In cases with superimposed infection, a skin swab should be carried out especially to rule out 
methicillin‐resistant S. aureus.
Lists of imaging techniques
Not applicable for this topic.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis of disease
• Irritant contact dermatitis and allergic contact dermatitis are skin conditions that can be 
­mistaken for AD.
Section 4: Treatment (Algorithm 2.2)
Treatment rationale
• First line treatment especially for milder cases is hydration of the skin. Baths with colloidal oatmeal 
or unscented soap are preferred. Following a bath, an unscented moisturizer should be applied 
to gently towel dried skin. Baths should be 15–20 minutes and the water should not be too hot. 
Bleach baths a few times per week can be beneficial in preventing infections and reducing flares.
• Topical steroids can be used in mild to moderate cases or when the first line treatment does not 
help. However, they should be applied only to lesional skin as there is concern of skin atrophy 
and adrenal suppression from prolonged use. Calcineurin inhibitors (e.g. tacrolimus and pime­
crolimus) are newer agents that are increasingly being used.
• Symptomatic management in the form of antihistamines for itching should be carried out 
concurrently.
• In cases of superimposed S. aureus infection, oral or topical antibiotics are needed. Bleach 
baths can help prevent infection, and should be added to treatment regimens.
• UVB phototherapy is a good option for moderate to severe disease, but is not feasible for most 
patients.
20  Part 1: Allergy
• In severe cases of AD or when topical treatment fails, systemic therapy can be used.
• Tapering courses of oral prednisone (very short time) or cyclosporin (should not be used longer 
than 1–2 years because of concerns of irreversible kidney damage) are also used for severe 
disease. Other immunosuppressants like azathioprine and mycophenolate mofetil have also 
been tried.
• Research is underway to look at biologics such as ustekinumab/anti‐p40/IL‐23, dupilumab/
anti‐IL‐4R, and other biologics for moderate to severe AD.
Treatment
Skin hydration Treating the disease
Controlling other symptoms (pruritus)
How to keep skin well hydrated
Fragrance-free moisturizers
Emollients (e.g. Vaseline, CeraVe®, Vanicream®)
Avoidance of long, hot showers
For moderate disease
UVA/UVB is an option 
Can use topical medications (outlined above) but may be cumbersome
Systemic immunosuppressants (e.g. oral steroids, cyclosporine, azathioprine,
mycophenolate mofetil)
For mild disease
Topical steroids (OTC or prescription)
Calcinuerin inhibitors can also be used 
(tacrolimus, pimecrolimus)
For severe disease
Systemic immunosuppressants are preferred
Concurrent management
Symptomatic treatment for pruritus: use of
sedating anti-histamines
Bleach baths can help prevent S. aureus
infections
Oral or topical antibiotics to treat 
superimposed S. aureus infection
Algorithm 2.2  Treatment of atopic dermatitis
Atopic Dermatitis in Teenagers and Adults  21
When to hospitalize
• Eczema herpeticum: viral infections such as herpes simplex can spread rapidly and cause a 
severe infection known as eczema herpeticum. This may present with fever, malaise, and a 
widespread, crusted, blistering rash. Treatment with oral antiviral agents such as acyclovir is 
indicated. Severe cases may need hospitalization.
• Erythrodermic atopic dermatitis: generalized redness of the skin. Inpatient hospital treatment is 
usually required for intravenous hydration and temperature control of the affected individual.
Managing the hospitalized patient
• Intravenous hydration and temperature regulation for erythrodermic eczema.
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comments
Conservative
Topical emollients, fragrance‐free moisturizers for 
mild cases
Medical
• Topical steroids
• Topical calcineurin inhibitors
• Oral steroids
• Other immunosuppressants like cyclosporine, 
azathioprine, mycophenolate mofetil
• Monitor renal functions when using cyclosporine
• Watch for steroid‐related side effects (skin atrophy, 
adrenal insufficiency)
Complementary
• Stress reduction
• Avoidance of triggers (if triggers are known)
Other
• UVA–UVB therapy
• Bleach baths can help prevent S. aureus infection
Prevention/management of complications
• Skin atrophy and adrenal suppression can be seen with prolonged use of topical steroids, espe­
cially high potency steroids. Limit use to 2 weeks.
• Adrenal suppression, osteoporosis, striae, cataracts, elevated blood glucose, and psychosis can be 
seen with prolonged use of high dose oral steroids. Patients should be closely monitored when 
on oral steroids especially for long periods of time. Every effort must be made to taper a patient 
of oral steroids as quickly as possible and to use the lowest dose possible to prevent side effects.
• Renal impairment is a concern with long‐term use of cyclosporine; hence should be avoided in 
patients with baseline impaired renal function. Blood tests to check renal function should be 
carried out at regular intervals when a patient is taking this medication.
• When using pimecrolimus, excessive exposure to sunlight should be avoided.
• Burning at the site of application is the most frequent adverse effect with tacrolimus. Again, 
sunlight exposure should be avoided when using this medication.
Clinical pearls
• Keeping skin hydrated is of primary importance; use moisturizers, emollients.
• Topical steroids can be used for mild to moderate disease.
• Severe disease may need systemic immunosuppressants, either oral steroids or medications 
like cyclosporine.
• Flares of disease may need short courses of oral corticosteroids.
22  Part 1: Allergy
Section 5: Special populations
Pregnancy
• Treatment is more focused on skin hydration and topical steroids. Oral steroids can be used if 
disease is severe or to treat flares.
• Avoid systemic immunosuppressive medications like cyclosporine or mycophenolate mofetil 
because of the possibility of teratogenicity.
• Avoid topical calcineurin inhibitors.
Children
• Skin hydration is essential.
• Topical steroids are most often used.
• Systemic steroids can be used for severe disease and for treating flares; however, watch closely 
for side effects.
• Oral cyclosporine can be used in children, but use should be for the shortest duration possible 
and renal function should be monitored.
Elderly
• Same management as for adults, be watchful for side effects.
Others
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 6: Prognosis
Natural history of untreated disease
• Without treatment patients continue to suffer and develop lesions of AD.
Prognosis for treated patients
• In successfully treated patients, there is a tremendous improvement in quality of life.
• Patients who do not respond to treatment continue to suffer.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 7: Reading list
Habif TP. Clinical Dermatology - A Colour Guide to Diagnosis and Therapy. 5th ed. Edinburgh, Mosby 
Elsevier. 2009
Wolff K, Johnson RA, Saavedra AP. Fitzpatricks Color Atlas and Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology. 7th ed. 
New York, McGraw-Hill. 2013
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• AD is a chronic, remitting, relapsing disease.
• Emollients should be used to keep skin hydrated.
• Medications are used to control disease and preventing flares.
• Avoidance of any trigger factors can help prevent flares.
• Antihistamines can help with itching.
Atopic Dermatitis in Teenagers and Adults  23
Suggested websites
www.nationaleczema.org
Section 8: Guidelines
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 9: Evidence
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 10: Images
SCORAD
EUROPEAN TASK FORCE
ON ATOPIC DERMATITIS
Last Name
Date of Birth:
DD/MM/YY
INSTITUTION
PHYSICIAN
Potency(brand name)
Amount / Month
(G)
Number of flares / Month
Topical Steroid used:
Date of Visit:
4.5
4.5
18
18
1
1
9
9
MEANS OF CALCULATION
CRITERIA
Erythema
Edema/Papulation
Oozing/crust
Excoriation
Lichenification
Dryness *
INTENSITY
INTENSITY ITEMS
0 = absence
1 = mild
2 = moderate
3 = severe
(average representative area)
9
Please indicate the area involved
0
10
9
1
4.5
4.5
4.5
4.5
(8.5)
(8.5)
(6)
(6)
Figures in parenthesis
for children under two years
* Dryness is evaluated
on uninvolved areas
TREATMENT:
REMARKS:
PRURITUS (0to10)
SLEEP LOSS (0to10)
Visual analog scale
(average for the last
3 days or nights)
A. EXTENT
B: INTENSITY
C: SUBJECTIVE SYMPTOMS
PRURITUS+SLEEP LOSS
A/5+7B/2+C
First Name
Figure 2.1  SCORAD: Scoring Atopic Dermatitis, is a scoring system for assessment of atopic dermatitis. 
Availalbe at http://www.fondation-dermatite-atopique.org/en/healthcare-professionals-space/scorad
24  Part 1: Allergy
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at:
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for 
patients, and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson.  
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.  
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
  25
Contact Dermatitis
Mariya Rozenblit and Emma Guttman‐Yassky
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 3
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• Contact dermatitis is an inflammatory reaction of the skin caused by direct contact with a 
substance.
Disease classification
• Contact dermatitis can be classified as allergic or irritant. Allergic contact dermatitis occurs 
when an allergen induces a type IV hypersensitivity reaction, whereas in irritant contact derma-
titis, the chemical or agent itself directly damages the skin.
Incidence/prevalence
• The prevalence of contact dermatitis in the United States is estimated at 136 cases per 10 000 
individuals, with the highest rates among hairdressers, bakers, and florists.
• Contact dermatitis is the most common occupational disease, accounting for 30% of all 
occupational diseases.
• These statistics are gathered from an annual survey conducted by the National Bureau of Labor 
and Statistics, which may underestimate the prevalence of this disease by 10‐ to 50‐fold 
because of underreporting for fear of job loss.
Overall Bottom Line
• Contact dermatitis is an inflammatory reaction of the skin caused by direct contact with a 
substance and it is classified as irritant or allergic.
• Allergic contact dermatitis occurs when an allergen induces a type IV hypersensitivity reaction, 
whereas in irritant contact dermatitis the chemical itself directly damages the skin.
• The most common agents that cause irritant contact dermatitis include cleaning agents, 
industrial solvents, acids or bases, and plants. The most common allergens are nickel sulfate 
(found in jewelry), neomycin sulfate (found in creams), and balsam of Peru and fragrances 
(found in topical medications and cosmetics).
• Diagnosis is based on history and findings on physical examination, and allergic contact 
dermatitis can be confirmed by patch testing.
• Treatment consists of removing the offending agent, wet dressings, and topical glucocorticoid 
creams.
26  Part 1: Allergy
Economic impact
• Direct costs associated with this condition are estimated to be $1.4 billion due to physician 
visits and prescriptions, and indirect costs are around $499 million due to lost work days and 
restricted activity days.
Etiology
• The most common agents that cause irritant contact dermatitis include cleaning agents, industrial 
solvents, acids and bases, and plants.
• There are more than 3700 allergens that can cause allergic contact dermatitis. The most common 
allergens are nickel sulfate (found in jewelry), neomycin sulfate (found in creams), and balsam 
of Peru and fragrances (found in topical medications and cosmetics).
Pathology/pathogenesis
• The pathogenesis of contact dermatitis is not yet fully understood.
• In irritant contact dermatitis, exposure to a chemical damages epidermal keratinocytes 
­leading to activation of the innate immune system and release of cytokines such as IL‐1α, 
IL‐1β, tumor necrosis factor α (TNF‐α), granulocyte macrophage colony‐stimulating factor 
(GM‐CSF), and IL‐8.
• These cytokines activate Langerhans cells, dendritic cells, and endothelial cells, which recruit 
infiltrating cells such as neutrophils, lymphocytes, macrophages, and mast cells that further 
promote the inflammatory cascade.
• Allergic contact dermatitis consists of two phases: a sensitization phase and an elicitation phase.
• During the sensitization phase, similar to irritant contact dermatitis, allergens induce the epi-
dermal keratinocytes to release cytokines and activate the innate immune system. Langerhans 
cells and dendritic cells that have encountered the antigen then migrate to the draining lymph 
nodes where they activate Th1, Th2, Th17, and regulatory T cells. These hapten‐specific T cells 
then proliferate, circulate, and – along with mast cells and eosinophils – migrate to the site of 
the initial exposure to the allergen.
• On re‐exposure to the allergen, the hapten‐specific T cells, mast cells, and eosinophils release 
cytokines that stimulate the keratinocytes and induce an inflammatory cascade. This is referred 
to as the elicitation phase.
Predictive/risk factors
Section 2: Prevention
Risk factor
Odds ratio
History of atopic dermatitis
4.19
Occupation
4.00
Female
3.29
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Prevention strategies are aimed at decreasing the risk of exposure to the irritant or allergen. 
Industries are encouraged to replace dangerous substances with less toxic or less irritative 
chemicals. Workers are encouraged to change their environment, or their behavior (such as 
decreasing the frequency of hand washing). Individual protective measures such as gloves, 
barrier creams, and moisturizers are also recommended.
Contact Dermatitis  27
Screening
Not applicable for this topic.
Primary prevention
• Education regarding possible irritants and allergens is a very effective primary prevention strat-
egy. National educational programs targeting high‐risk professions to increase awareness and 
motivate workers to avoid exposure and to use skin protection have been shown to be highly 
effective in Europe and such programs should be instituted in the United States.
• Legislation to reduce exposure to certain chemicals is also a powerful method of primary 
­prevention. Regulation of nickel exposure in Denmark was shown to decrease the incidence of 
nickel allergy.
Secondary prevention
• Patient education regarding avoidance of exposure, changing specific behaviors, and using 
personal protective equipment has been shown to be effective.
Section 3: Diagnosis (Algorithm 3.1)
Differential diagnosis
• Studies have shown that barrier creams decrease acute irritation and moisturizers can 
accelerate regeneration of the disrupted barrier in the skin.
• A Cochrane review in 2010 concluded that barrier creams, moisturizers, and educational 
interventions show a protective effect. However, larger studies are needed to reach statistical 
significance.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• The patient’s occupation, possible exposure to irritants or allergens in the environment, and 
any history of atopic dermatitis are key findings in the history.
• Patients with irritant contact dermatitis present with sharply demarcated erythema and 
superficial edema at the site of contact. In severe reactions, vesicles, blisters, or erosions can 
form within the erythematous lesions as well.
• In allergic contact dermatitis, the lesions are intensely pruritic and classically appear 2 days 
after exposure. The lesions can extend beyond the area of contact, and are erythematous, 
edematous, with superimposed vesicles and/or papules.
• Patch testing is negative in irritant contact dermatitis and positive in allergic contact dermatitis 
and can help to identify the offending allergen.
(Continued )
Differential diagnosis
Features
Atopic dermatitis
Usually begins in infancy and is associated with a family history of the 
atopic triad: atopic dermatitis, allergic rhinitis, asthma. Lesions are pruritic, 
poorly defined, may be accompanied by lichenification and are often found 
in flexural areas
Seborrheic dermatitis
Lesions are distributed along the sebum glands on the face, scalp, and 
trunk. Lesions are scaly and intermittent with worsening in the winter and 
early spring
28  Part 1: Allergy
Typical presentation
• In irritant contact dermatitis, patients may experience burning or stinging within seconds of 
exposure. Skin findings may occur within minutes or can be delayed up to 24 hours depending 
on which substance the patient is exposed to. Patients with acute irritant contact dermatitis 
present with sharply demarcated erythema and edema in the distribution of exposure to the 
substance, which may be linear or streaky. Repeated exposure results in chronic irritant 
­contact dermatitis, which usually appears on the hands as scaling with fissures and crusting 
and lichenification.
• In allergic contact dermatitis, the lesions typically appear 48 hours after contact with the 
allergen and repeated exposure worsens the eruption. Patients with acute allergic contact 
dermatitis present with well‐demarcated erythema and edema with superimposed closely 
Differential diagnosis
Features
Psoriasis
Lesions are chronic, recurring, scaly plaques
Drug eruption
Can mimic any type of dermatologic lesion. Timing since drug 
administration and resolution after drug withdrawal are key. Eosinophilia 
>1000/μL, lymphocytosis with atypical lymphocytes, and abnormal liver 
function test results may be found
History: Does the patient have a high-risk occupation such as a hairdresser, baker,
ﬂorist, etc? Is the patient at risk of exposure to possible irritants or allergens? Does
the patient have a history of atopic dermatitis? How soon did the lesions appear
after exposure? Are the skin lesions pruritic?
Physical examination: Is the erythema sharply demarcated? Is it in the distribution
(streaky or bizarre pattern) of exposure to an irritant or allergen? Is it in a common
location for exposure (ear lobe, dorsum of foot, wrist, collar, lips)?
Patch test: Positive in allergic contact dermatitis. Negative in irritant contact
dermatitis. Irritant contact dermatitis is a diagnosis of exclusion.
Allergic contact dermatitis
Irritant contact dermatitis
Lesions can exceed area of contact and
can be ill-deﬁned
Pruritis is the main symptom
Lesions are usually well demarcated
Symptoms after acute exposure include
burning, stinging, or pain
Lesions appear rapidly after exposure,
usually within minutes to hours
The reaction is described as
“decrescendo”: it reaches its peak
quickly then begins to heal
Lesions classically apppear 24–72 hours
after exposure
The reaction is described as crescendo:
it becomes more severe and takes longer
to resolve
Algorithm 3.1  Diagnosis of contact dermatitis
Contact Dermatitis  29
spaced non‐umbilicated vesicles. Bullae, erosions, and crusts can also appear in severe reac-
tions. Repeated exposure leads to chronic allergic contact dermatitis, which manifests as plaques 
of lichenification, scaling, excoriations, and hyperpigmentation. Typical locations include the 
earlobe, dorsum of the foot, wrist, collar area, and lips.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• Key findings in the history include age of onset, the patient’s occupation, possible environmen-
tal exposures, and if there is any family history of atopic dermatitis.
Physical examination
• Key findings on physical examination include the appearance, the location, and the pattern of 
distribution of the skin lesions.
Useful clinical decision rules and calculators
Not applicable for this topic.
Disease severity classification
Not applicable for this topic.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• A patch test consists of applying a small concentration of dilute known allergen to the upper 
back. The patches are then removed and evaluated at 48 and 96 hours.
• A positive patch test shows erythema at the site of contact. The intensity of the reaction is 
graded on a scale of 0–3.
• Patch tests are negative in irritative contact dermatitis and positive in allergic contact 
dermatitis.
Lists of imaging techniques
Not applicable for this topic.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding  
diagnosis of disease
• It is often very difficult to identify the irritant or allergen, because exposure may occur in many 
different types of environments (e.g. home, workplace, hobbies, leisure activities) and to sev-
eral irritants and allergens simultaneously. Identification of the allergen or irritant is especially 
difficult if the exposure is infrequent, if there is cross‐reactivity with another substance, or if the 
source of the exposure is contact with another person.
• Contact dermatitis also frequently coexists with atopic dermatitis and it can be clinically difficult 
to distinguish between the two.
Section 4: Treatment (Algorithm 3.2)
Treatment rationale
• The offending agent should be identified and removed.
30  Part 1: Allergy
• Treatment for acute cases includes wet dressings with Burow’s solution, antibiotic ointments 
(Mupirocin), followed by moderate to potent topical corticosteroids. First line treatment is 
­topical glucocorticoids such as triamcinolone 0.1% or even clobetasol 0.05%.
• In severe cases, where more than 20% of body surface area is involved, a 5–7 day course of 
oral prednisone taper can be prescribed.
• In chronic cases, a potent topical glucocorticoid should be used such as betamethasone or tri-
amcinolone 0.1%. The ointment should be preferred in cases of propylene glycol allergy.
When to hospitalize
Not applicable for this topic.
Managing the hospitalized patient
Not applicable for this topic.
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comments
Medical
Wet dressings
Mild: desonide 0.05%
Moderate: fluticasone propionate 0.05% or triamcinolone 0.1%
Severe: clobetasol 0.05%
Educational
Avoidance of irritant or allergen
Use of personal protective equipment
Are the skin lesions acute or chronic?
Do the skin lesions involve more than 20% of body surface area?
Acute
Chronic
Identify and remove causative agent
Identify and remove causative agent
Wet dressings +/– calamine lotion,
colloidal oatmeal baths
Start with higher potency steroid creams
such as betamethasone or clobetasol
Triamcinolone 0.1% or clobetasol 0.05%
or desonide ointment on areas with
thinner skin
Yes
No
Start oral prednisone at 0.5–1 mg/kg/day.
The patient should feel relief in 12–24 hours, then
taper by 50% on subsequent days.
Follow treatment plan above and
emphasize secondary prevention
strategies.
Algorithm 3.2  Treatment of contact dermatitis
Contact Dermatitis  31
Prevention/management of complications
• Long‐term use of topical glucocorticoids should be avoided to prevent possible complications 
such as skin thinning, atrophy, and increased risk of infection.
Section 5: Special populations
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 6: Prognosis
Natural history of untreated disease
• Chronic untreated contact dermatitis leads to hyperkeratoses, scaling, fissuring, and lichenifi-
cation. The damage to the skin may limit the ability of the patient to perform activities at work 
or in the home, especially if the hands are affected, leading to decreased quality of life.
Prognosis for treated patients
• Excellent if the inciting agent is identified and removed.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 7: Reading list
Ale IS, Maibach HA. Diagnostic approach in allergic and irritant contact dermatitis. Expert Rev Clin Immunol 
2010;6:291–310
Alikhan A, et al. Revised minimal baseline series of the International Contact Dermatitis Research Group: 
­evidence-­based approach. Dermatitis. 2011;22(2):121–2
Bauer A, Schmitt J, Bennett C, Coenraads PJ, Elsner P, English J, et al. Interventions for preventing occupational 
irritant hand dermatitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010;6:CD004414
Belsito DV. Occupational contact dermatitis: etiology, prevalence, and resultant impairment/disability. J Am 
Acad Dermatol 2005;53:303–13
Bourke J, Coulson I, English J; British Association of Dermatologists Therapy Guidelines and Audit 
Subcommittee. Guidelines for the management of contact dermatitis: an update. Br J Dermatol 2009; 
160:946–54
Cashman MW. Contact dermatitis in the United States: epidemiology, economic impact, and workplace 
prevention. Dermatol Clin 2012;30:87–98
Clinical pearl
• The most important predictor of treatment success is correct identification and removal of the 
irritant or allergen.
Bottom line/clinical pearl
• After removal of the offending agent, healing usually occurs within 2 weeks in acute cases, 
but can take as long as 6 weeks in chronic cases.
32  Part 1: Allergy
Larese Filon F, Bochdanovits L, Capuzzo C, Cerchi R, Rui F. Ten years incidence of natural rubber latex sensiti-
zation and symptoms in a prospective cohort of health care workers using non powdered latex gloves 
2000–2009. Int Arch Occup Environ Health 2014;87:463–9
Smedley J, Williams S, Peel P, Pedersen K; Dermatitis Guideline Development Group. Management 
of  occupational dermatitis in healthcare workers: a systematic review. Occup Environ Med 2011; 
69:276–9
van Gils RF, Boot CR, van Gils PF, Bruynzeel D, Coenraads PJ, van Mechelen W, et al. Effectiveness of 
prevention programmes for hand dermatitis: a systematic review of the literature. Contact Dermatitis 
2011;64:63–72
Suggested websites
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Guidelines for the management 
of contact dermatitis: an update
Agency for Healthcare Research 
and Quality (AHQR)
Br J Dermatol 2009;160:946–54
(http://www.guideline.gov/
content.aspx?id=15881)
Contact dermatitis: a practice 
parameter
American Academy of Allergy 
Asthma and Immunology 
(AAAAI)
Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 
2006;97(Suppl 2):S1–38
(https://www.aaaai.org/Aaaai/
media/MediaLibrary/PDF%20 
Documents/Practice%20 
and%20Parameters/contact_
dermatitis_‐2006.pdf)
International society guidelines
Guideline Title
Guideline source, summary
Date
Revised minimal baseline series
International Contact Dermatitis 
Group. Establishes an 
international standardized list 
of allergens to be included in 
patch testing
2013
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/21504701)
Contact Dermatitis  33
Section 9: Evidence
Type of evidence
Title, comment
Date
Randomized controlled trial
A prospective randomized 
clinical trial of 0.1% tacrolimus 
ointment in a model of chronic 
allergic contact dermatitis 
Comment: Demonstrated that 
an immunosuppressive agent 
is effective in treating allergic 
contact dermatitis
2006
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/16781290)
Meta‐analysis
Interventions for preventing 
occupational irritant hand 
dermatitis
Comment: A Cochrane review 
of four randomized controlled 
trials that established that 
barrier creams and moisturizers 
have a positive effect in 
preventing contact dermatitis
2010
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/20556758)
Systematic review
Evidence‐based guidelines for 
the prevention, identification, 
and management of 
occupational contact dermatitis
Comment: A systematic review 
of 786 papers that established 
guidelines for the prevention 
and treatment of occupational 
contact dermatitis
2010
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/20831687)
Retrospective study
A survey of exposures related to 
recognized occupational contact 
dermatitis in Denmark in 2010
Comment: Identified common 
substances that cause contact 
dermatitis, which is important in 
planning preventative programs 
in the future
2014
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/24102286)
Retrospective study
Allergic contact dermatitis in 
Danish children referred for 
patch testing – a nationwide 
multicenter study
Comment: Raised the issue that 
contact dermatitis is prevalent 
in children as well and identified 
common allergens and risk 
factors
2014
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/24102181)
Section 10: Images
Figure 3.1  Contact dermatitis to nickel from belt buckle. See color plate 3.1.
Figure 3.2  Contact dermatitis to propylene glycol, a preservative used in steroid creams. Consider this 
diagnosis if patient is not responding to treatment. See color plate 3.2.
Figure 3.3  Contact dermatitis to Bronopol. See color plate 3.3.
Contact Dermatitis  35
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at:
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for  
patients, and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson.  
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.  
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
36 
Allergic Rhinitis
Supinda Bunyavanich
Department of Pediatrics, Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,  
New York, NY, USA
Chapter 4
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• Allergic rhinitis is an IgE‐mediated inflammation of the naso‐ocular region. Caused by seasonal 
and/or perennial aeroallergens, common symptoms include nasal congestion, rhinorrhea, 
sneezing, and itching of the nose, palate, and eyes.
Disease classification
• Seasonal allergic rhinitis: caused by an IgE‐mediated reaction to seasonal allergens such as tree 
pollen, grass pollen, and weed pollen.
• Perennial allergic rhinitis: caused by an IgE‐mediated reaction to perennial allergens such as 
dust mites, molds, and animal allergens.
Incidence/prevalence
• Allergic rhinitis is common, affecting 10–30% of adults and 40% of children in the United States.
Economic impact
• Allergic rhinitis accounts for 2.5% of all clinic visits.
• 2 million school days and 6 million work days are lost each year due to allergic rhinitis.
Etiology and pathology/pathogenesis
• Repeated exposure to aeroallergens can lead to allergic sensitization in susceptible individuals.
• Subsequent exposure to aeroallergens to which a person is sensitized elicits IgE‐mediated 
inflammation of the naso‐ocular region.
• Inflammation of the naso‐ocular region leads to nasal congestion, rhinorrhea, sneezing, and itching.
Overall Bottom Line
• Allergic rhinitis is a common disease, affecting 10–30% of adults and 40% of children.
• Common symptoms of allergic rhinitis include nasal congestion, rhinorrhea, sneezing, and 
itching of the nose, palate, and eyes.
• Symptoms of allergic rhinitis can be seasonal or perennial.
• Allergens that commonly cause allergic rhinitis include dust mites, animal danders, molds, and 
pollens from trees, grasses, and weeds.
• Treatment of allergic rhinitis can include allergen avoidance, pharmacotherapy, and immunotherapy.
Allergic Rhinitis  37
Predictive/risk factors
• Family history of atopy.
• Male sex.
• Birth during pollen season.
• Firstborn status.
• Early use of antibiotics.
• Maternal smoking exposure during first year of life.
• Exposure to indoor allergens.
• Serum IgE >100 IU/mL before age 6 years.
• Presence of allergen‐specific IgE.
Section 2: Prevention
No interventions have been demonstrated to prevent the development of the disease.
Screening
Not applicable for this topic.
Primary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Secondary prevention
• For allergic rhinitis caused by dust mite, physical barriers such as pillow and mattress encase-
ments, humidity control, and reducing areas that harbor dust mites can reduce an individual’s 
exposure to the triggering allergen.
• For allergic rhinitis caused by pet dander, pet removal followed by aggressive cleaning is most 
helpful. High‐efficiency particulate air (HEPA) air filters may be helpful. “Hypoallergenic” breeds 
of cats or dogs have not been confirmed to be effective in scientific studies.
• For allergic rhinitis caused by molds, mold removal using bleach solutions and humidity control 
can be helpful.
• For allergic rhinitis caused by pollens, patients should avoid outdoor activities during high 
­pollen count days, close windows, and use air conditioners to help filter air, and shower before 
bedtime to remove allergens from hair and skin and reduce contamination of bedding.
• For allergic rhinitis caused by pests such as rodents and cockroaches, pest control should be 
the focus of secondary prevention.
Section 3: Diagnosis
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• The patient may report runny nose, nasal congestion, sneezing, post‐nasal drip, cough, itchy 
eyes, and/or irritated eyes when he/she does not have an upper respiratory infection.
• Examination findings include congested voice, allergic shiners (infra‐orbital edema and 
darkening), Dennie–Morgan lines (lines or folds below the lower eyelids), the allergic salute 
(constant upward rub of the nose causing a transverse nasal crease), mouth‐breathing, 
enlarged inferior nasal turbinates, pale turbinates, clear mucus in the nares, post‐nasal drip, 
and cobblestoning of the pharynx.
• Diagnosis of allergic rhinitis is often made on clinical grounds, but ideally, patients should 
demonstrate symptoms, signs, and evidence of allergen sensitization. Allergen‐specific testing 
38  Part 1: Allergy
Differential diagnosis
Typical presentation
• A male, young adult presents with nasal congestion, clear rhinorrhea, itchy nose, sneezing 
paroxysms, and red, itchy, watery eyes. He has difficulty breathing through his nose, so speaks 
with a congested voice and breathes through his mouth. He cannot sleep well because of these 
symptoms. He complains of feeling constantly tired and is unable to focus at work. He must 
carry a box of tissues with him all the time. His symptoms come every spring, usually as soon 
as he sees pollen starting to coat his car. They resolve by early summer. His symptoms have been 
getting worse each year.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• The clinician should ask the patient to describe specific symptoms, in what months they occur, 
and if there are specific environmental conditions or times of day when symptoms are better or 
worse (e.g. at girlfriend’s house where there is a cat, or every August and September when 
running outside).
• Inquiring about past medical history will inform whether the patient comes from an atopic 
background (e.g. history of asthma and/or atopic dermatitis) and may thus be at higher risk of 
developing allergic rhinitis, and if they may have other conditions on the differential diagnosis 
for allergic rhinitis.
(either allergen‐specific serum IgE levels or allergen skin testing) can be performed to detect 
and identify allergen sensitization.
• Sinus computed tomography (CT) may show thickening and/or opacification of sinus spaces.
• Nasal cytology is possible but not typically used outside of research settings.
Differential diagnosis
Features
Upper respiratory infection
Relatively short in duration, typically <2 weeks. Nasal 
obstruction, rhinorrhea, and sneezing are common, nasal 
mucosa is typically erythematous, but nasal and ocular itching 
are less prominent
Chronic non‐allergic rhinitis
Perennial symptoms without nasal itching or sneezing. 
Symptoms often exacerbated by changes in temperature, 
humidity, odors, or alcohol. Negative allergen skin test to 
environmental allergens
Rhinitis medicamentosa
History of vasoconstrictor nasal spray use or cocaine abuse. 
Beefy red nasal membranes on examination
Rhinitis caused by systemic 
medications
Use of medications including oral contraceptive pills, 
antihypertensive drugs, erectile dysfunction drugs, NSAIDs, 
psychiatric medications, cyclosporine, mycophenolic acid. 
Symptoms resolve within weeks of discontinuation
Atrophic rhinitis
Elderly patients. Chronic congestion with perception of bad 
odor. Negative allergen skin tests
Rhinitis of pregnancy
Pregnant patient. Improvement after pregnancy
Nasal polyps
Polyps may be visible on clinical rhinoscopy examination, 
fiberoptic rhinoscopy, or on imaging. Anosmia is common
Allergic Rhinitis  39
• The clinician should ask if they have tried any medications for their symptoms and if these had 
any effect on their symptoms.
• An environmental history should be taken, with questions about the home, work, and leisure 
environments with particular focus on pets, carpeting, heating, ventilation, and air conditioning 
(HVAC) system, and visible mold and pests.
Physical examination
• Physical examination should include measurement of temperature, as fever may be indicative 
of an alternate infectious etiology for the patient’s symptoms.
• The clinician should observe if the patient is speaking with congested voice, mouth‐breathing, 
or performing the allergic salute.
• Examine the face for allergic shiners, Dennie–Morgan lines, and transverse nasal crease.
• Examine the eyes for conjunctival injection, excess lacrimation, and discharge.
• Use the standard office otoscope with disposable speculum to perform anterior rhinoscopy 
and look for enlarged or pale inferior turbinates, mucous discharge, septal deviation, and 
­perforations in the nasal septum.
• Percuss frontal and maxillary sinus areas for tenderness.
• Examine posterior oropharynx for post‐nasal drip, cobblestoning, and tonsil size.
• Examine the lungs to assess for possible asthma and skin for signs of atopic dermatitis.
Useful clinical decision rules and calculators
Not applicable for this topic.
Disease severity classification
Not applicable for this topic.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• Allergen skin testing is recommended as the most comfortable, most sensitive, and least 
expensive method to detect allergen sensitization. This is performed by an allergist, who 
will place selected allergen solutions on the patient’s skin and examine for wheal and flare 
­reactions within 20 minutes. The results are immediately available and often illustrative and 
educational for the patient.
• Serum tests for allergen‐specific IgE antibodies are another way to detect allergen sensitization. 
They provide similar information as allergen skin tests, but are more expensive and less sensitive 
for diagnosing environmental allergies. Selection and interpretation are best carried out by an 
allergist, as ordering excessive or irrelevant allergens can lead to confusion.
Lists of imaging techniques
• A sinus CT scan may be considered for a patient with persistent symptoms refractory to 
therapy.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding  
diagnosis of disease
• Under‐diagnosis, particularly for patients with perennial allergic rhinitis, who may falsely believe 
that their year‐round symptoms are their “normal” baseline.
• Misdiagnosis of non‐allergic rhinitis as allergic rhinitis, leading to inappropriate anti‐allergy 
treatment and misdirected environmental avoidance.
40  Part 1: Allergy
Section 4: Treatment
Treatment rationale
• There are three main treatment paths for allergic rhinitis: allergen avoidance, pharmacother-
apy, and immunotherapy. Choice of which path(s) to pursue should be made with the patient’s 
preferences forefront, as each requires patient commitment for efficacy.
• Allergen avoidance involves implementing changes to the patient’s home and work environ-
ments, and to the patient’s lifestyle, to avoid contact with allergens that elicit this patient’s 
symptoms (see section on secondary prevention). For example, this may include removal of pets 
from the home, removing upholstery and fabric reservoirs of dust mites, and alteration of 
activities during high pollen count days.
• Pharmacotherapy choices include intranasal glucocorticoids, oral and intranasal antihistamines, 
intranasal cromolyn, leukotriene antagonists, ipratropium bromide, and nasal saline irrigation.
• Immunotherapy involves the administration of gradually increasing doses of allergen extracts 
to a patient has demonstrated sensitivity to the respective allergens. Over time, the attained 
dose alters the patient’s immune response to the allergen and results in fewer symptoms with 
exposure. Immunotherapy typically require years of commitment for efficacy. Subcutaneous 
immunotherapy is administered by an allergist or immunologist with monitoring, because 
­allergic reactions are possible with administration. Sublingual and oral immunotherapy are not 
yet Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved.
When to hospitalize
Not applicable for this topic.
Managing the hospitalized patient
Not applicable for this topic.
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comment
Conservative
• Allergen avoidance
• Nasal saline irrigation
• Patient with mild symptoms
• Patients who prefer non‐pharmacologic 
methods
Medical
• Intranasal glucocorticoids (1–2 sprays once to 
twice daily depending on specific agent and 
patient’s age)
• Oral antihistamines
•	 Diphenhydramine (5 mg/kg/day in divided 
doses every 6–8 hours)
•	 Loratadine (5 mg/day for children 2–5 years, 
10 mg/day for children ≥6 years or adults)
•	 Fexofenadine (30 mg twice daily for children 
2–11 years, 60 mg twice daily or 180 mg 
once daily for children ≥12 years or adults)
•	 Cetirizine (2.5 mg once daily for children 
6–12 months, 2.5 mg once or twice daily for 
children 12 months to <2 years, 2.5 mg twice 
daily or 5 mg once daily for children 2–5 
years, 5–10 mg once daily for children 
≥6 years or adults)
• Maximal effect requires several days or weeks
• Direct spray laterally to avoid epistaxis
• Particularly effective for patients whose primary 
complaint is congestion
• First generation antihistamines (e.g. 
diphenhydramine) cause sedation and 
sometimes paradoxical agitation in children 
and the elderly
• Second generation antihistamines (loratidine, 
fexofenadine, and cetirizine) cause less 
sedation and are similarly efficacious to one 
another
• Antihistamines are effective for itchy nose, 
eyes, palate, and ears
Allergic Rhinitis  41
Treatment
Comment
• Intranasal antihistamines
•	 Azelastine (1–2 sprays to each nostril twice 
daily)
• Cromolyn sodium (1–2 sprays to each nostril up 
to 4 times daily)
• Montelukast
• Ipratropium bromide (2 sprays to each nostril 
3–4 times daily)
• Bad taste often reduces patient adherence
• Fast onset
• Good for episodic symptoms, administer 
30 minutes before exposure
• Excellent safety profile
• Consider for pregnant, breastfeeding, and 
pediatric patients
• Less effective than intranasal steroids but may 
be a good choice for patients who do not 
tolerate other nasal sprays
• Decreases rhinorrhea primarily
• Requires patient adherence to present for 
regular injections at allergist’s office
Immunotherapy (subcutaneous injections of 
allergens to which the patient is sensitized, 
typically administered weekly during build‐up to 
target dose and then monthly injections of target 
dose for 3–5 years)
• The only treatment option that changes the 
body’s immune response to the allergen
• Allergic reactions can be a side effect of 
injections, so administration should be done in 
an allergist’s office
• Patient can have minimal or no symptoms to 
allergens upon completion of immunotherapy 
course
Prevention/management of complications
• Systemic side effects from intranasal glucocorticoids appear to be minimal to none in studies 
conducted thus far.
• Immunotherapy can result in allergic reactions and should therefore be administered in an 
allergist’s office equipped to monitor for and handle allergic reactions.
Section 5: Special populations
Pregnancy/breastfeeding
• Skin testing should be deferred until after delivery, as there is risk of systemic allergic reaction 
with skin testing.
• Non‐pharmacologic therapies should be considered first. Cromolyn sodium nasal spray is first line 
for mild allergic rhinitis during pregnancy and breastfeeding given its excellent safety profile. 
Budesonide is the only intranasal glucocorticosteroid with pregnancy category B classification (other 
agents are category C). There are no intranasal glucocorticosteroids with pregnancy category A 
rating. Loratadine and cetirizine have reassuring human data for drug safety in pregnant patients.
• Immunotherapy should not be initiated during pregnancy. If a pregnant patient is already on 
immunotherapy, then doses should not be increased during pregnancy.
Clinical pearls
• Allergen avoidance should be encouraged in patients with allergic rhinitis, as reduction or 
removal of exposure to the inciting allergen can be effective.
• Choice of pharmacologic treatment should take into account patients’ specific symptoms and 
their preferences regarding timing of use and route of administration.
• Immunotherapy is the only treatment path that changes the body’s immunologic response to 
allergen such that a patient may have few or no symptoms with exposure to the allergen after 
completion of the immunotherapy course.
42  Part 1: Allergy
Children
• Cromolyn sodium nasal spray has an excellent safety profile and should be considered.
• Cetirizine and fexofenadine are approved for children ≥6 months of age.
• Intranasal glucocorticosteroids do not appear to affect growth based on studies conducted thus far.
Elderly
• Avoid first generation antihistamines.
Section 6: Prognosis
Section 7: Reading list
deShazo RD, Kemp SF. Allergic rhinitis: Clinical manifestations, epidemiology, and diagnosis. In: UpToDate, 
Post TW (ed), UpToDate, Waltham, MA. (Accessed Dec 17, 2014)
deShazo RD, Kemp SF. Pharmacotherapy of allergic rhinitis. In: UpToDate, Post TW (ed), UpToDate, Waltham, MA. 
(Accessed Dec 17, 2014)
Orban NT, Saleh H, Durham SR. Allergic and non‐allergic rhinitis. In Adkinson NF Jr, Bochner BS, Busse WW, et al. 
(eds) Middleton’s Allergy: Principles and Practice, 7th edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 2009, 973–87
Scadding GK, Durham SR, Mirakian R, Jones NS, Leech SC, Farooque S, et al. BSACI guidelines for the manage-
ment of allergic and non‐allergic rhinitis. Clin Exp Allergy 2008;38:19–42
Wallace DV, Dykewicz MS, Bernstein DI, Blessing‐Moore J, Cox L, Khan DA, et al. The diagnosis and manage-
ment of rhinitis: an updated practice parameter. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2008;122:S1–84
Suggested websites
American Academic of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology. http://www.aaaai.org/conditions‐and‐ 
treatments/allergies/rhinitis.aspx
American College of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology. http://www.acaai.org/ALLERGIST/ 
ALLERGIES/TYPES/RHINITIS/Pages/default.aspx
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
The diagnosis and management 
of rhinitis: an updated practice 
parameter
American Academy of Allergy, 
Asthma, and Immunology 
(AAAAI)
2008
(DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.jaci.2008.06.003)
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Continued exposure to an allergen can lead to more severe symptoms over time, and to more 
severe symptoms with exposure to lower concentrations.
• Relocation to a new environment where the allergen is not present can lead to resolution 
of symptoms.
• Over time, patients with allergic rhinitis may also develop heightened sensitivity to non‐
allergen irritants such as tobacco smoke, particulate pollution, and strong scents.
• The only treatment path that changes the body’s immunologic response to an allergen is 
allergen immunotherapy. Completion of an immunotherapy course can lead to reduction or 
resolution upon exposure to the allergen.
Allergic Rhinitis  43
Section 9: Evidence
Type of evidence
Title
Date
Scientific evidence and clinical 
consensus
AAAAI Practice Parameter
http://www.aaaai.org/
Section 10: Images
Not applicable for this topic.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at:
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for  
patients, and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
44 
Non‐Allergic Rhinitis
Beth E. Corn
Department of Clinical Immunology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 5
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• Non‐allergic rhinitis can be defined as rhinitis without an identifiable etiology and in particular 
there is no IgE‐dependent component.
• It is associated with at least one of the following: nasal congestion, post‐nasal drainage, rhinorrhea, 
and sneezing.
• All forms are associated with some degree of autonomic dysregulation.
Disease classification
Not applicable for this topic.
Incidence/prevalence
• Allergic rhinitis affects up to 60 million Americans.
• Between 44 and 87% of these cases are mixed rhinitis, meaning a combined allergic and 
non‐allergic component.
• Pure non‐allergic rhinitis comprises approximately one‐quarter of all rhinitis cases.
Economic impact
• There is a significant economic burden in missed productive revenue and cost of symptomatic 
treatments.
• Based on data from 2002, there is a $7.3 billion direct cost (e.g. doctor visits, cost of medications). 
The indirect cost, including loss of productivity, is estimated at $4.2 billion.
Etiology
• The unifying factor of the various types of non‐allergic rhinitis is the lack of an association with 
an IgE‐mediated event.
Overall Bottom Line
• Rhinitis without an IgE component and/or allergic source.
• Far-reaching entity that affects up to 19% of the population of the United States.
• Treatment is limited to topical modalities including nasal washes, topical nasal steroids, 
and topical antihistamines.
Non‐Allergic Rhinitis  45
• All forms are associated with some degree of autonomic dysregulation.
• The various types of non‐allergic rhinitis include the following:
• Vasomotor rhinitis (idiopathic rhinitis);
• Gustatory rhinitis;
• Infectious rhinitis;
• Non‐allergic rhinitis with eosinophilia (NARES);
• Occupational rhinitis;
• Hormonal rhinitis;
• Drug‐induced rhinitis;
• Atrophic rhinitis; and
• Rhinitis medicamentosa.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• Non‐allergic rhinitis is a non‐IgE‐mediated condition comprised of many different subsets, all 
of which have a presumed non‐allergic etiology.
Predictive/risk factors
There are no known genetic markers or hereditary risk factors.
Section 2: Prevention
Screening
• Non‐allergic rhinitis is a group of conditions that must be distinguished from allergic rhinitis. This 
can only be done with skin testing for sensitivity to aeroallergens and in vitro allergen‐­specific 
IgE tests (radioallergosorbent test, RAST).
Primary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Secondary prevention
• Aggressive therapeutic control with topical steroids and antihistamine sprays prevents ongoing 
symptoms.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
In those with associated risk factors, prevention includes avoidance of trigger factors:
• Infectious: immediate treatment of infectious process.
• Occupational: avoidance of irritants.
• Rhinitis medicamentosa: avoidance of topical and oral decongestants.
• Rhinitis secondary to other medications: prompt discontinuation of medication in 
patients adversely affected by medication. Examples of offending agents include oral 
contraceptives, drugs for erectile dysfunction, aspirin/NSAIDs, some antihypertensives, 
and benzodiazepines.
46  Part 1: Allergy
Section 3: Diagnosis (Algorithm 5.1)
Differential diagnosis
Typical presentation
• Patient presents with vague, non‐specific complaints of intermittent or continuous nasal 
symptoms including at least one of the following: nasal congestion, post‐nasal drip, rhinor-
rhea, and sneezing, with or without a cough. The nasal symptoms are isolated without 
associated ocular symptoms or eczematous complaints. The predominant presentation of 
pure non‐allergic rhinitis occurs in females older than age 20. Most often there is no identifi-
able trigger.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Symptoms of rhinitis based on exposure to an offending agent (i.e. the relationship to provocative 
exposure including medications, irritants, and response to pharmacologic intervention).
• Lack of the characteristic physical examination of allergic rhinitis – enlarged turbinates that are 
often erythematous rather than pale and blue commonly seen in allergic rhinitis. Please note 
none of these findings are diagnostic and a normal appearance of nasal mucosa does not 
exclude the diagnosis of non‐allergic rhinitis.
• Negative skin test or RAST (in vitro test) to aeroallergens.
Differential diagnosis
Features
Allergic rhinitis
Pale bluish hue or palor of the nasal turbinate, blepheral 
edema, and discharge. Positive skin test or RAST to 
aeroallergens
Anatomic abnormalities
Tumors (benign/malignant)
Unilateral symptoms
Nasal polyps
Edematous semi‐translucent, opalescent gelatinous mass in 
nasal passage. Confirmation by endoscopic examination
Septal deviation
Asymmetrical appearance on physical examination
Hypertrophy of the nasal turbinates
Appearance on physical examination
Functional abmormalities
Laryngopharyngeal reflux
Isolated feeling of a posterior drip with or without  
dyspepsia
Rhinoscopy
Ciliary dysfunction syndrome  
(primary or secondary)
History of respiratory disease in the newborn with chronic 
sinopulmonary infections (primary)
Heterotropy (primary)
Mucociliary clearance test
CSF leak
History of recent surgery or trauma
Halo test
Foreign body (particularly in pediatrics)
Unilateral symptoms, purulent discharge
Non‐Allergic Rhinitis  47
1. Patient with
symptoms of rhinitis
2. History
suggestive
of allergic
rhinitis?
3. Therapeutic trail for
allergic rhinitis symptoms
4. Therapeutic trail for non-
allergic rhinitis symptoms
5. Does
patient
respond?
6. Further
follow-up,
meets
consultation
criteria?
7. Consultation with an
allergist or immunologist
8. Does patient
have an allergic
basis for
rhinitis (history
and skin test
correlation)?
9. Management of allergic rhinitis
Avoidance/environmental control
Adjust medication
Consider immunotherapy
Patient education
10. Management of 
non-allergic rhinitis
11. Cooperative follow-up
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Algorithm 5.1  Diagnosis of non‐allergic rhinitis
48  Part 1: Allergy
Clinical diagnosis
History
• Questions are intended to elucidate pattern, seasonality, chronicity, response to previous 
­treatments, precipitating factors (triggers) as well as the presence of coexisting conditions. This 
information should be teased out for each symptom. As with any complaint or diagnosis, quality 
of life issues such as ability to work, socialize, and sleep through the night are factors that the 
patient may not bring up or associate with the primary complaint. It is therefore incumbent 
upon the physician to ask the appropriate questions and discuss relevant symptoms.
• Response to previous treatments including over‐the‐counter treatments and medications 
(antihistamines and nasal saline washes) and prescription medications (antihistamines and 
nasal steroids).
• Precipitating factors (triggers) including occupational exposure, domestic environmental expo-
sure (pets, carpets, curtains), exercise, eating, medications, and weather changes.
Physical examination
• A detailed physical examination with particular emphasis on the head, eyes, ears, nose, and 
throat (HEENT), pulmonary and integumental systems.
• Signs and symptoms to be on the lookout for include nasal obstruction, deviation, enlarged 
turbinates, presence of a polyp, posterior pharyngeal drainage, presence of wheezing, pres-
ence of blephoral edema or allergic shiners, nasal crease, skin examination looking for evidence 
of atopy and eczema as well as dermatographism.
Useful clinical decision rules and calculators
• The patient who does not respond to initial treatment with topical nasal steroids or antihistamines 
warrants referral to an allergist.
Disease severity classification
Not applicable for this topic.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• All patients presenting to an allergist with symptoms of rhinitis must undergo allergy testing 
and/or in vitro testing (serum allergen‐specific IgE is a type of blood test used to diagnose allergies 
and determine what the patient is allergic to).
• Skin testing is often considered more sensitive and specific than in vitro tests and is the pre-
ferred test for ruling out allergic rhinitis. The particular agents tested are dependent on the 
history evoked including the particular region of the country, occupation, and activities.
• Nasal smears for eosinophilia, though not routinely performed, may identify eosinophilia in 
either allergic (expected) or non‐allergic rhinitis to identify non‐allergic rhinitis with eosinophilia 
(NARES).
• Beta 2 transferrin is diagnostic of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak.
List of imaging techniques
• In certain cases, fiberoptic nasal endoscopy and/or rhinomanometry may be useful in determin-
ing etiology of the rhinitis including anatomic abnormality.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis of disease
• Once non‐allergic rhinitis is diagnosed, the most common error is missing comorbid conditions, 
especially reflux, and to a lesser extent nasal polyps.
Non‐Allergic Rhinitis  49
Section 4: Treatment
Treatment rationale
• Nasal steroids: familiarity and long‐term successful history of use (until recently was the only 
therapeutic option).
• Topical nasal antihistamines approved in 2001.
• Combination of nasal steroids and topical nasal antihistamines, now available in a combined 
spray delivery system.
• Topical ipratropium bromide was specifically approved for rhinorrhea associated with non‐allergic 
rhinitis.
When to hospitalize
Not applicable for this topic.
Managing the hospitalized patient
Not applicable for this topic.
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comments
Conservative
Topical nasal saline wash/rinse
Medical
• Topical nasal steroids
• Topical antihistamine
• Combination of above
• Ipratropium bromide for isolated symptoms
Complementary
Topical capsaicin nasal spray
Prevention/management of complications
• Nasal steroids are contraindicated in patients with either increased intraocular pressure or 
cataracts. In addition, nasal steroids can lead to increased intraocular pressure and cataracts. 
If either of these occurs during treatment, the nasal steroids must be discontinued.
Section 5: Special populations
Pregnancy
• Only budesonide is approved in pregnancy (category B).
• All other nasal steroids as well as topical antihistamines and ipratropium are category C for 
pregnancy.
Children
Treated as above.
Clinical pearls
• Start with – topical nasal steroids.
• Then try – topical antihistamine.
• If more control needed – combination of above.
• For isolated symptoms of rhinorrhea – ipratropium bromide.
50  Part 1: Allergy
Elderly
Treated as above.
Others
Those with glaucoma or increased intraocular pressure are not candidates.
Section 6: Prognosis
Natural history of untreated disease
• A subset of patients may develop allergic rhinitis or asthma.
Prognosis for treated patients
• Only continued treatment will control symptoms.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
• Monitor for any increase in intraocular pressure for those patients on nasal steroids.
Section 7: Reading list
Bhargava D, Bhargava K, Al‐Abri A, Al‐Bassam W, Al‐Abri R. Non allergic rhinitis: prevalence, clinical profile 
and knowledge gaps in literature. Oman Med J 2011;26:416–20
Nozad CH, Michael LM, Betty Lew D, Michael CF. Non‐allergic rhinitis: a case report and review. Clin Mol 
Allergy 2010;8:1
Salib RJ, Harries PG, Nair SB, Howarth PH. Mechanisms and mediators of nasal symptoms in non‐allergic rhini-
tis. Clin Exp Allergy 2008;38:393–404
Van Gerven L, Boeckxstaens G, Hellings P. Up‐date on neuro‐immune mechanisms involved in allergic and 
non‐allergic rhinitis. Rhinology 2012;50:227–35
Varghese M, Glaum MC, Lockey RF. Drug‐induced rhinitis. Clin Exp Allergy 2010;40:381–4
Varricchio A, Capasso M, De Lucia A, Avvisati F, Varricchio AM, Bettoncelli G, et al. Intranasal flunisolide treat-
ment in patients with non‐allergic rhinitis. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol 2011;24:401–9
Suggested websites
www.aaaai.org
www.acaai.org
www.eaaci.org
Section 8: Guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
The diagnosis and management 
of rhinitis: an updated practice 
parameter
American Academy of Allergy, 
Asthma and Immunology 
(AAAAI); American College of 
Allergy, Asthma and Immunology 
(ACAAI); Joint Council of Allergy, 
Asthma and Immunology
2008
(http://www.jacionline.org/
article/S0091‐6749(08)01123‐8/
abstract)
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Non‐allergic rhinitis is a chronic disease for which there is no cure.
• Only continued treatment will control symptoms.
Non‐Allergic Rhinitis  51
Section 9: Evidence
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 10: Images
Not applicable for this topic.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at:
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for 
patients, and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
52 
Sinusitis
Yan W. Ho and Satish Govindaraj
Department of Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 6
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• Rhinosinusitis encompasses a broad range of diseases all characterized by inflammation of one 
or more paranasal sinuses. The diagnosis of rhinosinusitis is based on subjective and objective 
findings and depends on the duration of symptoms.
Disease classification
• Acute rhinosinusitis: up to 4 weeks of symptoms.
• Recurrent acute rhinosinusitis: four or more episodes of acute rhinosinusitis within 1 year with 
symptom‐free periods in between.
• Subacute rhinosinusitis: 4–12 weeks of symptoms.
• Chronic rhinosinusitis: 12 weeks or more of symptoms.
Overall Bottom Line
• Rhinosinusitis affects millions of people in the United States annually, or 15.2% of the 
population each year. The burden of disease includes lost workdays, increased health care 
costs, and increased doctor’s visits.
• The accurate diagnosis of acute, recurrent acute, subacute, and chronic rhinosinusitis depends 
on symptoms, the duration of symptoms, and disease progression. There are many predisposing 
factors for rhinosinusitis: preceding viral infection, smoking, allergic rhinitis, asthma, anatomic 
obstruction, and immunodeficiency.
• The physical examination is helpful in detecting possible intracranial or ocular complications, 
and endoscopy is helpful for confirmation of diagnosis. Routine nasal cultures, laboratory 
­testing, and imaging are not indicated unless disease is refractory to medical treatment or if 
there are complications.
• The preferred imaging of acute rhinosinusitis is CT of the sinus without contrast. However, 
CT with contrast can highlight abscesses and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can highlight 
soft tissue or nerve involvement.
• The mainstay of treatment of acute rhinosinusitis is supportive, with the addition of antibiotics, 
but for chronic rhinosinusitis treatment may require more adjunctive medications and possibly 
surgery.
Sinusitis  53
Incidence/prevalence
• According to data gathered through the National Health Interview Survey for calendar years 
1997–2006, the annual disease prevalence of sinusitis was 15.2%.
• In the United States, it is estimated that approximately 20 million cases of acute bacterial 
­rhinosinusitis occur annually.
• In the United States, 1999–2002, there were an estimated 3 116 142 visits annually due to acute 
rhinosinusitis, representing 0.30% of all ambulatory visits.
• Chronic rhinosinusitis has a period prevalence of 2% per decade, peaking between the ages of 
20 and 59 years.
Economic impact
• In 1985–1992, sinusitis was the fifth most common diagnosis for prescribing antibiotics and, in 
1996, sinusitis led to $3.5 billion dollars in health care expenditures.
• The burden of acute rhinosinusitis on patient quality of life is also substantial. Patients with 
sinusitis are significantly more likely to visit the emergency room, spend over $500 annually on 
health care, and see a medical specialist.
• Patients with sinusitis missed an average of 5.67 workdays annually versus 3.74 workdays for 
those without. Comparatively, health care expenditures due to sinusitis far exceeded those of 
ulcer disease, acute asthma, and hay fever.
Etiology
• The etiology of acute rhinosinusitis commonly involves predisposing factors that can be divided 
generally into three categories: environmental, anatomic, and systemic. They commonly occur 
at the same time, and can predispose patients to not only acute infections, but also contribute 
to development of chronic sinusitis.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• Acute bacterial rhinosinusitis is often preceded by an acute viral upper respiratory tract infec­
tion. After the first 10 days of a viral upper respiratory tract infection, approximately 0.5% of 
patients will go on to develop a bacterial acute rhinosinusitis. The most common bacterial 
organisms are Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Moraxella catarrhalis. 
However, there is evidence that Staphylococcus aureus is becoming a major contributor to the 
development of acute rhinosinusitis. If these acute infections are not resolved or become recurrent, 
S. aureus, anaerobic and gram‐negative organisms such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa become 
predominant.
• The transition between viral and bacterial acute rhinosinusitis has been studied extensively, and 
is thought to be secondary to altered mucociliary clearance and colonization of bacteria. The 
inflammation from the viral illness temporarily stuns the cilia, mucus remains trapped in the 
sinuses, and bacteria proliferate.
• Unlike acute rhinosinusitis, chronic rhinosinusitis or recurrent acute rhinosinusitis are more 
likely to be associated with the risk factors described.
Risk factors
• Allergic rhinitis: the association between allergic rhinitis and sinusitis has long been recognized, 
and has been attributed to decreased mucociliary clearance and mucus retention in the sinuses. 
The inflammation caused by the allergic response causes mucosal membranes to become 
edematous, thereby obstructing the outflow of mucus through sinus ostia. This leads to a 
buildup of mucus within sinus cavities, oxygen stores are depleted, and bacteria proliferate in 
54  Part 1: Allergy
this acidic environment. Most believe that the inflammation caused by allergic reaction causes 
obstruction of the sinus ostia but, in addition, some believe that the allergic response itself also 
causes an influx of eosinophils in the nasal cavity and the maxillary sinuses.
• Cigarette smoke: tobacco exposure in the form of smoking or second‐hand smoke has been 
shown to increase bacterial and viral infections. A study on the microbiology of acute bacterial 
rhinosinusitis found that smokers were more likely to have cultures positive for S. aureus, 
methicillin‐resistant S. aureus (MRSA), and beta‐lactamase producing bacteria.
• Pollution–exposures: the link between pollution and other exposures to acute rhinosinusitis is 
less defined, but nonetheless, a correlation has been shown. In a study following rescue and 
recovery workers who were exposed to the 9/11 World Trade Center bombings, workers were 
found to have more frequent upper respiratory tract infections and rhinosinusitis in the short 
term. Long‐term studies are currently being conducted.
• Sinonasal anatomy: abnormal sinonasal anatomy may contribute to the development of acute 
rhinosinusitis and, if left untreated, recurrent acute, subacute or chronic sinusitis. The presence 
of septal deviation, septal spurs, turbinate hypertrophy, Haller cells, agger nasi cells, or an 
obstructive mass, like a tumor or polyp, can pose as barriers to proper mucociliary clearance. 
Arguably, the impairment of mucociliary function due to local or systemic disease can also be 
considered as an anatomic predisposition to the development of rhinosinusitis. When compar­
ing CT scans of patients with refractory acute rhinosinusitis and patients without sinonasal 
disease, patients in the first group were statistically more likely to have septal deviation towards 
the affected side. Patient with recurrent acute rhinosinusitis were significantly more likely to 
have Haller cells and smaller infundibular widths (mean of 0.591 mm versus 0.823 mm in unaf­
fected individuals). They also were more likely to have concha bullosa and impinging septal 
spurs, although the difference was not statistically significant.
• Dental anatomy: particularly its relation to the maxillary sinus, dental anatomy can predispose 
patients to maxillary sinusitis. Depending on the development of the maxillary sinus, the maxil­
lary teeth may be positioned very close to the inferior boundary of the sinus. Dental caries or 
gingivitis can easily spread into the maxillary sinuses and cause an acute maxillary sinusitis.
• Ciliary dysfunction: in many cases of rhinosinusitis, ciliary dysfunction is thought to have a role 
in the pathophysiology. Most often, it is caused by environmental, infectious, or inflammatory 
factors but, in rare cases, a congenital disorder including Kartagener syndrome or another type 
of primary ciliary dyskinesia is involved. Primary ciliary dyskinesia is a disorder with an autosomal 
recessive inheritance affecting the function of cilia. It is estimated to affect 1 in 7000–60 000 
people. Manifestations include chronic otitis media, subfertility, and chronic rhinosinusitis. 
Usually, the investigation of these diseases is not indicated unless acute rhinosinusitis develops 
into recurrent acute or chronic rhinosinusitis.
• Immunodeficiencies (congenital or acquired): it is important to recognize the role of immuno­
deficiencies in patients who have recurrent or chronic rhinosinusitis. The investigation of acute 
rhinosinusitis should not routinely prompt an extensive immunologic investigation unless 
­indicated by other signs and symptoms. The most common congenital immunodeficiencies 
that present with recurrent rhinosinusitis include selective IgA deficiency, common variable 
immunodeficiency, Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome, ataxia telangiectasia, hypogammaglobulinemia, 
myelokathexis syndrome, and caspase‐8 deficiency. Common acquired and iatrogenic types 
of immunodeficiencies include HIV/AIDS, chemotherapy, transplantation, and the use of 
­immunomodulating medications.
• Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)/laryngopharyngeal reflux: reflux disease is increasingly 
being implicated as a contributor to chronic rhinosinusitis but its effects on the development of 
acute rhinosinusitis have yet to be studied.
Sinusitis  55
• Cystic fibrosis: this disorder is caused by mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane 
­conductance regulator (CFTR) gene on chromosome 7. This results in the abnormal transport 
of chloride ions leading to altered viscosity of mucous secretions. Cystic fibrosis is not as rele­
vant in isolated cases of acute sinusitis, but should be part of the investigation for chronic 
­rhinosinusitis especially in patients with polyps.
• Asthma: the association between asthma and chronic rhinosinusitis has long been recognized, 
but a causal relationship has yet to be illuminated. Although the evidence is focused primarily 
on the effect of asthma on chronic rhinosinusitis, this phenomenon is also seen in acute 
­rhinosinusitis. Patients who have viral upper respiratory tract infections are more likely to 
experience asthma exacerbations and have more severe attacks. Recently, multiple individuals 
also propose a “united airway disease” or “global airway disease” that links upper and lower 
­airway diseases including allergy, sinusitis, and asthma.
Section 2: Prevention
Screening
• Allergy testing.
Primary prevention
• Patients with chronic or recurrent acute rhinosinusitis cannot prevent infections from occurring, 
but can minimize the recurrence by practicing hand hygiene and avoiding other people who 
are ill.
• Smoking cessation can help to decrease the number and severity of sinus infections.
Secondary prevention
• The use of nasal saline irrigation has been shown to improve mucociliary function, decrease 
mucosal edema, and remove nasal debris and allergens. They have been shown to decrease 
rhinosinusitis symptoms and the need for antibiotics.
• Treating underlying GERD may also be helpful in decreasing chronic rhinosinusitis severity.
• Environmental control of allergens or initiation of immunotherapy are useful adjuncts for 
patients with chronic rhinosinusitis.
Section 3: Diagnosis
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Practicing good hygiene and smoking cessation can help to minimize chances of an acute 
infection, while nasal irrigations and allergy and GERD control can help to lessen the burden 
of disease for those with chronic rhinosinusitis.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• The diagnosis of acute rhinosinusitis depends on a full, detailed history and physical 
examination, and does not require routine laboratory work or imaging. The cardinal symptoms 
of nasal obstruction, purulent drainage, and facial pain, along with physical examination 
finding of purulence from the OMC should be enough for a diagnosis.
• When symptoms persist or recur despite proper medical therapy for acute rhinosinusitis, the 
clinician should investigate other causes for symptoms or other complications. If symptoms 
last for over 12 weeks, consider chronic rhinosinusitis or other diagnoses.
56  Part 1: Allergy
(Continued)
Differential diagnosis
• If the disease is refractory to initial treatment or becomes recurrent or chronic, further 
investigation to rule out immunodeficiencies, cystic fibrosis, Wegener’s granulomatosis, 
sarcoidosis, Churg–Strauss disease, or other autoimmune diseases may be necessary. Cultures 
may also help to guide antibiotic therapy and to detect drug‐resistant organisms.
• Imaging is not indicated for acute rhinosinusitis unless there are signs of complications, but it is 
useful in persistent or chronic disease to detect anatomic anomalies and the extent of disease.
Differential diagnosis
Features
Allergic rhinitis
It is difficult to distinguish rhinitis from rhinosinusitis by history alone. 
The physical examination helps to differentiate the two because in acute 
rhinosinusitis the nasal mucoca may be red and swollen and purulent 
drainage may be seen in the OMC, but in allergic rhinitis the turbinates 
are boggy and pale. The discharge in acute rhinosinusitis may turn gray, 
yellow, or green, whereas in allergic rhinitis it would be clear and watery
Non‐allergic rhinitis
This group of rhinitis is by definition not an IgE‐mediated sensitivity to 
allergen
Infectious rhinitis
Viral or fungal rhinosinusitis ex: rhinovirus, adenovirus
Vasomotor rhinitis
Vasomotor rhinitis is characterized by nasal obstruction, rhinorrhea, and 
congestion and symptoms are exacerbated by certain odors, alcohol, spicy 
foods, emotions, temperature, barometric pressure changes, and bright lights
Eosinophilic non‐allergic  
rhinitis
This is characterized by the presence of many eosinophils in nasal 
secretions, a negative history for allergen exacerbation, and negative  
skin tests. It is sensitive to steroid therapy
Rhinitis medicamentosa
Rhinitis due to excessive use of systemic or more likely topical use of 
decongestants (i.e. Afrin®) The use over 3 days may predispose patients to 
the development of this
Rhinitis due to pregnancy, 
hypothyroidism, Horner’s 
syndrome
Pregnancy can increase intravascular and extravascular volume. Estrogen 
also has cholinergic effects by increasing vessel dilatation and mucous 
production
Temporomandibular joint  
disease
The location of the facial pain tends to be pre‐auricular, radiating to the 
temple or neck. It is reproducible by palpation or movement of the jaw. In 
addition, the pain is exacerbated by chewing. There may be an  
audible click on jaw opening
Headache (migraines)
Sinus headaches are a type of migraine headache, and can resemble 
rhinosinusitis due to symptoms of facial pressure, pain over the cheeks, 
forehead, and around the eyes, which may be accompanied by nasal 
congestion, lacrimation, rhinorrhea, or eyelid edema. The investigation 
of these patients reveals minimal to no sinus disease, and the severity of 
symptoms does not correlate with endoscopic or radiologic findings
Trigeminal neuralgia
Facial pain can be caused by trigeminal neuralgia, also called “tic 
douloureux.” This disease is characterized by brief, repetitive, lancing, 
facial pain that is unilateral. The distribution of pain can be any one or 
more of the three distributions of the trigeminal nerve. These painful 
attacks can be triggered by a cutaneous stimulus, including chewing, 
shaving, and wind blowing on the face. Medical treatment, usually 
with carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, or other anticonvulsants are the 
first line of treatment, followed by surgical therapy, which involves 
either transecting a branch of the trigeminal nerve or performing a 
microvascular decompression of the nerve
Sinusitis  57
Typical presentation
• Patients typically present with a variable duration of symptoms that may include mucopurulent 
rhinorrhea, headache, facial pain, anosmia, and congestion. Other associated symptoms 
include fever, chills, cough, malaise, dental or ear pain. The time course of their symptoms will 
define the type of rhinosinusitis which will then guide treatment strategies.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• When diagnosing acute rhinosinusitis, it is also important to distinguish between viral and 
bacterial etiologies. According to the clinical practice guidelines, all acute rhinosinusitis symp­
toms should be diagnosed as viral if the duration of symptoms is less than 10 days and if they 
are not worsening. However, if the symptoms persist beyond 10 days or worsen after initial 
improvement, then the diagnosis of acute bacterial rhinosinusitis is applicable.
• Symptoms that are most sensitive and specific for acute rhinosinusitis include mucopurulent 
drainage (anterior or posterior), nasal obstruction/congestion, and facial pressure/pain/fullness. 
Differential diagnosis
Features
CSF rhinorrhea
The rhinorrhea from CSF would be positive for beta‐transferrin, and 
would be greatly exacerbated by Valsalva maneuvers and leaning forward. 
Often the drainage is unilateral
Sinus neoplasms
When rhinosinusitis is refractory to medical treatment or when an 
abnormality is found on physical examination, the possibility of a sinus 
neoplasm should be considered. CT scans can give bony detail, but MRI 
is better at distinguishing inflammatory causes from neoplastic causes 
of rhinosinusitis. The most common neoplasms in the sinonasal tract are 
squamous cell carcinoma, adenoid cystic carcinoma, and adenocarcinoma. 
Others include neuroectodermal (melanoma, olfactory neuroblastoma), 
sinonasal undifferentiated carcinoma, and metastatic lesions
Nasal polyposis
Nasal polyps are visible on endoscopic examination. They are commonly 
seen in patients with cystic fibrosis
Autoimmune disease
Autoimmune diseases can also be associated with rhinitis or sinonasal 
lesions
Wegener’s 
granulomatosis
This is an inflammatory disease of the blood vessels characterized by 
granulomas formed in the kidneys, lungs, and upper respiratory tract. 
Common symptoms in the upper respiratory tract include epistaxis, 
rhinitis, saddle nose, gingival hyperplasia, and subglottis stenosis due 
to granulomatous lesions
Sarcoidosis
This is an autoimmune disease that can also cause rhinosinusitis with 
additional features including nasal crusting, anosmia, and epistaxis. 
Patients may have hilar opacification on chest radiographs with elevated 
angiotensin‐converting enzyme levels
Odontogenic diseases
Odontogenic causes of maxillary rhinosinusitis are relatively uncommon, 
although it causes an estimated 10–12% of all cases of maxillary 
rhinosinusitis. In the evaluation of a patient with acute rhinosinusitis, it is 
prudent to look for an odontogenic source for the infection. Any history 
of an infected tooth or recent dental surgery should trigger a detailed 
dental examination. On physical examination tenderness with palpation 
of an infected tooth may prove diagnostic of an odontogenic source
58  Part 1: Allergy
Other symptoms include hyposmia or anosmia, headache, fever, cough, malaise, fatigue, 
­dental pain (maxillary), ear fullness, or otalgia.
• The most recent clinical practice guidelines on adult sinusitis focus on the three cardinal symp­
toms of rhinosinusitis: mucopurulent drainage, nasal obstruction, and facial discomfort. 
Specifically, the diagnosis requires the presence of purulent nasal discharge and either nasal 
obstruction or facial pain/pressure/fullness.
• The diagnosis of chronic rhinosinusitis requires 12 weeks or longer of two of four cardinal 
symptoms including mucopurulent drainage, nasal obstruction, facial pain/pressure/fullness, or 
decreased sense of smell and inflammation as documented as purulent mucus or edema in 
middle meatus or ethmoid region, polyps in the nasal cavity, or radiographic evidence of 
inflammation in the paranasal sinuses.
Physical examination
• During the basic head and neck examination, the examiner should focus on the forehead, max­
illa, and peri‐orbital region to detect erythema, swelling, or tenderness to palpation in those areas 
overlying the sinuses. Facial cellulitis may be an indication that an acute rhinosinusitis has spread 
outside of the sinuses. A thorough ophthalmologic examination with extraocular movements and 
visual acuity should be performed to rule out subperiosteal or intraorbital abscess. Tenderness to 
palpation of the temporomandibular joint may guide the clinician towards an alternate cause for 
facial or ear pain. An intraoral examination might reveal oroantral fistulas or dental causes for 
sinusitis or facial pain. A complete neurologic examination may be necessary to detect or exclude 
complications such as meningitis, encephalitis, intracranial abscess, or nerve palsies.
• Perhaps the most relevant finding of all is the detection of purulent fluid in the nasal cavity or 
posterior nasopharynx. Clinicians who are equipped with nasal endoscopes have a particular 
advantage of visualizing the turbinates, nasal septum, osteomeatal complex, nasopharynx, and 
eustachian tube orifices. Any anatomic abnormalities may also be detected at this time. During 
acute rhinosinusitis, nasal mucosa may be edematous or erythematous, and purulent material 
may be draining from the sinus ostia or pooling within the nasal passages (Figure 6.2).
Useful clinical decision rules and calculators
• Surveys have been developed in order to objectively measure the burden of disease on patient’s 
quality of life. These surveys, the sinonasal outcome tests (SNOT), help to score patient symp­
toms and give a reference for comparison after medical treatment or surgery. There are many 
surveys that have been developed including SNOT‐20 and SNOT‐22 used for chronic rhinosi­
nusitis, and a modified SNOT‐16 that assesses the impact of acute rhinosinusitis on quality of 
life of patients. This is a useful tool not only for initial evaluation, but also for subsequent moni­
toring of symptoms after treatment.
Disease severity classification
Not applicable for this topic.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• Routine use of laboratory tests is deemed to be unnecessary in cases of acute rhinosinusitis. 
The diagnosis can be established solely by a good history and examination. However, if the 
disease is refractory to initial treatment or becomes recurrent or chronic, further investigation 
to rule out immunodeficiencies, cystic fibrosis, Wegener’s granulomatosis, sarcoidosis, Churg–
Strauss disease, or other autoimmunes diseases may be necessary.
Sinusitis  59
• Obtaining nasal cultures can facilitate culture‐directed antimicrobial treatment, but the routine 
use of nasal cultures has not been proven to be useful or cost effective for acute rhinosinusitis. 
If patients are immunocompromised or if there is concern of drug resistance, nasal cultures may 
be performed to help direct therapy. Traditionally, cultures from the OMC or middle meatus are 
preferred under direct vision. However, there is evidence that cultures of the nasopharynx cor­
relate well with cultures of the middle meatus under direct endoscopic visualization, and may 
be useful in the primary care setting. Cultures may be particularly helpful in recurrent acute 
rhinosinusitis given the fact that these patients are similar to chronic rhinosinusitis but tend to 
require more antibiotic therapy.
• In patients with evidence of atopy or allergy, skin and laboratory testing can be conducted to 
investigate if allergy to environmental exposures may be contributing to the severity or fre­
quency of rhinosinusitis. This may also lead to treatments that can help decrease the severity 
and frequency of sinus disease.
Lists of imaging techniques
• Radiographs: X‐rays in the four traditional views (Waters’, Caldwell’s, lateral, and submental) 
may be useful in uncertain or recurrent cases of acute rhinosinusitis. Waters’ view (Figure 6.3) 
with the occiput tipped down and patient’s chin and nasal tip against the plate, has good visu­
alization of the maxillary sinuses with a positive predictive value of 82.5% and negative predic­
tive value of 76.9%. Caldwell’s view, with the forehead and nasal tip against the plate, provides 
a good view of the ethmoid and frontal sinuses. The lateral and submental views allow visuali­
zation of the sphenoid and posterior ethmoid sinuses. A normal X‐ray, especially in the frontal 
or maxillary sinuses, has a good negative predictive value (90–100%) but has a poor positive 
predictive value (as low as 80%).
• Ultrasound: the use of ultrasound in the diagnosis of acute rhinosinusitis is not mentioned as 
part of the clinical practice guidelines. However, in the setting of the primary care office, there 
is some preliminary evidence to support the use of an office ultrasound device that can be used 
to detect air–fluid levels in the maxillary sinus.
• CT: CT of the paranasal sinuses is not recommended as part of the routine investigation for 
acute rhinosinusitis. In cases with severe disease, immunocompromised state, or suspected 
complications, several guidelines including the rhinosinusitis initiative and the clinical practice 
guidelines advocate CT without IV contrast as the preferred imaging technique. The application 
of cone‐beam CT has recently expanded to sinonasal disease and although this technique 
offers some advantages, like convenience of office‐use and reduction of radiation dosage, its 
routine use has not been well studied for cost‐effectiveness and efficacy. Common findings in 
a sinus CT include air–fluid levels in acute rhinosinusitis and mucosal thickening, periosteal 
thickening, and sclerosis in chronic rhinosinusitis.
• The most widely accepted radiographic staging system for chronic rhinosinusitis is the Lund–
Mackay scale. This is an objective measure to grade the right and left sides independently, and 
it assesses the maxillary, anterior ethmoids, posterior ethmoids, sphenoids, frontal sinuses, and 
the ostiomeatal complex. Each sinus is scored 0 (no abnormality), 1 (partial opacification), or 2 
(total opacification), while the ostiomeatal complex is scored either 0 or 2 (for absence or pres­
ence of disease). The highest score is 24.
• MRI: not used routinely for acute rhinosinusitis unless there are signs of aggressive disease or 
cases with complications. MRI provides better soft tissue information (useful for intracranial, 
intraorbital, and extrasinonasal manifestations of rhinosinusitis), especially when differentiating 
malignant from inflammatory causes of rhinosinusitis. In addition, it does not pose a radiation 
exposure concern.
60  Part 1: Allergy
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding  
diagnosis of disease
• It is important to distinguish between an acute viral and bacterial rhinosinusitis due to the 
pitfalls of over‐prescribing antibiotics for a virally induced illness.
• Radiographic imaging is not routinely necessary in cases of simple rhinosinusitis.
• If patients present with persistent, recurrent, or chronic disease that fails medical management, 
a consultation with an otolaryngologist for further assessment with nasal endoscopy or a base­
line CT scan of the sinuses would be indicated.
Section 4: Treatment
Treatment rationale
• Treatment of acute rhinosinusitis has to take into account the duration of disease, severity of 
symptoms, and patient compliance. If symptoms’ duration is within 10 days and are not wors­
ening, a viral rhinosinusitis is presumed and treatment is symptomatic with antipyretics and 
analgesics. Oral or topical decongestants may be used for nasal congestion, while mucolytics 
and expectorants may be used for cough. The utility of antihistamines and topical or systemic 
steroids in the treatment of viral rhinosinusitis is still under investigation.
• If symptoms last more than 10 days or if there is worsening or double worsening, then the 
presumptive diagnosis is a bacterial acute rhinosinusitis and this may be managed by watchful 
waiting for reliable patients or treated with antibiotics and other adjunctive therapies: analgesics 
and antipyretics, steroids, irrigations, decongestants, mucolytics, and allergy management.
• Most guidelines advocate the use of amoxicillin or amoxicillin‐clavulanate as a first line of 
­treatment based on its efficacy, low cost, and low side‐effect profile. Those with an allergy to 
penicillin may be given macrolides or trimethoprim‐sulfamethoxazole. The adequate duration 
of therapy is still debated, with most studies advocating 3–10 days of therapy.
• In patients with recurrent, subacute, or chronic rhinosinusitis, nasal cultures may help to guide 
antibiotic therapy, and there may be a role for nasal saline irrigations (with or without antibiotic 
and steroid additives). In those who fail medical therapy, surgical management with endo­
scopic sinus surgery, septoplasty, turbinate reduction, balloon sinuplasty, or even functional 
rhinoplasty may be necessary.
When to hospitalize
• After 7 days of treatment, if patients fail to improve or worsen, then the clinician should consider 
an otolaryngology evaluation for nasal endoscopy and culture. Intravenous antibiotic therapy 
may be indicated for severe symptoms or a culture that reveals only intravenous antibiotic options.
• Signs and symptoms that the disease has spread intracranially or intraorbitally include propto­
sis, visual changes (diplopia), severe headache and fever, abnormal extraocular movements, 
changes in mental status, peri‐orbital inflammation, edema, or erythema. In addition, frontal 
sinus infections may spread to skin and soft tissue of the forehead leading to frontal osteo­
myelitis, an entity known as Pott’s puffy tumor.
• If these signs are present, routine laboratory tests should be ordered such as complete blood 
count, BMP, and coagulation profile (in preparation for possible surgical intervention). 
Endoscopic examination should be performed in order to obtain nasal cultures or biopsies. 
Imaging such as CT head and sinus with or without contrast should be obtained. If abscess is 
suspected, contrast should be used.
• If there are signs of intracranial or intraorbital complications, the patient should be admitted for 
monitoring, intravenous antibiotics, and possible lumbar tap after imaging is performed.
Sinusitis  61
Managing the hospitalized patient
• Intravenous antibiotics should be used in cases with intracranial or intraorbital complications 
and cases of failure of oral antibiotic treatment.
• The appropriate consultations should be made to other services, which include neurosurgery, 
ophthalmology, infectious disease, or medicine if there are other medical problems that may 
need to be addressed.
• If the imaging shows an abscess that necessitates surgical intervention, this should be coordi­
nated expeditiously to avoid further sequelae of the infection.
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comment
Conservative
Watchful waiting is an acceptable management 
option for patients with uncomplicated acute 
rhinosinusitis (temperature <38.3 °C, mild pain) 
and good follow‐up
Medical
• Antibiotics
• Nasal saline irrigations/sprays
• Intranasal steroid sprays
• Mucolytics, decongestants, antihistamines
There are many combinations of antibiotics that 
can be used for treating acute rhinosinusitis. For 
chronic rhinosinusitis, antibiotic choice depends 
on the prevalent organisms and sensitivities. 
Chronic rhinosinusitis can also benefit from nasal 
irrigations and steroids
Adjunctive therapies can be used to supplement 
antibiotic treatment
Surgical
• Functional endoscopic sinus surgery (maxillary 
antrostomy, ethmoidectomy, sphenoidotomy, 
frontal sinusotomy
• Balloon sinuplasty
• Septoplasty
• Turbinate reduction
When medical therapy has failed to resolve or 
improve symptoms, surgical intervention may be 
considered. This includes a variety of techniques 
(balloon or instrumentation) and can involve any 
location of the sinonasal tract that seems to be 
involved and seems to contribute to the disease
Prevention/management of complications
• Surgical complications include but are not limited to epistaxis, recurrent infections, damage to 
the orbit, CSF leak, nasolacrimal duct injury, and anosmia.
Clinical pearls
• Treatment for chronic rhinosinusitis is predominantly medical with surgery reserved for a small 
subset of patients who fail non‐surgical therapy.
• Surgery for chronic rhinosinusitis does not replace medical therapy. Actually, medical therapy 
becomes more important after surgery is performed.
• In a patient with unilateral acute sinusitis, rule out a structural problem of drainage or an 
odontogenic source of infection.
• In patients with recurrent acute sinusitis, consider a CT scan at the time of an infection to help 
determine which sinuses are the problem. Classically, the patient with recurrent acute sinusitis 
has a normal CT scan between infections.
62  Part 1: Allergy
Section 5: Special populations
Pregnancy
• During pregnancy, increasing blood volume, shifts to the extravascular space, and increased 
estrogen all contribute to vascular dilatation and increased mucus production.
• Approximately 10–30% of women of childbearing age report worsening of rhinitis or sinusitis 
symptoms during pregnancy.
• It is of utmost importance to understand the risk : benefit ratio of rhinosinusitis and its manage­
ment options when deciding how to counsel, diagnose, and treat patients during pregnancy.
• If a CT is necessary, performing one without contrast and after 17 weeks’ gestation is best.
• Antimicrobials within category B such as penicillins, cephalosporins, clindamycin, erythromycin, 
and azithromycin are safer than those in category C such as clarithromycin, fluoroquinolones, 
aminoglycosides, sulfonamides, tetracycline, and vancomycin.
• Antihistamines such as chlorpheniramine, loratadine, and cetirizine are within category B.
• The only intranasal steroid spray in category B is budesonide.
• Surgery should only be considered as a last resort after other medical modalities have failed 
because of the risks of general anesthesia, which include preterm labor and effects on the fetus.
Children
• Systematic review of the literature has shown that rhinosinusitis is a major cause of morbidity 
to children who suffer from this disease.
• Although medical therapy is the mainstay of treatment for the pediatric population for rhinosi­
nusitis of all categories, FESS may be beneficial in cases resistant to medical treatment (failing 
2–6 weeks of antibiotic treatment).
• However, pediatric FESS seems to have less benefit in patients with underlying systemic ­diseases 
such as cystic fibrosis.
• Absolute indications for surgical intervention include complete nasal obstruction due to polyps 
in cystic fibrosis, orbital abscess, intracranial complications, antrochoanal polyp, mucocele and 
mucopyocele, and fungal sinosinusitis.
Elderly
• There are studies that show chronic sinusitis can affect cognitive functioning in the elderly 
population.
• It is important to treat rhinosinusitis in the aging population, but considerations need to be 
made when prescribing antibiotics in the setting of other comorbidities including renal and 
hepatic insufficiency.
Others
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 6: Prognosis
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Chronic rhinosinusitis is a chronic disease that requires ongoing medical therapy and 
management of underlying triggers such as allergies.
• This condition is not a curable disease, but a chronic illness that requires ongoing medical 
therapy and possible lifestyle modification.
• Surgery is used as an adjunct of treatment in those that have failed medical management. 
However, surgery does not alleviate the need for ongoing medical management.
Sinusitis  63
Natural history of untreated disease
• Untreated chronic rhinosinusitis results in significant loss of quality of life as well as exacerba­
tions of asthma.
• Patients will vary in the progression of their disease and this is due to underlying etiology of 
their chronic rhinosinusitis.
Prognosis for treated patients
• Medical treatment is ongoing and controls symptoms in the majority of cases.
• Surgery has an 80–90% success rate with complete or moderate improvement in symptoms 
and disease severity.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
• There is no consensus on frequency of monitoring of patients with chronic rhinosinusitis .
• In general, an evaluation every 3 months is recommended until the condition has stabilized. In 
patients with polyps, examination and endoscopy will detect early polyp growth before symp­
toms develop.
• Hyposmia or anosmia is the first symptom seen in polyp regrowth. This occurs before nasal 
obstruction, headaches, or posterior rhinorrhea.
Section 7: Reading list
Brook I. Microbiology and antimicrobial management of sinusitis. J Laryngol Otol 2005;119:251–8.
Cornelius RS, Martin J, Wippold FJ 2nd, Aiken AH, Angtuaco EJ, Berger KL, et al. ACR appropriateness criteria 
sinonasal disease. J Am Coll Radiol 2013;10:241–6
Desrosiers M, Evans GA, Keith PK, Wright ED, Kaplan A, Bouchard J, et al. Canadian clinical practice guidelines 
for acute and chronic rhinosinusitis. J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2011;40(Suppl 2):S99–193
Meltzer EO, Hamilos DL. Rhinosinusitis diagnosis and management for the clinician: a synopsis of recent con­
sensus guidelines. Mayo Clin Proc 2011;86:427–43
Meltzer EO, Hamilos DL, Hadley JA, Lanza DC, Marple BF, Nicklas RA, et al. Rhinosinusitis: establishing defini­
tions for clinical research and patient care. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2004;114(Suppl):155–212
Rosenfeld RM, Andes D, Bhattacharyya N, Cheung D, Eisenberg S, Ganiats TG, et al. Clinical practice guideline: 
adult sinusitis. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2007;137(Suppl):S1–31
Slavin RG, Spector SL, Bernstein IL, Kaliner MA, Kennedy DW, Virant FS, et al. The diagnosis and management 
of sinusitis: a practice parameter update. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2005;116(Suppl):S13–47
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Clinical Practice Guideline: Adult 
Sinusitis
Otolaryngology–Head and Neck 
Surgery
2007
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/17761281)
International society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Canadian clinical practice 
guidelines for acute and chronic 
rhinosinusitis
Allergy, Asthma and Clinical 
Immunology (AACI)
2011
(http://www.aacijournal.com/
content/7/1/2)
64  Part 1: Allergy
Section 9: Evidence
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 10: Images
Figure 6.1  Nasal endoscopy of left middle meatus with purulent drainage noted in infundibulum. 
Patient had an acute maxillary sinusitis. See color plate 6.1.
Figure 6.2  Acute sinusitis. Non‐contrast CT scan of the sinuses with an acute left odontogenic maxillary 
sinusitis. Patient has an air–fluid level in the left maxillary sinusitis with a dental implant placed into the floor 
of the maxillary sinus. Patient required maxillary antrostomy to clear the infection.
Sinusitis  65
Figure 6.4  Chronic rhinosinusitis with polyposis. Non‐contrast CT scan of the sinuses of patient in Figure 6.3 
demonstrates expansile polyposis of the right sinonasal cavity. The arrow points to area of polyp extension 
from ethmoid cavity into the orbit. In these cases the periorbita of the eye is usually not violated; however, 
caution is needed during surgical clearance of polyps in this area to avoid risk of intraorbital injury.  
See color plate 6.3.
Figure 6.3  Nasal endoscopy of patient with nasal polyps and complete nasal airway obstruction. This patient 
had complaints of anosmia and nasal congestion. See color plate 6.2.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at:
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for  
patients, and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
66 
Allergic Diseases of the Eye
Amanda L. Cox
Division of Pediatric Allergy/Immunology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 7
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
Ocular allergic diseases are multifactorial allergic inflammatory disorders of the ocular surface 
that affect the conjunctiva (the mucous membrane lining the anterior sclera and inner eyelid 
surfaces), eyelids, and, in some conditions, the cornea.
Disease classification
Allergic conjunctivitis disorders include acute, seasonal, and perennial forms, which are associated 
with discomfort, but are generally self‐limited. VKC and AKC are more severe chronic allergic inflam-
matory eye diseases that can threaten sight. Giant papillary conjunctivitis (GPC) results from chronic 
mechanical trauma due to a foreign substance on the ocular surface.
Incidence/prevalence
• Allergic conjunctivitis is the most common form of ocular allergy and affects up to 20% of the 
population, including 60% of allergic rhinitis sufferers.
• AKC occurs most often in adults 30–50 years of age, with a history of atopic dermatitis, but 
the exact prevalence is unknown.
• VKC occurs most commonly in atopic males <20 years of age, in warm, dry, subtropical climates 
and is rare in cooler climates. Only 50% will show positive IgE testing.
Overall Bottom Line
• Ocular allergy includes allergic conjunctivitis, atopic keratoconjunctivitis (AKC), and vernal 
keratoconjunctivitis (VKC).
• Both seasonal and perennial subtypes of allergic conjunctivitis are self‐limited disorders of the 
conjunctiva, and occur upon exposure to environmental allergens.
• AKC and VKC are chronic inflammatory ocular disorders, exacerbated by environmental 
allergens and other factors, and affect the conjunctiva, cornea, and eyelids.
• AKC and VKC are associated with potentially sight‐threatening corneal fibrosis.
• Giant papillary conjunctivitis (GPC), an inflammatory reaction to a foreign substance in the 
eye, is not a true allergic disease, but mimics features of ocular hypersensitivity, and so is 
sometimes categorized as an allergic eye disease.
• These conditions result from primarily type I and IV hypersensitivity responses and involve 
similar inflammatory mediators and cell populations.
Allergic Diseases of the Eye  67
• GPC affects 1–5% of non‐disposable soft contact lens wearers but 10‐fold fewer rigid contact 
lens wearers. GPC predominantly affects young adults, and may be more common in individuals 
with asthma or allergic rhinitis.
Economic impact
Not applicable for this topic.
Etiology
• Allergic conjunctivitis has a similar etiology to that of other atopic diseases, with multiple environ-
mental factors and genes involved, leading to an over‐expression of Th2 cytokine expression and 
an allergic phenotype. Seasonal allergic conjunctivitis is a hypersensitivity response to seasonal 
pollen (tree, grass, ragweed) exposures, while chronic allergic conjunctivitis occurs with perennial 
allergen exposures, such as indoor mold, pets and dust mites.
• In AKC, environmental risk factors, such as chronic exposure to animals and winter months 
have been identified, while VKC is exacerbated often in the spring but can be triggered by 
non‐specific stimuli. The genetic risk factors for AKC and VKC are the same as those for allergy 
in general with multiple genetic loci implicated.
• GPC is a non‐infectious inflammatory process that is a reaction to repetitive and chronic lid 
movement over a foreign substance such as a contact lens.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• Acute, seasonal and perennial allergic conjunctivitis disorders are manifestations of type I IgE‐
mediated hypersensitivity in which antigen cross‐links with IgE‐antibody bound to the high‐
affinity IgE receptor on mast cells. Mast cells and eosinophils are increased in the conjunctival 
epithelium and substantia propria of individuals with allergic conjunctivitis. Phase I of the allergic 
response is mediated primarily by chemical mediators, including histamine, released immediately 
by mast cells. Histamine results in vasodilatation, vasopermeability, and ocular itching. Other 
cytokines and chemokines released by mast cells cause a late phase of the allergic reaction with 
influx of inflammatory cells including eosinophils, basophils, and neutrophils, followed by 
­lymphocytes and monocytes.
• AKC results primarily from a type IV (delayed‐type Th1 and Th2 lymphocyte) hypersensitivity 
reaction as well as some type I hypersensitivity reaction to environmental allergen exposures. 
AKC occurs in sensitized individuals who have atopic dermatitis, but the exact mechanisms 
are not known. CD4+ T cells, eosinophils, monocytes, mast cells, and fibroblasts contribute to 
the disease process. Elevated IgE is found in the tears and serum of AKC patients. Tears also 
contain CD4+ T cells and activated B cells, as well as increased cytokines IFN‐γ, TNF‐α, IL‐4, 
IL‐5, IL‐10, and the chemokine eotaxin. Dysfunction of cell‐mediated and aberrant innate 
immunity have been demonstrated in some patients with AKC. Lower tarsal conjunctivae and 
cornea can be involved.
• VKC involves some type I (IgE‐mediated) but primarily type II (Th2)‐mediated responses, as well 
as IgG‐mediated responses, basophil hypersensitivity, and cellular delayed‐type hypersensitivity. 
Conjunctival accumulation of CD4+ T cells may result in hyper‐reactivity against substances that 
come in contact with the conjunctiva, such as allergens (pollen, dust mites, mold, animal dander) 
and other non‐specific stimuli. Mast cells are induced to release mediators that stimulate fibroblast 
activity, production of collagen, and formation of giant papillae. IgE, histamine, tryptase and 
­multiple inflammatory mediators are found in elevated levels in the tears, increased expression of 
histamine receptors is found in conjunctival tissue, and capillaries ­proliferate. The upper tarsal con-
junctival surface is involved. Eosinophil infiltration and activation can cause corneal complications.
68  Part 1: Allergy
• GPC involves mechanical and immunologic processes. Debris that builds up on a contact lens 
surface over time may be recognized as foreign to mucous membranes of the conjunctiva and 
may trigger type I and IV hypersensitivity reactions. Blinking over a foreign substance may 
cause mechanical trauma to the eyelid and thereby provide an entry point for antigens to 
induce an immune response, release of inflammatory mediators, and infiltration of lympho-
cytes. Papillary formation, fibroblast proliferation, and collagen deposition leads to formation 
of giant papillae.
Predictive/risk factors
Atopy is a risk factor for SAC, PAC, AKC, and VKC.
Section 2: Prevention
No interventions have been demonstrated to prevent the development of ocular allergic 
disorders.
Screening
Not applicable for this topic.
Primary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Secondary prevention
• Seasonal allergic conjunctivitis: allergen avoidance measures including avoidance of outdoor 
exposure, use of air conditioning, keeping windows closed during peak seasons.
• Perennial allergic conjunctivitis: allergen avoidance measures for dust mites, indoor mold, 
and pets.
• Atopic and vernal keratoconjunctivitis: avoidance of non‐specific triggers, eye‐rubbing, and 
known allergens.
• Giant papillary conjunctivitis: avoidance of specific ocular irritant or stimuli, temporary discontinuation 
of contact lens use
Section 3: Diagnosis (Algorithm 7.1)
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Ocular allergy almost always presents with a history of pruritus.
• Diagnosis of acute, seasonal, and perennial allergic conjunctivitis is made clinically based 
on suggestive signs, pattern of symptoms, and demonstration of IgE‐mediated sensitization 
(by epicutaneous skin prick tests or serum IgE levels) to specific allergens.
• Diagnosis of AKC is based on typical epidemiology and clinical features. Suspect AKC in adults 
with a history of atopic dermatitis who have ocular pruritus, eyelid dermatitis, and giant 
papillae on the conjunctival lining of the lower tarsus and inferior fornix.
• Diagnosis of VKC is based on typical epidemiology (primarily affects pre‐pubertal boys living in 
warm climates) and clinical features (ocular pruritus, giant papillae on the conjunctival lining  
of the upper eyelid).
• While tears in all conditions have characteristic findings, tear evaluation is not typically part 
of the evaluation of patients for ocular allergy disorders. Eyelid tissue scrapings may be 
performed in some conditions, but are not routine.
Non-allergic,
non-infectious
Dry eye
acne 
rosacea
foreign body
chemical 
medication
 
 
 
Itching of conjunctiva, clear
mucoid discharge, allergic 
sensitization, no corneal 
involvement  
Allergic 
conjunctivitis
 
 
Seasonal pattern with
sensitization to 
seasonal allergens, 
(i.e. pollen) 
Seasonal 
allergic 
conjunctivitis  
Chronic pattern 
with sensitization to 
perennial allergens 
(dust mites, pets, 
indoor mold) 
 
Perennial 
allergic 
conjunctivitis
Chemosis, stringy mucoid
discharge, cobblestoning of 
eyelid
 
 
 
 
Giant papillae on upper tarsal
conjunctiva, blepharospasm, 
possible corneal keratitis, 
patient <20 years of age with
seasonal pattern of symptoms
Vernal 
keratoconjunctivitis
 
 
Presence of foreign 
materials on ocular 
surface, no corneal 
involvement
Giant papillary 
conjunctivitis  
Mucopurulent discharge
 
 
Infectious 
conjunctivitis
Presentation of itchy eye, conjunctival hyperemia, tearing, ± eyelid
swelling 
Atopic 
keratoconjunctivitis
Chronic symptoms, patients
with history of atopic
dermatitis, presence of
eyelid eczema, giant
conjunctival papillae on
lower  tarsal conjunctiva,
blepharospasm, frequent
corneal involvement  
Algorithm 7.1  Diagnosis of allergic diseases of the eye
70  Part 1: Allergy
Differential diagnosis
Typical presentation
• Allergic disorders of the conjunctiva present with symptoms of conjunctival erythema, signifi-
cant ocular pruritus, tearing, discharge, discomfort, and eye pain. Without pruritus, allergic 
conjunctivitis is unlikely. Mucus discharge is usually serous, clear or watery, but often stringy. 
Visual disturbance may occur in severe AKC or VKC but does not occur in allergic conjuncti-
vitis. Patients may have eyelid or conjunctival membrane swelling (chemosis). Some of these 
disorders have seasonal patterns of onset or exacerbation, or are associated with an allergen 
exposure. Presentation of AKC or VKC may include thickening and erythema of the tarsal 
conjunctiva with pinprick size to >1 mm giant papillae, resulting in “cobblestoning” under 
the eyelid (Figure 7.1). Eyelid dermatitis and inflammation of the eyelid margin (blepharitis) 
may be seen. These more severe disorders may also present with conjunctival scarring and 
corneal involvement. GPC presents initially with mild irritation, itching, and mucous production 
that progresses to more intense itching and foreign body sensation, blurry vision, and ­intolerance 
to wearing contact lenses.
Differential diagnosis
Features
Allergic conjunctivitis (SAC or PAC)
Sensitized individual with seasonal allergies or year‐round 
allergies
Bilateral involvement
Associated with allergic rhinitis
No ocular surface damage
Self‐limiting
Not sight‐threatening
Atopic keratoconjunctivitis (AKC)
Sensitized individual
Peak incidence 20–50 years of age
Bilateral involvement
Seasonal or perennial allergies
Chronic symptoms, but may have seasonal exacerbations
History of atopic dermatitis, and presence of eyelid dermatitis
Photophobia
Potential for cataracts and loss of sight
Vernal keratoconjunctivitis (VKC)
Sensitized individual
Peak incidence 3–20 years of age
Males predominate 3 : 1
Bilateral involvement
Warm, dry climate
Seasonal or perennial allergies
Severe photophobia
Potential for loss of sight
Giant papillary conjunctivitis (GPC)
Allergic sensitization not necessarily present
Bilateral involvement
Prosthetic or contact lens ocular exposure
Contact lens intolerance
Not sight‐threatening
Note: Also consider other non-allergic causes of conjunctivitis: preservative toxicity, conjunctivitis 
medicamentosa, dry eye, contact dermatitis, blepharitis, pemphigoid, and infectious conjunctivitis.
Allergic Diseases of the Eye  71
Clinical diagnosis
History
• Presence of additional atopic conditions (e.g. asthma, atopic dermatitis, urticaria, allergic rhinitis) 
or symptoms.
• Family history of atopy.
• Indoor and outdoor environmental exposures.
• Onset of allergic eye symptoms in relation to development of nasal allergies.
• Seasonal exacerbations versus chronic unremitting symptoms.
• Bilateral involvement.
• Presence of itching (primary complaint) and eye rubbing.
• Use of soft contact lenses, prosthetics, or presence of other foreign substance on eye surface.
• Complaints of mucus, glassy appearing eyes, or blepharospasm.
• Complaints of foreign body sensation, pain, photophobia.
• Change in vision or visual acuity.
Physical examination
• It is important to inspect the eyelid, conjunctiva and cornea, as well as assess any discharge. 
Ocular mobility and visual acuity should also be evaluated. Signs of allergic rhinosinusitis should 
be considered. Ophthalmologists may conduct a slit‐lamp examination.
• Allergic conjunctivitis findings include bilateral tearing, conjunctival edema, hyperemia, watery 
discharge, chemosis, and eyelid edema.
• AKC is bilateral but severity may be asymmetric, and findings include thickened eyelids, intermit-
tent eyelid swelling, scaly and indurated periocular skin, and flaking peri‐ocular dermatitis on a 
reddened base. Eyelids can become lichenified and may develop cicatricial ectropion (lower ­eyelid 
eversion). Eyelid fissures, loss of eyelashes, lateral canthal ulceration and ptosis can develop. Lid 
margins may show meibomian gland inflammation, keratinization, and punctual ectropion 
(lid eversion). Blepharitis may be present. Conjunctival chemosis, hyperemia, and tarsal papillary 
hypertrophy of upper lids may develop.
• VKC is bilateral and findings include giant cobblestone‐like papillae on the conjunctival lining 
of the upper eyelids (Figure 7.1). Other findings may include conjunctival and episcleral hyper-
emia, superficial keratopathy, non‐purulent mucus discharge, yellow–gray infiltrates (Horner–
Trantas dots), corneal shield ulcers, ptosis, and blepharospasm. The upper tarsal (palpebral) 
form of VKC involves the conjunctiva that covers the inside of the eyelid. The limbal form of 
VKC involves the thin border between the cornea and sclera.
• GPC findings include enlarged papillae on the upper tarsus, mucus production, conjunctival 
hyperemia, eyelid thickening, and occasionally ptosis. Papules are <0.3 mm in early stages but 
can progress to 1–2 mm in size. Protein deposits are often visible on contact lens surface.
Useful clinical decision rules and calculators
Not applicable for this topic.
Disease severity classification
• Allergic conjunctivitis is generally mild but may have significant effects on quality of life.
• VKC and AKC can progress to severe forms and be sight‐threatening.
• GPC includes four stages of severity:
i.	mild mucus discharge, mild itching without papillae;
ii.	increased mucus production and itching, awareness of contact lens, blurred vision, upper 
tarsal papillae;
72  Part 1: Allergy
iii.  severe mucus production and intense itching; contact lens coated with debris; increased 
size and number of papillae;
iv.  all signs and symptoms severe, and contact lenses can only be worn briefly.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• Diagnosis of all forms of ocular allergic disease is generally made clinically and by physical 
examination. Tests that can be done are generally limited to academic or confirmatory purposes 
but include:
• For allergic conjunctivitis confirmation:
➤
➤conjunctival scrapings for presence of eosinophils, tear film IgE levels, serum IgE levels, tear 
tryptase immunoassay.
➤
➤Conjunctival provocation tests with allergen.
➤
➤Demonstration of IgE‐mediated hypersensitivity to aeroallergens via allergy skin prick test-
ing or measurement of serum IgE levels to aeroallergens.
• AKC: increased specific IgE in tears, increased serum IgE and blood eosinophils, eosinophils 
in conjunctival scrapings.
• VKC: increased IgE and/or IgG, histamine, tryptase in tears.
• GPC may be associated with elevated tear levels of IgE, IgM, and IgG, and tryptase but no 
increased tear histamine levels.
• Tear or conjunctival cytology may also be evaluated to rule out neoplastic processes and confirm 
an allergic condition.
• Conjunctival or eyelid cultures may be needed to rule out infectious processes.
Lists of imaging techniques
Not applicable for this topic.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis of disease
• Allergic conjunctivitis is under‐reported as patients often do not seek medical evaluation and 
self‐medicate with over‐the‐counter topical medications.
• Milder or initial stages of all allergic eye diseases have similar, overlapping features.
• It is important to exclude infectious conjunctivitis as treatment differs from that of allergic eye 
diseases.
Section 4: Treatment (Algorithm 7.2)
Treatment rationale
• First line treatment for all ocular allergic diseases involves avoidance of antigen or allergen where 
possible and, in the case of GPC, discontinuation of use of contact lenses. Cold compresses may 
alleviate some symptoms. Artificial tear substitutes act as a barrier for conjunctival mucosa, dilute 
allergens and inflammatory mediators, and flush ocular surface to provide relief of symptoms.
• Recurrence of GPC due to contact lenses can be prevented by use of preservative‐free lens solu-
tion, changing lens type, frequent replacement of contact lenses, and reduced lens wearing time.
• Antiallergic therapeutic agents include systemic or topical antihistamine, and combination 
topical antiallergic + mast cell stabilizing agents. These medications relieve symptomatic itching 
and redness in the short term.
• Topical decongestants act as vasoconstrictors and reduce erythema but are for short‐term use 
only.
Allergic Diseases of the Eye  73
• Mast cell stabilizers reduce mast cell degranulation and histamine release. They do not relieve 
existing symptoms but prevent degranulation with subsequent exposure to allergens.
• Multimodal topical agents act as histamine receptor antagonists, mast cell stabilizers, and 
suppressors of eosinophil infiltration and activation.
• Topical non‐steroidal anti‐inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) can be used as an additive drug to 
reduce conjunctival hyperemia and pruritus.
• Corticosteroids are immunosuppressive and the most potent agents for more severe variants of 
ocular allergy but should be used with care because of the potential for adverse effects.
• Aggressive treatment should be considered for AKC and VKC, both of which can be sight‐
threatening in the most severe forms.
• Allergen‐specific immunotherapy can induce clinical tolerance to specific allergens that 
trigger exacerbations, and may be an adjunct to treatment for allergic conjunctivitis (­seasonal 
and perennial), AKC, and VKC.
When to hospitalize
Not applicable for this topic.
Managing the hospitalized patient
Not applicable for this topic.
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comment
Conservative
• Allergen avoidance
• Cold compresses
• Prevention of eye rubbing
• Desensitization
• Topical lubricants/artificial tears
• Cessation of contact lens use or removal of 
source of mechanical irritation
These measures may reduce the need for 
pharmacotherapy, relieve symptoms and may be 
sufficient in mild cases of ocular allergy
(Continued)
Algorithm 7.2  Management of allergic diseases of the eye
1.	 Basic eye care: allergen avoidance, prevention of eye rubbing.
2.	 Treatment of dry eyes: cold compress, artificial tears
3.	 Topical decongestant/vasoconstrictor for transient symptom 
relief only
4.	 Topical antihistamine, topical mast cell stabilizer, topical 
NSAID or combination anti-allergy + mast cell stabilizer  
agent.
5.	 Topical calcineurin inhibitor (cyclosporine)
6.	 Topical corticosteroid + ophthalmology evaluation for more 
severe disease
7.	 Consider allergen‐specific immunotherapy where there is a 
known allergenic trigger to reduce the severity of chronic 
disease and prevent exacerbations of seasonal diseases
74  Part 1: Allergy
Treatment
Comment
Medical
Oral sedating or non‐sedating antihistamines
• Topical antihistamines
• Levacobastine
• Emedastine
• Pheniramine
• Antazoline
• Topical decongestants/vasoconstrictors
• Phenylephrine
• Naphazoline
• Oxymetazoline
• Topical mast cell inhibitors
• Cromolyn
• Lodoxamide
• Pemirolast
• Nedocromil
• Topical NSAIDs
• Ketorolac
• Diclofenac
• Flurbiprofen
• Combination antihistamine + mast cell stabilizers
• Olopatadine
• Bepotastine besilate
• Azelastine
• Ketotifen
• Topical calcineurin inhibitors (AKC, VKC)
• Tacrolimus
• Cyclosporine
• Topical antibiotics
• Topical corticosteroids
• Loteprednol
• Rimexolone
• Oral immunomodulatory agents
• Corticosteroid
• Calcineurin inhibitors (severe AKC, VKC)
Treatment should be tailored to severity of signs 
and symptoms
Topical agents are more effective than systemic 
agents in most cases
Mast cell stabilizers are not useful for acute 
symptoms but are helpful on a prophylactic basis
Immunomodulatory agents should be reserved 
for more severe disease, as in VKC and AKC
The use of topical steroids should be initiated in 
conjunction with an ophthalmologist. It is the 
last choice for allergic conjunctivitis, but may be 
necessary for VKC and AKC
Allergen‐specific immunotherapy is effective 
when the allergen triggering allergic ocular 
disease is well known and should be considered 
in patients who do not respond to medications 
or who experience side effects from medications
Surgical
• Punctal plugs
• Debridement of inflammatory debris
• Surgical or laser removal of corneal plaques
• Keratoplasty or cyanoacrylate glue application
Surgery is reserved for treatment of sight‐
reducing corneal disease in AKC and VKC
Keratoplasty or cyanoacrylate glue application is 
indicated for corneal scarring and for extensive 
corneal thinning or perforation
Other
• Topical immunomodulator (corticosteroid or 
tacrolimus) ointment
• Intranasal topical corticosteroids
Treatment of peri‐ocular atopic dermatitis in 
patients with AKC
For patients with allergic rhinitis in conjunction 
with allergic eye symptoms
Prevention/management of complications
• Frequent eye examinations may be necessary in patients with severe or chronic ocular allergy.
• Vasoconstrictors can cause rebound conjunctival hyperemia and are not effective for severe or 
chronic ocular allergy.
• Oral or systemic antihistamines can cause decreased tearing and ocular dryness, which may 
exacerbate ocular allergy symptoms.
Allergic Diseases of the Eye  75
• Complications of topical steroid use include cataracts, glaucoma, and viral super‐infection. 
Treatment with corticosteroids needs to be monitored carefully so cataracts or increased 
intraocular pressure can be detected early. Any suspected eye infection should be treated 
promptly.
Section 5: Special populations
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 6: Prognosis
Natural history of untreated disease
Not applicable for this topic (no published information).
Prognosis for treated patients
Not applicable for this topic (no published information).
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
• For patients diagnosed with VKC or AKC, visual acuity should be monitored, and eyes examined 
for corneal involvement.
• For patients on topical corticosteroids, intraocular pressure must be measured periodically and 
eyes examined for development of cataracts.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Seasonal and perennial allergic conjunctivitis usually affect children and young adults and 
severity tends to lessen, or conjunctivitis resolves altogether, with increasing age. Most 
patients do experience relief with medical therapies.
• AKC management is difficult and patients are not cured. AKC has the highest association with 
corneal involvement and can lead to significant vision loss.
• VKC can cause severe damage to the ocular surface, corneal scarring, and vision loss if not properly 
treated. VKC may be recurrent (seasonally) or chronic, but usually resolves after adolescence.
• GPC symptoms and clinical findings resolve within days to weeks of removal of the source of 
mechanical irritation, and most patients can resume use of contact lenses if they comply with 
treatment and contact lens care.
Clinical pearls
• For all ocular allergic diseases, avoidance of known allergenic triggers is recommended.
• Medical agents may be used for any ocular allergic disease and should be tailored to the 
type and severity of disease, extent of ocular involvement, and risk for permanent sight 
impairment.
• VKC and AKC are severe, potentially sight‐threatening due to corneal involvement, and 
require more aggressive treatment with stronger agents including topical immunomodulators. 
Treatment of these diseases requires close surveillance and monitoring.
• In AKC, it is important to control the facial and eyelid eczema.
• GPC once identified is treated with removal of the offending foreign substance, and generally 
self‐resolves within 1–4 weeks.
• Consider ophthalmology referral for any patient who requires topical immunomodulator or 
who has refractory symptoms.
76  Part 1: Allergy
Section 7: Reading list
Abelson MB, Smith L, Chapin M. Ocular allergic disease: mechanisms, disease sub‐types, treatment. Ocul Surf 
2003;1:127–49
Berdy GJ, Berdy SS. Ocular allergic disorders: disease entities and differential diagnoses. Curr Allergy Asthma 
Rep 2009;9:297–303
Bielory L. Ocular allergy overview. Immunol Allergy Clin North Am 2008;28:1–23
Kumar S. Vernal keratoconjunctivitis: a major review. Acta Ophthalmol. 2009 Mar;87(2):133‐47.
Leonardi A. The central role of conjunctival mast cells in the pathogenesis of ocular allergy. Curr Allergy 
Asthma Rep 2002;2:325–31
Mantelli F, Lambiase A, Bonini S. A simple and rapid diagnostic algorithm for the detection of ocular allergic 
diseases. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2009;9: 471
Suggested websites
American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology. www.aaaai.org
American Academy of Ophthalmology. www.aao.org
Section 8: Guidelines
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 9: Evidence
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 10: Images
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at:
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for 
patients, and ICD codes
Figure 7.1  Vernal conjunctivitis – cobblestone papillae cover the superior tarsal conjunctiva. See color plate 
7.1. From Rubenstein JB, Tannan A. Conjunctivitis: infectious and noninfectious. In Yanoff M, Duker JS, eds. 
Ophthalmology. 4th ed. St. Louis, MO, Mosby Elsevier; 2013:chap 4.6. Reproduced with permission.
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
  77
Tests for Assessing Asthma
Gwen S. Skloot
Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 8
Section 1: Background
• Tests for assessing asthma are important in the diagnosis and ongoing monitoring of the asthmatic 
patient. Understanding the tests that are available, when they should be performed, and the 
information that can be gleaned from them is crucial to the clinician.
• Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disorder of the airways characterized by airway obstruction 
that is generally reversible and by hyperresponsiveness to a variety of stimuli.
• Tests such as spirometry pre‐ and post‐bronchodilator can provide information about a patient 
that is both diagnostic and prognostic over time.
• Bronchoprovocation tests are most useful in excluding a diagnosis of asthma.
• At times, it is necessary to obtain full pulmonary function testing to exclude entities such as 
emphysema, other obstructive lung diseases, diseases that may present with obstruction or 
restriction (e.g. sarcoidosis), or vocal cord dysfunction.
• Chest radiographs and allergy skin tests can be helpful adjuncts to testing when assessing a 
difficult patient.
• Biomarkers of inflammation are the newest tests to be introduced and while they are being 
used more often to both diagnose asthma and monitor response to therapy, they have not yet 
been fully implemented in clinical practice.
• Home peak flow monitoring can be part of a patient’s asthma action plan and a useful adjunct 
to care.
Overall Bottom Line
• Spirometry before and after inhalation of a short‐acting bronchodilator is the main test to 
diagnose and monitor asthma.
• Spirometry should be performed at initial evaluation and repeated after the patient is 
considered “stabilized” on therapy, during periods of loss of asthma control, or at a minimum 
of every 1–2 years.
• Measurement of peak expiratory flow at home is a helpful adjunct to monitor asthma.
• Other tests to consider when the diagnosis of asthma is in question include lung volume 
and gas exchange measurements, bronchoprovocation, allergy skin testing, and chest 
radiograph.
• Biomarkers of inflammation should be considered both for diagnostic and monitoring 
purposes.
78  Part 1: Allergy
Section 2: Prevention
• Although current asthma therapy initiated early in life can impact symptoms and even reduce 
airflow limitation, there is no evidence that it can prevent accelerated loss of lung function in 
those who are destined to have severe disease.
Section 3: Diagnosis
• Spirometry is an important test in the diagnosis of asthma as well as for ongoing moni­
toring of asthma patients. Typical spirometry measurements include the maximal volume 
of  air forcibly exhaled after a deep inspiration to total lung capacity (i.e. the forced 
vital capacity, FVC), the volume of air exhaled during the first second of the maneuver 
(i.e. forced expiratory volume in 1 second, FEV1) and the ratio of these two parameters 
(i.e. FEV1/FVC). In asthma, a reduction in the FEV1/FVC is the hallmark of an obstructive 
pattern (Figure 8.1A).
• Patients with asthma generally demonstrate reversible airways obstruction following adminis­
tration of a short‐acting bronchodilator (e.g. albuterol) (Figure 8.1B) with an increase in either 
the FEV1 or FVC of ≥200 mL and ≥12% from baseline. It is important to recognize that the 
bronchodilator response may vary from day to day or in response to therapy so that a single 
test result should never be used to exclude the diagnosis. Also, reversible airways obstruction 
is not specific for asthma so that the finding should be interpreted in the context of the clinical 
presentation. Spirometry should be performed at initial evaluation and repeated after the 
patient is considered “stabilized” on therapy, during periods of loss of asthma control, or at a 
minimum of every 1–2 years.
• When the diagnosis of asthma is uncertain, additional testing may be necessary. 
Bronchoprovocation, most commonly with methacholine (i.e. an agent that directly causes 
airway smooth muscle constriction by stimulation of acetylcholine receptors), should be 
considered mainly when the diagnosis of asthma is questionable and spirometry is normal. 
The test is conducted by administering serially increasing concentrations of inhaled 
­methacholine until there is at least a 20% decrease in FEV1 from baseline or the patient has 
received the highest concentration of methacholine permitted. A negative methacholine 
test rules out asthma with a high degree of certainty. A positive test, while not specific for 
the diagnosis of asthma, can quantify the degree of airway hyper‐­responsiveness.
• Other important diagnostic testing includes complete lung function assessment such as lung 
volume measurements (i.e. to assess for concurrent “restriction” or hyperinflation and/or air 
trapping), diffusing capacity (i.e. generally reduced in emphysema), and inspiratory flow 
­volume loops (i.e. may be abnormal in cases of vocal cord dysfunction). A chest radiograph 
can help eliminate other pulmonary diseases that can present with obstruction on spirometry 
(e.g. bronchiectasis, sarcoidosis).
• The use of biomarkers of inflammation is gaining increasing interest as an adjunct to asthma 
assessment. Fractional exhaled nitric oxide (i.e. FeNO) is a simple test believed to reflect the 
degree of eosinophilic inflammation of the bronchial mucosa. Along with measurements of 
eosinophils in the sputum, the FeNO test can assist in asthma diagnosis.
Section 4: Treatment
• Treatment recommendations for asthma are based, in part, on objective testing results in 
­conjunction with frequency of symptoms, exacerbations, and rescue inhaler use. The degree of 
spirometric impairment (i.e. assessment of FEV1 and FEV1/FVC) is one important determinant of 
Table 8.1  Classifying asthma severity and initiating treatment in youths ≥12 years of age and adults. Assessing severity and initiating treatment for patients who are not currently 
taking long‐term medications. The table demonstrates that spirometric impairment is an important determinant of asthma severity.
Components of Severity
Classification of asthma severity ≥12 years of a age
Intermittent
Persistent
Mild
Moderate
Severe
Impairment
Normal FEV1/FVS:
8–19 yr 85%
20–39 yr 80%
40–59 yr 75%
60–80 yr 70%
Symptoms
≤2 days/week
>2 days/week 
but not daily
Daily
Throughout the day
Nighttime awakenings
≤2×/month
3–4×/month
>1×/week but not nightly
Often 7×/week
Short‐acting beta2‐agonist 
(not prevention of EIB)
≤2 days/week
>2 days/week but not 
daily, and not more than 
1× on any day
Daily
Several times per day
Interference with 
normal activity
None
Minor limitation
Some limitation
Extremely limited
Lung function
• Normal FEV1 between 
exacerbations
• FEV1 > 80% predicted
• FEV1/FVC normal
• FEV1 > 80% predicted
• FEV1/FVC normal
• FEV1 > 60% but <80% 
predicted
• FEV1/FVC reduced 
>5%
• FEV1 < 60% predicted
• FEV1/FVC reduced 
>5%
Risk
Exacerbations requiring 
oral systemic 
corticosteroids
0–1/year (see note)
≥2/year (see note) 
 Consider severity and interval since last exacerbation. 
Note: Frequency and severity may fluctuate over time for patients in any severity category.
Relative annual risk of exacerbations may be related to FEF1.
Recommended Step for Initiating Treatment
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4 or 5
and consider short course of oral 
systemic corticosteroids
Note: In 2–6 weeks, evaluate level of asthma control that is achieved and adjust therapy accordingly.
Source: The National Heart Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI), National Asthma Education and Prevention Program, Expert Panel Report 3: Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of 
Asthma, 2007, p. 344.
80  Part 1: Allergy
asthma severity (Table 8.1). Asthma severity, in turn, is the foundation for the stepwise approach 
to asthma management and choice of specific therapy.
• Peak flow monitoring can be helpful as a home tool for ongoing monitoring. Daily peak flow 
monitoring is recommended for patients with moderate–severe persistent asthma and/or a his­
tory of severe exacerbations. Peak flow monitoring comprises an important part of an action 
plan that can alert the patient and physician to early changes in lung function that require 
treatment or a change in treatment.
• FeNO should be considered, in addition to standard testing, to assess response to asthma 
therapy and to assist in decisions regarding titration of inhaled corticosteroid dose.
Section 5: Special populations
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 6: Prognosis
• The degree of severity of spirometric obstruction portends the risk of future asthma exacerba­
tions and is important in determining prognosis. The severity of spirometric abnormality is 
assessed by comparing the patient’s results to reference values based on demographic factors 
such as age, height, gender, and race.
• Patients with the greatest degree of reversibility in terms of response to bronchodilator may 
be at the greatest risk for developing fixed airflow obstruction and accelerated loss of lung 
function.
• Although lung function declines in all adults as a result of aging, adults with asthma demon­
strate greater declines, on average, than non‐smoking, non‐asthmatic adults.
Section 7: Reading list
Crapo RO, Casaburi R, Coates AL, Enright PL, Hankinson JL, Irvin CG, et al. Guidelines for methacholine and 
exercise challenge testing 1999. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000;161:309–29
Dweik RA, Boggs PB, Erzurum SC, Irvin CG, Leigh MW, Lundberg JO, et al. An official ATS Clinical Practice 
Guideline: interpretation of exhaled nitric oxide levels (FENO) for clinical applications. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med 2011;184:602–15
Miller MR, Hankinson J, Brusasco V, Burgos F, Casaburi R, Coates A, et al. Standardisation of spirometry. Eur 
Respir J 2005;26:319–38
National Heart Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI). National Asthma Education and Prevention Program, Expert 
Panel Report 3: Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Asthma, 2007
Pellegrino R, Viegi G, Brusasco V, Crapo RO, Burgos F, Casaburi R, et. al. Interpretative strategies for lung 
function tests. Eur Respir J 2005;26:948–68
Suggested websites
This is the official site of the American Thoracic Society that provides a link to all pertinent 
­consensus statements. www.thoracic.org
This is the official site of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute. The site provides access to 
the guidelines for the diagnosis and management of asthma including updates on selected 
topics. http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/asthma/index.htm
Tests for Assessing Asthma  81
Section 8: Guidelines
International society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source, comment
Date
Global Initiative for Asthma:
Global Strategy for 
Asthma Management and 
Prevention, revised 2014
Global Initiative for Asthma Report
Comment: The report includes clinical 
practice guidelines for the diagnosis 
and management of asthma.
2014
(http://www.ginasthma.org/
documents/4)
Expert Panel Report 3: 
Guidelines for the 
Diagnosis and 
Management of Asthma
The National Heart, Lung and Blood 
Institute (NHLBI), National Asthma 
Education and Prevention Program
Comment: The guidelines include 
sections on recommended testing for 
asthma diagnosis and management
2007
(http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/files/
docs/guidelines/asthgdln.pdf)
Section 9: Evidence
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 10: Images
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at:
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for  
patients, and ICD codes
Normal ﬂow volume loop
Volume (liters)
(A)
(B)
Volume (liters)
Flow (liters/sec)
Flow (liters/sec)
Flow volume loop showing
obstruction
Pre-bronchodilator
Post-bronchodilator
Figure 8.1  (A) shows the exhalation portion of a flow volume loop and demonstrates an obstructive pattern 
in contrast to normal spirometry. In obstruction, there is “scooping” of the descending limb of the flow 
volume loop attributable to a decrease in the FEV1/FVC ratio. (B) demonstrates that in asthma, obstruction is 
generally reversible in response to bronchodilator. In the figure, there is less “scooping” post‐bronchodilator 
and increase in flows. The increase in volume noted corresponds to an increase in forced vital capacity (FVC).
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
82 
Asthma in Infants and Children
Kate Welch1 and Jennifer S. Kim2
1 Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
2 NorthShore University HealthSystem, Evanston, IL, USA
Chapter 9
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disease of the airways that is characterized by variable 
­symptoms of airflow obstruction and bronchial hyper‐responsiveness.
• The hallmark symptoms of cough and wheeze fluctuate but can be managed with anti‐inflammatory 
drugs such as inhaled corticosteroids.
Disease classification
• Asthma is generally classified by the degree of severity, which is assessed by measurement of 
asthma control and the need to step‐up or step‐down therapies.
• Alternatively, asthma can be classified based on symptom triggers, and whether they fall into 
the broad categories of irritant, allergen, viral, or exercise‐induced.
Incidence/prevalence
• The prevalence of childhood asthma varies in different countries and ranges from 1 to 18%; 
asthma affects more than 7 million children in the United States.
• Of children who have asthma, 50–80% develop symptoms before their fifth birthday.
• In early life, asthma is more prevalent in boys; after puberty, asthma affects more women.
Overall Bottom Line
• One of the most common chronic illnesses of childhood, asthma is an airway disorder 
characterized by reversible airway obstruction, bronchial hyper‐responsiveness, and underlying 
inflammation.
• A careful history and physical examination must be undertaken, given the broad differential 
diagnosis of wheezing in an infant or young child and their inability to participate in formal 
testing.
• Multiple trigger factors exist and range from irritants and specific allergens to exercise or viral 
infections.
• Treatment of asthma is based on assessment of disease severity and on routine and periodic 
assessment of asthma control.
Asthma in Infants and Children  83
Economic impact
• According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the total economic impact 
of asthma in school‐age children is roughly $2 billion per year, which includes direct medical 
expenditures, such as medications, inpatient hospitalizations, outpatient care, and emergency 
room visits, as well as parents’ loss of productivity from asthma‐related school absenteeism.
Etiology
• Asthma results from a complex interplay between genetic and environmental factors leading to 
an altered immune response.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• Asthma in patients of all ages is an inflammatory process. There is a characteristic interplay between 
inflammatory cells and mediators, as well as with IgE production in allergy‐related disease.
• In asthmatics, a shift toward the Th2‐cytokine profile results in eosinophilic inflammation and 
production of Th2 cytokines (IL‐4, IL‐5, and IL‐13). Mast cells also have a role in bronchocon-
striction via release of histamine, prostaglandins, and other mediators. Increased numbers of 
eosinophils in asthmatic airways induce inflammatory enzymes and cytokines. Macrophages 
can be activated by allergens to release inflammatory mediators and cytokines. Mast cells, 
lymphocytes, basophils, and dendritic cells have high‐affinity IgE receptors which, when 
­activated, initiate bronchospasm and promote airway inflammation.
• The “hygiene hypothesis” has gained much attention as a means to explain the shift toward a 
Th2 phenotypic profile and away from a Th1 profile. Several factors are thought to influence 
this shift: widespread use of antibiotics, Western lifestyle, urban environment, diet, and sensi-
tization to dust mite and cockroach.
• The genetics of asthma are not clearly understood, although there is clearly a heritable compo-
nent to the disease, as family history is the strongest risk factor.
Predictive/risk factors
• Environmental factors have a key role in the development and persistence of allergic 
symptoms.
• Respiratory tract infections are a classic trigger, especially in young children. Respiratory syncy-
tial virus (RSV), influenza virus, and rhinovirus are common triggers, particularly in children 
younger than 3 years. Approximately 40% of children admitted with RSV will develop asthma 
later in childhood.
• Allergens, both indoor and outdoor, are important triggers of childhood asthma. Roughly 80% 
of children with asthma have concurrent allergies.
• Other irritant exposures include tobacco smoke, air pollution, perfumes, and propellant 
cleaning products.
• Exercise‐induced bronchospasm occurs in up of 90% of children with asthma.
Section 2: Prevention
• There are no clear interventions to prevent the development of the disease.
Screening
Not applicable for this topic.
Primary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
84  Part 1: Allergy
Secondary prevention
• Inhaled corticosteroids are the treatment of choice, adherence to which can prevent or reduce 
exacerbation rates.
• Allergens and irritants that worsen asthma should be controlled or eliminated from the 
environment.
• Written asthma management plans can help ensure proper and timely management of symptoms.
Section 3: Diagnosis
Differential diagnosis
• The differential diagnosis for both cough and wheeze must be considered in the infant or child 
presenting with asthma‐like symptoms.
• In addition to a lack of response to asthma medications, the features in the differential diagnosis 
box may be seen.
Typical presentation
• As many as 80% of children with asthma will develop symptoms before their fifth birthday. 
Parents may note an increase in respiratory symptoms at night‐time or a variation in symptoms 
with relatively quiet periods interspersed with exacerbations triggered by upper respiratory 
infections (URIs), exercise, weather or allergens.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• According to Expert Panel recommendations, the clinician should determine that:
• Episodic symptoms of airflow obstruction are present;
• Airflow obstruction is at least partially reversible; and
• Alternative diagnoses are excluded.
• The clinician should enquire about cough, wheeze, difficulty breathing, and complaints of chest 
tightness.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• A history of coughing or wheezing in an infant or child should prompt an investigation for 
asthma carefully considering a broad list of differential diagnoses.
• Examination findings during an exacerbation classically include wheezing and prolonged 
expiratory phase on auscultation, as well as a dry cough or tachypnea. Signs of associated 
atopic conditions may be present.
• Spirometry can be used to diagnose airflow obstruction in older children.
Differential diagnosis
Features
Viral bronchiolitis
Viral prodrome, rhinitis
Foreign body aspiration
Acute onset
Cystic fibrosis
Failure to thrive and evidence of malabsorption
Swallowing dysfunction or gastroesophageal reflux
Symptoms usually exacerbated by eating
Vascular ring
May have persistent wheeze; usually exaggerated 
by position
Immunodeficiency
Recurrent infections
Vocal cord dysfunction
Inspiratory stridor, no nocturnal symptoms
Asthma in Infants and Children  85
• Identification of exacerbating factors should be elicited, including URIs, environmental ­allergens 
(animal dander, dust mites, cockroaches, pollen, mold), exercise, smoke or other airborne 
chemical irritants, changes in weather, or emotional expression (such as crying or laughing).
• The clinician should also ask whether symptoms occur nocturnally (while asleep).
Physical examination
• Physical examination is normal when the patient is not experiencing an exacerbation.
• During an acute exacerbation, tachypnea, coughing, wheezing, accessory muscle use, retractions, 
and a prolonged expiratory phase may be present.
• Associated atopic conditions may be present on examination and include atopic dermatitis or 
evidence of allergic rhinitis.
Disease severity classification
• Asthma severity is based on impairment as well as risk.
• Impairment takes into account frequency of symptoms, night‐time awakenings, short‐acting 
beta‐2‐agonist use, interference with normal activity, as well as baseline lung function, if known.
• Risk is based on the number of exacerbations requiring oral steroids.
• Severity is assigned based on the most severe category in which any feature occurs and is 
categorized as intermittent and persistent, with subcategories of persistent ranging from mild 
to moderate to severe.
Useful clinical decision rules and calculators
• Standard algorithms exist for assessing asthma severity (see Table 9.1).
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• There is no laboratory test to diagnose asthma. However, there are studies that can be considered 
in ruling out other conditions or in establishing comorbid disease.
• Allergy testing, via skin prick testing or serum-specific IgE levels, is helpful in identifying environ-
mental triggers, such as cockroach, dust mite, animal dander, and mold.
• Pollens, while possible triggers for older children, are unusual triggers for infants and very 
young children.
• Sweat, chloride testing for cystic fibrosis should be performed in children with frequent 
respiratory complaints, recurrent pneumonias, or nasal polyps.
Lists of imaging techniques
• Spirometry is recommended by the National Asthma Education and Prevention Program in 
patients 5 years of age and older if a diagnosis of asthma is suspected.
• Airflow obstruction is defined as forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) below 80% 
predicted and an FEV1/FVC ratio of less than 85% for 8–19 year olds.
• Reference values are based on age, height, sex, and race.
• Pre‐ and post‐bronchodilator administration should be performed to assess for reversibility 
(defined as an increase in FEV1 greater than 12% from baseline).
• Spirometry cannot reliably be performed in children under 5 years of age. In this population, a 
trial of asthma medications may help to establish the diagnosis.
• A chest radiograph is recommended only in children who do not respond to initial therapy in 
order to identify an alternative diagnosis. Typical findings of asthma include hyperinflation, 
peri‐bronchial thickening, and atelectasis.
• If swallowing dysfunction or aspiration are of concern, a video‐fluoroscopic swallow study and/
or barium swallow study may be considered.
86  Part 1: Allergy
Table 9.1  Classifying asthma severity and initiating treatment in children 5–11 years of age, who are not 
currently taking long‐term control medication.
Components of Severity
Classification of asthma severity (5–11 years of age)
Intermittent
Persistent
Mild
Moderate
Severe
Impairment
Symptoms
≤2 days/week
>2 days/week 
but not daily
Daily
Throughout 
the day
Nighttime 
awakenings
≤2 days/week
>2 days/week 
but not daily
>1× /week but 
not nightly
Throughout 
the day
Nighttime 
awakenings
≤2× /month
3–4 × /month
>1× /week but 
not nightly
Often 7× /week
Short‐acting 
beta2‐agonist use 
for symptom 
control (not 
prevention of EIB)
≤2 days/week
>2 days/week 
but not daily
Daily
Several times 
per day
Interference with 
normal activity
None
Minor 
limitation
Some limitation
Extremely limited
Lung function
• Normal FEV1 
between 
exacerbations
• FEV1 > 80% 
predicted
• FEV1/FVC 
>85%
• FEV1 = >80% 
predicted
• FEV1/FVC 
>80%
• FEV1 = 60–80% 
predicted
• FEV1/FVC 
=75–80%
• FEV1 < 60% 
predicted
• FEV1/FVC 
<75%
Risk
Exacerbations 
requiring oral 
systemic 
corticosteroids
0–1/year 
(see note)
≥2/year (see note) 
Consider severity and interval since last exacerbation. 
Frequency and severity may fluctuate over time for patients in any severity 
category.
Relative annual risk of exacerbations may be related to FEV1.
Recommended step for 
initiating therapy
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3, 
medium‐dose 
ICS option
Step 3, medium‐
dose ICS option, 
or step 4
and consider short course of oral 
systemic corticosteroids
In 2–6 weeks, evaluate level of asthma control that is achieved, 
and adjust therapy accordingly.
Key: EIP, exercise‐induced bronchospasm; FEV1, forced expiratory volume in 1 second; FVC, forced vital capacity; 
ICS, inhaled corticosteroids.
Notes:
• The stepwise approach is meant to assist, not replace, the clinical decision-making required to meet individual 
patient needs.
• Level of severity is determined by both impairment and risk. Assess impairment domain by patient’s/caregiver’s 
recall of previous 2–4 weeks and spirometry. Assign severity to the most severe category in which any feature 
occurs.
• At present, there are inadequate data to correspond frequencies of exacerbations with different levels of 
asthma severity. In general, more frequent and intense exacerbations (e.g., requiring urgent, unscheduled 
care, hospitalization, or ICU admission) indicate greater underlying disease severity. For treatment purpose, 
patients who had ≥2 exacerbations requiring oral systemic corticosteroids in the past year may be considered 
the same as patients who have persistent asthma, even in the absence of impairment levels consistent with 
persistent asthma.
Source: Expert Panel Report 3: Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Asthma Full Report 2007. National 
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. National Asthma Education and Prevention Program.
Asthma in Infants and Children  87
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis of disease
• Classifying asthma in infants and young children poses a dilemma. Some babies and toddlers 
may have virus‐induced wheezing but lack other atopic conditions often seen in children with 
asthma. These children may be labeled as having “reactive airway disease” and often outgrow 
the condition by 5 years of age. The diagnosis of asthma implies a chronic condition often 
associated with atopy, which is less likely to spontaneously resolve with age.
Section 4: Treatment
Treatment rationale
• The cornerstones of asthma treatment include inhaled corticosteroids and short‐ and long‐­
acting beta‐2‐agonists. Short courses of systemic corticosteroids may be used for moderate to 
severe exacerbations.
• The goal of asthma therapy is to maintain long‐term control of symptoms with the least 
amount of medication possible. As with the assessment of asthma severity, asthma control falls 
into two domains: reducing impairment and reducing risk.
• Reducing impairment involves preventing chronic symptoms, minimizing use of short‐acting 
rescue inhalers, and maintaining normal physical activity levels.
• Reducing risk involves preventing recurrent exacerbations and minimizing medication side effects.
• According to Expert Panel guidelines, initiating daily long‐term controller therapy in children 0–4 
years of age is recommended in patients having four or more episodes of wheezing in the past 
year that lasted more than 1 day and affected sleep and who have risk factors for developing 
persistent asthma defined as either:
• One of the following: parental history of asthma, a physician‐diagnosis of atopic dermatitis, 
or evidence of sensitization to aeroallergens; or
• Two of the following: evidence of sensitization to foods, >4% peripheral blood eosinophilia, 
or wheezing apart from colds.
• Initiating daily long‐term control therapy in children 5–11 years of age is recommended for 
children who have persistent asthma as defined in Figure 9.1.
• Long‐term control is best maintained through a well‐established step‐wise approach, by which 
the type and frequency of medications is increased when necessary and decreased when pos-
sible. Figure 9.1 shows management for children aged 5–11 years.
• Proper use and technique for medication delivery is crucial for effective and efficient treatment. 
Several delivery devices are available for infants and young children including an MDI plus 
valved holding chamber (VHC) with a face mask or a nebulizer with a face mask. Using the 
“blow by” technique, holding the mask or open tube near the infant’s nose and mouth, is not 
effective. Crying decreases delivery to the lungs.
When to hospitalize
• Assessment of asthma exacerbations in infants will depend on physical examination rather 
than objective measurements. Use of accessory muscles, paradoxical breathing, inspiratory and 
expiratory wheezing, or tachypnea are signs of serious distress and should prompt emergent 
evaluation and likely hospitalization if response to treatment is inadequate.
Managing the hospitalized patient
• A patient who does not respond to emergency room treatments should be admitted to the hospital 
for administration of scheduled bronchodilators, steroids, and close monitoring. Serial physical exam-
inations as well as peak flow monitoring can help determine when a child is back to baseline.
• Those children with severe acute exacerbations (status asthmaticus) require admission to an 
ICU and consideration of positive pressure and/or mechanical ventilation.
88  Part 1: Allergy
Table of treatment
The following long-term control medications are approved by the FDA for young children:
• ICS budesonide nebulizer solution (approved for children 1–8 years of age).
• ICS fluticasone DPI (approved for children 4 years of age and older).
• Combination product of long-acting inhaled beta2-agonist (LABA) salmeterol and fluticasone DPI 
(approved for children 4 years of age and older).
• LTRA montelukast, based on safety data rather than efficacy data, in a 4 mg chewable tablet 
(approved for children 2–6 years of age) and in 4 mg granules (approved down to 1 year of age).
• Cromolyn nebulizer (approved for children ≥2 years of age).
Prevention/management of complications
• The prevention of asthma complications relies on prevention of exacerbations. This is accom-
plished with regular use of controller medications and avoidance of known triggers, such as 
allergens and irritants.
• Use of rescue medications prior to exercise is advised for children with exercise‐induced asthma.
• Use of scheduled bronchodilators or inhaled steroids during URIs may be effective in preventing 
or ameliorating asthma exacerbations during acute respiratory illnesses.
• Regular follow‐up and assessment of asthma control is essential in determining the need to 
step‐up or the ability to step‐down therapy. Office visits are usually made at 1‐ to 6‐month 
intervals, depending on the degree of control.
• Once asthma symptoms are well‐controlled for at least 3 months, a reduction in pharmacologic 
therapy (“step‐down”) may be attempted. If asthma is not well‐controlled, a “step‐up” in 
therapy can be undertaken, and if it is very poorly controlled, therapy can be stepped up 1–2 
steps along with a possible course of oral corticosteroids.
Section 5: Special populations
Risk factors for fatal asthma
Asthma history
• previous severe exacerbation (e.g., intubation or ICU admission for asthma). 
• two or more hospitalizations for asthma in the past year. 
• three or more ED visits for asthma in the past year. 
• hospitalization or ED visit for asthma in the past month. 
• using >2 canisters of SABA per month. 
• difficulty perceiving asthma symptoms or severity of exacerbations. 
• other risk factors: lack of a written asthma action plan, sensitivity to Alternaria.
Social history
• low socioeconomic status or inner-city residence. 
• illicit drug use. 
• major psychosocial problems.
Comorbidities
• cardiovascular disease. 
• other chronic lung disease. 
• chronic psychiatric disease.
Clinical pearls
• Remember a broad differential when assessing a child for cough or wheeze.
• Frequent monitoring is necessary to maintain a child on the lowest efficacious regimen of 
asthma therapy.
• Consider allergic and environmental triggers of disease.
Asthma in Infants and Children  89
Section 6: Prognosis
Natural history of untreated disease
• Without treatment, asthma can lead to complications of exacerbations that can even result in 
death. Even when treated, long‐term studies reveal that adults with a history of severe childhood 
asthma have diminished pulmonary function when compared with non‐asthmatic controls. 
However, many children with mild to moderate asthma have no residual pulmonary effects.
Prognosis for treated patients
• Whether childhood asthma is ever completely outgrown remains controversial but remission of 
symptoms occurs often although the potential for airway hyper‐reactivity may persist. If asthma 
persists into adulthood and is treated appropriately, asthma does not typically affect life expec-
tancy in the absence of other pulmonary comorbidities.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
• Physician evaluation should occur at 1‐ to 6‐month intervals depending on the level of ­control. 
Three‐month follow‐ups are generally recommended if step‐down therapy is anticipated.
Section 7: Reading list
Bacharier LB, Guilbert TW. Diagnosis and management of early asthma in preschool‐aged children. J Allergy 
Clin Immunol 2012;130:287–96
Bousquet J, Mantzouranis E, Cruz AA, Aït‐Khaled N, Baena‐Cagnani CE, Bleecker ER, et al. Uniform definition 
of asthma severity, control, and exacerbations: document presented for the World Health Organization 
Consultation on Severe Asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2010;126:926–38
Gruchalla RS, Pongracic J, Plaut M, Evans R 3rd, Visness CM, Walter M, et al. Inner City Asthma Study: relationships 
among sensitivity, allergen exposure, and asthma morbidity. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2005;115:478–85
Jenkins HA, Cherniack R, Szefler SJ, Covar R, Gelfand EW, Spahn JD. A comparison of the clinical characteristics 
of children and adults with severe asthma. Chest 2003;124:1318–24
Michelson PH, Williams LW, Benjamin DK, Barnato AE. Obesity, inflammation, and asthma severity in childhood: 
data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 2001–2004. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 
2009;103:381
Suggested websites
http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health-pro/guidelines/current/asthma-guidelines
http://www.cdc.gov/asthma/
www.uptodate.com
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
National Asthma Education 
and Prevention Program: Expert 
Panel Report 3 (EPR3)
NIH, National Heart, Lung and 
Blood Institute
2007
(http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/files/
docs/guidelines/asthsumm.pdf)
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• No markers are available to predict prognosis although severe persistent asthma is less likely 
to resolve or be “outgrown.”
• Young children with recurrent, significant episodes of wheezing who also have eczema, 
aeroallergen sensitivity, or a parental history of asthma are more likely to have persistent 
asthma after age 5 years.
90  Part 1: Allergy
Section 9: Evidence
See NIH guidelines.
Section 10: Images
Intermittent
asthma
Persistent asthma: Daily medication
Consult with asthma specialist if Step 4 care or higher is required.
Consider consultation at Step 3.
Low-dose ICS
Quick-relief medication for all patients
Key: Alphabetical order is used when more than one treatment option is listed within either
preferred or alternative therapy. ICS, inhaled corticosteroid; LABA, inhaled long-acting beta2-agonist,
LTRA, leukotriene receptor antagonist; SABA, inhaled short-acting beta2-agonist
SABA as needed for symptoms. Intensity of treatment depends on severity of symptoms: up to 3
treatments at 20-minute intervals as needed. Short course of oral systemic corticosteroids may be needed.
Caution: Increasing use of SABA or use >2 days a week for symptom relief (not prevention of EIB)
generally indicates inadequate control and the need to step up treatment.
Each step: patient education, environmental control, and management of comorbidities.
Steps 2–4: Consider subcutaneous alergen immunotherapy for patients who have allergic asthma (see notes).
Either:
Low-dose ICS +
either LABA,
LTRA, or
Theophylline
OR
Medium-dose
ICS
Medium-dose
ICS + either
LTRA or
Theophylline
High-dose
ICS + LABA
High-dose
ICS + either
LTRA or
Theophylline
High-dose
ICS + either
LTRA or
Theophylline +
oral systemic
corticosteroid
High-dose ICS
+ LABA + oral
systemic
corticosteroid
Step up if
needed
Step down if
possible
(and asthma is
well controlled
at least
3 months)
(First, check
adherence,
inhaler
technique,
environmental
control, and
comorbid
conditions)
Cromolyn,
LTRA,
nedocromil, or
Theophylline
Step 1
SABA PRN
Preferred:
Alternative:
Preferred:
Alternative:
Alternative:
Alternative:
Preferred:
Preferred:
Preferred:
Preferred:
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
Step 5
Step 6
Medium-dose
ICS + LABA
Assess
control
Notes:
The stepwise approach is meant to assist, not replace, the clinical decision-making required to meet individual
patient needs.
If alternative treatment is used and response is inadequate, discontinue it and use the preferred treatment before
stepping up.
Theophylline is a less desirable alternative due to the need to monitor serum concentration levels.
Step 1 and step 2 medications are based on Evidence A. Step 3 ICS + adjunctive therapy and ICS are based on
Evidence B for efﬁcacy of each treatment and extrapolation from comparator trials in older children and adults—
comparator trials are not available for this age group: steps 4–6 are based on expert opinion and extrapolation
from studies in older children and adults.
Immunotherapy for steps 2–4 is based on Evidence B for house-dust mites, animal danders, and pollens; evidence
is weak or lacking for molds and cockroaches. Evidence is strongest for immunotherapy with single allergens.
The role of allergy in asthma is greater in children than in adults. Clinicians who administer immunotherapy should
be prepared and equipped to identify and treat anaphylaxis that may occur.
Figure 9.1  Stepwise approach for managing asthma in children 5–11 years of age. Source: Expert Panel 
Report 3: Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Asthma Full Report 2007. National Heart, Lung, 
and Blood Institute. National Asthma Education and Prevention Program.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at:
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for  
patients, and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
  91
Asthma in Teenagers and Adults
Supinda Bunyavanich
Department of Pediatrics, Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,  
New York, NY, USA
Chapter 10
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• Asthma is a common, chronic disorder of the airways that is complex and characterized by 
variable and recurring symptoms, airflow obstruction, bronchial hyper‐responsiveness, and 
underlying inflammation.
Disease classification
• Asthma can be classified as mild intermittent, mild persistent, moderate persistent, and severe 
persistent asthma depending on frequency of symptoms. Asthma may also be classified as 
intrinsic and extrinsic.
Incidence/prevalence
• The overall prevalence of asthma is about 8% of the US population.
• 50% of asthmatics are <5 years old.
• 33% of asthmatics are aged 15–44 years, and late‐onset asthma comprises about 15% of 
asthmatics.
Economic impact
• Asthma costs the United States more than $30 billion every year in direct expenditure for treat-
ing asthma.
Overall Bottom Line
• Asthma is a common, chronic disorder of the airways that causes wheezing, chest tightness, 
shortness of breath, and /or cough.
• Although much of asthma develops and occurs in childhood, a substantial number of 
teenagers and adults also have asthma.
• Asthma can be classified as mild intermittent, mild persistent, moderate persistent, and severe 
persistent asthma depending on frequency of symptoms.
• Treatment of asthma follows a stepwise approach according to severity and can include 
short‐acting and long‐acting beta‐2‐agonists, inhaled and oral glucocorticosteroids, mast cell 
stabilizers, leukotriene modifying agents, and omalizumab.
• Asthma action plans should be reviewed with patients on a regular basis, and periodic clinic 
visits are helpful for treatment adjustments as appropriate.
92  Part 1: Allergy
Etiology and pathology/pathogenesis
• Much of asthma in teenagers and adults is continued childhood asthma or a relapse of earlier 
childhood asthma (see Chapter 9).
• New‐onset asthma during adolescence or adulthood is possible.
• The complete causes of asthma are unknown.
• Genetic studies have identified genes associated with asthma, but the roles of these genes are 
not completely understood.
Predictive/risk factors
• Overweight.
• History of atopic dermatitis, allergic rhinitis, food allergy.
• Family history of atopy.
• Lower socioeconomic status.
• Male sex is a risk factor for asthma in childhood but there is no difference between males and 
females after age 30 years.
• Environmental allergen sensitization.
• Exposure to tobacco smoke.
• Exposure to pollution.
• Occupational exposure to chemicals.
• Maternal tobacco use while pregnant.
• Low birth weight.
Section 2: Prevention
• No interventions have been demonstrated to prevent the development of the disease.
Screening
Not applicable for this topic.
Primary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Secondary prevention
• Smoking cession by patient and household members.
• Exercise improves lung function.
• Avoidance of pollution and aeroallergens.
• Avoidance of beta‐blockers, aspirin, and NSAIDs that may provoke asthma.
• Immunization for influenza reduces morbidity.
Section 3: Diagnosis
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Patient may report wheezing, shortness of breath, chest tightness, and/or coughing. 
Symptoms are often elicited by exercise, exposure to cold air or allergens, and upper 
respiratory infections.
• Physical examination may show decreased breath sounds and expiratory wheezing. If 
the patient is not symptomatic at the time of examination, physical examination may be 
unremarkable.
• Reversible obstruction on pulmonary function testing supports a diagnosis of asthma.
Asthma in Teenagers and Adults  93
Differential diagnosis
Typical presentation
• An adult with a history of wheezing and eczema as an infant and current allergic rhinitis 
describes wheezing, chest tightness, and coughing during upper respiratory infections, exer-
cise, and the spring pollen season. The cough is dry and typically worse at night. She wakes 
up coughing and feeling short of breath. She has poor exercise tolerance during these times. 
Her symptoms are better during the summer when it is warmer, the tree pollen season is over, 
and she has less frequent respiratory infections. Acute symptoms are improved following 
short‐acting beta‐2‐agonist use.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• The clinician should take a detailed history of wheezing and previous asthma, including age of 
onset, past and current treatment, previous emergency department visits and hospitalizations 
for respiratory complaints, number of oral steroid courses previously taken for respiratory 
issues, and current symptoms and control (e.g. asthma control test).
• The clinician should also ask if there are respiratory symptoms that change with exertion, 
temperature, or time of day. The clinician should enquire whether there are any nocturnal 
awakenings due to cough or shortness of breath.
Physical examination
• Physical examination should include detailed examination of the ears, nose, throat, chest, 
heart, and extremities.
• Chest examination may reveal expiratory wheezing, prolonged expiration, and diminished 
breath sounds. During asthma exacerbations, the patient may be tachypneic, tachycardic, use 
accessory respiratory muscles, and have intercostal retraction.
• There may be no findings on examination when the patient is asymptomatic.
Differential diagnosis
Features
Central airway obstruction
Vocal cord dysfunction
Exercise‐induced dyspnea and inspiratory stridor, with throat 
tightness during maximal exercise that resolves within 5 minutes 
of stopping. Common among young adult female patients. Vocal 
cord adduction may be observed by laryngoscopy when patient is 
symptomatic. Unresponsive to beta‐agonist
Chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD)
Chronic cough and sputum production. There is often a history of 
tobacco use. Daytime symptoms often worse than night‐time. Chest 
X‐ray findings. Airway obstruction not reversible on spirometry
Congestive heart failure
Exertional dyspnea, orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, 
productive cough. Pulmonary venous congestion, peripheral edema, 
improvement with heart failure therapy
Gastroesophageal reflux
Chronic cough can be an extra‐esophageal symptom of GERD. 
Arytenoid and inter‐arytenoid edema may be visible on laryngoscopy
Coronary artery disease
Patients are typically older and may demonstrate other risk factors 
such as hyperlipidemia and diabetes
94  Part 1: Allergy
Useful clinical decision rules and calculators
Not applicable for this topic.
Disease severity classification
• Mild intermittent asthma: symptoms present for 2 days/week or less, or 2 nights/month or less.
• Mild persistent asthma: symptoms present for >2 days/week but less than daily, or >2 nights/
month.
• Moderate persistent asthma: symptoms daily or more than once per night.
• Severe persistent asthma: symptoms throughout the day and frequent at night.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• Peak flow rate and spirometry to assess lung function at baseline and during exacerbations.
• Exhaled nitric oxide.
• Impulse oscillometry.
• Bronchial provocation testing can be useful for difficult cases.
• Pulse oximetry may be used to assess oxygenation.
• Arterial blood gas during severe exacerbations to evaluate acid–base status and oxygenation.
Lists of imaging techniques
• Chest X‐ray is helpful to assess other or additional pulmonary pathology.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis of disease
• Unremarkable physical examination, peak flow, and spirometry do not mean that the patient does 
not have asthma. These can all be normal when the patient is asymptomatic.
Section 4: Treatment
Treatment rationale
• The goal of treatment is to reduce impairment and reduce risk so that the patient can pursue 
normal activities, including regular exercise and normal work.
• Treatment follows a stepwise approach depending on asthma severity. Short‐acting beta‐2‐­
agonist as needed is recommended for intermittent asthma. For more persistent disease, inhaled 
corticosteroids, long‐acting beta‐2‐agonists, leukotriene‐modifying agents, omalizumab, and 
oral corticosteroids may be considered in stepwise fashion.
• Monitoring and follow‐up are essential.
• When initiating therapy, monitoring at 2–6 week intervals is recommended to ensure that asthma 
control is achieved. Depending on the level of control, subsequent follow‐up can be at 1–6 month 
intervals for adjustments in therapy as needed. Step‐up or step‐down in treatment may occur.
• The patient should be given a written asthma action plan that details daily management as well 
as recommendations for therapeutic adjustments during exacerbations.
When to hospitalize
• Persistent respiratory distress unresponsive to short‐acting beta‐2‐agonist is an indication for 
immediate evaluation by a health care provider. This is particularly important if the patient 
demonstrates ominous signs such as inability to speak or drink, use of accessory muscles of the 
chest, retractions, fatigue, drowsiness, confusion, cyanosis, and paradoxical abdominal move-
ment with respiration.
Asthma in Teenagers and Adults  95
Managing the hospitalized patient
• Intubation, mechanical ventilation, IV corticosteroids, and continuous albuterol nebulization 
should be implemented for impending or actual respiratory arrest.
• In the non‐intubated patient with severe asthma exacerbation, nebulized albuterol, oxygen, 
systemic corticosteroids, and frequent assessments are recommended.
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comment
Conservative
• Smoke‐free home and workplace
• Reduce allergen exposure
• Regular exercise
Cigarette smoke exacerbates asthma
Patients who are allergic to environmental allergens
Improves lung function
Medical
• Oxygen (2–4 L/min)
• Short‐acting beta‐2‐agonists
• Albuterol (1.25–5 mg or 2+ puffs inhaled every 
20 min–6 hours as needed)
• Long‐acting beta‐2‐agonists:
• Formoterol (12 µg inhaled every 12 hours)
• Salmeterol (42–50 µg inhaled every 12 hours)
• Ipratropium (250–500 µg inhaled every 
30 min–6 hours as needed)
• Inhaled glucocorticosteroids (many varieties 
and dosing varies by specific type)
• Systemic glucocorticosteroids:
• Prednisone (0.5–1 mg/kg/day PO)
• Methylprednisolone (1.5 mg/kg IV every 8 hours)
• Mast‐cell stabilizers:
• Cromolyn sodium (2–4 puffs 4 times a day)
• Nedocromil (2 puffs 4 times a day)
• Leukotriene modifying agents:
• Montelukast (10 mg/day)
• Zafirlukast (20 mg twice daily)
• Theophylline (dosing based on body weight and 
serum levels)
• Omalizumab (SC injection weight and IgE level 
based)
• Magnesium sulfate (2 g IV over 10–15 min)
Caution if comorbid COPD
Fast‐acting and relieves symptoms quickly
Tachyphylaxis possible
Often used in combination with inhaled 
corticosteroid as maintenance treatment
Should not be used for acute symptoms
Acts rapidly with minimal systemic adverse effects
Not as effective as short‐acting beta‐2‐agonist for 
acute systems
Effective for control of chronic asthma as a 
maintenance inhaler
Minimal systemic absorption occurs
Check inhaler technique to ensure drug delivery
Rinse mouth after use
Dose should be tailored to patient’s requirements 
and can be tapered as patient improves
Excellent safety profile
Frequent administration may limit adherence
Oral formulation, which may be preferable 
to patients who do not like inhalers
Close monitoring of serum levels is needed to avoid 
toxicity
FDA approved for individuals ≥12 years with serum 
IgE level 30–700 IU/mL, sensitization to a perennial 
aeroallergen, and symptoms inadequately controlled 
with inhaled steroids
For status asthmaticus in inpatient setting
Prevention/management of complications
• Patients should be counseled on appropriate use of maintenance versus fast‐acting medica-
tions for asthma control, and symptoms and signs of asthma exacerbation that necessitate 
urgent medical evaluation.
• Patients should review asthma action plan with their provider on a regular basis, as adherence 
to maintenance therapy and appropriate response to exacerbations is key to asthma control.
96  Part 1: Allergy
Section 5: Special populations
Pregnancy
• Shortness of breath during pregnancy may be due to restrictive physiology and not asthma.
• It is safer for pregnant women to be treated with asthma medications than to have asthma 
symptoms and exacerbations.
• Cromolyn sodium inhaler has an excellent safety profile and should be considered for prophylactic 
treatment before exercise.
• Budesonide is the preferred inhaled glucocorticosteroid during pregnancy.
Children
See Chapter 9.
Elderly
• Consider heart failure, coronary artery disease, COPD, parenchymal pulmonary disease in the 
differential diagnosis.
Section 6: Prognosis
Section 7: Reading list
Bateman ED, Hurd SS, Barnes PJ, Bousquet J, Drazen JM, FitzGerald M, et al. Global strategy for asthma 
management and prevention: GINA executive summary. Eur Respir J 2008;31:143–78
British Thoracic Society and Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network. British Guideline on the Management 
of Asthma. 2012. Available at: http://sign.ac.uk/guidelines/fulltext/101/
Li JT, Oppenheimer J, Bersnetin IL, Nicklas RA. Attaining optimal asthma control: a practice parameter. J Allergy 
Clin Immunol 2005;116: S3–11
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Asthma Education and Prevention Program. Expert panel 
report 3: guidelines for the diagnosis and management of asthma. NIH publication no. 07‐4051. Bethesda, 
Md.: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; 2007:363–372. Available from: http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/
guidelines/asthma/asthgdln.pdf (accessed October 9, 2014).
Boulet LP. Diagnosis of Asthma in Adults. In Middleton’s Allergy: Principles and Practice, Adkinson NF, Bochner 
BS, Burks AW, et al. (eds)., 8th ed. Saunders, Elsevier 2013;892–900.
Clinical pearls
• The main goal of treatment is to allow patients to pursue normal activities and exercise.
• Treatment should be stepwise according to asthma severity.
• Patient education and adherence are key to control, and regular monitoring and asthma 
action plans help with this.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Remission from asthma is common in adolescents and young adults, but less common in older 
adults.
• Patients with more severe symptoms and spirometry changes are less likely to have 
remission.
• Asthmatics who smoke have the greatest decline in lung function compared to non‐asthmatics 
and non‐smoking asthmatics.
Asthma in Teenagers and Adults  97
Suggested websites
American Academy of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology. http://www.aaaai.org
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute. http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/prof/lung/asthma/naci/
asthma‐info/asthma‐guidelines.htm
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Guidelines for the Diagnosis and 
Management of Asthma (EPR‐3)
National Heart, Lung, and Blood 
Institute
2007
(https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/
health‐pro/guidelines/current/
asthma‐guidelines/index.htm)
Global strategy for asthma 
management and prevention
Global Initiative for Asthma 
(GINA) and National Heart, 
Lung, and Blood Institute
2008
(http://www.ginasthma.org/
documents/4)
British Guideline on the 
Management of Asthma.
British Thoracic Society 
and Scottish Intercollegiate 
Guidelines Network
2012
(http://sign.ac.uk/guidelines/
fulltext/101/)
Section 9: Evidence
See guidelines listed in Section 8.
Section 10: Images
Not applicable for this topic.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at:
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for  
patients, and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
98 
Evaluation of Cough
Paula J. Busse
Department of Medicine, Division of Clinical Immunology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 11
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• Cough is one of the most common presenting complaints for adults in the primary care 
­setting and is associated with significant impact on quality of life. There are several disorders 
that can produce cough, and it is a diagnostic challenge that often requires a multidisciplinary 
approach.
Disease classification
• Acute cough: lasting <3 weeks.
• Subacute cough: 3–8 weeks’ duration.
• Chronic cough: >8 weeks’ duration.
Incidence/prevalence
• Cough is a frequent reason for seeking medical advice. Evaluation of cough is frequent: over 
30 million outpatient visits occur per year in the United States for evaluation of cough.
Overall Bottom Line
• Patient history is critical to determine the etiology of cough and should address recent 
respiratory infections, smoking history, use of angiotension‐converting enzyme inhibitors 
(ACE‐I), history of childhood or present asthma, history of symptoms of allergic rhinitis, and 
whether the patient is immunocompromised.
• The most common causes of cough are due to upper airway syndrome (i.e. post‐nasal drip), 
asthma, and gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
• For patients with subacute and chronic cough, without a recent history of infection or 
identifiable etiology of cough, an empiric trial to treat upper airway syndrome is the initial 
step for diagnosis and management.
• If there is no improvement in cough after treatment for upper airway syndrome, spirometry 
should be obtained.
• A chest radiograph should be obtained in adults whose cough persists for longer than 
8 weeks.
Evaluation of Cough  99
Economic impact
• Cost of treating cough exceeds several billion dollars annually on a global basis.
Etiology
• Upper airway cough syndrome (UACS; e.g. allergic rhinitis, irritant rhinitis).
• Airway disease (e.g. asthma, chronic bronchitis, bronchiectasis).
• GERD and laryngopharyngeal reflux.
• Current or recent respiratory tract infections.
• Medication side effects (ACE‐I).
• Disease of pulmonary parenchyma (e.g. interstitial lung disease).
• Rare causes (recurrent aspiration, tracheobronchomalacia, laryngeal sensory neuropathy, 
tonsillar enlargement, irritation of external auditory canal, premature ventricular 
contractions).
• Psychogenic.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• Cough is produced via stimulation of the cough reflex arc.
• Irritation of cough receptors by chemical irritants (i.e. acid, cold, capasaicin‐like compounds) or 
mechanical factors (i.e. touch or displacement) trigger activation of transient receptor potential 
vanilloid type 1 and transient receptor potential ankyrin type 1 receptors.
• Activation of these receptors travel via an afferent pathway to the “cough center” in the 
medulla, which stimulates an efferent signal to the vagus, phrenic, and spinal motor nerves to 
produce a cough.
Predictive/risk factors
• Smoking history.
• Genetic factors: determine risk of asthma inception and development of allergen sensitization.
• ACE‐I.
• Immunosuppression.
• Occupational history.
Section 2: Prevention
Screening
Not applicable for this topic.
Primary and secondary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Prevention of cough depends upon its etiology.
• Avoidance of cigarette smoke is most likely the most obtainable method to prevent cough 
in some subjects.
100  Part 1: Allergy
Section 3: Diagnosis
Differential diagnosis
Typical presentation
• The presentation of cough may be influenced by the underlying etiology.
• Patients with cough secondary to upper airway syndrome frequently have complaints of post‐
nasal drip or secretions in the back of the throat.
Differential diagnosis
Features
Upper airway cough 
syndrome
Frequent nasal discharge, sensation of liquid dripping into back of throat, 
frequent throat clearing. On examination, cobblestone appearance of 
nasopharyngeal mucosa and secretions in the nasopharynx
ACE‐I induced
Usually begins within 1 week of starting medication and will resolve 
approximately 1 month after discontinuation
Chronic bronchitis/
obstructive lung disease
Productive cough (clear or white sputum) for most days over a 3‐month 
time period. Frequently associated with smoking history
Lung cancer
Smoking history. Hemoptysis. Pulmonary examination potentially with 
decreased breath sounds if focal airway obstruction present
Viral infection
Common cause of acute cough
Pertussis
Persistent cough (several weeks to months) with paroxysms
GERD
Cough may be the only symptom of reflux in up to 40% of patients with 
cough secondary to GERD
Tuberculosis
Chronic cough with sputum production, hemoptysis, fever, weight loss. 
At‐risk populations (e.g. human immunodeficiency virus‐seropositive or 
homeless)
Anatomic abnormalities
e.g. Retrotracheal mass, tracheobronchomalacia
Psychogenic or habitual
Diagnosis of exclusion. Failure to cough during sleep does not exclude this 
condition
Bronchiectasis
Usually a productive cough that is mucopurulent. High‐resolution CT 
required for diagnosis
Asthma
Airway hyper‐responsiveness (AHR), airway inflammation, reversible airway 
obstruction
Non‐asthmatic 
eosinophilic bronchitis
Elevated sputum eosinophilia. No AHR demonstrated
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Obtain history of recent respiratory tract infections, whether the patient is immunosuppressed, 
use of ACE‐I, smoking, symptoms of allergic rhinitis, GERD.
• If patient history does not suggest etiology, empiric treatment with a daily intranasal 
corticosteroid to address UACS is warranted. If there is no improvement after 2–3 
weeks, spirometry with pre‐ and post‐bronchodilator response, lung volumes, diffusion 
capacity should be obtained. If obstruction is not found, methacholine challenge may be 
indicated.
• If cough is present >8 weeks, a chest radiograph should be obtained.
• Esophageal pH monitoring is indicated if therapeutic trials to treat GERD are ineffective.
Evaluation of Cough  101
• Cough secondary to asthma should be considered when cough is worse at night and exacerbated 
by cold air, upper respiratory tract infection, exercise, or pollen exposure.
• Patients with cough secondary to GERD may complain of heartburn or a sour taste in their 
mouth, but these symptoms may not be present.
• After resolution of an upper respiratory infection, some patients will experience a prolonged 
cough (post‐infectious cough).
Clinical diagnosis
History
• The evaluation of cough includes a thorough history, including smoking status, medication use, 
history of asthma (past and present), symptoms of allergic rhinitis, occupational exposures, 
evaluation of immunocompetence, current or recent respiratory tract infections.
Physical examination
• Nose: evaluate for pale and swollen turbinates (allergic rhinitis).
• Throat: evaluate for cobblestone appearance of oropharyngeal mucosa and mucus in the 
oropharynx (UACS), tonsillar enlargement.
• Respiratory: evaluate for expiratory wheezes and/or wheezing (asthma), bilateral rhonchi or 
crackles (may suggest bronchiectasis).
• Extremities: clubbing and cyanosis.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• Spirometry: used to evaluate airway obstruction (asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease, COPD) and if it is reversible after administration of a bronchodilator (asthma).
• Lung volumes: determination of air trapping (obstructive lung disease) or airway restriction 
(interstitial lung disease).
• Diffusion capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO): to distinguish airway obstruction from asthma 
(DLCO normal or increased) versus COPD (DLCO decreased).
• Methacholine challenge: if asthma is suspected, but spirometry does not demonstrate airway 
obstruction (see Chapter 8).
• Twenty‐four hour esophageal manometry: determination of GERD.
• IgE sensitization: to determine if a patient may have a component of allergic rhinitis (can be done 
by serum or skin prick testing) (see Procedures section of Chapter 37).
• Direct laryngoscopic evaluation: arytenoid erythema and edema suggest laryngeal and pharyngeal 
reflux.
Lists of imaging techniques
• Chest X‐ray: persistent cough >8 weeks.
• High‐resolution CT of chest: persistent cough >8 weeks and if above diagnostic tests and empiric 
treatments have not identified an etiology.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis  
of disease
• Cough may be the only symptom of asthma in some patients (e.g. cough‐variant asthma).
• Symptoms of GERD and post‐nasal drip may be absent and cough may be the only symptom.
• Treatment of acute cough secondary to viral infection using antihistamine therapy is not 
effective.
102  Part 1: Allergy
Section 4: Treatment
Treatment rationale
• Acute cough rarely requires therapy.
• Treatment of subacute and chronic cough involves empiric therapy for the most common 
causes, treating one potential etiology at a time.
• If cough does not improve with the specific therapy, treatment of the next potential etiology 
should be pursued.
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comments
Conservative
Most appropriate for acute cough and post‐
infectious cough
Lifestyle modifications for GERD (e.g. weight 
loss, elevation of head of bed, avoidance of 
acidic foods, coffee and eating meals 2–3 
hours before bed)
Medical
• Intranasal corticosteroids (see Chapter 4)
• Acid‐suppression medications
• β‐agnostics (see Chapter 10)
• Inhaled corticosteroids (and possible addition of 
long‐acting beta‐agonists) (see Chapter 10)
• Antitussive agents
Patient needs to use on a daily basis; may take 
2 weeks to notice improvement
Begin proton pump inhibitor (PPI) at moderate 
dose; may take up to 8 weeks to notice 
improvement
Needed by all patients with asthma for acute 
rescue
For patients with persistent asthma
Limited efficacy
Surgical
• Nissen fundoplication for GERD
Improvement of symptoms variable
Prevention/management of complications
• Intranasal corticosteroids: minimal risk of glaucoma and cataracts (patients should have 
yearly eye examinations), nasal bleeding (proper teaching of administration may reduce 
risk).
• Oral corticosteroids: risk of adrenal suppression, mood changes, care in diabetics to manage 
blood glucose level, decreased bone mineral density.
• Acute cough: usually associated with the common cold, but occasionally it can be associ-
ated with potentially life‐threatening conditions (e.g. pulmonary emboli, congestive heart 
failure). The first step is to evaluate if acute cough is secondary to one of these conditions 
and treat appropriately. Otherwise, acute cough can be managed conservatively (Algorithm 
11.1).
• Subacute cough: the initial step in determining treatment for subacute cough is assessing 
whether the cough follows a respiratory infection. If there is a concern for Bordetella pertussis 
(i.e. whooping cough), a nasopharyngeal swab for culture should be performed and, if positive, 
treatment with a macrolide antibiotic. In some patients with cough that persists after a respira-
tory tract infection, treatment with an inhaled corticosteroid for 30 days should be considered. 
If the cough is not likely post‐infectious, management should be the same as for chronic cough 
(Algorithm 11.2).
Evaluation of Cough  103
Sub-acute cough
(3–8 weeks) 
UACS
GERD
Post-infectious
New onset or exacerbation
of underlying lung disease
Pneumonia
Medication induced
(i.e. ACE-I) 
Pertussis
Bronchitis
Asthma
COPD
Bronchiectasis
Non-asthmatic 
eosinophilic bronchitis 
Algorithm 11.2  Diagnosis of subacute cough for patients ≥15 years of age  
with cough lasting 3–8 weeks
Note: ACE‐I, ACE inhibitor; GERD, gastroesophageal reflux disease.
Acute cough  
(<3 weeks)
UACS
P.E.
Heart failure
Infectious
Exacerbation of underlying 
lung disease
Asthma
COPD
Bronchiectasis
URTI
Pneumonia
Algorithm 11.1  Diagnosis of acute cough for patients ≥15 years of age  
with cough lasting <3 weeks
Note: COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; PE, pulmonary embolism; UACS, upper airway 
cough syndrome; URTI, upper respiratory tract infection.
104  Part 1: Allergy
• Chronic cough: may be caused by more than one condition. If the etiology is not apparent 
by history, a sequential and empiric treatment approach is recommended (Algorithm 11.3). 
In these instances, treatment of the most common etiologies of cough should be addressed as 
follows:
• UACS: 2‐week daily intranasal corticosteroids; patients should be educated that an effect 
may not be seen before this time (see Chapter 4);
• Asthma: See Chapter 10;
• Non‐asthmatic eosinophilic bronchitis: inhaled corticosteroids; and
• GERD: PPI if treatment failure, 24‐hour pH monitoring.
If there is partial, but not complete response to therapy, pursuing other etiologies is recommended, 
which may include the addition of other medications and diagnostic testing.
Section 5: Special populations
Pregnancy
Not applicable for this topic.
Clinical pearls
• The initial step in management of cough is to identify whether patients are 
immunosuppressed, smokers, or have an emergent condition, which needs to be addressed 
(e.g. pulmonary emboli, pulmonary edema; more typical of acute cough).
• The most effective approach to treatment of cough is a systematic approach with empiric 
therapy and, in cases without improvement, objective testing.
• For treatment of suspected UACS, patients should receive a daily intranasal corticosteroid and 
be instructed that symptoms relief may take 2–3 weeks to begin after initiating daily nasal 
steroid use.
Chronic cough  
(>8 weeks)
Lung 
cancer
UACS
Medication induced
(i.e. ACE-I) 
GERD
New onset or exacerbation
of underlying lung disease
Asthma COPD Bronchiectasis
Non-asthmatic 
eosinophilic bronchitis 
Algorithm 11.3  Diagnosis of chronic cough algorithm for patients ≥15 years of age  
with cough lasting >8 weeks
Evaluation of Cough  105
Children
• The most common causes of cough in children are asthma, respiratory tract infections, and 
GERD.
• Foreign body aspiration should be considered as a cause of cough in young children.
• Congenital abnormalities are occasionally a cause of cough in children.
Elderly
Not applicable for this topic.
Others
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 6: Prognosis
Section 7: Reading list
Birring SS. Controversies in the evaluation and management of chronic cough. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 
2011;183:708–15
Chung KF, Pavord ID. Prevalence, pathogenesis, and causes of chronic cough. Lancet 2008;371:1364–74
Haque RA, Usmani OS, Barnes PJ. Chronic idiopathic cough: a discrete clinical entity? Chest 
2005;127:1710–3
Irwin RS. Assessing cough severity and efficacy of therapy in clinical research: ACCP evidence‐based clinical 
practice guidelines. Chest 2006;129:232S–7S
Irwin RS. Complications of cough: ACCP evidence‐based clinical practice guidelines. Chest 2006;129:54S–8S
Irwin RS, Baumann MH, Bolser DC, Boulet LP, Braman SS, Brightling CE, et al. Diagnosis and management of 
cough executive summary: ACCP evidence‐based clinical practice guidelines. Chest 2006;129:1S–23S
Irwin RS, Madison JM. The diagnosis and treatment of cough. N Engl J Med 2000;343:1715–21
Morice AH, Fontana GA, Sovijarvi AR, Pistolesi M, Chung KF, Widdicombe J, et al. The diagnosis and management 
of chronic cough. Eur Respir J 2004;24:481–92
Pratter MR. Chronic upper airway cough syndrome secondary to rhinosinus diseases (previously referred to as 
postnasal drip syndrome): ACCP evidence‐based clinical practice guidelines. Chest 2006;129:63S–71S
Woodcock A, Young EC, Smith JA. New insights in cough. Br Med Bull 2010;96:61–73
Woodwell D. National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey: 1998 Summary. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for 
Health Statistics, 2000
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Diagnosis and management of cough 
executive summary: ACCP evidence‐based 
clinical practice guidelines
American College of Chest 
Physicians (ACCP)
2006
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pubmed/16428686)
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Improvement of cough is highly dependent upon the etiology.
• Complications of cough include headache, dizziness, hoarseness, musculosketal pain, urinary 
incontinence, and rib fractures in some patients with decreased bone density.
106  Part 1: Allergy
Section 9: Evidence
See Guideline listed in Section 8.
Section 10: Images
Not applicable for this topic.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at:
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for  
patients, and ICD code
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
  107
Exercise‐Induced Asthma
Supinda Bunyavanich
Department of Pediatrics, Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,  
New York, NY, USA
Chapter 12
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• Exercise‐induced asthma is bronchoconstriction that is triggered by exercise. The preferred term 
for exercise‐induced asthma is exercise‐induced bronchoconstriction.
Disease classification
• It is debated whether exercise‐induced bronchoconstriction should be grouped as follows:
• Exercise‐induced bronchoconstriction in patients with chronic asthma;
• Exercise‐induced bronchoconstriction in athletes who do not otherwise have asthma.
Incidence/prevalence
• Of the general population, 5–20% are estimated to have exercise‐induced bronchoconstriction.
• Of individuals with persistent asthma, 80–90% are thought to have some degree of exercise‐
induced bronchoconstriction.
• Of elite winter athletes, 30–70% have exercise‐induced bronchoconstriction.
Economic impact
Not applicable for this topic.
Overall Bottom Line
• Exercise‐induced asthma is bronchoconstriction that is induced by exercise.
• Symptoms include wheezing, chest tightness, shortness of breath, and/or coughing 10–15 
minutes into prolonged exercise.
• Exercise‐induced bronchoconstriction may occur in patients with chronic underlying asthma or 
may manifest only with exercise in otherwise asymptomatic patients.
• Optimizing cardiovascular fitness, exercising in warm and humid environments, and pre‐exercise 
warm‐up can be helpful general measures.
• Symptoms can be prevented with pre‐exercise inhaled short‐acting beta‐2‐agonist or cromolyn 
sodium; inhaled glucocorticosteroids and leukotriene‐modifying agents can also be used, but 
these have longer times to onset.
108  Part 1: Allergy
Etiology and pathology/pathogenesis
• Minute ventilation increases with exercise.
• Large volumes of relatively cool and dry air passing through the airways triggers:
• Changes in airway surface osmolality;
• Increases in leukotrienes, histamine, and interleukins in the airway;
• Activation of peripheral Th2 lymphocytes;
• Eosinophil influx and activation;
• Release of neurokinins.
• These changes lead to abnormal distribution of alveolar ventilation and perfusion, arterial 
hypoxemia, and closure or near closure of segmental airways.
Predictive/risk factors
• Chronic asthma.
• Exercise in cold, dry environments.
• History of atopy.
Section 2: Prevention
No interventions have been demonstrated to prevent the development of the disease.
Screening
Not applicable for this topic.
Primary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Secondary prevention
• Exercise in warm, humid environment.
• Prophylactic treatment with short‐acting beta‐2‐agonists.
• Prophylactic treatment with inhaled cromolyn sodium.
• Control underlying asthma.
Section 3: Diagnosis
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Patient may report wheezing, shortness of breath, chest tightness, and/or coughing during 
or following exercise.
• They may not demonstrate any findings on examination at baseline. After 6–8 minutes of 
vigorous exercise, however, there may be audible wheezing and coughing.
• An exercise challenge test, which involves monitored exercise with measurement of lung 
function, may show a ≥15% decrement in forced expiratory volume (FEV1).
Exercise‐Induced Asthma  109
Differential diagnosis
Typical presentation
• A young adult with asthma describes wheezing, chest tightness, and coughing 10–15 minutes 
into prolonged exercise, especially when exercising in the cold winter air. Symptoms self‐resolve 
within 30–90 minutes of rest. Symptoms during exercise are worse when the patient forgets to 
take her maintenance glucocorticosteroid inhaler and her underlying asthma is poorly controlled. 
Symptoms are attenuated if she takes two puffs of her inhaled short‐acting beta‐2‐agonist 
inhaler before exercise.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• The clinician should take a detailed history of underlying asthma, including age of onset, past 
and current treatment, previous emergency department visits and hospitalizations, number of 
oral steroid courses previously taken, and current symptoms and control (e.g. asthma control 
test). The clinician should then ask if asthma symptoms are affected by exertion, and, if so, the 
intensity, duration, and setting of exercise. The patient should also describe if symptoms are 
modulated by prophylactic use of short‐acting beta‐2‐agonist use before exercise.
Physical examination
• Physical examination should include detailed examination of the ears, nose, throat, chest, 
heart, and extremities. Heart and extremities may exhibit signs of heart failure and peripheral 
artery disease that may lend support for alternate etiologies for respiratory symptoms.
Differential diagnosis
Features
Central airway obstruction
Vocal cord dysfunction
Exercise‐induced dyspnea and inspiratory stridor, with throat 
tightness during maximal exercise that resolves within 5 minutes 
of stopping. Common among young adult female patients. Vocal 
cord adduction may be observed by laryngoscopy when patient is 
symptomatic. Unresponsive to beta‐agonist
Laryngeal dysfunction, laryngeal 
prolapse, and laryngomalacia
Exercise‐induced inspiratory stridor, with throat tightness during 
maximal exercise that resolves within 5 minutes of stopping. 
Common among young adult female patients. Unresponsive to 
beta‐agonist
Parenchymal pulmonary disease
Dyspnea may be reported during periods of rest as well. 
Pulmonary findings on examination and imaging. Additional 
symptoms depending on specific disease
Gastroesophageal reflux
Chronic cough can be an extraesophageal symptom of GERD, 
which exercise may exacerbate. Arytenoid and interarytenoid 
edema may be visible on laryngoscopy
Exercise‐induced hyperventilation
Not directly from bronchial obstruction, marked by hypocapnia 
and abnormal ventilator homeostasis during exercise
Coronary artery disease
Patients are typically older and may demonstrate other risk factors 
such as hyperlipidemia and diabetes
Heart failure
Patients are typically older. Physical findings may include elevated 
jugular venous pulse and peripheral edema
110  Part 1: Allergy
Useful clinical decision rules and calculators
Not applicable for this topic.
Disease severity classification
Not applicable for this topic.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• Exercise challenge test. According to the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, this should 
involve exercise at 5‐minute intervals for 20–30 minutes. A post‐exercise decrement in FEV1 of 
≥15% compared to baseline is considered a positive result for exercise‐induced bronchocon-
striction. Different types, durations, and intensities of exercise as well as FEV1 criteria have been 
proposed. Ideally, heart rate should reach 80–90% of predicted maximum and pulmonary 
function should be followed for 30 minutes after exercise.
• Lung function measurements before and after short‐acting beta‐2‐agonist.
Lists of imaging techniques
Not applicable for this topic.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis  
of disease
• Measurement of peak expiratory flow rates before and after exercise can be inaccurate. 
Therefore, measurement of FEV1 before and after exercise is preferred.
• A patient may have no asthma symptoms outside of exercise and still have exercise‐induced 
asthma.
Section 4: Treatment
Treatment rationale
• General and pharmacologic measures help with treatment. Good control of any underlying 
asthma decreases the frequency of exercise‐induced bronchoconstriction. Exercising in an envi-
ronment of warm, humid air also decreases symptoms, and heat exchange mask may help with 
this. Improving cardiovascular fitness is also helpful, as this reduces the minute ventilation 
required for a given level of exertion.
• Pharmacologic treatment includes use of inhaled glucocorticosteroids and leukotriene modifi-
ers to control underlying asthma, and prophylactic treatment with inhaled short‐acting beta‐2‐
agonists and inhaled cromolyn sodium. Short‐acting beta‐2‐agonist is helpful for symptoms 
once symptoms are present.
When to hospitalize
• Persistent respiratory distress unresponsive to short‐acting beta‐2‐agonist.
Managing the hospitalized patient
See guidelines for treating acute asthma.
Exercise‐Induced Asthma  111
Table of treatment
Prevention/management of complications
• Patients should be counseled on appropriate use of maintenance versus fast‐acting medications 
for asthma control, and symptoms and signs of asthma exacerbation that necessitate urgent 
medical evaluation.
• Daily use of short‐acting beta‐2‐agonists may lead to tachyphylaxis or partial loss of efficacy.
Treatment
Comment
Conservative
Improve cardiovascular fitness
Exercise in warm and humid environments
Heat exchange mask (e.g. tie scarf or cloth loosely 
around nose and mouth during exercise in cold, dry air 
to provide local humidity and warmth for inspired air)
Pre‐exercise warm up for 10–15 minutes to reach 
50–60% maximum heart rate
Breathe through the nose during exercise to allow cool 
dry air to be humidified and warm
Patients with mild symptoms
Patients who prefer non‐pharmacologic 
methods
Medical
Inhaled short‐acting beta‐2‐agonist (2 puffs 10 minutes 
before exercise and additionally as needed during 
exercise)
Inhaled cromolyn sodium (2–4 puffs 15 minutes 
before exercise)
Inhaled glucocorticosteroids
Leukotriene modifying agents
Peak efficacy 15–60 min, duration of action 
3 hours
Patients with more severe asthma may 
require higher doses
Excellent safety profile with few side effects
Not as effective as inhaled short‐acting 
beta‐2‐agonists
Effective for control of underlying asthma 
that may predispose toward exercise‐induced 
bronchoconstriction
Improves airway hyper‐responsiveness over 
weeks to months
Onset within 2 hours and benefit up to 
24 hours
Also effective for control of underlying 
asthma
Consider in children who exercise 
intermittently throughout the day
Clinical pearls
• The main goal of treatment is to allow patients to exercise safely.
• Improving cardiovascular fitness and exercising in warm, humid environments can decrease 
exercise‐induced bronchoconstriction.
• Prophylactic use of short‐acting beta‐2‐agonist and cromolyn sodium inhalers can be helpful.
• Short‐acting beta‐2‐agonist (but not cromolyn sodium) inhaler is effective once exercise‐
induced bronchoconstriction has occurred.
112  Part 1: Allergy
Section 5: Special populations
Pregnancy
• Shortness of breath during pregnancy may be due to restrictive physiology and not exercise‐
induced bronchoconstriction.
• It is safer for pregnant women to be treated with asthma medications than to have asthma 
symptoms and exacerbations.
• Cromolyn sodium inhaler has an excellent safety profile and should be considered for prophylactic 
treatment before exercise.
• Budesonide is the preferred inhaled glucocorticosteroid during pregnancy.
Children
• Inhaled cromolyn sodium has an excellent safety profile and should be considered.
• Leukotriene modifying agents may be a good choice for children who exert themselves 
sporadically (thus making frequent prophylactic treatment impractical).
Elderly
• Consider heart failure, coronary artery disease, and parenchymal pulmonary disease in the 
­differential diagnosis of shortness of breath during exercise.
Section 6: Prognosis
Section 7: Reading list
Hallstrand TS. New insights into pathogenesis of exercise‐induced bronchoconstriction. Curr Opin Allergy Clin 
Immunol 2012;12:42–8
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. National Asthma Education and Prevention Program. Managing 
asthma long term: special situations. Expert panel report 3: guidelines for the diagnosis and management 
of asthma. NIH publication no. 07‐4051. Bethesda, MD: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; 2007: 
363–372. http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/asthma/asthgdln.pdf (accessed October 10, 2014).
O’Byrne PM. Exercise‐induced bronchoconstriction. In: UpToDate, Post TW (Ed), UpToDate, Waltham, MA. 
(Accessed on December 17, 2014.)
Randolph C. Diagnostic exercise challenge testing. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep 2011;11:482–90
Weiller JM, Bonini S, Coifman R, et al. American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology Work Group 
Report: Exercise‐induced asthma. J. Allergy Clin Immunol 2007;119:1349–58
Suggested websites
American Academic of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology. http://www.aaaai.org/conditions‐and‐
treatments/library/asthma‐library/asthma‐and‐exercise.aspx
American College of Sports Medicine. http://www.acsm.org/docs/brochures/exercise‐induced‐
asthma.pdf
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• With good control of underlying asthma (if it exists) and a plan for prophylactic treatment as 
well as management of breakthrough exercise‐induced bronchoconstriction, a patient should 
be able to continue exercising safely.
• Patients with exercise‐induced asthma do not need to avoid exercise. For example, 50% of 
Olympic cross‐country skiers have exercise‐induced bronchoconstriction and still exercise 
strenuously in cold, dry air.
Exercise‐Induced Asthma  113
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Guidelines for the Diagnosis 
and Management of 
Asthma (EPR‐3)
National Heart, 
Lung, and Blood 
Institute
2007
(http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health‐pro/guidelines/
current/asthma‐guidelines/full‐report.htm)
Section 9: Evidence
See Guidelines listed in Section 8.
Section 10: Images
Not applicable for this topic.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at:
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for  
patients, and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
114 
Occupational Asthma
Paula J. Busse
Department of Medicine, Division of Clinical Immunology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 13
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• OA is defined as new‐onset asthma (characterized by variable airway obstruction, airway hyper‐
responsiveness (AHR) and airway inflammation) which develops secondary to an exposure to a 
product present at the workplace. It must be distinguished from “work‐exacerbated asthma,” 
which is pre‐existing asthma that has worsened from workplace exposure.
Disease classification
• OA is typically classified based upon the latency period between exposure and the development of 
symptoms, and its mechanism of onset as follows:
• OA due to immunological sensitizers: has a latency period; may be IgE or non‐IgE 
mediated;
• OA due to non‐immunologic provocation: usually occurs from a single exposure to an inhala-
tion of a high concentration of an irritant gas, aerosol, or smoke (RADS) or from a single or 
multiple exposures to low doses of irritants. Asthma symptoms develop without a latency 
period.
Incidence/prevalence
• Between 10% and 25% of adult‐onset asthma is attributed to OA.
• OA is one of the most common occupational lung diseases in developed countries.
Economic impact
• The total cost of OA is estimated to be > $1.6 billion per year.
Overall Bottom Line
• Occupational asthma (OA) is asthma that results from exposure to agents at the workplace.
• OA is classified as either immunologically induced (produced by either high‐molecular weight 
(HMW) or low‐molecular weight agents (LMW)) or non‐immunologically induced (e.g. irritant 
or reactive airway dysfunction syndrome, RADS).
• In patients developing late‐onset asthma, the possibility of OA should be considered.
• The risk of developing OA depends upon several factors including intensity of exposure, the 
particular agent, atopy, cigarette smoking, and genetic predisposition.
• Continued exposure to the causative agent in patients with OA leads to a slower rate of recovery.
Occupational Asthma  115
Etiology
• Over 350 agents have been identified that may cause OA. Agents that cause immunologic OA 
are divided into (Table 13.1):
• High‐molecular weight (HMW);
• Low‐molecular weight (LMW).
• Agents that cause non‐immunologic OA include irritant gases, fumes, smoke, and aerosols 
(see Table 13.2).
Pathology/pathogenesis
• Immunologically mediated: the underlying lung pathology is similar in this form of OA as in 
patients with non‐occupational asthma in which smooth muscle hyperplasia, subepithelial 
fibrosis, mucus metaplasia, epithelial desquamation are noted, along with increased eosinophilic 
and lymphocytic airway inflammation. Many HMW agents act as a complete antigen causing the 
production of specific IgE molecules; some of the LMW agents act as haptens, binding to proteins 
Table 13.1  Principal agents causing immunologic occupational asthma.
Agent
Workers/Occupations at Risk
High‐molecular‐weight agents
Cereals (flour)
Wheat, rye, barley, buckwheat
Millers, bakers, pastry makers
Latex
Gloves
Health care workers, laboratory technicians
Animals
Mice, rats, cows, seafood
Laboratory workers, farmers, seafood 
processors
Enzymes
α‐Amylase, maxatase, alcalase, 
papain, bromelain, pancreatin
Baking products manufacture, bakers, 
detergent production, pharmaceutical 
industry, food industry
Low‐molecular‐weight agents
Isocyanates
Toluene diisocyanate (TDI), methylene 
diphenyl‐diisocyanate (MDI), 
hexamethylene diisocyanate (HDI)
Polyurethane production, plastic industry, 
molding, spray painters, insulation installers
Metals
Chromium, nickel, cobalt, platinum
Metal refinery, metal alloy production, 
electroplaters, welders
Biocides
Aldehydes, quaternary ammonium 
compounds
Health care workers, cleaners
Persulfate salts
Hair bleach
Hairdressers
Acid anhydrides
Phthalic, trimellitic, maleic, 
tetrachlorophthalic acids
Epoxy resin workers
Reactive dyes
Reactive black 5, pyrazolone 
derivatives, vinyl sulfones, carmine
Textile workers, food industry workers
Acrylates
Cyanoacrylates, methacrylates, di‐ and 
triacrylates
Manufacture of adhesives, dental and 
orthopedic materials, sculptured fingernails, 
printing inks, paints and coatings
Wood dusts
Red cedar, iroko, obeche, oak
Sawmill workers, carpenters, cabinet and 
furniture makers
Source: Adkinson et al. (eds). Middleton’s Allergy Principles and Practice, 8th edition. Saunders, an imprint of Elsevier 
Inc. Reproduced with permission of Elsevier.
116  Part 1: Allergy
to form a complete antigen to induce generation of specific IgE molecules. However, most LMW 
agents act via a non‐IgE dependent pathway that has not been clearly established.
• Non‐immunologically mediated: the underlying airway pathology in this subset of OA is char-
acterized by rapid denudation of the airway mucosa with fibrinohemorrhagic exudates in the 
submucosa which can develop from loss of epithelial‐derived relaxing factors, exposure of the 
nerve endings with substance P release, non‐specific activation of mast cells with release of 
pro‐inflammatory cytokines, and direct beta‐2‐adrenergic receptor inhibition. Subsequent 
regeneration of the epithelium with proliferation of the basal and parabasal cells, epithethial 
edema, and thickening of the airway wall develops.
Predictive/risk factors
Table 13.2  Common causes of irritaion in various situations.
Exposure
Agent or process
Acids
Glacial acetic, sulfuric, hydrochloric, hydrofluoric
Alkali
Bleach, calcium oxide, sodium hydroxide, World Trade Center dust, air bag emissions
Gases
Chlorine, sulfur dioxide, ammonia, mustard, ozone, hydrogen sulfide, phosgene, 
nitrogen dioxide
Sprays
Paints, coatings
Explosion
Irritant gases, vapors, fume releases under pressure
Fire or pyrolysis
Combustion and pyrolysis products of fires, burning paint fumes, pyrolysis products 
of polyvinylchloride, meat‐wrapping film
Confined spaces
Epichlorohydrin, acrolein, floor sealant, metal‐coating remover, biocides, fumigating 
aerosol, cleaning aerosol sprays, mixture of drain‐cleaning agents
Workplace
Glass‐bottle manufacture, popcorn flavoring manufacture, second‐hand tobacco 
smoke, chlorine gas puffs, pyrite dust explosion, locomotive and diesel exhaust, 
aerosols of metalworking fluids, aluminum smelting (potroom fumes), metal 
processing, pulp milling, shoe and leather manufacture (organic solvents), exposure 
to S02 from apricot sulfurization, aldehydes (formaldehyde, glutaraldehyde), biologic 
dusts, tunnel construction, coke oven emissions, food industry cleaners and 
disinfectants, chili pepper picking, cyanoacrylates
Source: Brooks SM, Bernstein IL. Irritant‐induced airway disorders. Immunol Allergy Clin North Am 2011;31:747–68. 
Reproduced with permission of Elsevier.
(Continued)
Risk factor
Odds ratio
Sex
• Male sex
• Female sex
Higher in bakers, laundry workers, shoemakers and 
shoe repair, tanners, metal workers
Higher in jewelry engravers, round‐timber workers
Geographic location
Low prevalence of OA in Mediterranean and Eastern 
European countries
Atopy
Risk factor for developing OA due to HMW compounds
Smoking
Risk factor for OA due to some HMW agents (coffee,  
castor beans, shrimp and snow‐crab, but not laboratory 
animals). Risk factor for OA due to some LMW agents  
(platinum RR 5, 95% CI 1.7–15.2, phthalic anhydride)
Occupational Asthma  117
Section 2: Prevention
Screening
• Monitoring of workers in the work environment for early detection of antigen sensitization 
(if possible) and bronchial hyper‐responsiveness (see Diagnosis section).
• Patients should not be excluded from employment if they have risk factors for the development of OA.
Primary prevention
• Subjects who are atopic and entering a high‐risk workplace with possible exposure to HMW 
agents should be advised about the potential of developing OA and receive regular medical 
follow‐up.
• Engineering and work practices to control exposure to agents that may cause OA.
• Data on the use of respiratory protection devices to prevent OA are limited.
• Smoking cessation.
Secondary prevention
• Complete avoidance of further exposure to the offending agent.
• Additional study is required to determine if the use of respiratory protection devices (e.g. N95 
mask, laminar flow helmets) will allow workers with OA to continue working at the same 
workplace without causing disease progression.
Section 3: Diagnosis
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• The clinical history of a patient suspected of having OA must include detailed information 
about the potential exposures at the workplace, length of time of exposure at work, and 
history of prior asthma.
• The initial step in the diagnosis of OA is to demonstrate the patient has asthma (reversible 
airway obstruction by spirometry and, if necessary, methacholine challenge) (see Chapter 8).
• A chest radiograph is often required to evaluate new‐onset cough and shortness of breath in 
adults to exclude other etiologies besides OA.
• Earlier diagnosis of OA and removal of the patient from exposure to the causative agent at 
work improves chances of clinical improvement.
Risk factor
Odds ratio
Type and intensity of workplace exposure:
• HMW agents (e.g. laboratory animals, 
latex, flour)
• LMW agents
2–8% person‐years of those exposed will develop OA
5–10% of patients exposed will develop OA
Genetics
• HLA antigens DR3, DQ5, DQA1, DQB1, DR1
• Glutathione S‐transferase GSTP1 
polymorphism
Risk for exposure to diisocyanates, Western red cedar, 
platinum salts, laboratory animals, anhydrides
Diisocyanate‐induced asthma
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Control and regulation of the level of exposure to potential agents causing OA is the most 
important method to prevent the development of disease.
• Use of respiratory protective equipment reduces the incidence of OA, but may not completely 
prevent it.
118  Part 1: Allergy
Differential diagnosis
Typical presentation
• Immunologically mediated OA: following continued exposure to a causative agent, there is 
a latency period before the onset of symptoms. The latency is variable in immunologically 
induced OA and tends to be shorter for LMW agents such as isocyanates (which may occur 
after 2 years’ exposure) and longer for HMW agents (which may take 5 years). Prior to 
symptom onset many patients experience work‐related rhinoconjunctivitis (such as itchy 
eyes, tearing, sneezing). Symptoms of OA are similar to non‐occupational asthma: chest 
tightness, cough, wheezing, and dyspnea. However, symptoms of OA are typically worse 
during the work week with exposure and improved on weekends and vacations, especially 
after initial onset. With progression of OA, symptoms may not improve during these times.
• Non‐immunologically mediated OA: the clinical symptoms of this type of OA are similar to 
immunologically induced OA, but the onset of symptoms has no latency period after exposure 
to the agent. Symptoms are not reproduced by re‐exposure of affected patients to lower, 
non‐irritant doses.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• Immunologic OA: the history should include exclusion of pre‐existing asthma, a detailed cur-
rent and past work history to determine possible offending agent. The time between starting 
work and symptom onset, whether there is resolution during weekends and/or vacations needs 
to be obtained.
• Non‐immunologic OA: symptoms of RADS and irritant‐induced asthma are similar to other 
forms of asthma. However, the timing of RADS is within 24 hours following exposure to an 
agent, often leading to an emergency room visit or unscheduled outpatient visit. The time 
course to onset of symptoms is more gradual in irritant‐induced asthma.
Physical examination
• The physical examination may be normal, particularly when away from work. However, as with 
other patients with asthma, high‐pitched wheezing is heard on expirations.
• Some patients with OA who have concomitant occupational rhinitis have pale and swollen 
nasal mucosa.
Differential diagnosis
Features
Work‐exacerbated asthma
Asthma onset pre‐dates exposure at work
Occupational non‐asthmatic 
eosinophilic bronchitis
New onset non‐productive cough without AHR but associated with 
increased sputum eosinophils (usually exposure to acrylates, latex, 
lysosyme and mushroom spores)
COPD
Associated with cigarette smoking; DLCO will be decreased
Work‐related irritable larynx 
syndrome (i.e. vocal cord 
dysfunction)
Hyperkinetic laryngeal symptoms triggered by sensory stimuli in the 
workplace. Differentiated from asthma by stridor and abnormal 
inspiratory flow volume loop. No response to bronchodilator. May see 
paradoxical motion of the vocal cords during symptoms
Hyperventilation syndrome
Hyperventilation without wheezing
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis
Lung volumes with a restrictive pattern
Occupational Asthma  119
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• Demonstration of IgE to occupational agents are available for a few HMW antigens (plant and 
animal) and fewer LMW antigens (platinum salts), and these tests are not standardized. The pres-
ence of specific IgE to an agent signifies sensitization, but does not confirm the diagnosis of OA.
• IgE sensitization to common aeroallergens is useful to determine atopic status of the patient.
• Peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR): comparison serial measurement of PEFR at work (performed 
in triplicate done four times per day for 2 weeks) compared to days off (1–2 weeks) to demon-
strate if expiratory flow decreases with work exposure.
• Spirometry: baseline spirometry is needed to evaluate if airway obstruction is present (FEV1/FVC 
below the lower limit of normal). Patients should also have reversibility of obstruction by a 
significant increase in FEV1 (12% and >200 mg) after inhalation of a bronchodilator. Reversibility 
may not be seen in RADS. In some patients, comparison of spirometry should be performed 
between exposure and non‐exposure days (particularly true for immunologically mediated OA).
• Methacholine challenge (non‐specific bronchoprovocation): performed if spirometry does not 
demonstrate AHR or obstruction and there is a strong clinical suspicion for OA. It is best to 
perform methacholine challenges within 24 hours of exposure to the workplace and again 
when the patient has been away from the workplace for at least 1 week. A decrease of two 
doublings in the concentration of methacholine that causes a 20% decrease in FEV1 is consid-
ered clinically significant (see Chapter 8).
• Bronchoprovocation challenge with specific occupational agents: if spirometry and non‐specific 
bronchoprovocation are normal and there is a high clinical suspension, a specific challenge to the 
occupational agent may be indicated. This test is performed by exposing the patient to the agent 
with increasing doses and measuring if lung function changes (e.g. decrease in FEV1). This is only 
carried out in specialized centers and for patients with suspected immunologically mediated OA.
• Sputum cell counts: the presence of elevated eosinophils or neutrophils suggests asthma, but 
is not routinely carried out as part of the evaluation of OA.
• Pulse oximetry: for patients with RADS.
Lists of imaging techniques
• Chest X‐ray: typically normal or hyper‐inflated. Performed to exclude other etiologies of new‐
onset cough and shortness of breath.
• High‐resolution CT: performed only to exclude other etiologies of symptoms.
• Environmental assessment: air sampling is not routinely performed as detection of particles 
may not provide an accurate reflection to what the workers are exposed to. The employer 
should supply data about possible agents (Box 13.1).
Box 13.1  Diagnostic criteria for RADS
1.  Absence of preexisting respiratory disorder, asthma symptoms, or a history of asthma in 
remission; and exclusion of conditions that can simulate asthma
2.  Onset of asthma after a single exposure or accident
3.  Exposure is to irritant vapor, gas, fumes, or smoke in very high concentrations
4.  Onset of asthma occurs within minutes to hours and always less than 24 hours after the exposure
5.  Finding of a positive methacholine challenge test (<8 mg/ml) following the exposure
6.  Possible airflow obstruction on pulmonary function testing
7.  Another pulmonary disorder to explain the symptoms and findings is excluded.
Source: Brooks SM, Bernstein IL. Irritant‐induced airway disorders. Immunol Allergy Clin North Am 2011;31: 
747–68. Reproduced with permission of Elsevier.
120  Part 1: Allergy
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis of disease
• Compliance obtaining a 2‐week record of PEFR often low.
• Methacholine challenge may need to be performed serially – at the end of a work day and 
>10 days after being away from work.
• Specific inhalation challenge (“gold standard” for diagnosis) is performed only at a few centers.
Section 4: Treatment
Treatment rationale
• A critical step in the treatment of OA is to make the diagnosis and remove the patient from the 
exposure at the workplace inciting asthma onset.
• The next step is to determine the severity of asthma, following the same guidelines as for 
non‐occupational asthma. This will suggest the appropriate pharmacologic therapy and its 
dosage (see Chapter  10). Acute presentation of RADS and treatment of exacerbations of 
other forms of OA is as for the treatment of an acute asthma exacerbation (see Chapter 10).
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comment
Conservative
Prompt removal of worker from exposure to agent. Low levels 
of exposure, in particular for immunologically mediated OA 
associated with lower likelihood of improvement and resolution
Respiratory protection devices require proper fitting. Not 
established that use will prevent or attenuate OA
Medical
Same as non‐occupational asthma
Allergen immunotherapy
See Chapter 10
Limited data on effect on the course of OA
Section 5: Special populations
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 6: Prognosis
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• OA is not always reversible after removal from agent exposure.
• Asthma symptoms may persist in approximately 70% of patients several years after removal 
from environment.
• Better outcome for asthma the shorter the exposure time and sooner the removal of agent.
Clinical pearls
• Complete avoidance of the offending agent in OA is the optimal treatment.
• If patients are not able to completely avoid the agent causing OA, the next option (although 
not ideal) is to reduce the exposure as much as possible and patients should undergo careful 
medical monitoring to identify worsening of asthma.
• Besides removal from agent exposure, the treatment of asthma should follow standard 
guidelines of asthma therapy.
Occupational Asthma  121
Natural history of untreated disease
• Most patients with OA due to immunologic mechanisms will have progressive deterioration of 
lung function with continued exposure to agent.
Prognosis for treated patients
• For patients with immunologically induced OA, a shorter duration of exposure after develop-
ment of symptoms means they are more likely to undergo remission. Patients with irritant‐
induced OA, after resolution, should be removed from exposure to the agent, but subsequent 
exposure at low levels is less likely to induce relapse than immunologically induced OA.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
• For those patients who have milder symptoms and continue at the same workplace, ongoing 
follow‐up (e.g. routine spirometry) is important.
Section 7: Reading list
Brooks SM, Bernstein IL. Irritant‐induced airway disorders. Immunol Allergy Clin North Am 2011;31:747–68, vi
Dykewicz MS. Occupational asthma: current concepts in pathogenesis, diagnosis, and management. J Allergy 
Clin Immunol 2009;123:519–28; quiz 29–30
Fishwick D, Barber CM, Bradshaw LM, Ayres JG, Barraclough R, Burge S, et al. Standards of care for occupa-
tional asthma: an update. Thorax 2012;67:278–80
Leigh JP, Romano PS, Schenker MB, Kreiss K. Costs of occupational COPD and asthma. Chest 
2002;121:264–72
Maestrelli P, Boschetto P, Fabbri LM, Mapp CE. Mechanisms of occupational asthma. Allergy Clin Immunol 
2009;123:531–42; quiz 43–4
Malo JL, Vandenplas O. Definitions and classification of work‐related asthma. Immunol Allergy Clin North Am 
2011;31:645–62, v
Mapp CE, Boschetto P, Maestrelli P, Fabbri LM. Occupational asthma. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 
2005;172:280–305
Tarlo SM, Balmes J, Balkissoon R, Beach J, Beckett W, Bernstein D, et al. Diagnosis and management 
of work‐related asthma: American College of Chest Physicians Consensus Statement. Chest 2008; 
134:1S–41S
Venables KM, Dally MB, Nunn AJ, Stevens JF, Stephens R, Farrer N, et al. Smoking and occupational allergy in 
workers in a platinum refinery. BMJ 1989;299:939–42
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
An official American 
Thoracic Society statement: 
work‐exacerbated asthma
American Thoracic 
Society
2011
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21804122)
Diagnosis and management 
of work‐related asthma
American College 
of Chest Physicians
2008
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18779187)
Section 9: Evidence
See guidelines listed in Section 8.
122  Part 1: Allergy
Section 10: Images
Not applicable for this topic.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at:  
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for  
patients, and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
  123
Status Asthmaticus and Pending 
Pulmonary Failure
Jacob D. Kattan
Division of Allergy/Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 14
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• Status asthmaticus, or acute severe asthma, is an acute exacerbation of asthma that is unresponsive 
to repeated treatment with beta‐agonists.
Disease classification
• The severity of patients with status asthmaticus may be classified based on the findings of an ABG. 
ABG in a patient with a less severe exacerbation may demonstrate respiratory alkalosis, a decreased 
pCO2, and a normal or slightly decreased pO2, while a patient with impending respiratory failure 
or arrest is likely to demonstrate a normal pH or respiratory acidosis, a normal or increased pCO2, 
and a decreased pO2.
Incidence/prevalence
• While the Centers for Disease Control have reported that asthma prevalence in the United 
States has increased in recent years, the annual death rate from asthma in the United States 
has declined since 1995.
• In the United States, fatalities from asthma occur more frequently in lower income, non‐white, 
urban populations.
• It is estimated that asthma accounts for about 1 in every 250 deaths worldwide.
Overall Bottom Line
• Status asthmaticus is defined as severe asthma unresponsive to repeated courses of beta‐
agonist therapy.
• Risk factors for a fatal asthma attack include a recent history of poorly controlled asthma or 
any history of near‐fatal asthma (intubation or ICU admission).
• About half of patients with acute severe asthma will have a concomitant respiratory tract infection.
• The goal of therapy is not to restore patients to baseline pulmonary function, but to stabilize 
them quickly, correct hypoxemia, and improve bronchial obstruction while minimizing and 
preventing complications such as pneumothorax and respiratory arrest.
• In a patient with status asthmaticus, an arterial blood gas (ABG) demonstrating a normal 
pH and CO2 indicates impending respiratory failure.
124  Part 1: Allergy
Economic impact
• There is a considerable cost due to asthma, both from direct costs such as hospital admissions 
and drug costs as well as indirect costs such as time lost from work or school.
Etiology
• In a patient with asthma, triggers for status asthmaticus include:
• Respiratory tract infections;
• Medicinal non‐compliance;
• Lack of inhaled or oral corticosteroid use;
• Allergen exposure (especially pets);
• Exercise;
• Cold temperature;
• Medications such as beta‐blockers or non‐steroidal anti‐inflammatory drugs; and
• Irritant inhalation.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• The airway hyper‐reactivity and airflow limitation seen in asthma is due to a variety of factors, 
including airway narrowing, hyperinflation, and plugging of the airways with mucus and 
inflammatory infiltrates. These infiltrates can vary widely in patients with asthma, but are 
­typically made up of eosinophils, neutrophils, lymphocytes, and plasma cells.
Predictive/risk factors
• A history of near‐fatal asthma (intubation or ICU admission).
• Three or more emergency department visits for asthma in the past year.
• Hospitalization for asthma in the past year.
• Recent or current use of oral glucocorticoids.
• Comorbidities such as chronic lung disease.
• A history of poor adherence with asthma medications.
• Use of more than one canister of short‐acting beta‐agonist per month.
Section 2: Prevention
Screening
• While there is no routine screening for status asthmaticus, asthma control may be assessed by 
clinicians using objective measures such as peak expiratory flow rate, forced expiratory volume 
in 1 second (FEV1), and forced vital capacity.
Primary prevention
• Adherence of preventative medications such as inhaled glucocorticoids.
• Smoking cessation.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• The prevention of status asthmaticus involves adherence of preventative medications such as 
inhaled glucocorticoids, smoking cessation, avoidance of known triggers such as aeroallergens 
or aspirin, and teaching patients to recognize the symptoms of an asthma exacerbation early 
and to implement an appropriate asthma action plan.
Status Asthmaticus and Pending Pulmonary Failure  125
• Avoidance of known triggers such as aeroallergens or aspirin.
• Teaching patients to recognize the symptoms of an asthma exacerbation early and to implement 
an appropriate asthma action plan.
Secondary prevention
• Reoccurrence of status asthmaticus or pending pulmonary failure due to asthma may be prevented 
by the methods discussed in the Primary prevention section.
Section 3: Diagnosis
Differential diagnosis
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Patients may report breathlessness, cough, wheezing, or chest tightness.
• On examination, a patient with a severe asthma exacerbation may have tachypnea, use 
of accessory muscles of inspiration, inability to speak in full sentences, pulsus paradoxus, 
diaphoresis, or an inability to lie flat due to breathlessness. Oxygen saturation <90% indicates 
life‐threatening asthma (pending respiratory failure).
• Decreased expiratory airflow detectable with a peak expiratory flow meter or spirometer may 
help assess a severe asthma attack. This measurement varies based on patient height, gender, 
and age, but in general a peak flow rate below 200 L/min indicates severe obstruction in most 
adults. If the baseline peak flow is known for a patient, a decrease of more than 50% signifies 
a serious exacerbation.
• In a patient with status asthmaticus, an ABG demonstrating a normal pH and normal or 
elevated CO2 indicates impending respiratory failure.
(Continued)
Differential diagnosis
Features
Anaphylaxis
Frequently associated with cutaneous symptoms including urticaria and 
angioedema
Typical presentation of symptoms is within minutes to 4–6 hours after 
exposure to a food, drug, insect bite or sting, or other allergen, though 
signs and symptoms often develop within minutes of exposure
May be confirmed by measurement of elevated concentrations of plasma 
and urinary histamine or serum tryptase levels
Bronchiolitis
Viral upper respiratory prodrome followed by increased respiratory effort 
and wheezing
Difficult to distinguish from asthma during the first episode of wheezing
More likely to be asthma with a history of recurrent wheezing episodes or 
a personal or family history of asthma, eczema, or atopy
Foreign body aspiration
History of choking
Radiography may demonstrate a radiopaque object, though most aspirated 
objects (foods) are radiolucent
Bronchoscopy may be necessary for diagnosis and removal of the foreign 
body
Mediastinal mass
Fever, night sweats, and weight loss can be present in the case of 
lymphoma
Mass is typically diagnosed or suspected based on abnormalities on  
chest X‐ray; a chest CT can confirm the presence of a mediastinal mass
126  Part 1: Allergy
Typical presentation
• Patients with status asthmaticus will typically present with cough, breathlessness, chest tightness, 
and wheezing. They may report brief or no response to the use of inhaled beta‐agonists. There is 
often an identifiable trigger such as a respiratory tract infection, allergen exposure, exercise, cold 
temperature, or inhalation of an irritant.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• Key aspects of the history include a history of asthma, past hospitalizations or emergency depart-
ment visits, use of inhaled or oral corticosteroids, frequency of inhaled beta‐agonist use, current 
medications, exposure to allergens, and any past admissions to the ICU or intubations for asthma.
Physical examination
• Examination findings with status asthmaticus include tachypnea, use of accessory muscles of 
inspiration, inability to speak in full sentences, pulsus paradoxus, diaphoresis, or an inability to 
lie flat due to breathlessness. Oxygen saturation <90% indicates life‐threatening asthma 
(pending respiratory failure).
Disease severity classification
• An asthma exacerbation is moderate when dyspnea interferes with or limits usual activity and the 
peak expiratory flow is 40–69% of predicted or the patient’s personal best. An exacerbation is 
severe when there is dyspnea at rest or the respiratory status interferes with conversation, with a 
peak expiratory flow of <40% of predicted or the patient’s personal best. Asthma is classified as 
life‐threatening when the patient is too dyspneic to speak or the peak expiratory flow is <25% 
of predicted or the patient’s personal best. When an ABG is obtained, a patient with a less severe 
exacerbation may demonstrate respiratory alkalosis, a decreased pCO2, and a normal or slightly 
decreased pO2, while a patient with impending respiratory failure or arrest is likely to demonstrate 
a normal pH or respiratory acidosis, a normal or increased pCO2, and a decreased pO2.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• The arterial blood gas is key in the assessment of status asthmaticus and pending respiratory 
failure.
Differential diagnosis
Features
Pneumothorax
Sudden onset dyspnea and pleuritic chest pain
Diminished breath sounds, hyper‐resonant percussion, decreased chest 
excursion on the affected side
Chest X‐ray demonstrates a white visceral pleural line
Vocal cord dysfunction
Stridor that may be inspiratory, expiratory, or both, accompanied by 
respiratory distress
Albuterol typically has little or no beneficial effect
In a symptomatic patient, direct observation of the adducted vocal cords 
by laryngoscopy is diagnostic
Panic disorder
Episodes of intense fear that begin suddenly and last several minutes 
to an hour
Symptoms may include chest pain or shortness of breath
Can occur in other anxiety disorders
Status Asthmaticus and Pending Pulmonary Failure  127
• A complete blood count may be necessary in patients with fever and a productive cough.
• Electrolytes may be obtained, with a focus on the potassium level, as beta‐agonists and steroids 
may lower serum potassium levels.
Lists of imaging techniques
• Chest X‐ray is not required and may be unrevealing in acute asthma exacerbations, although it 
may help when the diagnosis is uncertain, helping to rule out abnormalities such as a pneumo-
thorax or pneumonia.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis of disease
• In a patient presenting with status asthmaticus, a normal pH and CO2 on an ABG is not a 
reassuring sign, instead indicating impending respiratory failure.
• Efforts to decrease mortality from asthma focus on educating patients to recognize the symptoms 
of asthma exacerbations early so that they institute an appropriate action plan and seek prompt 
medical attention.
Section 4: Treatment (Algorithm 14.1)
Treatment rationale
• Upon first presentation, supplemental oxygen should be administered to relieve hypoxemia 
with an asthma exacerbation.
• Patients should first be given a short‐acting beta‐agonist along with inhaled ipratropium 
bromide to relieve airflow obstruction.
• Systemic corticosteroids should also be administered to decrease airway inflammation in 
patients who do not respond promptly and completely to a short‐acting beta‐agonist, although 
clinical benefits are likely to be delayed.
• Intramuscular epinephrine should be administered if the asthma exacerbation is part of an 
­anaphylactic reaction or if administration of aerosolized albuterol is ineffective or not possible.
• If not responsive to these therapies, other therapies to consider include heliox, as well as intravenous 
magnesium sulfate.
When to hospitalize
• Admit when a patient has not experienced substantial improvement after 4–6 hours of urgent 
care management.
• Consider hospital admission when a moderate or severe asthma exacerbation has an incomplete 
response to therapy, demonstrated by an FEV1 or peak expiratory flow of 40–69% and mild to 
moderate symptoms.
• Admit to the hospital if there is a poor response to therapy, including an FEV1 or peak expiratory 
flow <40%, a PCO2 ≥ 42 mmHg, or severe symptoms.
• When there is impending or actual respiratory arrest the patient should be admitted to the 
hospital ICU.
Managing the hospitalized patient
• Patients should receive supplemental oxygen as necessary to maintain oxygen saturation ≥92%.
• Inhaled short‐acting beta‐agonists should be administered from continuously to every 4 hours, 
depending on the severity of illness.
• Patients should receive systemic glucocorticoids.
• Controller medications should be initiated or adjusted, and asthma education should begin 
once the patient is admitted and stabilized.
FEV1or PEF ≥40% (Mild-to-moderate)
Oxygen to achieve SaO2 ≥90%
Inhaled SABA by nebulizer or MDI with 
valved holding chamber, up to 3 doses 
in ﬁrst hour
Oral systemic corticosteroids if no 
immediate response or if patient 
recently took oral systemic 
corticosteroids
FEV1or PEF <40% (Severe)
Oxygen to achieve SaO2 ≥90%
High-dose inhaled SABA plus 
ipratropium by nebulizer or MDI
plus valved holding chamber,
every 20 minutes or continuously
for 1 hour
Oral systemic corticosteroids
Impending or actual 
respiratory arrest
Intubation and mechanical 
ventilation with 100% oxygen
Nebulized SABA and 
ipratropium
Intravenous corticosteroids
Consider adjunct therapies
Repeat assessment 
Symptoms, physical examination, PEF, O2 saturation, other tests as needed
Admit to hospital intensive
care (see box below)
Severe exacerbation
FEV1 or PEF <40% predicted/personal best
Physical exam:  severe symptoms at rest, accessory muscle use,
chest retraction
History:  high-risk patient
No improvement after initial treatment
   Oxygen
   Nebulized SABA + ipratropium, hourly or continuous
   Oral systemic corticosteroids
   Consider adjunct therapies
Moderate exacerbation
FEV1 or PEF 40–69% predicted/personal best
Physical exam:  moderate symptoms
Inhaled SABA every 60 minutes
Oral systemic corticosteroid
Continue treatment 1–3 hours, 
provided there is improvement; 
make admit decision in <4 hours
Incomplete response 
FEV1 or PEF 40–69%
Mild-to-moderate symptoms
Poor response 
FEV1or PEF <40%
PCO2 ≥ 42 mm Hg
Physical exam: symptoms severe, 
drowsiness, confusion
Individualized decision re:
hospitalization (see text)
Discharge home
Continue treatment with inhaled SABA.
Continue course of oral systemic corticosteroid
Consider initiation of an ICS.
Patient education
–  Review medications, including inhaler 
    technique.
–  Review/initiate action plan.
–  Recommend close medical followup.
Admit to hospital ward
Oxygen
Inhaled SABA
Systemic (oral or intravenous)
corticosteroid
Consider adjunct therapies
Monitor vital signs, FEV1
or PEF, SaO2
Admit to hospital intensive
care
Oxygen
Inhaled SABA hourly or 
continuously
Intravenous corticosteroid
Consider adjunct therapies
Possible intubation and 
mechanical ventilation
Improve
Discharge home
Continue treatment with inhaled SABAs.
Continue course of oral systemic corticosteroid.
Continue on ICS. For those not on long-term control therapy, consider initiation of an ICS.
Patient education (e.g., review medications, including inhaler technique and, whenever possible, environmental
control measures; review/initiate action plan; recommend close medical followup).
Before discharge, schedule followup appointment with primary care provider  and/or asthma specialist in 1–4 weeks.
Good response
FEV1 or PEF ≥70%
Response sustained 60 minutes after
last treatment
No distress
Physical exam:  normal
Key:  FEV1, forced expiratory volume in 1 second; ICS, inhaled corticosteroid; MDI, metered dose inhaler; PCO2, partial
pressure carbon dioxide; PEF, peak expiratory ﬂow; SABA, short-acting beta2-agonist; SaO2, oxygen saturation 
Improve
Initial assessment
Brief history, physical examination (auscultation, use of accessory muscles, heart rate, respiratory rate), 
PEF or FEV1, oxygen saturation, and other tests as indicated.
Algorithm 14.1  Management of asthma exacerbations: emergency department  
and hospital‐based care
Source: Management of Asthma Exacerbations: Emergency Department and Hospital‐Based Care, p. 388, from: 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Asthma Education and Prevention Program. Expert panel report 
3: guidelines for the diagnosis and management of asthma. NIH publication no. 07‐4051. Bethesda, MD: National 
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; 2007. Available here: http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/asthma/asthgdln.pdf. 
Last accessed November 2014.
Status Asthmaticus and Pending Pulmonary Failure  129
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comment
Medical
• Oxygen (2–4 L/min)
• Short acting beta‐2‐agonist
• Albuterol 0.15 mg/kg (minimum dose  
2.5 mg) every 20 minutes for 3 doses then 
0.15–0.3 mg/kg up to 10 mg every 1–4  
hours as needed, or 0.5 mg/kg/hour by 
continuous nebulization in children, 
2.5–5 mg every 20 minutes for 3 doses, then 
2.5–10 mg every 1–4 hours as needed, or 
10–15 mg/hour c­ontinuously in adults
• Systemic (injected) beta‐2‐agonist
• Epinephrine 0.01 mg/kg up to 0.3 mg IM every 
20 minutes for 3 doses in children, 0.3–0.5 mg 
IM every 20 minutes for 3 doses in adults
• Terbutaline 0.01 mg/kg subq every 20 
minutes for 3 doses then every 2–6 hours as 
needed in children, 0.25 mg subq every 20 
minutes for 3 doses in adults
• Ipratropium bromide 0.25–0.5 mg nebulized 
solution every 20 minutes for 3 doses, then 
as needed in children, 0.5 mg nebulized 
solution every 20 minutes for 3 doses then as 
needed in adults
• Systemic glucocorticoids
• Prednisone 1–2 mg/kg/day PO in divided doses 
(maximum 60 mg/day) in children, 40–80 mg/
day PO in 1 or 2 divided doses in adults
• Methylprednisolone 1–2 mg/kg/day IV in 2 
divided doses up to 60 mg/day in children, 
80 mg IV in 1 or 2 divided doses per day in 
adults
• Magnesium sulfate 25–75 mg/kg IV up to 2 g in 
children, 3 g IV in adults
• Heliox (mixture of helium and oxygen)
Only selective beta‐2‐agonists are recommended 
in patients with acute severe asthma
Should be administered if the exacerbation is part 
of an anaphylactic reaction or if administration of 
aerosolized albuterol is ineffective or not possible
The systemic therapies have no proven advantage 
over aerosol
May be mixed in same nebulizer with albuterol
Not recommended for use once patient is 
admitted
Glucocorticoid dose should be tailored to patient 
requirements and can be tapered as patient 
improves
Magnesium sulfate and heliox are for use in life‐
threatening exacerbations and those unresponsive 
to 1 hour of intensive conventional therapy
Prevention/management of complications
• Use of continuous nebulized beta‐agonist therapy and corticosteroids can lead to decreases in 
serum potassium, magnesium, and phosphate, and it may be helpful to obtain daily electrolyte 
levels in these patients.
• Patients should review their asthma action plans with their providers on a regular basis, as 
adherence to maintenance therapy and appropriate response to exacerbations is vital in the 
prevention of exacerbations.
Clinical pearl
• Use of continuous nebulized beta‐agonist therapy can lead to transient decreases in serum 
potassium, magnesium, and phosphate, and it may be helpful to obtain daily electrolyte levels 
in these patients.
130  Part 1: Allergy
Section 5: Special populations
Pregnancy
• Management of acute asthma exacerbations during pregnancy does not differ greatly from 
that of non‐pregnant patients and includes albuterol, inhaled anticholinergic agents, oral or 
intravenous glucocorticoids, and, if appropriate, intravenous magnesium sulfate.
• While concerns have been raised that the use of systemic glucocorticoids may lead to a slightly 
increased risk of congenital malformations, this potential risk is considered small compared to 
the substantial risk to the mother and fetus resulting from severe, uncontrolled asthma.
Children
• Infants require special attention, as they are at greater risk for respiratory failure than other 
populations. Assessment depends on the physical examination rather than objective measure-
ments. Signs of serious distress include inspiratory and expiratory wheezing, use of accessory 
muscles, cyanosis, paradoxical breathing, and a respiratory rate >60 breaths per minute.
Elderly
Not applicable for this topic.
Others
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 6: Prognosis
Natural history of untreated disease
• When left untreated, status asthmaticus can be fatal.
Prognosis for treated patients
• Good in the vast majority of cases.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
• Patients should follow‐ up with their primary care provider or an asthma specialist 3–5 days 
­following hospital discharge.
Section 7: Reading list
Akinbami L. Asthma prevalence, health care use and mortality: United States, 2003–2005. National Center for 
Health Statistics, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hestat/
asthma03‐05/asthma03‐05.htm (accessed October 10, 2014)
British Guideline on the Management of Asthma. British Thoracic Society and Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines 
Network. 2012. Available from: https://www.brit‐thoracic.org.uk/document‐library/clinical‐information/
asthma/btssign‐guideline‐on‐the‐management‐of‐asthma/ (accessed October 30, 2014)
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• In general, status asthmaticus has a good prognosis when appropriate therapy is 
administered.
• While the mortality rate from asthma had been increasing in the 1990s, it has decreased in 
recent years. In 2008 and 2009, there were about 11 deaths from asthma per million people 
in the United States population.
Status Asthmaticus and Pending Pulmonary Failure  131
Camargo CA Jr, Spooner CH, Rowe BH. Continuous versus intermittent beta‐agonists in the treatment of 
acute asthma. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2003;4:CD0011115
Griffiths B, Ducharme FM. Combined inhaled anticholinergics and short‐acting beta2‐agonists for initial treat-
ment of acute asthma in children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013;8:CD000060
Kim IK, Phrampus E, Venkataraman S, Pitetti R, Saville A, Corcoran T, et al. Helium/oxygen‐driven albuterol 
nebulization in the treatment of children with moderate to severe asthma exacerbations: a randomized, 
controlled trial. Pediatrics 2005;116:1127–33
Krishnan V, Diette GB, Rand CS, Bilderback AL, Merriman B, Hansel NN, et al. Mortality in patients hospitalized 
for asthma exacerbations in the United States. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2006;174:633–8
Manser R, Reid D, Abramson M. Corticosteroids for acute severe asthma in hospitalised patients. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 2001;1:CD001740
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Asthma Education and Prevention Program. Expert panel 
report 3: Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of asthma. NIH publication no. 07‐4051. Bethesda, 
MD: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; 2007. Available from: http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/
asthma/asthgdln.pdf (accessed October 10, 2014)
Paasche‐Orlow MK, Riekert KA, Bilderback A, Chanmugam A, Hill P, Rand CS, et al. Tailored education may 
reduce health literacy disparities in asthma self‐management. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2005;172:980–6
Suggested websites
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention FastStats. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/asthma.htm
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute. http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/prof/lung/asthma/naci/
asthma‐info/asthma‐guidelines.htm
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Expert Panel Report 3: 
Guidelines for the Diagnosis and 
Management of Asthma
National Heart, Lung, and 
Blood Institute (NHLBI), 
National Asthma Education and 
Prevention Program (NAEPP)
2007
(http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/files/
docs/guidelines/asthgdln.pdf)
British Guideline on the 
Management of Asthma
British Thoracic Society 
and Scottish Intercollegiate 
Guidelines
2012
(http://www.sign.ac.uk/pdf/
SIGN141.pdf)
Section 9: Evidence
See Guidelines listed in Section 8.
Section 10: Images
Not applicable for this topic.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at:  
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for  
patients, and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
132 
Evaluation of Food Allergy
Scott H. Sicherer
Department of Pediatrics, Division of Allergy/Immunology, Mount Sinai Hospital, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 15
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• A food allergy is an adverse health effect arising from a specific immune response that occurs 
reproducibly on exposure to a given food. A food allergy is distinct from other adverse health 
consequences from food such as intolerance (non‐immunologic, e.g. lactose intolerance) or 
other non‐immune‐mediated reactions (e.g. toxic, pharmacologic).
Disease classification
• Immune responses may primarily be IgE antibody mediated, typically with acute onset of symp-
toms, or cell‐mediated (non‐IgE) in which symptoms may be subacute or chronic. Disease clas-
sification is also related to the organ systems affected, such as the skin, gastrointestinal or 
respiratory tract, cardiovascular system, or combinations of these (see chapters on individual 
diseases).
Incidence/prevalence
• Food allergy is estimated to affect more than 1–2% and less than 10% of the population.
• Significant food allergies appear to be more common in children than adults.
• Although over 170 foods have been noted to cause allergic reactions, peanut, tree nuts, milk, 
egg, fish, shellfish, soy, and wheat account for the majority of significant allergies.
• Immune responses to chemical, in contrast to protein, food additives/preservatives appears 
uncommon.
Overall Bottom Line
• Food allergy is distinct from other adverse food reactions to foods because it is caused by 
an adverse immune response.
• Diagnosis relies upon a careful history and is confirmed by tests including skin prick tests, 
serum tests for food‐specific IgE, elimination diets, and oral food challenges.
• Treatment relies upon allergen avoidance and preparation to treat severe reactions promptly 
with epinephrine.
• Prognosis is excellent for resolution of many childhood food allergies, although allergies to 
peanut, tree nuts, fish, and shellfish are likely to persist.
Evaluation of Food Allergy  133
Economic impact
• Treatment of allergic reactions to foods is estimated to cost $25 billion annually in the United 
States.
Etiology
• Food allergy is a failure of normal oral tolerance induction.
• The etiology is not completely understood, but appears to be related to a Th2 immune bias.
• IgE‐mediated allergy requires sensitization (perhaps oral, cutaneous, or respiratory exposure) where 
antigen‐presenting cells and T cells orchestrate production of allergen‐specific IgE antibodies by 
plasma cells.
• Cell‐mediated allergy is not completely understood but may involve homing of effector cells, 
such as eosinophils, to affected organs.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• Food protein‐specific IgE antibodies populate the high affinity IgE receptors on mast cells and 
basophils where, upon re‐exposure, protein binding to IgE and cross‐linking of antibodies 
results in mediator release (e.g. histamine) thereby inducing symptoms.
• Disorders with chronic symptoms may involve homing of effector cells to sites of inflammation 
(e.g. eosinophilic esophagitis and atopic dermatitis).
Predictive/risk factors
• Children with moderate to severe atopic dermatitis appear to be at increased risk of having 
food allergies (e.g. 35% risk versus 8% population risk).
• The risk of peanut allergy for a sibling of a child with peanut allergy is approximately 7% 
(compared with a population risk of approximately 1.4%).
• Having a pollen allergy increases the risk of having mild allergic responses to raw fruits and 
vegetables (pollen‐related food allergy).
• Based on case series, those at highest risk of fatal, food‐induced anaphylaxis are teenagers/young 
adults, those with asthma, a known food allergy, and, most importantly, a delay in treatment with 
epinephrine.
Section 2: Prevention
Screening
• General screening tests in healthy individuals are not recommended.
• Screening for peanut allergy in a younger sibling of a child with peanut allergy might be 
considered.
• For patients with food allergies who have not already tolerated potential allergens (based on 
individual circumstances), screening may be considered (i.e. testing for cashew allergy in a person 
with walnut, pecan, and macadamia allergies who has not yet ingested cashew).
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• There are limited data supporting any intervention to prevent food allergy, although 
breastfeeding is encouraged and, if not possible, the use of a protein hydrolysate formula 
may reduce the risk of atopic dermatitis and perhaps milk allergy compared to using a 
cow’s milk or soy infant formula. Secondary prevention (treatment) is based on allergen 
avoidance.
134  Part 1: Allergy
Primary prevention
• Exclusive breastfeeding is recommended for the first 4–6 months but evidence for the prevention 
of food allergy is uncertain.
• For at‐risk infants (parent or sibling with an allergic disorder) who are not breast fed, a hydrolyzed 
infant formula, as opposed to cow’s milk or soy formula, may be considered to prevent cow’s milk 
allergy or atopic dermatitis.
• The introduction of solid foods should not be delayed beyond 4–6 months, including potentially 
allergenic foods.
• Maternal avoidance diets during pregnancy or lactation are not proven to prevent food allergy.
• Studies of probiotics, prebiotics, and synbiotics suggest a potential to reduce atopic disease, 
but studies remain inconclusive.
Secondary prevention
• Avoidance of foods proven to be allergens for the individual is the primary means of prevention 
of food‐allergic reactions.
Section 3: Diagnosis (Algorithm 15.1)
Differential diagnosis
Typical presentation
• The most common presentation is an acute reaction in childhood. For example, an 18‐month‐
old child who has had moderate atopic dermatitis ingests peanut butter for the first time and 
Differential diagnosis
Features or examples
Anaphylaxis or allergic reactions from 
another cause
History of another exposure (e.g. insect sting, drug) or 
lack of food ingestion or lack of consistent responses
Food intolerance
Symptoms typically affect the gut without signs or 
symptoms of typical allergic responses
Toxic reactions to spoiled food
Bacterial food poisoning. Scombroid fish poisoning may 
mimic anaphylaxis
Pharmacologic reactions to foods
Caffeine may induce tachycardia, sweating
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• The history is necessary to determine if symptoms are likely caused by food allergy, and, 
if so, what the underlying pathophysiology may be (IgE‐mediated or not) and which foods 
are triggers.
• Skin and serum tests to determine food‐specific IgE antibodies are recommended to diagnose 
IgE‐mediated food allergy but are not in and of themselves diagnostic.
• Elimination diets and other modalities may be needed to diagnose non‐IgE‐mediated food 
allergies.
• The oral food challenge is recommended to diagnose food allergies, and the double‐blind, 
placebo‐controlled oral food challenge is considered the “gold standard.”
• Pitfalls in diagnosis include clinically irrelevant cross‐reactivity, sensitization without 
clinical reactivity, tests that are positive because of binding to proteins that are unlikely 
to trigger allergic reactions, misidentification of triggers, having negative tests despite 
clinical reactions due to cell‐mediated allergy, or IgE‐mediated reactions to proteins not 
represented on the test.
Evaluation of Food Allergy  135
within minutes his lips swell, urticaria develops on the face and becomes generalized, and he 
coughs repetitively and vomits.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• A detailed history should focus upon the symptoms, timing in relation to ingestion, the possible 
causal food(s), consistency of reactions upon exposure, how the food was prepared, whether 
additional factors were occurring at the time (exercise, illness, use of aspirin), whether symp-
toms also occur without a relationship to ingestion, what treatments were given, and the time 
course of symptoms.
• A diet diary may be helpful.
• The nature of the reaction is important in determining if food allergy is a likely cause, what food 
may be a trigger, and whether the pathophysiology may be IgE‐mediated or cell‐mediated.
Periodic re-evaluation to assess disease course
and/or resolution of speciﬁc allergies
No
No
No
Discuss management and 
any additional tests for 
adverse reaction caused by 
toxins, intolerance, or 
pharmacologic components 
of foods
Yes
Yes
Yes
Is the primary reaction atopic
dermatitis or eosinophilic 
esophagitis?
Perform serum and/or skin 
tests to incriminated foods. 
Positive tests may be 
conﬁrmatory of an allergy. 
Negative tests with a 
compelling history or 
positive tests with an 
ambiguous history or 
low/small results may 
warrant an oral food 
challenge (see text)
Evaluation may include tests
for IgE antibodies but relies
more on responses to
elimination diets and oral
food challenges
Evaluation of non-IgE-
mediated illness requires 
elimination diets and oral 
food challenges. However, 
history may be compelling to
make a presumptive 
diagnosis
History consistent with
allergy (see text)?
History consistent with 
immediate onset of reaction 
(IgE-mediated allergy)?
Algorithm 15.1  General approach to diagnosis of food allergy
136  Part 1: Allergy
Physical examination
• The physical examination alone cannot diagnose a food allergy but may reveal ongoing symptoms 
or signs of atopic disease.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• Skin prick tests are recommended to assist in identifying foods that may be provoking an IgE‐
mediated allergic reaction. The test cannot be used as the sole means to diagnose food allergy 
(see Potential pitfalls section). Some studies suggest that increasingly larger positive tests correlate 
with a higher chance of clinical allergy.
• Allergen‐specific serum IgE is recommended to assist in identifying foods that may be provoking 
an IgE‐mediated allergic reaction. The test cannot be used as the sole means to diagnose food 
allergy (see Potential pitfalls section). Some studies suggest that increasingly higher antibody 
concentrations correlate with a higher chance of clinical allergy. Particularly high “diagnostic 
points” may confirm an allergy. Testing to specific proteins within a food, component testing, is 
available for select foods and may assist in confirming an allergy when binding is observed to 
proteins that are stable to digestion and are associated with clinical reactions.
• Food elimination diets may be used to investigate if a select number of suspected allergens are 
triggering chronic symptoms, especially in non‐IgE‐mediated disorders or mixed IgE/non‐IgE‐
mediated disorders. However, confirmatory diagnostic studies should be considered.
• Oral food challenges (medically supervised) are recommended for diagnosing food allergy. They are 
typically performed when the medical history and ancillary tests do not confirm an allergy, or to test 
for resolution. The may be the only means to identify non‐IgE‐mediated allergic reactions. The double‐
blind, placebo‐controlled oral food challenge is a “gold standard” for diagnosis (see Chapter 25).
• A variety of tests are not routinely recommended (total serum IgE, the atopy patch test), not 
recommended (intradermal skin testing), or not recommended because they are non‐standard-
ized or unproven (provocation‐neutralization, basophil histamine activation, applied kinesiology, 
IgG/IgG4, cytotoxicity assays, electrodermal testing, hair analysis, facial thermography, gastric 
juice analysis, and mediator release assays, among others).
• Serum tryptase levels may not be elevated during food‐induced anaphylaxis, and are not a reliable 
means of diagnosis.
Lists of imaging techniques
Not applicable for this topic.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis 
of disease
• A positive prick skin test or food‐specific IgE antibody test indicates “sensitization” but does not 
indicate clinical allergy. For example, approximately 8% of the US population is sensitized to 
peanut but only about 1% are clinically allergic. Also, about 50% of those with peanut allergy 
test positive to other legumes, but 95% tolerate ingestion of these related foods. Persons with 
pollen allergy may test positive to many foods with homologous proteins but may tolerate the 
food or have only mild reactions to raw forms. The history is essential in interpretation of the test 
results. Screening a battery of foods without a specific suspicion can be misleading.
• Patients may be clinically allergic to a food despite negative tests either because the disorder is 
not IgE‐mediated, the test does not display a protein to which they react, or there is a labora-
tory error. If there is a high suspicion of an allergy, retesting, possibly with a different modality 
such as prick testing with a fresh food extract or using an alternative test whether serum or skin 
test. If these are negative, an oral food challenge should be considered.
Evaluation of Food Allergy  137
Section 4: Treatment
Treatment rationale
• There are no medications currently recommended to prevent food‐allergic reactions.
• Allergen avoidance is required to prevent allergic reactions. Disorder‐specific treatment advice is 
provided in separate chapters (see chapters on individual diseases). Physicians should instruct patients 
on allergen avoidance including careful reading of product ingredient labels, discussing the allergy 
when obtaining food at restaurants, and avoiding cross contact, whereby a safe food is tainted by an 
allergen during preparation (e.g. chopping nuts and lettuce on the same cutting board).
• Young children require close supervision to prevent unintended ingestion of avoided foods.
• Approximately 70% of persons allergic to egg or milk may tolerate these allergens in bakery 
goods (extensive heating), but caution is needed in identifying individuals who may tolerate 
such foods because anaphylaxis to these foods is possible.
• Treatment of food allergy using immunotherapy and other measures is under study.
• Patients with life‐threatening IgE‐mediated food allergies should carry epinephrine, wear medi-
cal identification jewelry, and have emergency plans in place to treat anaphylaxis promptly. 
They should be instructed on emergency management including recognizing and treating 
­anaphylaxis and seeking emergency care.
• The management of food‐induced anaphylaxis is similar to anaphylaxis from other causes.
When to hospitalize
• Hospitalization may be required for severe or prolonged anaphylaxis.
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comment
Allergen avoidance
Allergen avoidance is the basis of prevention of allergic reactions
Epinephrine autoinjector, 
0.15 or 0.3 mg
Patients with potentially life‐threatening food allergies should have 
immediate access to autoinjectors. Delay in treatment with epinephrine is 
associated with fatal outcomes
Antihistamines
Provides additional relief of minor symptoms
Prevention/management of complications
• Complications of allergen avoidance include nutritional deficiencies.
• Height and weight should be followed in children and nutritional counseling provided.
• Clinical evaluations should address whether the diet can be expanded.
• Food allergy can affect quality of life, induce anxiety, and affect social activities.
• Responsibilities of management should be age‐appropriate. Counseling about addressing 
these issues is warranted.
Clinical pearls
• Education about avoidance and emergency management is key to successful management.
• Exposure by ingestion, rather than skin contact or inhalation, is the main concern in 
preventing anaphylaxis.
• Patients should be reminded not to “test” their allergens by home trials.
• Anaphylaxis can occur without urticaria.
138  Part 1: Allergy
Section 5: Special populations
Pregnancy
Not applicable for this topic.
Children
Not applicable for this topic.
Elderly
Not applicable for this topic.
Others
• Teenagers and young adults are at highest risk of fatal anaphylaxis, presumably as a result of 
risk‐taking and delay in treatment. Additional focus on avoidance and emergency management, 
and possibly psychosocial issues that could affect treatment, should be considered.
Section 6: Prognosis
Natural history of untreated disease
• Peanut allergy diagnosed in young children remits for approximately 20% of patients.
• Milk, egg, wheat, and soy allergies typically remit by adulthood.
• Allergies to tree nuts, fish, and shellfish are persistent, with generally under 10% remitting.
• Non‐IgE‐mediated gastrointestinal food allergies (enterocolitis, proctocolitis) typically resolve in 
childhood, but food‐induced eosinophilic esophagitis appears to be more likely to persist.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
• Periodic retesting is recommended, but the timing depends upon the age of the patient and 
food involved. Annual testing for children with allergies to milk, egg, wheat, and soy is gener-
ally undertaken. Testing may be less frequent for other foods or in older individuals. However, 
there is no specified schedule of retesting. Physician re‐evaluations, for example annually, may 
be warranted to provide updates and education on management even if testing is not 
indicated.
Section 7: Reading list
Bernstein IL, Li JT, Bernstein DI, Hamilton R, Spector SL, Tan R, et al. Allergy diagnostic testing: an updated 
practice parameter. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2008;100(Suppl 3):S1–148
Boyce JA, Assa’ad A, Burks AW, Jones SM, Sampson HA, Wood RA, et al. Guidelines for the diagnosis and 
management of food allergy in the United States: report of the NIAID‐sponsored expert panel. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol 2010;126(Suppl):S1–58
Burks AW, Jones SM, Boyce JA, Sicherer SH, Wood RA, Assa’ad A, et al. NIAID‐sponsored 2010 guidelines for 
managing food allergy: applications in the pediatric population. Pediatrics 2011;128:955–65
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Allergies to milk, egg, wheat, and soy typically resolve in childhood.
• Allergies to peanuts, tree nuts, fish, and shellfish are likely to persist.
• Fatalities are rare, but vigilance is needed to prevent and treat severe reactions.
• Non‐IgE‐mediated gastrointestinal food allergies (enterocolitis, proctocolitis) typically resolve in 
childhood, but eosinophilic esophagitis is more likely to persist.
Evaluation of Food Allergy  139
Greer FR, Sicherer SH, Burks AW. Effects of early nutritional interventions on the development of atopic disease 
in infants and children: the role of maternal dietary restriction, breastfeeding, timing of introduction of 
complementary foods, and hydrolyzed formulas. Pediatrics 2008;121:183–91
Nowak‐Wegrzyn A, Assa’ad AH, Bahna SL, Bock SA, Sicherer SH, Teuber SS. Work Group report: oral food 
challenge testing. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2009;123(Suppl):S365–83
Sampson HA, Gerth vW, Bindslev‐Jensen C, Sicherer S, Teuber SS, Burks AW, et al. Standardizing double‐blind, 
placebo‐controlled oral food challenges: American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology‐European 
Academy of Allergy and Clinical Immunology PRACTALL consensus report. J Allergy Clin Immunol 
2012;130:1260–74
Sampson, HA, Aceves S, Bock SA, James J, Jones S, Lang D, et al. Food allergy: a practice parameter 
update–2014. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014; pii:S0091‐6749(14)00672‐1. Available from: http://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25174862 (accessed October 13, 2014)
Sicherer SH, Sampson HA. Food allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2010;125(Suppl 2):S116–25
Sicherer SH, Vargas PA, Groetch ME, Christie L, Carlisle SK, Noone S, et al. Development and validation of 
educational materials for food allergy. J Pediatr 2012;160:651–6
Sicherer SH, Wood RA. Allergy testing in childhood: using allergen‐specific IgE tests. Pediatrics 2012;129:193–7
Suggested websites
www.aaaai.org
www.acaai.org
www.cofargroup.org
www.foodallergy.org
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Food allergy: a practice 
parameter update
Joint Council of Allergy and 
Immunology
2014
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/25174862)
Guidelines for the diagnosis and 
management of food allergy in 
the United States: report of the 
NIAID‐sponsored expert panel
National Institutes of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases
2010
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/21134576)
Section 9: Evidence
See Guidelines listed in Section 8.
Section 10: Images
Not applicable for this topic.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at: 
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions  
(provided by Hugh Sampson), advice for patients,  
and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
140 
Oral Allergy Syndrome
Julie Wang
Department of Pediatrics, Division of Allergy/Immunology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 16
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• OAS describes localized symptoms with ingestion of fresh fruits and vegetables in patients with 
allergic rhinitis.
Disease classification
Not applicable for this topic.
Incidence/prevalence
• OAS is the most common food allergy in adults.
• The prevalence of OAS is variable by region and affects 30–70% of patients with allergic rhinitis.
• OAS is more common in women.
Economic impact
• While OAS can significantly impact quality of life, the economic burden of this disorder has not 
been investigated.
Etiology
• OAS is an IgE‐mediated allergy that is due to cross‐reacting homologous proteins between 
­pollens and food proteins.
• These proteins are sensitive to heat, acid, and digestion, thus symptoms are often limited to the 
oropharynx, and cooked forms of the foods are well tolerated.
• Birch pollen allergy is most commonly associated with symptoms with Rosacea fruits (i.e. apple, 
pear, cherry, peach), Apicaceae vegetables (i.e. carrot, celery), and some tree nuts (e.g. hazel-
nuts, and occasionally peanuts).
Overall Bottom Line
• Oral allergy syndrome (OAS) is a contact allergy that affects patients with allergic rhinitis 
and is a result of homologous proteins in pollens and fresh fruits and vegetables.
• Symptoms are primarily mild and limited to the oropharyngeal area.
• Anaphylaxis can occur in 2% of cases.
• Patients with OAS should avoid the fresh foods that trigger symptoms, but may continue to 
include heated forms of those foods in the diet as well as other related foods that do not 
trigger symptoms.
Oral Allergy Syndrome  141
• Lipid transfer proteins (LTPs), the major allergens involved in non‐pollen allergy plant food 
allergies, are primarily seen in the Mediterranean area and are associated with higher rates of 
systemic reactions, including anaphylaxis.
• Other associations have been described, including celery‐birch‐mugwort‐spice syndrome, 
­ragweed‐melon‐banana association, and latex‐fruit syndrome.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• The primary event is sensitization to inhaled pollen allergens (or latex allergen) via the respiratory 
tract, leading to production of pollen‐specific IgE. When exposure to homologous proteins in 
plant‐derived foods occurs, cross‐linking of IgE on mast cells and basophils in the oropharyngeal 
mucosa leads to mediator release (i.e. histamine) which results in symptoms of OAS. These food 
allergens are generally heat labile and susceptible to gastric digestion, therefore these proteins 
are denatured in the stomach.
Predictive/risk factors
• Sensitization to tree pollens (particularly birch pollen).
• Sensitization to multiple pollens.
• More severe symptomatic allergic disease.
• Higher pollen‐specific IgE levels.
• High‐risk areas where pollens are prevalent (e.g. birch, LTP).
• Sensitization to LTPs.
Section 2: Prevention
Screening
Not applicable for this topic.
Primary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Secondary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 3: Diagnosis (Algorithm 16.1)
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• No interventions have been demonstrated to prevent the development of this disease.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• History is the most important diagnostic tool for OAS.
• Physical findings include signs and symptoms of allergic rhinitis.
• Skin prick tests and measurement of serum‐specific IgE levels are not very reliable for the 
diagnosis of OAS.
• Oral food challenges are diagnostic for food allergy; however, difficulties in standardizing the 
procedure include variations in allergen levels in different parts of the fruits, in different cultivars, or 
due to different ripeness or storage conditions, which may lead to different food challenge outcomes.
142  Part 1: Allergy
Differential diagnosis
Typical presentation
• A patient with allergic rhinitis typically complains of oropharyngeal symptoms such as lip and/or 
mouth itching and swelling after eating fresh fruits or vegetables. The onset of symptoms is often 
within 5 minutes of exposure. Heated fruits or vegetables are generally well tolerated. Symptoms 
can extend outside of the oropharynx, with 14% having gastrointestinal symptoms, 14% 
reporting laryngeal edema, and 2% having anaphylaxis. For some, seasonal variations are seen, 
with symptoms being more pronounced during the associated pollen season.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• History is important for the diagnosis of OAS. Patients should be asked about rhinitis symptoms, 
foods triggering symptoms, type of symptoms, medications used to treat symptoms, whether symp-
toms occur with only the fresh fruit or vegetables or whether heated foods trigger symptoms as well.
Physical examination
• Physical examination may reveal signs and symptoms of allergic rhinitis (e.g. ocular redness, 
nasal congestion or rhinorrhea, allergic shiners, nasal crease).
Useful clinical decision rules and calculators
Not applicable for this topic.
Disease severity classification
Not applicable for this topic.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• Skin prick tests and measurement of serum‐specific IgE levels can identify the pollens that are 
triggering allergic rhinitis.
• Skin prick tests and serum‐specific IgE are less reliable for identifying the triggering foods for OAS.
• While skin prick tests with fresh fruits and vegetables correlate better with clinical symptoms 
when compared with commercial extracts, this is not standardized. Variations in test results 
Differential diagnosis
Features
Class I food allergy
Symptoms are triggered by fresh and cooked forms of the foods
Systemic reactions are more common
Contact urticaria
Tomato, citrus, garlic, berries can cause local urticaria
This is suggested by lack of pollen sensitization
Contact dermatitis
Delayed‐type hypersensitivity reaction
Symptoms may be triggered by contact allergens (particularly metals) and drugs
Gastroesophageal reflux
Symptoms are not specific to raw fruits and vegetables
There is no association with atopy
Eosinophilic esophagitis
Throat symptoms due to dysphagia may be mistaken for OAS
Symptoms are not limited to raw fruits and vegetables
Other gastrointestinal symptoms including vomiting and failure to thrive 
may be seen
Burning mouth syndrome
Characterized by recurrent or chronic burning symptoms of the mouth
Not triggered by food ingestion
Oral Allergy Syndrome  143
from testing with fresh fruits and vegetables can be due to differences in part of the fruit used 
for testing, cultivars, ripeness, and storage conditions.
• Double‐blind, placebo‐controlled food challenges are the gold standard for the diagnosis of 
food allergies; however, there are no standardized protocols for food challenges to assess for 
OAS. Furthermore, difficulties blinding fresh foods and variations in allergen level as a result of 
different parts of the fruit, different cultivars, ripeness, or storage conditions complicate the 
standardization of the food challenge procedure.
Lists of imaging techniques
No imaging studies are indicated for OAS.
History of adverse reaction
to food
Reproducible reactions 
occur with exposure to 
fresh fruit or vegetables,
but tolerance to heated
forms of the food
Evaluate for food allergy
History should enquire 
about allergic rhinitis; 
physical examination may 
reveal signs and symptoms
of allergic rhinitis
Skin prick testing or serum
IgE testing can identify the
pollens that are triggering
allergic rhinitis 
Skin prick testing with fresh
fruits and vegetables
correlate better with clinical
symptoms when compared
with commercial extracts
Double-blind, placebo-
controlled food challenges
are the gold standard for
the diagnosis of food
allergies. However, there
are no standardized
protocols for food
challenges to assess for OAS
 
No
Yes
Algorithm 16.1  Diagnosis of oral allergy syndrome (OAS)
144  Part 1: Allergy
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis of disease
• OAS should be distinguished from class I food allergy in which food allergens are the sensitizers 
and elicitors of symptoms. The risk for anaphylaxis is greater for class I food allergy.
• Skin testing and serum IgE testing are not reliable predictors of OAS because standard reagents 
may not contain the relevant proteins.
Section 4: Treatment (Algorithm 16.2)
Treatment rationale
• There are currently no consensus guidelines for the management of OAS. As symptoms with one 
food do not necessarily predict symptoms with all members within a botanical family, patients are 
advised to avoid only the fruits and/or vegetables that trigger symptoms. For related foods that 
patients have not yet been exposed to, oral challenges may be performed to determine whether 
it is safe to include these new foods in the diet. Heating the food allergens that trigger OAS 
denatures the relevant protein, therefore cooked forms of the foods are well tolerated.
• In addition to education on allergen avoidance, patients should understand that OAS can lead 
to systemic reactions and anaphylaxis in some cases. Thus, it is important to be knowledgeable 
Food allergen 
avoidance
 
Avoid the fresh fruits and
vegetables that cause
symptoms
 
Heated forms of the fruits 
and vegetables causing 
symptoms should be well 
tolerated  
Foods that are tolerated
may continue to be
included in the diet
Oral food challenges may
be performed for related
foods that have not yet
been introduced  
Management of 
acute reactions
 
Oral antihistamines can 
relieve mild symptoms of
OAS 
In ~2% of cases, OAS
symptoms can result in
anaphylaxis.
Intramuscular epinephrine
is the treatment of choice
for anaphylaxis
Algorithm 16.2  Management of oral allergy syndrome
Oral Allergy Syndrome  145
about the identification and treatment of systemic reactions, including indications for self‐
injectable epinephrine.
• There are currently no effective therapies to prevent or cure OAS. While subcutaneous immu-
notherapy is effective to treat symptoms of allergic rhinitis, it remains an unproven therapeutic 
approach for OAS.
When to hospitalize
• OAS is managed in the outpatient setting.
Managing the hospitalized patient
Not applicable for this topic.
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comment
Conservative
• Avoid the fresh fruits and vegetables that 
cause symptoms. However, foods that are 
tolerated may continue to be included in 
the diet
• Heated forms of the fruits and vegetables 
causing symptoms should be well tolerated
• Oral food challenges may be performed for 
related foods that have not yet been 
introduced
• Patients should be educated on the potential 
risk for severe reactions and be prepared to 
identify and treat allergic reactions, including 
having self‐injectable epinephrine available
This is applicable to all patients with OAS
Medical
• Oral antihistamines can relieve symptoms 
of OAS
Chronic use of antihistamines may mask mild 
symptoms of OAS, prompting increased consumption 
of the triggering food and increasing the risk of 
systemic reactions
Prevention/management of complications
• In approximately 2% of cases, OAS symptoms can result in anaphylaxis. Intramuscular epinephrine 
is the treatment of choice for anaphylaxis (see Chapter 29).
Section 5: Special populations
Not applicable for this topic.
Clinical pearls
• Only the fresh fruits and vegetables that cause symptoms should be avoided.
• Heated forms of these foods are generally well tolerated.
• Systemic reactions can occur in some cases so patients need to be educated regarding the 
identification and treatment of acute allergic reactions, including the use of self‐injectable 
epinephrine.
146  Part 1: Allergy
Section 6: Prognosis
Natural history of untreated disease
• There is no treatment available to alter the natural history of OAS.
• Immunotherapy with pollen or food allergens have been investigated; however, results have 
been inconsistent so this remains an unproven therapeutic approach for OAS.
Prognosis for treated patients
Not applicable for this topic.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 7: Reading list
Geroldinger‐Simic M, Zelniker T, Aberer W, Ebner C, Egger C, Greiderer A, et al. Birch pollen‐related food 
allergy: clinical aspects and the role of allergen‐specific IgE and IgG4 antibodies. J Allergy Clin Immunol 
2011;127:616–22
Ma S, Sicherer SH, Nowak‐Wegrzyn A. A survey on the management of pollen‐food allergy syndrome in allergy 
practices. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2003;112:784–8
Ortolani C, Ispano M, Pastorello EA, Ansaloni R, Magri GC. Comparison of results of skin prick tests (with fresh 
foods and commercial food extracts) and RAST in 100 patients with oral allergy syndrome. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol 1989;83:683–90
Valenta R, Kraft D. Type 1 allergic reactions to plant‐derived food: a consequence of primary sensitization to 
pollen allergens. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1996;97:893–5
Suggested websites
American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology (AAAAI). www.aaaai.org
American College of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology (ACAAI). www.acaai.org
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Food allergy: A practice 
parameter update—2014
American Academy of Allergy, 
Asthma and Immunology (AAAAI); 
American College of Allergy, 
Asthma and Immunology (ACAAI)
2014
(http://www.allergyparameters.
org/published‐practice‐parameters/
alphabetical‐listing/food‐allergy‐
download/)
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• OAS is a mild disorder for most.
• Risk factors for systemic reactions include prior history of systemic reaction to the food, 
reactions to the cooked forms of the food, positive skin prick tests with the food extract, lack 
of pollen sensitization, and sensitization to lipid transfer protein.
Oral Allergy Syndrome  147
Section 9: Evidence
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 10: Images
Not applicable for this topic.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at: 
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for  
patients, and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
148 
Food Allergy and Atopic Dermatitis
Kate Welch and Hugh A. Sampson
Jaffe Food Allergy Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 17
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• Patients with AD have a higher rate of allergic disease, including allergic rhinitis and food 
allergy, than the general population. There is clearly an increased rate of sensitization to food 
allergens in patients with AD, but the degree to which food triggers or exacerbates AD varies 
between patients.
Disease classification
• Food‐induced AD affects a subset of patients with AD. Food allergies are more likely to have a 
role in exacerbating symptoms in patients who have more severe forms of AD as measured by 
the SCORAD index.
Incidence/prevalence
• AD affects roughly 10% of children and 1–3% of adults worldwide.
• Food allergens are considered to provoke AD in approximately 35% of pediatric patients.
• They have a role in exacerbating AD in up to 33% of patients with moderate to severe AD, 
10–20% of patients with mild to moderate AD, and 6% of patients with mild AD.
• Milk, egg, wheat, soy, and peanut account for nearly 75% of the cases of food‐
induced AD.
Overall Bottom Line
• Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a chronic inflammatory skin disorder characterized by intense pruritus 
and a variable course of exacerbations and remissions (see Chapters 1 and 2).
• While there is some controversy with regard to the role of food allergy in atopic dermatitis, 
these two conditions are often seen in the same patient.
• Food allergy is considered to be a provoking cause of AD in a subset of patients, particularly in 
about one‐third of infants and young children with moderate to severe AD.
• Patients with AD often have elevations of serum food‐specific IgE antibodies.
• Food elimination diets followed by oral food challenges are the best way to determine 
whether food allergy or sensitivity is an exacerbating factor of a patient’s AD.
Food Allergy and Atopic Dermatitis  149
Economic impact
Not applicable for this topic.
Etiology
• AD is thought to occur as a result of a genetic predisposition coupled with environmental 
triggers.
• Atopic conditions, including eczema, allergic rhinitis, food allergy, and asthma, are often seen 
in the same patient.
• Patients with AD generally have increased serum IgE levels as well as food allergen‐specific IgE 
levels initially and environmental aeroallergens later.
• In the subset of patients with food‐induced AD, ingestion of certain allergens leads to an 
immediate or delayed exacerbation of eczematous skin eruptions.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• AD, which typically begins in early infancy, has numerous trigger factors, including foods, 
inhalant allergens, bacterial colonization of the skin (especially with Staphylococcus aureus), 
irritating substances, temperature change, psychologic stress, systemic infections, and hor-
mones, among others. T cells have an important role in mediating hypersensitivity reactions 
in AD. Once ingested, food proteins enter the circulation and are distributed throughout the 
body, including to skin. Food antigens can directly interact with food‐specific IgE bound to 
mast cells, basophils, and skin‐infiltrating T lymphocytes, thus setting off the inflammatory 
response.
Predictive/risk factors
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 2: Prevention
Screening
• Given that there are a wide range of triggers for AD, from allergens to environmental factors 
such as heat, humidity, irritants, and stress, the question of whom to screen for food hyper-
sensitivity arises. In general, any patient who responds poorly to the usual AD treatment regi-
men of hydrating baths, topical steroids, lubricating ointments, and antihistamines should be 
screened for evidence of food hypersensitivity. Furthermore, if an obvious pattern is noted 
between ingestion of a food and exacerbation of skin conditions, an evaluation should be 
pursued.
Primary prevention
• There is no consensus on methods of primary prevention for food‐induced AD.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Management of food‐induced AD ultimately involves the identification and elimination of 
culprit foods from the diet.
• Not all foods to which a patient has evidence of IgE sensitivity will cause an exacerbation of 
eczema symptoms, so a systematic approach must be undertaken.
150  Part 1: Allergy
Secondary prevention
• Once a specific food has been identified to exacerbate a patient’s AD, that food should be 
eliminated from the patient’s diet. Because certain food allergies are frequently outgrown, 
particularly milk and egg in the pediatric population, routine monitoring for clinically relevant 
allergy is essential.
Section 3: Diagnosis (Algorithm 17.1)
Differential diagnosis
Typical presentation
• Food‐induced AD is more commonly seen in the pediatric population. Typically, an infant will 
present who has severe eczema and is starting to eat solid foods. The parents note that when 
a certain food, such as egg, is fed to the child, he/she will have a flare of eczema within 24 
hours. The same scenario may be seen at a younger age with introduction of milk‐ or soy‐
based formulas. There is often a family history of atopy in such cases. Allergy testing for milk, 
egg, peanut, wheat, and soy can be undertaken, and sensitivity to one or more food aller-
gens likely noted (egg allergy is the most frequent cause of food‐induced AD exacerbations). 
Once the sensitized food is completely eliminated from the child’s diet, the eczema should 
improve.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• The clinician should enquire about periods of exacerbation and remission. Patients are unlikely 
to have food‐induced AD if they have extended periods of clear skin with little need for topical 
corticosteroids while on a regular diet. Food allergy is more likely a trigger if the onset or 
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• AD is a clinical diagnosis based on identification of the classic pruritic skin eruption that occurs 
by the age of 5 years in nearly 85% of cases.
• For patients who have additional atopic conditions, or for patients who do not seem 
to improve on the classic regimen of skincare treatment, an investigation into food 
hypersensitivity should be undertaken.
• The diagnosis involves identification of food sensitization (via skin testing or serum IgE 
evaluation) and confirmation of clinical allergy with oral food challenges.
• Ingestion of a causal food can provoke a flare of eczema within minutes to hours if the 
reaction is IgE‐mediated, or infrequently can take hours to days if the reaction is non‐IgE‐
mediated. Consequently, history of food‐induced symptoms is often not evident in patients 
with AD and food allergy.
• A patient may have persistent lesions if the food is eaten chronically.
• Food elimination with subsequent monitoring for skin clearing is the key to diagnosis.
Differential diagnosis
Features
Allergic contact dermatitis
Suspicion of reaction to a medication or skincare product
Exposure to irritants
Environmental history
Severe AD unrelated to food
No improvement on elimination diet and/or spontaneous relapses without 
dietary intervention
Food Allergy and Atopic Dermatitis  151
worsening of skin symptoms correlates with exposure to the food, but this is often not evident, 
especially in children with moderate to severe disease.
Physical examination
• A complete skin examination to evaluate the extent and severity of eczematous involvement is 
key to diagnosis. Clinicians should look for other signs of atopic conditions such as asthma or 
allergic rhinitis. This includes a lung examination to evaluate potential wheezing as well as an 
ENT examination to evaluate for signs of rhinitis or ocular allergy.
Useful clinical decision rules and calculators
• Food‐induced AD is more common in infants and young children.
• In general, the more severe the AD, the more likely that food allergy is present.
Disease severity classification
• Food‐induced AD is clinically indistinguishable from classic food allergy with risk for severe 
systemic reaction, including anaphylaxis. An evaluation for the latter condition may be needed 
based on the patient’s history. While patients with AD may appear to tolerate certain food 
allergens with no evidence of acute allergic symptoms, elimination of these foods from their 
diet for a 2–3 week period may result in the development of acute allergic symptoms (e.g. 
dyspnea and wheezing, vomiting) with reintroduction of the food.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• Prick skin testing to common food allergens as well as suspected foods.
• Serum food‐specific IgE evaluation.
Lists of imaging techniques
Not applicable for this topic.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis of disease
• Not all foods to which a patient is sensitized will result in a challenge‐confirmed food allergy or 
lead to eczema flares.
• Clinicians must be careful not to overly restrict a patient’s diet, particularly in the pediatric 
population, and thereby place the patient at risk of nutritional deficiency.
• Foods should not be eliminated from the diet without firm clinical suspicion.
Aggressive topical
care including
hydration of the
skin, e.g. soaking
baths, followed by
application of
topical
corticosteroids &
antihistamines,
e.g. hydroxyzine,
for management
of pruritus
If no
improvement,
inquire about
history of
ingestion of
foods leading
to apparent
exacerbations
of eczematous
lesions
Prick skin
testing and/or
serum food-
 speciﬁc lgE
levels for
common food
allergens; e.g.
egg, milk,
peanut, soy,
wheat
2–3 week
elimination of
skin test positive
and/or IgE
positive foods
If symptoms
improve,
maintain diet
and/or conﬁrm
clinical reactivity
with oral food
challenge; if
symptoms do not
improve, add food
back to the diet
Algorithm 17.1  Diagnosis of atopic dermatitis
152  Part 1: Allergy
Section 4: Treatment
Treatment rationale
• A hydrating skincare regimen with use of topical steroids or antibiotics as needed is necessary 
in the initial management of all forms of eczema.
• For patients with food‐induced symptoms, elimination of the food from the patient’s diet should 
lead to improvement.
• Patients should be evaluated at regular intervals to determine if the food allergy is resolved, 
especially to milk and egg. However, children with serum IgE levels greater than 25 kUA/L to 
major food allergen are unlikely to “outgrow” the food allergy in the short term.
When to hospitalize
• Patients with food‐exacerbated AD rarely need to be hospitalized. Reasons for hospitalization 
might include a severe anaphylactic reaction to food or a severe skin infection resulting from 
excoriations of eczematous skin lesions.
Managing the hospitalized patient
Not applicable for this topic.
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comment
Conservative
Elimination of foods to which a patient has hypersensitivity and which exacerbate skin 
symptoms
Medical
Lubricating emollients, topical steroids, and antibiotics may be needed for management 
of skin lesions and super‐infections
Prevention/management of complications
• It is important to note that once a food allergen is identified as a trigger of AD and removed 
from a patient’s diet, there is a risk for severe allergic reaction upon reintroduction of that 
food, particularly if hypersensitivity persists. Routine monitoring of sensitivity via skin 
and  serum testing as well as introduction of a food in a monitored setting is generally 
necessary.
Section 5: Special populations
Pregnancy
No change in management.
Clinical pearls
• Not all foods to which an atopic patient has evidence of IgE sensitivity will result in clinically 
significant food allergy or eczema exacerbations.
• Do not overly restrict a patient’s diet without firm clinical evidence of hypersensitivity.
• There is a risk for anaphylaxis upon reintroduction of a food that was eliminated from the diet 
for reasons of food‐exacerbated AD.
Food Allergy and Atopic Dermatitis  153
Children
No change in management. Attention to nutritional status upon food elimination.
Elderly
No change in management. Overall, less common issue in this population.
Others
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 6: Prognosis
Natural history of untreated disease
• Continued feeding of food allergens may lead to more severe AD lesions and secondary infection 
due to severe pruritus.
Prognosis for treated patients
Not applicable for this topic.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
• Serum food‐specific IgE levels.
Section 7: Reading list
Caubet JC, Eigenmann PA. Allergic triggers in atopic dermatitis. Immunol Allergy Clin North Am 
2010;30:289–307
Eigenman PA, Sicherer SH, Borkowski TA, Cohen BA, Sampson HA. Prevalence of IgE‐mediated food allergy 
among children with atopic dermatitis. Pediatrics 1998;101:E8
Hill DJ, Hosking CS, de Benedictis FM, Oranje AP, Diepgen TL, Bauchau V; EPAAC Study Group. Confirmation 
of the association between high levels of immunoglobulin E food sensitization and eczema in infancy: an 
international study. Clin Exp Allergy 2008;38:161–8
NIAID‐Sponsored Expert Panel, Boyce JA, Assa’ad A, Burks AW, Jones SM, Sampson HA, Wood RA, et al. 
Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of food allergy in the United States: report of the NIAID‐
sponsored expert panel. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2010;126(Suppl):S1–58
Sicherer SH, Sampson HA. Food hypersensitivity and atopic dermatitis: pathophysiology, epidemiology, 
diagnosis, and management. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1999;104:S114–22
Tollefson MM, Bruckner AL. Atopic dermatitis: Skin-directed management. Pediatrics 2014;134(6):e1735–44
Werfel T, Breuer K. Role of food allergy in atopic dermatitis. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2004;379–85
Suggested websites
www.acaai.org
www.aaaai.org
www.aad.org
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• AD is characterized by relapses and exacerbations of disease.
• Removal of an inciting food can improve overall skin condition in food‐exacerbated eczema.
• Pediatric patients will often outgrow their food hypersensitivities that are associated with AD.
154  Part 1: Allergy
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Section 9: Evidence
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 10: Images
Not applicable for this topic.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at: 
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for  
patients, and ICD codes
Guideline title
Source
Date
Atopic dermatitis: A practice 
parameter update.
American Academy of Allergy, 
Asthma & Immunology
2012
(http://www.allergyparameters.
org/published-practice-
parameters/alphabetical-listing/
dermatitis-download/)
Guidelines for the Diagnosis and 
Management of Food Allergy in 
the United States: Report of the 
NIAID-Sponsored Expert Panel
NIH, National Institute of Allergy 
and Infectious Disease
2010
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/21134576)
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
  155
Food Protein‐Induced Enterocolitis Syndrome
Elizabeth J. Feuille and Anna Nowak‐Węgrzyn
Jaffe Food Allergy Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 18
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• FPIES is a non‐IgE‐mediated food hypersensitivity in which patients present in infancy with 
profuse vomiting, sometimes accompanied by diarrhea, resulting in dehydration, lethargy, 
weight loss, and failure to thrive.
Incidence/prevalence
• Non‐IgE‐mediated or mixed gastrointestinal immune hypersensitivities to CM account for 40% 
of all CM protein allergy in children.
• The incidence of CM FPIES in a large Israeli birth cohort was found to 0.34% (44/33 019); by 
comparison, the incidence of IgE‐mediated CM allergy in this population was 0.5%.
• The prevalence of FPIES in the United States is not known.
Etiology
• The mechanisms through which FPIES develops are as yet unclear.
• The most common triggering foods causing FPIES are CM and soy, although FPIES may also 
occur upon ingestion of solid foods, including grains (rice, oats, barley, corn), meat and poultry 
Overall Bottom Line
• Food protein‐induced enterocolitis syndrome (FPIES) is a non‐IgE‐mediated food 
hypersensitivity. Patients typically present with profuse vomiting, diarrhea, and dehydration in 
the acute setting, or with weight loss and failure to thrive in the chronic form.
• The most common inciting foods are cow’s milk (CM) and soy formulas, and rice in young 
infants.
• FPIES is diagnosed based on history and typical symptoms, which improve with food 
avoidance, and exclusion of other etiologies.
• Management of FPIES includes rehydration in the acute setting and food avoidance and 
provision of an emergency treatment plan for reactions after accidental ingestion.
• The majority of patients with FPIES caused by CM and soy resolve within the first 3–5 years 
of life; solid food FPIES or FPIES associated with positive food‐specific IgE may have a more 
protracted course.
156  Part 1: Allergy
(beef, chicken, turkey), egg white, vegetables (white potato, sweet potato, squash, string bean), 
fruit (tomato, banana), legumes (peanut, green pea, lentil), seafood (fish, crustaceans, mollusks), 
and the probiotic Saccharomyces boulardii.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• The mechanisms underlying FPIES are not known.
• It is hypothesized that T‐cell activation by food allergens may mediate local intestinal 
inflammation through release of pro‐inflammatory cytokines, causing increased intestinal 
permeability and fluid shifts. This local inflammation may be mediated by activated peripheral 
mononuclear cells, increased TNF‐β, and decreased expression of TGF‐β receptors in the 
intestinal mucosa.
• Patients with FPIES have decreased food‐specific IgG4 and increased serum food‐specific IgA 
levels. Though systemic food‐specific IgE is typically absent in FPIES, intestinal mucosal IgE 
antibodies may facilitate antigen uptake and intestinal inflammation.
• Increased eosinophils present in intestinal biopsies, blood and stool samples from patients with 
FPIES point to possible overlap of the immunopathogenic mechanisms underlying food protein‐
induced syndromes and eosinophilic gastroenteropathies.
Predictive/risk factors
• There is only one study using a large unselected birth cohort in Israel with sufficient data to 
calculate odds ratios.
Section 2: Prevention
Screening
There are no screening methods for FPIES.
Primary prevention
• Primary prevention in FPIES has not been well studied.
• Breastfeeding appears to have a role in preventing FPIES. CM FPIES in exclusively breastfed 
infants is rare, with only four case reports in the literature.
Risk factor
Odds ratio
Cesarean delivery
2.57
Jewish race
10
Male gender
52–60% of infants with FPIES are male*
FPIES to other food protein
30–50% of patients with FPIES to one food develop FPIES to another*
Personal history of atopic disease
Present in 30% of FPIES patients*
Family history of atopic disease
Present in 40–80% of FPIES patients*
Family history of food allergy
Present in 20% of FPIES patients*
* Sufficient data are not available to calculate odds ratio.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Prevention of FPIES has not been studied; however, breastfeeding appears to be protective as 
FPIES is very rare in exclusively breastfed infants.
Food Protein‐Induced Enterocolitis Syndrome  157
Section 3: Diagnosis (Algorithm 18.1)
Differential diagnosis
Ill-appearing infant  
 with repetitive emesis 
 
Suspicion of FPIES
Typical presentation: Ill appearing infant with repetitive emesis, loose stools, and dehydration. 
Symptoms may be quite severe and acute, or more chronic and associated with failure to thrive
 
Consider other conditions
(see differential diagnosis) 
Clinical history and physical 
examination, age, general condition
Rule out sepsis as appropriate for infant 
age
 
Complete blood count with differential reveals
leukocytosis with neutrophilia   
Persistence of symptoms
 
Yes
 
No 
Yes  
No 
Sepsis ruled out 
Resolution of symptoms with food 
avoidance   
FPIES is likely 
Consider conﬁrmatory food challenge
 
No 
Algorithm 18.1  Diagnosis of food protein‐induced enterocolitis syndrome (FPIES)
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• FPIES is diagnosed based on history of typical presenting symptoms, which improve with 
removal of the offending food from the diet, and exclusion of other etiologies.
• On examination, infants with FPIES often appear dehydrated and lethargic; infants with 
chronic FPIES may additionally have failure to thrive.
• Though there are no laboratory or radiographic findings specific to FPIES, findings of an 
elevated white blood count with neutrophilia and methemoglobinemia following food 
ingestion and vomiting are consistent with FPIES.
• Oral food challenge (OFC) is the gold standard for diagnosis, but may not be necessary for the 
initial diagnosis if the child presents with recurrent symptoms consistent with typical FPIES.
(Continued)
Differential diagnosis
Features
Food protein‐induced proctitis/
proctocolitis
Blood‐streaked stools, otherwise well
Food protein‐induced 
enteropathy
Malabsorption, failure to thrive, intermittent emesis, and blood‐
streaked diarrhea
158  Part 1: Allergy
Typical presentation
• FPIES occurs in chronic and acute forms.
• Chronic FPIES occurs with frequent ingestion of the inciting food. It typically occurs in a 
formula‐fed infant in the first weeks of life, with symptoms of intermittent emesis, watery or 
mucus‐containing diarrhea, poor weight gain, and dehydration.
• Acute FPIES occurs with intermittent ingestion of the inciting food, with the onset of 
symptoms 1–3 hours after ingestion, typically with somewhat more severe presentation than 
chronic FPIES. In addition to profuse emesis (which may be projectile and occur up to 10–20 
times) and dehydration, infants may develop lethargy, pallor, and hypotension.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• Detailed history regarding the timing and number of vomiting episodes, diarrhea, and association 
with feeding changes; the infant’s growth since birth; any associated symptoms including 
choking, breathing difficulty, cyanosis, abdominal distension; and office or emergency depart-
ment visits for symptoms.
Physical examination
• The clinician should pay particular attention to the following, which indicate the need for 
resuscitation: lethargy, depressed fontanelle, sunken eyes, dry mucous membranes, poor skin 
turgor, prolonged capillary refill, pallor, and cyanosis.
Differential diagnosis
Features
Eosinophilic gastrointestinal 
disorders
Nausea, emesis, abdominal pain and distension, early satiety, diarrhea, 
weight loss, difficulty swallowing, and food impaction; insidious and 
chronic in onset
Anaphylaxis
Emesis, lethargy, rash (urticaria), oropharyngeal swelling, and 
bronchoconstriction; within minutes to hours after ingestion of 
offending food
Sepsis
Lethargy, emesis, diarrhea, hypothermia, and hypotension; associated 
fever and respiratory symptoms when present are distinguishing 
features
Infectious gastroenteritis or 
enteritis (viral, bacterial, or 
parasitic)
Emesis, lethargy, diarrhea, and dehydration; reported sick contacts 
and presence of other manifestations of infection are distinguishing 
features
Intestinal obstruction due to 
volvulus or other
Acute onset of bilious emesis and feeding intolerance
Gastroesophageal reflux  
disease (GERD)
Emesis and discomfort after feeding, persisting despite formula 
changes
Necrotizing enterocolitis
Variable presentation that includes emesis, feeding intolerance, 
diarrhea, abdominal distension, and lethargy; when present, 
temperature instability, abdominal distension, and gastric retention are 
distinguishing features
Metabolic disease
May manifest acutely with emesis, dehydration, and lethargy, and 
chronically with failure to thrive; findings of hypoglycemia, anion gap 
metabolic acidosis, or hyperammonemia should raise suspicion for a 
metabolic disorder
Congenital methemoglobinemia
Typically mild symptoms, including headache and easy fatigability
Food Protein‐Induced Enterocolitis Syndrome  159
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• A complete blood count (CBC) with differential may reveal leukocytosis with neutrophilia, 
anemia, eosinophilia, and thrombocytosis.
• Blood chemistries in significantly dehydrated infants may reveal electrolyte abnormalities.
• A blood gas assessment should be ordered for infants who are ill‐appearing or lethargic, and 
may reveal non‐anion gap metabolic acidosis (with a mean pH of 7.03 in one series).
• Co‐oximetry to assess for methemoglobinemia is important when an infant appears ashen, 
gray, or cyanotic on physical examination.
• Food‐specific IgE and/or skin prick testing may be ordered non‐emergently to provide complete 
evaluation for food sensitization, particularly when considering a food challenge. Though more 
than 90% of patients with FPIES have undetectable serum IgE at the time of diagnosis, 18–30% 
of patients with FPIES develop IgE‐mediated food sensitivity to the same food at some point 
during their course.
• Endoscopy with biopsy may be indicated to rule out other gastrointestinal disorder when 
symptoms do not resolve with bowel rest or amino acid based formula.
• Stool studies may reveal elevated leukocytes, frank or occult blood, and/or eosinophils.
• OFC is the gold standard for diagnosis, but may not be necessary for initial diagnosis if 
the child presents with recurrent symptoms typical of FPIES. OFC in patients with FPIES 
is considered a high‐risk procedure, and is best performed under physician supervision 
in a facility capable of administering intravenous fluids. OFC involves administering 
0.06–0.6 g of food protein divided in three equal portions, eaten over 30 minutes, and 
followed by observation for 4–6 hours prior to discharge. OFC is positive if typical 
­symptoms and laboratory findings occur. Symptoms include emesis (onset 1–3 hours), 
lethargy (onset 1–3 hours), and, less often, diarrhea (onset 2–10 hours, mean 5 hours). 
CBC with differential should be sent prior to and about 6 hours after challenge if there 
are symptoms. If diarrhea is present, stool guaiac tests and other stool investigations 
may be required.
• In research studies, gastric juice analysis showing >10 leukocytes/high‐powered field (hpf) 
3 hours after a food challenge and atopy patch testing have been evaluated in patients with 
FPIES, but the utility of these tests has not yet been confirmed.
Lists of imaging techniques
• Radiologic studies are not part of the routine diagnostic investigation for FPIES but may be 
obtained when the diagnosis is not clear in order to rule out other etiologies. Abdominal X‐ray 
may reveal distension of small bowel loops, air–fluid levels, non‐specific narrowing, and thumb‐
printing of the rectum and sigmoid, intramural gas, thickening of the plicae circulares in the 
duodenum and jejunum with excess luminal fluid.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding  
diagnosis of disease
• Infants with FPIES often present with multiple reactions and extensive evaluations before the 
diagnosis of FPIES is considered.
• Factors contributing to delays in diagnosis of FPIES include the non‐specific nature of symptoms 
and lack of classic allergic skin and respiratory symptoms, broad differential diagnosis, relative 
lack of knowledge among physicians, and, in the case of FPIES to solid foods, the perception 
that grains and vegetables are hypoallergenic (Table 18.1).
160  Part 1: Allergy
Section 4: Treatment (Algorithm 18.2)
Treatment rationale
• Treatment of acute and chronic FPIES consists of dietary food elimination, supportive therapies 
for acute and chronic FPIES on presentation, and providing an emergency treatment plan for 
episodes resulting from accidental exposures.
• Acute episode: the first line in management of an acute episode of FPIES is vigorous 
intravenous hydration, usually 10–20 mL/kg bolus of normal saline, repeated as needed. 
The second line includes a single dose of intravenous methylprednisolone (dosed at 
1 mg/kg, with a maximum of 60–80 mg), in order to decrease presumed cell‐mediated 
inflammation. Patients may need other supportive therapies as necessary including sup-
plemental oxygen, vasopressors, bicarbonate, and methylene blue. A recent case report 
described the use of ondansetron for the management of severe emesis during the food 
challenge in FPIES.
• Elimination diet: infants with suspected FPIES to cow’s or soy milk protein should strictly avoid 
all forms of the inciting food, including baked and processed foods. They may be either exclu-
sively breastfed or start a casein hydrolysate‐based formula. Ten to 20% may require an amino 
acid‐based formula. For the rare cases of FPIES in breastfed infants, breastfeeding mothers 
should eliminate the suspected trigger food(s) from her diet.
Table 18.1  Empirical recommendations for dietary management of food protein‐induced  
enterocolitis (FPIES). No controlled trials have been performed to determine optimal timing  
of introduction in infants and toddlers with FPIES.
Milk/soy 
FPIES
Solid food 
FPIES
Milk/soy and 
solid food FPIES
0–12 months
Avoid cow’s milk and soy
X
X
Exclusive breastfeedinga or extensively hydrolyzed casein 
formulab or consider soy OFC in case of milk FPIES
X
X
Introduce yellow vegetables
X
X
X
Avoid grainsc, legumes, poultry
Xd
Xd
>12 months
Avoid trigger foods, OFC with reactive food every 
18 months
X
X
X
Exclusive breastfeedinga or extensively hydrolyzed 
casein formulab or consider soy OFC in case of milk 
FPIES
X
X
Consider OFC with milk or soy if not tried
X
X
X
Consider OFC with grains, legumes, poultry if not tried
Xd
Xd
a No maternal elimination diet recommended unless reactions to food through breast milk.
b If not tolerated, an amino acid based formula should be initiated.
c Including oat, rice, wheat, barley, rye.
d Oral food challenges may be necessary to introduce new solid foods to children with multiple food FPIES.
Source: Järvinen KM, Nowak‐Wegrzyn A. Food protein induced enterocolitis syndrome: current management 
strategies. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2013;1:317. Reproduced with permission from Elsevier.
Food Protein‐Induced Enterocolitis Syndrome  161
• Food introduction: for infants with FPIES to one food, experts recommended delaying the 
introduction of grain, legumes, poultry, as well as cow’s and soy milk until the first year because 
of the high rate of FPIES to multiple foods.
• Emergency treatment plan: emergency treatment plans outlining clinical features and 
­management of acute reactions should be provided to patients with FPIES (a template can 
be accessed on the International Association for Food Protein Enterocolitis, http://iaffpe.org/
docs/Emergency_Plan.pdf). Mild reactions may be managed with careful oral rehydration at 
home. Infants with more severe reactions require resuscitation in the emergency department or 
inpatient unit (see Treatment rationale for acute episode).
When to hospitalize
• Significant dehydration, with inability to continue rehydration or keep up with ongoing losses 
with fluid intake by mouth.
• Persistent tachycardia, acidosis, hypotension, or lethargy despite administration of intravenous 
fluids in the emergency department.
• Methemoglobinemia requiring intravenous methylene blue.
Prevention/management of complications
• Treatment complications are minimal as the mainstay of treatment consists of dietary food 
elimination and provision of an emergency plan for accidental ingestions. Nutritional consulta-
tion may be necessary.
Conﬁrmed FPIES
Strict avoidance of the offending food for about 12–18 months
Gradual introduction of new foods
Continue avoidance
Re-evaluation in 12–18 months
Interim accidental reactions
Yes
No
Negative
Positive
Skin prick test and/or blood level of
food-speciﬁc IgE antibody
No symptoms after 4–6 hours
FPIES resolved
Add food to the diet at home
Negative
Symptoms (emesis) and elevated neutrophil count
Continue strict food avoidance, re-evaluate at
12–18 months
Positive
Consider delaying OFC or FPIES oral food
challenge under physician supervision with
intravenous line in place; obtain baseline CBC
with differential; administer incremental doses of
food every 10–15 minutes due to the risk of an
acute allergic reaction   
FPIES oral food challenge under physician
supervision with intravenous line in place;
obtain baseline CBC with differential; three
equal doses of food over 45 minutes    
Algorithm 18.2  Management of FPIES
162  Part 1: Allergy
Section 5: Special populations
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 6: Prognosis
Natural history of untreated disease
• For CM FPIES, resolution rates by age 3 years ranges from about 50% in a US referral popu-
lation to 90% in an Israeli birth cohort. For soy FPIES, resolution rates range from 25% by 
age 3 years in a US referral population to 90% by age 10 months in a Korean cohort. For 
solid food FPIES, a retrospective study in Italy reported a resolution rate of 48%. In US refer-
ral populations, resolution rates are approximately 40% for rice, 66% for oat, and 67% for 
vegetables.
• Though the majority of patients with FPIES have negative specific IgE antibodies and skin prick 
tests at diagnosis, those with positive testing tend to have a more protracted course and are at 
risk for developing IgE‐mediated food allergy.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
• After 1 year of life, consider OFC to inciting foods every 18–24 months, along with testing to 
evaluate for development of food‐specific IgE.
Section 7: Reading list
Järvinen KM, Nowak‐Wegrzyn A. Food protein induced enterocolitis syndrome: current management strate-
gies. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2013;1:317
Katz Y, Goldberg MR, Rajuan N, Cohen A, Leshno M. The prevalence and natural course of food protein‐
induced enterocolitis syndrome to cow’s milk: a large‐scale, prospective population‐based study. J Allergy 
Clin Immunol 2011;127:647–53
Clinical pearls
• Infants with moderate to severe reactions should be resuscitated in the emergency 
department or inpatient unit with intravenous fluids and other supportive therapies. 
Intravenous methylprednisolone may be used for more severe reactions, although its 
therapeutic benefit has not been proven in controlled clinical trials.
• The mainstay of treatment is dietary elimination of the inciting food and provision of an 
emergency plan.
• Currently, experts recommend avoiding the inciting food until 1 year of life, after which OFC 
should be considered every 18–24 months.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Infants with acute FPIES reactions generally recover rapidly with rehydration alone.
• Infants with chronic FPIES usually return to usual state of health within 3–10 days of switching 
to a hypoallergenic formula.
• FPIES to one food increases likelihood of developing FPIES to other foods.
• Age of FPIES resolution varies widely depending on the inciting foods, the country, and the 
population being studied.
Food Protein‐Induced Enterocolitis Syndrome  163
Leonard SA, Nowak‐Wegrzyn A. Manifestations, diagnosis, and management of food protein‐induced entero-
colitis syndrome. Pediatr Ann 2013;42:135–40
Mehr S, Kakakios A, Frith K, Kemp AS. Food protein induced enterocolitis: 16‐year experience. Pediatrics 
2009;123:e459
Sicherer SH. Food protein‐induced enterocolitis syndrome: case presentations and management lessons. 
J Allergy Clin Immunol 2005;115:149–56
Suggested websites
www.fpies.org
http://www.niaid.nih.gov/topics/foodallergy/clinical/Pages/default.aspx
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source, comment
Date
Guidelines for the Diagnosis and 
Management of Food Allergy in 
the United States
National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Disease (NIAID)
Comment: These guidelines 
were developed by a panel of 
experts in the field, through 
review and evaluation of recent 
publications about food allergy
2011
(http://www.niaid.nih.gov/
topics/foodallergy/clinical/Pages/
default.aspx)
Section 9: Evidence
Type of evidence
Title, comment
Date
Prospective, cohort 
study
The prevalence and natural course of food 
protein‐induced enterocolitis syndrome to cow’s 
milk: a large‐scale, prospective population‐
based study
Comment: This is the only study assessing the 
prevalence of FPIES; it describes the natural 
course of FPIES in a large birth cohort
2011
(Katz Y et al.  
J Allergy Clin ImmunoI 
2011;127;647–53)
Cohort study
Indexes of suspicion of typical cow’s milk 
protein‐induced enterocolitis
Comment: In this analysis of 142 consecutive 
infants admitted with vomiting and diarrhea, 
authors identify independent predictors 
of FPIES to cow’s milk (versus infants with 
infection), which included failure to thrive and 
hypoalbuminemia
2007
(Hwang JB et al. J Korean 
Med Sci 2007;94:425)
Retrospective study
A multicenter retrospective study of 66 Italian 
children with food protein‐induced enterocolitis 
syndrome: different management for different 
phenotypes
Comment: This study demonstrated an 
increase in FPIES diagnosis over the 7 years of 
the study. It documented presentations and 
natural course of FPIES in 66 children
2012
(Sopo SM et al. Clin Exp 
Allergy 2012;42:326)
(Continued )
164  Part 1: Allergy
Type of evidence
Title, comment
Date
Restrospective study
Food protein‐induced enterocolitis: a 16‐year 
experience
Comment: In reviewing the cases of 35 
children with FPIES, the authors highlight the 
frequent misdiagnosis and delays in diagnosis 
of FPIES; they identify hypothermia and 
thrombocytosis as features of FPIES
2009
(Mehr S et al. Pediatrics 
2009;123:e459)
Cohort study
Prospective follow‐up oral food challenge in 
food protein‐induced enterocolitis syndrome
Comment: The authors determined resolution 
rates for 23 infants with FPIES in a Korean 
cohort
2009
(Hwang JB et al. Arch Dis 
Child 2009;94:425)
Retrospective study
Clinical features of food protein‐induced 
enterocolitis syndrome
Comment: Thorough discussion of 16 patients 
with FPIES in a referral population, this article 
clarifies the diagnostic features, laboratory 
evaluation, food challenge results, and clinical 
course of FPIES
1998
(Sicherer SH et al. J 
Pediatr 1998;133:214)
Retrospective study
Food protein‐induced enterocolitis syndrome 
caused by solid food proteins
Comment: The clinical characteristics and 
natural course of 14 infants with solid food 
FPIES are described and compared with 30 
infants with cow’s milk or soy FPIES
2003
(Nowak‐Wegrzyn et al. 
Pediatrics 2003;111:829)
Section 10: Images
Not applicable for this topic.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at:  
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for  
patients, and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
  165
Food Protein‐Induced Proctocolitis Syndrome
Jean‐Christoph Caubet1 and Anna Nowak‐Węgrzyn2
1 Division of Allergy, Department of Pediatrics, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
2 Jaffe Food Allergy Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 19
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• Food protein‐induced proctocolitis or proctitis is a benign and transient non‐IgE‐mediated food 
allergy, characterized by an inflammatory response limited to the rectum and distal sigmoid 
colon induced by ingested food proteins. From a clinical point of view, the typical presentation 
is blood‐streaked stools appearing in the first few weeks of life in otherwise healthy breastfed 
infants or infants receiving infantile formulas (i.e. milk or soy formulas).
Disease classification
• According to the current nomenclature of allergy, FPIP is classified as a non‐IgE‐mediated allergic 
disorder.
Incidence/prevalence
• The overall prevalence of rectal bleeding and of FPIP is not well established.
• In one study, rectal bleeding was the chief complaint in 0.3% of more than 40 000 patients 
presenting to a referral hospital emergency department.
• FPIP appears to be a common cause of rectal bleeding in otherwise healthy infants, with a 
prevalence in the range of 18–64%; one study estimated the prevalence of isolated rectal 
bleeding attributed to cow’s milk consumption to be 0.16%.
Economic impact
Not applicable for this topic.
Overall Bottom Line
• Food protein‐induced proctocolitis (FPIP) should be suspected in well‐appearing infants 
presenting with isolated bloody stools.
• No specific diagnostic test is available and the diagnosis is based mainly on the clinical 
response to a strict elimination diet and exclusion of other etiologies.
• FPIP is characterized by an eosinophil‐dominated inflammation limited to the rectum and 
distal sigmoid colon.
166  Part 1: Allergy
Differential diagnosis
Features
Anal fissure
Most common cause of rectal bleeding in children younger than 
1 year; clinical examination lead to correct diagnosis
Infection
Fever, abdominal pain, diarrhea, vomiting, tenesmus
Food protein‐induced 
enterocolitis syndrome (FPIES)
Severe, repetitive emesis in 1–3 hours, diarrhea in 2–10 hours after 
food intake; tends to persist longer; chronic form may cause failure 
to thrive
Etiology
• FPIP typically occurs in breastfed infants, with cow’s milk and soy proteins from the mother’s 
diet being the most common causes.
• FPIP is also common in infants fed with cow’s milk or soy‐based formulas.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• The exact pathogenic mechanism of FPIP is not well defined.
• This disorder most commonly affects the distal colon and the rectum. The reason why specific food 
proteins induce an inflammatory response limited to this part of the digestive tract is not known.
• Endoscopy typically reveals focal erythema with lymphoid nodular hyperplasia. Biopsy shows an 
­eosinophil‐dominated inflammation. These cells are often degranulated and localized next to 
the lymphoid nodules. Eosinophil mediators may be responsible for mast cells’ degranulation, 
smooth muscle ­constriction, gastric dismotility, and stimulation of chloride secretion from 
colonic epithelium. Of note, these pathologic features are similar to other forms of eosinophilic 
gastrointestinal disorders, suggesting that they could correspond to different forms and grades 
of the same fundamental process.
Predictive/risk factors
Risk factors have not been determined.
Section 2: Prevention
No interventions have been demonstrated to prevent the development of the disease.
Screening
No screening tests have been shown to be useful in this disease
Primary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Secondary prevention
• Secondary prevention relies on the avoidance of the offending food in the diet.
Section 3: Diagnosis (Algorithm 19.1)
Differential diagnosis
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• The diagnosis is based on a positive clinical history (mild rectal bleeding in an otherwise 
healthy infant) and resolution of symptoms following elimination of the causative food 
protein, usually within 48–96 hours.
• Skin prick tests and specific IgE are usually negative in FPIP.
• Exclusion of other causes of rectal bleeding, particularly infection, anal fissure, necrotizing 
enterocolitis, and intussusception, is of major importance.
Food Protein‐Induced Proctocolitis Syndrome  167
Typical presentation
• The patient typically presents at 2–8 weeks of age with gradual onset of intermittent blood‐
streaked stools having a normal or soft consistency.
• Infants with FPIP are otherwise healthy and thriving. Most of them are either breastfed or fed 
with standard infant cow’s milk or soy‐based formulas.
• The symptoms increase in frequency if the incriminated food is continuously ingested and 
resolves only after complete elimination of the offending food, usually within 3 days.
Differential diagnosis
Features
Swallowed maternal blood
Transient, self‐resolving, blood in the stool not associated with any 
other symptoms
Meckel’s diverticulum
Painless rectal bleeding in an otherwise healthy individual
Necrotizing enterocolitis
Typically occurs in infants born prematurely, associated with fever 
or hypothermia, septic appearance, abdominal distension and 
presence of intramural gas on abdominal X‐ray
Intussusception
Sudden‐onset, severe, crampy, progressive abdominal pain, crying, 
lethargy associated with bloody mucus in the stool (currant jelly 
stool). Uncommon prior to 3 months of age
Infant
with isolated bloody stool
Clinical history and physical
examination, age, general condition
No
Yes
Consider other conditions
(see Differential diagnosis)
Re-evaluation
proctocolonoscopy
biopsy
Persistence of symptoms
Elimination diet
Red blood cell count, hemoglobin
peripheral eosinophilia
hypoalbuminemia
Typical presentation: 4- to 8-week-old infants,
well-appearing, mild rectal bleeding, exclusively
breastfeeding, cow’s milk protein in mother’s diet
Suspicion of food protein-induced proctocolitis
Algorithm 19.1  Diagnosis of food protein‐induced proctocolitis
168  Part 1: Allergy
Clinical diagnosis
History
• The diagnosis is mainly based on a typical clinical history and resolution of symptoms following 
withdrawal of the presumed food antigen.
• Although FPIP typically occurs before the age of 4 months, the age of onset ranges from 1 week 
of life to 14 years of age. Breastfed infants are often older at the time of initial presentation and 
have less severe disease.
• In addition to the bloody stools, associated digestive symptoms have been described in up to 
one‐third of the patients (i.e. increased gas, intermittent emesis, pain on defecation, or 
abdominal pain).
• A careful dietary history is essential to diagnose FPIP. In formula‐fed infants, cow’s milk and/or 
soy proteins are typically incriminated; in breastfed infants, it is usually caused by cow’s milk 
and soy proteins.
• Although there is often a prolonged latent interval between the introduction of food proteins 
and the initial presentation, the onset of symptoms may occur within 12 hours after the first 
feeding of the offending food.
• Elimination of the offending food leads to complete resolution of the symptoms, typically 
within 48–96 hours, but it may take longer for some patients (i.e. up to 2 weeks).
Physical examination
• The physical examination should particularly focus on the digestive system and evaluation for 
anal fissures, as well as on the evaluation of the growth. No specific sign is characteristic of this 
disorder.
Useful clinical decision rules and calculators
Not applicable for this topic.
Disease severity classification
Not applicable for this topic.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• A complete blood count (CBC) is recommended in children with persistent symptoms, particu-
larly as some rare patients may develop mild anemia. Approximately one‐third of the older 
children have peripheral eosinophilia, which does not correlate with the level of eosinophils in 
the biopsy.
• Although rare, an associated hypoalbuminemia can be found in some patients with more severe 
symptoms.
• Approximately one‐quarter of patients have a history of atopy and elevated serum IgE levels, 
which correspond to the prevalence in the general population. Thus, skin prick tests and specific 
IgE are not recommended for an initial diagnosis, except for patients presenting with symptoms 
suggestive of a concomitant IgE‐mediated food allergy.
• Smears of the fecal mucus usually reveal increased polymorphonuclear neutrophils.
• Colonoscopy should be reserved for patients with persistent bleeding despite implementation 
of an elimination diet, mainly to exclude another cause. The colonoscopy usually shows a mild 
colitis with focal erythema, rectal ulcerations, and lymphoid nodular hyperplasia.
• Biopsy reveals a high number of eosinophils (6 to >20 per 40× high power field) in the lamina propria 
and muscularis mucosa, features of eosinophils degranulation, and, occasionally, crypt abscesses.
Food Protein‐Induced Proctocolitis Syndrome  169
Lists of imaging techniques
Not applicable for this topic.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis of disease
• Some patients falsely diagnosed with anal fissures can present with symptoms lasting for several 
weeks.
• Distinction with food protein‐induced enterocolitis syndrome (FPIES) could be difficult as the 
initial symptoms (bloody stools) may be similar to those of FPIP. Some authors have suggested 
that these disorders may represent a continuum of the same disease with similar underlying 
immunopathogenic mechanisms.
Section 4: Treatment (Algorithm 19.2)
Treatment rationale
• Treatment is based on dietary restriction.
• Mothers should be encouraged to continue breastfeeding, but will have to strictly avoid the 
offending food proteins in their diet.
• Initially, milk products are avoided. In the absence of clinical response, soy followed by egg 
should be eliminated. Usually, the symptoms resolve gradually within 72 hours, although it may 
take up to 2 weeks for complete resolution.
• In formula‐fed children, casein hydrolysates are the first line of treatment; only a few infants 
(i.e. approximately 5–10%) will need amino acid‐based formulas.
• Gradual reintroduction of the offending food is proposed usually at 8–12 months of age, usually at 
home. Recurrence of bleeding will appear within 6–72 hours if the infant is still allergic to the food.
• In infants with significant atopic dermatitis and/or IgE‐mediated allergy to other foods, skin 
prick tests or serum measurement of food‐specific IgE can be performed at that time. If food‐
specific IgE to the offending food is negative, food reintroduction can be carried out at home. 
If food‐specific IgE to the offending food is positive, a supervised oral food challenge in the 
physician’s office may be necessary.
When to hospitalize
Patients with FPIP do not usually require hospitalization.
Managing the hospitalized patient
Not applicable for this topic.
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comment
Dietary restriction
In breastfed infants, elimination of cow’s milk from the maternal diet is 
recommended in the first place. If there is no improvement, elimination of soy 
followed by egg should be carried out. Rarely, weaning the baby from breast 
milk may be required
In infants fed with artificial formula, formulas based on casein hydrolysate, or, 
in rare instances, an amino acid‐based formula may be required
Iron supplementation
May be required in infants with an associated anemia
Psychological
The psychological impact of strict dietary restriction as well as the onset of the 
symptoms during the first few weeks of life may have important psychological 
consequences, which need to be managed appropriately
170  Part 1: Allergy
Prevention/management of complications
• Dietary restrictions may be responsible for nutrient deficiencies and may require additional 
­supplementations, especially with calcium.
• Large dietary restrictions should be avoided and only limited to selected foods known to cause 
this disorder (i.e. milk, soy, egg, corn).
• The decision to start a diet should always be discussed with the pediatrician and/or the allergist. 
A nutritional consultation may be considered.
Section 5: Special populations
Not applicable for this topic.
Clinical pearls
• In breastfed infants, it is recommended to eliminate milk products from the mother’s diet first, 
followed by soy and egg in the absence of clinical response. Resolution of visible blood usually 
occurs within 48–96 hours.
• In infants fed by soy or milk formulas, an extensively hydrolyzed formula is recommended.
• Amino acid‐based formula is rarely needed to control patients with FPIP.
• Food reintroduction is usually attempted at 8–12 months of age. If allergy tests to the 
offending food are negative, reintroduction can be carried out at home. If allergy food tests 
are positive, reintroduction may require an oral food challenge under physician supervision.
Exclusively breastfed?
Consider other diagnosis
Casein-hydrolysate or amino acid-based
formula leads to resolution of symptoms
Food re-introduction
between 8 months and 1 year of age
Consider other diagnosis
Casein-hydrolysate or amino acid-based
formula leads to resolution of the symptoms
Removal of soy or egg from the mother’s
diet leads to resolution of the symptoms
Removal of milk form the mother’s diet
leads to resolution of the symptoms
Patients with suspicion of
food protein-induced proctocolitis
(after excluding other causes of rectal bleeding)
Yes
Conﬁrmed diagnosis of
food protein-induced
proctocolitis
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Algorithm 19.2  Management of food protein‐induced proctocolitis
Food Protein‐Induced Proctocolitis Syndrome  171
Section 6: Prognosis
Natural history of untreated disease
• Some patients with a satisfying growth rate may have persistent bleeding despite maternal 
avoidance of food(s). These patients may develop anemia even though receiving iron supple-
mentation, so regular laboratory monitoring is important for the follow‐up.
• Persistence of bleeding may be a result of a partial elimination diet or because the allergen has 
not been correctly identified. Reaction to the human breast milk protein is another possible 
explanation.
Prognosis for treated patients
Not applicable for this topic.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 7: Reading list
Arvola T, Ruuska T, Keranen J, Hyoty H, Salminen S, Isolauri E. Rectal bleeding in infancy: clinical, allergological, 
and microbiological examination. Pediatrics 2006;117:e760–8
Elizur A, Cohen M, Goldberg MR, Rajuan N, Cohen A, Leshno M, et al. Cow’s milk associated rectal bleeding: 
a population based prospective study. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 2012;23:766–70
Lake AM. Food‐induced eosinophilic proctocolitis. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2000;30(Suppl):S58–60
Maloney J, Nowak‐Wegrzyn A. Educational clinical case series for pediatric allergy and immunology: allergic 
proctocolitis, food protein‐induced enterocolitis syndrome and allergic eosinophilic gastroenteritis with 
protein‐losing gastroenteropathy as manifestations of non‐IgE‐mediated cow’s milk allergy. Pediatr Allergy 
Immunol 2007;18:360–7
Xanthakos SA, Schwimmer JB, Melin‐Aldana H, Rothenberg ME, Witte DP, Cohen MB. Prevalence and outcome 
of allergic colitis in healthy infants with rectal bleeding: a prospective cohort study. J Pediatr Gastroenterol 
Nutr 2005;41:16–22
Suggested websites
Not applicable for this topic.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• The prognosis is excellent, the majority of patients achieve tolerance by 1 year of age and 
usually before 2 years of age.
• Up to 20% of breastfed infants have spontaneous resolution of bleeding without changes 
in the maternal diet.
• The long‐term prognosis is excellent, and there are no report of inflammatory bowel disease 
in infants with FPIP followed for more than 10 years.
172  Part 1: Allergy
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Guidelines for the diagnosis and 
management of food allergy 
in the United States: Summary 
of the NIAID‐Sponsored Expert 
Panel Report
J Allergy Clin Immunol
2010
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/21134576)
Summary and 
recommendations: 
Classification of gastrointestinal 
manifestations due to 
immunologic reactions to foods 
in infants and young children
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr
2000
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/10634304)
Section 9: Evidence
Type of evidence
Title, comment
Date
Birth cohort study
Cow’s milk associated rectal bleeding: a 
population based prospective study
Comment: This is one of the largest studies 
evaluating the prevalence of rectal bleeding 
induced by cow’s milk
2012
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/23050491)
Prospective
Allergic proctocolitis in infants: a prospective 
clinicopathologic biopsy study
Comment: This is a large prospective 
clinicopathologic biopsy study demonstrating 
the focal eosinophil‐dominant inflammation 
in patients with FPIP
1993
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/8505043)
Retrospective
Allergic proctitis and gastroenteritis in 
children. Clinical and mucosal biopsy 
features in 53 cases
Comment: This is important large study on 
the clinical characteristics of patients with FPIP
1986
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/3953938)
Section 10: Images
Not applicable for this topic.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at: 
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for  
patients, and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
  173
Eosinophilic Esophagitis
Mirna Chehade
Division of Allergy/Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 20
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• EoE is a chronic, immune/antigen‐mediated esophageal disease characterized clinically by 
symptoms related to esophageal dysfunction and histologically by eosinophil‐predominant 
inflammation.
Disease classification
Not applicable for this topic.
Incidence/prevalence
• EoE has been reported to occur worldwide. It seems to be reported more frequently in westernized, 
developed countries. The reason for this is unclear.
• The incidence and prevalence have been increasing over time. This is because of a true 
increase in the incidence in addition to improving awareness of the disease by health care 
providers.
Overall Bottom Line
• Eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) is a chronic, immune/antigen‐mediated esophageal disease 
characterized clinically by symptoms related to esophageal dysfunction and histologically by 
eosinophil‐predominant inflammation.
• Although it is a relatively newly recognized disease, EoE has been reported worldwide, and its 
prevalence has been increasing over time.
• EoE seems to be triggered by multiple foods, and possibly aeroallergens.
• The pathogenesis of EoE is poorly understood; histopathology points towards an allergic 
phenomenon.
• Age‐related differences in presenting symptoms are noticed in EoE. Children typically present 
with abdominal pain, gastroesophageal reflux symptoms, vomiting, feeding difficulties, and, 
at times, failure to thrive. Older children and adults present with dysphagia and esophageal 
food impactions.
• There are no FDA‐approved therapies for EoE. If left untreated, EoE may lead to 
complications such as esophageal narrowing and strictures. Treatment has so far consisted 
of various forms of dietary restrictions and/or topical corticosteroids to the esophagus with 
variable success.
174  Part 1: Allergy
• Using the International Classification of Diseases, 9th revision, code 530.13 for EoE, its prevalence 
is calculated to be 56.7/100 000 in the United States. This is deemed to be an underestimate, 
given that knowledge of the code and recognition of EoE have been suboptimal but improving 
over time.
• Approximately 1% of children and adults with gastroesophageal reflux symptoms prove to 
have EoE.
• Approximately 12–15% of adults referred to endoscopy for dysphagia are eventually diagnosed 
with EoE.
• Approximately 50% of adults with esophageal food impactions have EoE.
Etiology
• Multiple food allergens and possibly aeroallergens can act as triggers for EoE.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• The pathogenesis of EoE is poorly understood.
• Histopathologically similar to other allergic diseases, EoE is characterized by an inflammatory 
infiltrate in the epithelial layers of the esophagus, consisting of an increased number of T 
lymphocytes (both T‐helper (CD4) and T‐suppressor (CD8) cells), mast cells, and eosinophils. 
Finding 15 or more intraepithelial eosinophils per high power field (HPF) on microscopic 
examination of esophageal mucosal biopsy sections is considered diagnostic for EoE in the 
proper clinical setting.
• Mast cells and eosinophils residing in the esophagus seem to be activated in a large number of 
patients, as evidenced by degranulation on histopathologic examination.
• Increased number of mast cells and IgE‐positive cells in the esophagus, and a tissue cytokine 
profile consistent with a T‐helper type 2 phenotype, suggest an allergic etiology for EoE. 
Whether T‐lymphocytes largely contribute to the T‐helper type 2 allergic cytokine profile is still 
unknown.
Predictive/risk factors
• Family history: sibling recurrence risk ratio for EoE is estimated at approximately 80.
• IgE‐mediated food hypersensitivity: rate of IgE‐mediated food allergy in patients with EoE is 
reported to be 15–43%.
• Allergic rhinitis: rate of allergic rhinitis in patients with EoE is reported to be 40–75%.
• Asthma: rate of asthma in patients with EoE is reported to be 14–70%.
• Atopic dermatitis: rate of atopic dermatitis in patients with EoE is reported to be 40–75%.
Section 2: Prevention
No interventions have been demonstrated to prevent the development of the disease.
Screening
Not applicable for this topic.
Primary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Secondary prevention
• If the disease is food‐responsive (i.e. disease remission is achieved by avoidance of certain food 
triggers), then continued avoidance of those food triggers may prevent recurrence of EoE.
Eosinophilic Esophagitis  175
Section 3: Diagnosis (Algorithm 20.1)
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Age‐related differences in presenting symptoms are noticed with EoE. Children typically 
present with abdominal pain, gastroesophageal reflux symptoms including nausea and 
vomiting, and, at times, failure to thrive. Discerning EoE from acid‐induced gastroesophageal 
reflux disease (GERD) by symptoms alone can be difficult, although dysphagia and early 
satiety/anorexia are more commonly seen in EoE than GERD. In infants and younger children, 
symptoms are harder to delineate, as EoE may simply manifest as feeding difficulties, such as 
food refusal and gagging with foods. In adults, symptoms are better defined, with dysphagia, 
food impactions, and heartburn and/or chest pain being the most common presenting 
symptoms.
• Physical examination is useful in children to identify any abnormal growth pattern, and in 
both children and adults to identify any comorbid allergic diseases. However, no features on 
physical examination are specific in making the diagnosis of EoE.
• The diagnosis of EoE is confirmed by esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) with biopsies, 
demonstrating esophageal eosinophilia (15 or more eosinophils per HPF in the maximally 
infiltrated area of the esophageal epithelium) in the absence of increased eosinophils in other 
parts of the gastrointestinal tract, and after ruling out acid‐induced GERD by negative pH 
probe or by empiric trial with proton pump inhibitor therapy for 8 weeks. Multiple esophageal 
biopsies need to be obtained, because the disease is patchy in nature.
• Radiologic tests are not routinely recommended for the diagnosis of EoE. They can be 
helpful in selected cases to characterize esophageal abnormalities that are difficult to identify 
by endoscopy, and can provide information on the length and diameter of complicated 
esophageal strictures in EoE.
Dysphagia
Possible EoE
EoE
No remission
Remission
PPI then repeat EGD +
biopsies in 2–3 months
Likely GERD
Likely PPI-REE
>15 eosinophils/HPF
<15 eosinophils/HPF
EGD + biopsies
Algorithm 20.1  Diagnosis of eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE)
Note: EGD, esophagogastroduodenoscopy; GERD, gastroesophageal 
reflux disease; HPF, high power field; PPI‐REE, proton pump 
inhibitor‐responsive esophageal eosinophilia. Note that whenever 
remission is mentioned, it refers to clinical and histologic remission.
176  Part 1: Allergy
Differential diagnosis
Typical presentation
• A typical presentation in adults is that of a Caucasian male in his second or third decade of 
life, who presents with dysphagia and food impaction. This is because the disease seems to 
have a male predominance of 2 : 1 to 3 : 1, and is more common in the non‐elderly. Racial 
­disparity is also described, with most patients being white, non‐Hispanic. The reasons for this 
observation are still not clear. Often the patient also gives a history of IgE‐mediated food 
allergy, allergic rhinitis, asthma, and/or atopic dermatitis, and at times family history of atopy 
or esophageal food impactions.
• Children typically present differently, often with abdominal pain, intermittent emesis, and 
feeding difficulties. The child is typically described as the picky eater by his/her family. Some 
children also suffer from growth failure.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• In addition to enquiring about the symptoms described, as well as any medical history of food 
allergies and atopic diathesis, it is helpful to enquire about family history of esophageal food 
impactions or esophageal dilatations, because EoE is a relatively newly recognized disease, 
therefore it may have been under‐diagnosed in the past. Furthermore, dysphagia can be a 
difficult symptom to elicit in some patients because of the development of feeding adapta-
tional behaviors to cope with symptoms and prevent food impactions, such as eating slowly, 
prolonged chewing, drinking liquids with every bite of food, cutting foods into very small pieces, 
and at times avoiding foods with harder/lumpier textures altogether. Therefore, enquiring about 
feeding patterns is important.
Differential diagnosis
Features
Gastroesophageal reflux 
disease (GERD)
The vast majority of patients with GERD respond to antacids
Failure to thrive is very rare in children with GERD
Erosive features may be seen on endoscopy
Intraepithelial esophageal eosinophils are rare or very low in number
Infectious esophagitis 
(Candida, herpes, 
cytomegalovirus)
Intraepithelial esophageal eosinophils are low in number
Neutrophils are often present in the esophageal epithelium
The organisms can be seen in the esophageal epithelium with special 
staining
Connective tissue disease
Intraepithelial esophageal eosinophils are rare or very low in number
Esophageal mucosal abnormalities are rarely seen
• No specific blood test has shown utility in serving as a surrogate peripheral marker of 
esophageal eosinophilia in patients with EoE. Peripheral eosinophilia (absolute eosinophil 
count >300–350/mm3) was reported in 40–50% of patients with EoE. Total serum IgE levels 
are increased in 50–60% of patients with EoE. These tests can be influenced by the presence 
of comorbid allergic diseases in some patients with EoE.
• Sensitization to foods (positive skin prick tests to foods, positive serum food‐specific IgE) 
is common in children with EoE, but the significance of these positive test results remains 
unclear.
Eosinophilic Esophagitis  177
Physical examination
• Physical examination should include a neck examination to exclude any masses or an enlarged 
thyroid gland interfering with swallowing. Evaluation for growth failure should be carried out 
in children. At times, epigastric tenderness may be elicited on physical examination, especially 
in children.
Useful clinical decision rules and calculators
Not applicable for this topic.
Disease severity classification
Not applicable for this topic.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• Endoscopy may reveal one or more of the following features:
• Longitudinal furrows;
• White plaques or exudates;
• Rings (appearance referred to as trachealization of the esophagus);
• Shearing (crepe paper esophagus);
• Stricture; and
• At times, the esophagus appears normal, highlighting the importance of obtaining biopsies 
for accurate diagnosis.
• Esophageal biopsies reveal some of the following features on hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) 
staining of biopsy sections:
• Esophageal eosinophilia: eosinophilic infiltration of the epithelial layer (at least 15 eosino-
phils per HPF in the maximally involved area), at times with eosinophilic degranulation, sur-
face layering of the eosinophils, and/or formation of eosinophilic microabscesses.
• Infiltration of the epithelium by other cells: lymphocytes (commonly referred to as squiggle cells 
on H&E sections) and other immune cells that can only be seen by special staining, including 
mast cells, dendritic cells, and basophils.
• Epithelial alterations: epithelial basal zone hyperplasia, along with papillary elongation and 
dilated intercellular spaces in the epithelium.
• Lamina propria changes: subepithelial lamina propria fibrosis is seen in some patients, with 
occasional infiltration of the lamina propria by eosinophils and plasma cells.
Lists of imaging techniques
• Radiologic tests are not routinely recommended for the diagnosis of EoE. They can be helpful in 
patients with EoE and esophageal stricture or narrowing, to evaluate the length and diameter of 
the stricture.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis of disease
• To under‐diagnose EoE in children with non‐specific abdominal symptoms such as abdominal 
pain and vomiting.
• To under‐diagnose EoE in adults who do not report dysphagia because of behavioral feeding 
modifications to prevent symptoms, such as eating slowly, prolonged chewing, drinking liquids 
with every bite of food, cutting foods into very small pieces, and at times avoiding foods with 
harder or lumpier textures altogether.
178  Part 1: Allergy
• To misdiagnose EoE as chronic GERD because of similar symptoms in some patients, and the 
fact that patients with EoE can feel better with the use of proton pump inhibitor therapy 
despite persistent esophageal eosinophilia.
Section 4: Treatment (Algorithm 20.2)
Treatment rationale
• Goals of therapy are to relieve symptoms and prevent disease progression from inflamma-
tory to fibrostenosis, as delay in diagnosis and increasing patient age seem to correlate with 
fibrostenotic disease.
• No FDA‐approved therapies for EoE yet exist. Therefore, therapy consists mostly of dietary 
restriction or topical corticosteroids to the esophagus. Dietary therapy can consist of an ele-
mental diet (amino acid‐based formula, at times with continued ingestion of only 1–2 foods), 
an allergy test‐directed elimination diet (removing foods that test positive on skin prick tests 
and atopy patch tests), or an empiric elimination diet (removing foods known to be typical food 
allergens in the general population, such as milk, wheat, egg, soy, nuts, and seafood). Success 
rate of these dietary elimination therapies, defined as clinical and histologic disease remission, 
range from 50% to 95%.
• Topical corticosteroid therapies to the esophagus have also been used. These consist of off‐
label use of various doses of inhaled medications to swallow, such as fluticasone sprayed and 
swallowed, or oral viscous budesonide (liquid budesonide that is thickened with a sugar substi-
tute so that it coats the esophagus when swallowed), with very variable success rates.
EoE conﬁrmed by EGD+biopsies
- Consider allergy testing to foods (SPT, APT)
- Educate patient and family
- Discuss various therapy options
Dietary therapy
- Elemental diet
- Test-directed elimination diet
- Empiric elimination diet
No remission
No remission
Remission
Remission
EGD+biopsies in 2–3 months
Pharmacological therapy
with topical corticosteroids
(ﬂuticasone, budesonide)
- Consider
changing
dose/steroid
- Review
method of
administration
- Consider
stricter diet if/
when feasible
- Consider
switching to
corticosteroids
Consider re-
introduction of
safe foods one
at a time with
clinical/
histological
follow-up
Consider
continuing
steroids as a
maintenance
therapy
EGD+biopsies in 2–3 months
Algorithm 20.2  Treatment of EoE
Note: APT, atopy patch tests; EGD, esophagogastroduodenoscopy; SPT, skin prick tests. Note that whenever 
remission is mentioned, it refers to clinical and histologic remission.
Eosinophilic Esophagitis  179
When to hospitalize
• Hospitalization is rare for patients with EoE. It may occur for a few reasons:
• Observation following a complicated emergency removal of a food impacted in the 
esophagus;
• Esophageal perforation (occurring spontaneously with a severe food impaction, or following 
a complicated esophageal dilatation for a stricture); or
• Hydration in a patient who develops severe anxiety and refusal to eat or drink following a 
severe esophageal food impaction.
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comment
Conservative
Observation only
Being debated for truly asymptomatic patients with 
EoE, due to the risk of esophageal narrowing and 
stricture formation over time
Medical
Off‐label use of fluticasone inhalation spray 
to swallow
Off‐label use of budesonide to swallow 
(thickened with a sugar substitute to render 
it viscous)
Oral corticosteroids
Monitor for risk of oropharyngeal and/or 
esophageal candidal infection; unknown long‐
term risks
Monitor for risk of oropharyngeal and/or 
esophageal candidal infection; unknown long‐
term risks
Not advisable as a chronic therapy option, because 
of the plethora of potential systemic side effects
Psychological
Counseling
Recommended for reduced quality of life; maladaptive 
coping with the disease or its therapy
Dietary
Elemental diet (amino acid‐based formula 
±1–2 foods)
Test‐directed elimination diet (based on 
positive skin prick tests and atopy patch tests 
to foods)
Empiric elimination diet (avoiding milk, 
wheat, egg, soy, nuts, seafood)
Difficult to implement in older children and adults 
because of its very restrictive nature; food introductions 
under close monitoring are advised as soon as disease 
remission is achieved
Consultation with a dietitian is recommended to 
ensure adequate restriction and proper caloric intake 
and balance
Consultation with a dietitian is recommended to 
ensure adequate restriction and proper caloric intake 
and balance
Prevention/management of complications
• Esophageal stricture or narrowing may be present with prolonged disease, requiring esophageal 
dilatation at times.
• Risk of osteoporosis, cataract formation, or other systemic side effects with long‐term use of 
topical corticosteroids to the esophagus is unknown.
• Dietary therapies can be associated with decreased quality of life or malnutrition if not properly 
monitored and difficulties addressed.
180  Part 1: Allergy
Section 5: Special populations
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 6: Prognosis
Natural history of untreated disease
• If left untreated, EoE may lead to complications such as esophageal narrowing and strictures.
Prognosis for treated patients
Not applicable for this topic.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 7: Reading list
Chehade M, Lucendo AJ, Achem SR, Souza RF. Causes, evaluation, and consequences of eosinophilic esophagi-
tis. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2013:1300:110–8
Liacouras CA, Furuta GT, Hirano I, Atkins D, Attwood SE, Bonis PA, et al. Eosinophilic esophagitis: updated 
consensus and recommendations for children and adults. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2011;128:3–20
Lieberman JA, Chehade M. Eosinophilic esophagitis: diagnosis and management. Immunol Allergy Clin N Am 
2012;32:67–81
Schoepfer AM, Safroneeva E, Bussmann C, Kuchen T, Portmann S, Simon HU, et al. Delay in diagnosis of 
eosinophilic esophagitis increases risk for stricture formation in a time‐dependent manner. Gastroenterology 
2013;145:1230–6
Straumann A, Aceves SS, Blanchard C, Collins MH, Furuta GT, Hirano I, et al. Pediatric and adult eosinophilic 
esophagitis: similarities and differences. Allergy 2012;67:477–90
Suggested websites
American Partnership for Eosinophilic Disorders. www.apfed.org
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Untreated EoE seems to progress from an inflammatory to a fibrostenotic disease over time.
• Esophageal cancer has not been described in EoE. However, the disease is relatively new in 
terms of its recognition and follow‐up.
Clinical pearls
• Monitor patients on dietary elimination therapy to ensure adequate caloric intake and 
balance. A dietitian with expertise in food allergy is important for this.
• Reintroduce foods as soon as disease remission is achieved, with clinical and histologic 
follow‐up, to ensure that foods that are not EoE triggers for the patient are being 
consumed again.
• Verify for any risk of immediate allergic reactivity to the newly introduced food following a 
long period of avoidance of that food, prior to offering it to the patient. An allergist with 
expertise in food allergy is important for this.
• Monitor patients for any decreased quality of life or coping difficulties and provide counseling 
when needed. A mental health professional may be needed for this.
Eosinophilic Esophagitis  181
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
ACG clinical guideline: 
Evidenced based approach to 
the diagnosis and management 
of esophageal eosinophilia and 
eosinophilic esophagitis
American College of 
Gastroenterology (ACG)
2013
(http://gi.org/guideline/evidenced‐
based‐approach‐to‐the‐diagnosis‐and‐
management‐of‐esophageal‐eosinophilia‐
and‐eosinophilic‐esophagitis‐eoe/)
International society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Management guidelines of 
eosinophilic esophagitis in 
childhood
European Society for Pediatric 
Gastroenterology, Hepatology, 
and Nutrition (ESPGHAN)
2014
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/ 
24378521)
Section 9: Evidence
Type of evidence
Title, comment
Date
Systematic review
Eosinophilic esophagitis: Updated consensus 
and recommendations for children and adults
Comment: Summary of what is known and 
what still needs to be investigated in EoE, with 
consensus recommendations for diagnosis 
and management
2011
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/21477849)
Section 10: Images
(A)
(B)
(C)
Figure 20.1  Inflammatory features of eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) on endoscopy. Patients with EoE can 
present with furrows (A), white plaques (B), or white plaques aligning along the furrows (C) on endoscopy. 
See color plate 20.1.
182  Part 1: Allergy
(A)
(B)
(C)
Figure 20.2  Fibrostenotic features of EoE on endoscopy. Rings (A), esophageal stricture (B), or esophageal 
shearing (C) can be present in patients with advanced EoE on endoscopy. See color plate 20.2.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at: 
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for  
patients, and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
  183
Eosinophilic Gastroenteritis
Mirna Chehade
Division of Allergy/Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 21
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• EG is a disease characterized by eosinophilic infiltration of the gastric and/or duodenal mucosae 
with related symptoms, in the absence of other causes of tissue eosinophilia.
Disease classification
Not applicable for this topic.
Incidence/prevalence
• No data exist as to the incidence or prevalence of EG. EG seems to be much less prevalent than 
eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE).
• EG can affect adults, children, and infants.
Etiology
• Multiple food allergens can act as triggers for EG, especially in children.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• The pathogenesis of EG is poorly understood.
Overall Bottom Line
• Eosinophilic gastroenteritis (EG) is a disease characterized by eosinophilic infiltration of the 
gastric and/or duodenal mucosae with related symptoms, in the absence of other causes of 
tissue eosinophilia.
• EG is rare, but seems to affect all age groups.
• The pathogenesis of EG is poorly understood.
• Symptoms relate to the depth of tissue that the eosinophils infiltrate. Mucosal disease 
manifests with abdominal pain, emesis, and diarrhea; muscular disease leads to obstructive 
symptoms; and serosal disease is associated with ascites. The mucosal type is the most 
common. Children with EG can also present with growth failure. Gastrointestinal bleeding can 
rarely occur in children and adults with EG, likely secondary to ulcer formation. A subset of 
patients with EG can also have anemia and edema thought to be secondary to an associated 
protein‐losing enteropathy (PLE), where occult blood and protein losses occur.
• There are no FDA‐approved therapies for EG. Systemic corticosteroids have been shown to be 
effective but disease relapse may occur following discontinuation. Elemental diets have shown 
effectiveness in some children with EG.
184  Part 1: Allergy
• Histopathologically, while eosinophils are normally present in the gastric and duodenal 
mucosae, they are significantly increased in number in EG.
• Eosinophils can infiltrate various depths of the gastric and duodenal mucosae, resulting in 
mucosal, muscular, and/or serosal disease, with varying clinical manifestations as a result.
Predictive/risk factors
• Allergic rhinitis: allergic rhinitis is common in patients with EG, especially the mucosal type.
• Asthma: asthma is common in patients with EG, especially the mucosal type.
• Atopic dermatitis: atopic dermatitis is common in patients with EG, especially the mucosal 
type.
Section 2: Prevention
No interventions have been demonstrated to prevent the development of the disease.
Screening
Not applicable for this topic.
Primary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Secondary prevention
• If the disease is food‐responsive (i.e. remission is achieved by avoidance of certain food ­triggers), 
then continued avoidance of these food triggers may prevent recurrence of EG. This is particu-
larly true in children.
Section 3: Diagnosis (Algorithm 21.1)
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Symptoms relate to the depth of tissue that the eosinophils infiltrate. Mucosal disease 
manifests with abdominal pain, emesis, and diarrhea; muscular disease leads to obstructive 
symptoms; and serosal disease is associated with ascites. The mucosal type is the most 
common. Children with EG can also present with growth failure. Gastrointestinal bleeding can 
rarely occur in children and adults with EG, likely secondary to ulcer formation. A subset of 
patients with EG can also have anemia and edema thought to be secondary to an associated 
PLE, where occult blood and protein losses occur.
• Physical examination may reveal abdominal tenderness, pallor in those with anemia, and edema 
in those with PLE. Abdominal distension may be seen in EG patients with muscular involvement 
resulting from obstruction. Ascites may be detected in patients with serosal disease.
• The diagnosis of mucosal EG (the most common type) is confirmed by 
esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) with biopsies, demonstrating gastric and/or duodenal 
eosinophilia that is not accompanied by other inflammatory cells such as neutrophils. Deeper 
involvement with eosinophilia may require a laparotomy for diagnosis.
• Blood tests may reveal anemia in those with a bleeding ulcer or those with PLE, and 
hypoproteinemia and hypoalbuminemia in those with PLE. Peripheral eosinophilia is variable 
in patients with EG.
• Radiological tests are helpful in EG patients with symptoms of obstruction (e.g. abdominal 
X‐ray, upper gastrointestinal series) and those with suspected ascites (e.g. abdominal 
sonogram).
Eosinophilic Gastroenteritis  185
Differential diagnosis
Differential diagnosis
Features
Irritable bowel syndrome
No inflammation and no increase in eosinophil numbers are seen on 
gastric and duodenal biopsies
Inflammatory bowel disease
Gastrointestinal eosinophilia not as severe as in EG, and is admixed 
with other inflammatory infiltrates
Hypereosinophilic syndrome
Other organs are involved with eosinophilia
Parasitic infection
History of travel to areas or settings with high rates of parasitic 
infections
Recovery of ova or parasites upon stool testing
Drug reaction
History of taking medications or supplements associated with 
eosinophilia
Collagen vascular disease
Suggestive history is present
Typical presentation
• A typical presentation is that of a patient with abdominal pain, and at times bloating. Vomiting 
and/or diarrhea can often be present as well. Children also often suffer from growth failure. 
Often, the patient also gives history of atopy, including allergic rhinitis, asthma, and/or atopic 
dermatitis.
Abdominal pain
vomiting
diarrhea
EGD + biopsies
Possible EG
Sheets of eosinophils
and no other changes
Negative investigations
EG
Diseases
mimicking EG
Positive investigations
Mild GI eosinophilia
admixed with other cells
Rule out
etiologies
other than EG
(e.g. Crohn's
disease)
Rule out other causes of
GI eosinophilia
(parasitic infection, drug
reaction, HES, etc)
Algorithm 21.1  Diagnosis of eosinophilic gastroenteritis (EG)
Note: EGD, esophagogastroduodenoscopy; GI, gastrointestinal; HES, hypereosinophilic 
syndrome; IBS, irritable bowel syndrome.
186  Part 1: Allergy
Clinical diagnosis
History
• In addition to enquiring about the symptoms described, as well as any medical history of food 
allergies and atopic diathesis, it is helpful to enquire about symptoms suggestive of Crohn’s 
disease, medication history, joint symptoms, and history of travel or swimming in stagnant 
water ponds, to rule out other diseases mimicking EG.
Physical examination
• Abdominal examination is important, noting for any tenderness. Severe epigastric tenderness 
may suggest an ulcer or severe eosinophilic inflammation. In addition, examine for abdominal 
distension and for ascites. Presence of pallor, and periorbital or peripheral pitting edema should 
be noted.
Useful clinical decision rules and calculators
Not applicable for this topic.
Disease severity classification
Not applicable for this topic.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• The diagnosis of EG requires performing an EGD with biopsies of the gastric and duodenal 
mucosae. Grossly, the mucosa may appear normal, or may reveal erosions or even ulcers. Ulcers 
can be deep enough in some patients to result in occult bleeding and anemia, and can result 
in the appearance of pseudopolyps in the stomach.
• Histologically, dense gastric and/or duodenal mucosal eosinophilic infiltration, not accompa-
nied by other inflammatory cells such as neutrophils, is present. Eosinophils may infiltrate the 
glands or the surface epithelium in some patients.
• Peripheral eosinophilia and elevated serum total IgE are seen in half of the patients with EG.
• In patients with associated PLE, anemia, hypoproteinemia, and hypoalbuminemia are present. 
Confirmation of PLE can be done by checking for stool alpha‐1‐antitrypsin, which will be ele-
vated, and by checking stools for occult blood, which will be positive. As only small protein 
molecules leak through the gut in PLE, serum IgG levels can sometimes be low while IgM and 
IgA levels remain normal.
Lists of imaging techniques
• Radiologic tests are not routinely recommended for the diagnosis of EG. They may be helpful 
in assisting with the diagnosis of obstruction or ascites in those patients with the muscular or 
serosal type of EG, respectively.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis of disease
• To misdiagnose EG as irritable bowel syndrome in adults with chronic non‐specific abdominal 
pain and intermittent or mild diarrhea.
• To confuse Crohn’s disease with EG, since early Crohn’s disease can present with gastrointesti-
nal tissue eosinophilia.
• To confuse hypereosinophilic syndrome (HES) as EG in patients with gastrointestinal eosino-
philia, the latter being one possible feature of HES.
Eosinophilic Gastroenteritis  187
Section 4: Treatment (Algorithm 21.2)
Treatment rationale
• Goals of therapy are to relieve symptoms and prevent disease complications such as bleeding 
ulcers. No FDA‐approved therapies for EG yet exist.
• Dietary restriction therapies may be effective in some patients, mostly in the pediatric popula-
tion. An elemental diet consisting of an amino acid‐based formula is highly effective in chil-
dren. Food allergy test‐directed dietary elimination therapy has not been successful because 
the food allergic mechanism in EG seems to be non‐IgE mediated.
• Oral corticosteroids are effective in treating EG. However, long‐term use may be needed in 
some patients to prevent disease relapse, therefore risking potential systemic side effects of 
corticosteroids. Topical corticosteroids to the stomach were attempted in a case series of 
patients with EG with symptomatic relief, although histologic verification for disease remission 
was not available in those patients. Cromolyn and montelukast have been reported to be suc-
cessful in some patients with EG. However, data on these two drugs are limited to case reports. 
As for biologic therapies, the monoclonal humanized anti‐IgE antibody omalizumab was given 
to adults with EG at one center, with a resultant decrease in gastric and duodenal eosinophilia, 
but not to a significant degree. Symptoms, however, significantly improved in the EG patients, 
suggesting that anti‐IgE therapy may be a potential candidate for future therapeutic trials in EG 
patients, alone or in combination with other therapies.
When to hospitalize
• Hospitalization is rare for patients with EG. It may occur for a severely bleeding ulcer, complica-
tions from obstruction in EG with muscular involvement, or peritonitis in the case of EG with 
serosal disease.
EG conﬁrmed by EGD+biopsies
- Consider allergy testing to foods (SPT, APT)
- Educate patient and family
- Discuss various therapy options
EGD+biopsies in 2–3 months
EGD+ biopsies in 2–3 months
No remission
No remission
- Consider
changing
dose/steroid
Monitor for any
relapse upon
discontinuation
of steroids
- Consider
stricter diet if/
when feasible
- Consider
switching to
corticosteroids
Consider re-
introduction of
safe foods one
at a time with
clinical/histological
follow-up
Remission
Remission
Pharmacological therapy
(systemic corticosteroids
most effective)
Dietary therapy
(Elemental diet most
effective in children)
Algorithm 21.2  Treatment of EGD
Note: APT, atopy patch tests; EGD, esophagogastroduodenoscopy; SPT, skin prick tests. Note that whenever 
remission is mentioned, it refers to clinical and histologic remission.
188  Part 1: Allergy
Managing the hospitalized patient
Not applicable for this topic.
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comment
Conservative
Observation only
Being debated for truly asymptomatic patients with EG, due 
to the risk of ulcers and bleeding
Medical
Off‐label use of budesonide (crushed 
beads in water) to take at bedtime
Oral corticosteroids
Efficacy uncertain, unknown short‐term and long‐term risks
Not advisable as a chronic therapy option, due to plethora of 
systemic side effects
Psychological
Counseling
Recommended for reduced quality of life; maladaptive coping 
with the disease or its therapy
Dietary
Elemental diet (amino acid‐based 
formula ±1–2 foods)
Difficult to implement in older children and adults because 
of its very restrictive nature; may be less effective in adults; 
food introductions under close monitoring needed as soon as 
disease remission is achieved
Prevention/management of complications
• Risk of osteoporosis or cataract formation with repeated or chronic use of oral corticosteroids.
• Dietary therapies can be associated with decreased quality of life or malnutrition if not properly 
monitored and difficulties addressed.
Section 5: Special populations
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 6: Prognosis
Clinical pearls
• Monitor patients on dietary elimination therapy to ensure adequate caloric intake and 
balance. A dietitian with expertise in food allergy is important for management.
• Reintroduce foods as soon as disease remission is achieved, with clinical and histologic follow‐
up, to ensure that foods that are not EG triggers for the patient are being consumed again.
• Wean off corticosteroid therapy whenever possible to prevent systemic complications of the 
medication.
• Monitor patients for any decreased quality of life or coping difficulties and provide counseling 
when needed. A mental health professional may be needed for this.
Bottom line/clinical pearl
• Treatment is needed to alleviate symptoms and prevent serious complications such as bleeding 
ulcers during flare‐ups of EG.
Eosinophilic Gastroenteritis  189
Natural history of untreated disease
• Untreated EG may have three possible courses over time: no relapse following therapy, remit-
ting/relapsing, or chronic.
Prognosis for treated patients
Not applicable for this topic.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 7: Reading list
Chang JY, Choung RS, Lee RM, Locke GR 3rd, Schleck CD, Zinsmeister AR, et al. A shift in the clinical spectrum 
of eosinophilic gastroenteritis toward the mucosal disease type. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2010;8:669–75
Chehade M, Magid MS, Mofidi S, Nowak‐Wegrzyn A, Sampson HA, Sicherer SH. Allergic eosinophilic gastro-
enteritis with protein‐losing enteropathy: intestinal pathology, clinical course, and long‐term follow‐up. 
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2006;42:516–21
Chehade M, Sicherer SH, Magid MS, Rosenberg HK, Morotti RA. Multiple exudative ulcers and pseudopolyps 
in allergic eosinophilic gastroenteritis that responded to dietary therapy. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 
2007;45:354–7
Foroughi S, Foster B, Kim N, Bernardino LB, Scott LM, Hamilton RG, et al. Anti‐IgE treatment of eosinophil‐
associated gastrointestinal disorders. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2007;120:594–601
Goldman H, Proujansky R. Allergic proctitis and gastroenteritis in children: clinical and mucosal biopsy features 
in 53 cases. Am J Surg Pathol 1986;10:75–86
Klein NC, Hargrove RL, Sleisenger MH, Jeffries GH. Eosinophilic gastroenteritis. Medicine 1970;49:299–319
Pineton de Chambrun G, Gonzalez F, Canva JY, Gonzalez S, Houssin L, Desreumaux P, et al. Natural history of 
eosinophilic gastroenteritis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2011;9:950–6
Prussin C, Lee J, Foster B. Eosinophilic gastrointestinal disease and peanut allergy are alternatively associated 
with IL‐5+ and IL‐5(–) T(H)2 responses. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2009;124:1326–32
Talley NJ, Shorter RG, Phillips SF, Zinsmeister AR. Eosinophilic gastroenteritis: a clinicopathological study of 
patients with disease of the mucosa, muscle layer, and subserosal tissues. Gut 1990;31:54–8.
Suggested website
American Partnership for Eosinophilic Disorders. www.apfed.org
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Not applicable for this topic.
International society guidelines
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 9: Evidence
Type of evidence
Title, comment
Date
Systematic review
Summary and recommendations: 
Classification of gastrointestinal 
manifestations due to immunologic reactions 
to foods in infants and young children
Comment: Comprehensive summary of the 
IgE‐mediated and non‐IgE‐mediated food 
allergies in children, including EG
2000
(http://journals.lww.com/jpgn/
Fulltext/2000/01001/Summary_ 
and_Recommendations__ 
Classification_of.13.aspx#)
190  Part 1: Allergy
Section 10: Images
6
5
(A)
(B)
Figure 21.1  Possible features of eosinophilic gastroenteritis (EG) on endoscopy include multiple erosions of 
the gastric mucosa (A) or multiple gastric pseudopolyps in advanced cases (B). See color plate 21.1.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at: 
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for  
patients, and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson.  
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.  
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
  191
Food Allergy‐Induced Anaphylaxis
Kate Welch and Hugh A. Sampson
Jaffe Food Allergy Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 22
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• Food‐induced anaphylaxis is a severe allergic reaction resulting from the ingestion of a food aller-
gen. It most commonly involves the rapid onset of skin or mucosal tissue symptoms (e.g. hives, 
flushing, or oral mucosal swelling) in addition to respiratory compromise (dyspnea, shortness of 
breath, wheezing) and/or cardiovascular symptoms (light‐headedness, dizziness, hypotension).
• Alternatively, it can be defined as the involvement of two or more of the following areas after 
the ingestion of a known food allergen: skin/mucosal tissue symptoms, respiratory compro-
mise, hypotension/syncope, and persistent gastrointestinal symptoms, such as abdominal pain 
and vomiting.
Disease classification
• Food‐induced anaphylaxis is, by definition, a severe reaction, but may be classified as mild, 
moderate, or severe. It is most commonly caused by ingestion of a food to which a patient has 
an IgE‐mediated allergy.
• A less common form of the disease, known as food‐dependent, exercised‐induced anaphylaxis 
(FDEIA) occurs only after exercise is undertaken within several hours after a known allergen is 
ingested. In rare cases, this can occur with exercise after the ingestion of any food, not simply 
foods to which a patient has a known allergy.
Incidence/prevalence
• Food allergy is the leading cause of anaphylaxis outside of the hospital setting.
Overall Bottom Line
• Anaphylaxis is a severe and life‐threatening allergic reaction that can be caused by the 
ingestion of a food to which a patient is allergic.
• It is caused by the release of inflammatory mediators from mast cells and basophils after cross 
linkage of food allergen with allergen‐specific IgE antibodies bound to these cells.
• Symptoms often involve the skin and mucosal tissue in conjunction with respiratory or 
cardiovascular compromise and occur within minutes to hours after ingestion of the allergen.
• Treatment includes the intramuscular injection of epinephrine and immediate medical 
attention for supportive care.
• Without treatment, food‐induced anaphylaxis can result in death.
192  Part 1: Allergy
• Food allergic reactions account for more than 200 000 emergency room visits each year, and 
the CDC estimates that food allergies among children increased approximately 50% between 
1997 and 2011.
• Episodes of anaphylaxis from all causes are estimated at a lifetime prevalence of 0.05–2%.
• Less than 1% of all‐cause cases of anaphylaxis prove fatal.
Economic impact
• The economic cost of food‐related anaphylaxis is difficult to measure, but the estimated cost of 
food allergies in the pediatric population alone is nearly $25 billion per year.
Etiology
• Food‐related anaphylaxis occurs after a patient ingests a food to which he or she has an 
IgE‐mediated food allergy.
• The most common allergens to trigger an anaphylactic reaction include peanuts, tree nuts, and 
shellfish, although in children, milk, egg, and sesame are also common culprits.
• Anaphylaxis caused by mere contact with a food rather than actual ingestion has not been 
reliably validated, although inhalation of cooking vapors (steam), particularly involving seafood, 
has been implicated in rare reactions.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• Once a food allergen is ingested and crosses the oral or gastrointestinal lining, it enters the 
­circulation, where it can bind to allergen‐specific IgE antibodies. These antibodies are attached 
to receptors on basophils and mast cells, which when cross‐linked by allergen, degranulate 
and release their pro‐inflammatory cytokines. Such inflammatory mediators lead to the classic 
symptoms of flushing, swelling, urticaria, respiratory distress, and potentially intravascular 
collapse.
Predictive/risk factors (H2)
• Any person with a food allergy, whether diagnosed or undiagnosed, is potentially at risk of 
anaphylaxis following the ingestion of a food allergen. Several risk factors put patients at slightly 
higher risk: large quantity of ingested food allergen, presence of asthma (especially poorly con-
trolled asthma), extreme sensitivity (i.e. prior reaction to only a small amount of ingested food), 
and a prior history of anaphylaxis.
Section 2: Prevention
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• The key to prevention involves avoiding the ingestion of known allergens. If the ingestion of 
a food allergen is suspected, prompt treatment with a liquid antihistamine is warranted. If 
symptoms of anaphylaxis begin to develop, epinephrine should be injected intramuscularly 
and medical attention sought immediately. In individuals who experienced a previous severe 
anaphylactic reaction following ingestion of a food allergen, administration of epinephrine 
even prior to the development of obvious symptoms is warranted. Unfortunately, there is 
no way to predict the severity of an allergic reaction.
Food Allergy‐Induced Anaphylaxis  193
Screening
• While there is no way to screen for risk of anaphylaxis, food allergy testing, in the form of a 
detailed history as well as skin prick testing and serum IgE evaluation, helps to identify food 
allergies and guide avoidance patterns.
Primary prevention
• Education on how to recognize hidden sources of food allergens and avoidance of those 
known allergens.
• Education on how to recognize early signs of a pending anaphylactic reaction.
• Adherence to a patient‐specific “emergency action plan” which guides dosing of antihista-
mines and need for epinephrine injections based on severity of symptoms.
Secondary prevention
• Education and avoidance are the best ways to prevent recurrent severe allergic reactions.
Section 3: Diagnosis
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Food‐induced anaphylaxis is a clinical diagnosis based upon a detailed history of ingestion and 
evaluation of characteristic signs and symptoms (see Table: Diagnosis of anaphylaxis).
• A panel of experts has agreed upon the clinical criteria needed for diagnosis as any one of the 
following three scenarios:
• Acute onset of an illness (minutes to several hours) with involvement of the skin, mucosal 
tissue, or both (i.e. generalized hives, pruritus or flushing, swollen lips‐tongue‐uvula) and at 
least one of the following:
➤
➤respiratory compromise (i.e. dyspnea, wheeze‐bronchospasm, stridor, hypoxemia);
➤
➤reduced BP or associated symptoms of end‐organ dysfunction (i.e. hypotonia, collapse, 
syncope, incontinence).
• Two or more of the following that occur rapidly after exposure to a likely allergen for that 
patient (minutes to several hours):
➤
➤involvement of the skin‐mucosal tissue (i.e. generalized hives, pruritus or flushing, swollen 
lips–tongue–uvula);
➤
➤respiratory compromise (i.e. dyspnea, wheeze–bronchospasm, stridor, hypoxemia);
➤
➤reduced BP or associated symptoms of end‐organ dysfunction (i.e. hypotonia, collapse, 
syncope, incontinence);
➤
➤persistent gastrointestinal symptoms (i.e. crampy abdominal pain, vomiting).
• Reduced blood pressure (BP) after exposure to a known allergen for that patient (minutes to 
several hours):
➤
➤infants and children: low systolic BP or greater than 30% decrease in systolic BP;
➤
➤adults: systolic BP of less than 90 mmHg or greater than 30% decrease from the person’s 
baseline.
• Biphasic anaphylactic reactions occur in up to 20% of anaphylactic reactions and are 
defined as a recurrence of symptoms after the apparent resolution of the initial event. It 
typically occurs within 1–4 hours following the initial event and should be diagnosed and 
managed similarly.
194  Part 1: Allergy
Differential diagnosis
Typical presentation
• Food‐induced anaphylaxis is typically seen in the emergency room, as it is a severe reaction neces-
sitating urgent care. Upon ingestion of a previously unknown food allergen or accidental inges-
tion of a known culprit, a patient will develop the acute onset of symptoms varying from mucosal, 
skin, gastrointestinal, or respiratory involvement. There is slight variability in presentation between 
children and adults. In the pediatric population, gastrointestinal and cutaneous symptoms tend 
to predominate; shock is less common than in adults. Ideally, symptoms are recognized as those 
of anaphylaxis, and an epinephrine auto‐injector is used prior to presentation to the hospital.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• The clinician should enquire about the timing of previously ingested foods, as most anaphylac-
tic reactions to foods will occur within minutes to several hours of ingestion. Concomitant use 
of NSAIDs or alcohol may exacerbate symptoms, and this should be discussed as well. A history 
of asthma is important to note, as these patients may have more severe symptoms. Also, a his-
tory of beta‐blocker use may render anaphylactic symptoms more difficult to treat.
Physical examination
• A rapid assessment of vital signs is critical as well as evaluation of the airway. Any hypoxia or 
hypotension should be treated immediately with supplemental oxygen and intravenous 
fluids.
• ENT examination should look for signs of oropharyngeal swelling that may obstruct the airway 
and necessitate intubation.
• Lung examination should focus on signs of wheezing.
• An assessment of the skin for rash or hives and an abdominal examination complete the initial 
evaluation.
Useful clinical decision rules and calculators (Table 22.1)
• Some cases of food‐induced anaphylaxis require multiple injections of epinephrine. If a patient 
is still symptomatic after the initial injection, subsequent doses can be given at 10‐minute inter-
vals. Ideally, the patient is in an emergent setting at this point, where attention can also be 
given to other means of supportive care.
Differential diagnosis
Features
Asthma exacerbation
Wheezing is predominant symptom
Aspiration
Airway symptoms predominate; no ingestion of allergen
Acute urticaria
No mucosal or airway involvement
Panic attack
No evidence of mucosal or gastrointestinal involvement; able 
to be calmed or “talked down”
Vasovagal reactions
Clinical history of precipitant
Reactions caused by excess 
endogenous production of histamine
Laboratory tests confirm such disorders as mastocytosis, 
urticarial pigmentosa
Other forms of shock
History of bleeding, infection, hypoglycemia, cardiac disease, 
etc.
“Restaurant syndromes”
Ingestions of MSG, sulfites, fish (scombroidosis)
Food Allergy‐Induced Anaphylaxis  195
Disease severity classification
• Anaphylaxis is by definition a severe reaction.
• Biphasic symptoms, which occur in up to 20% of reactions, typically occur within 1–4 hours 
after initial symptom resolution. However, some cases have been reported up to 78 hours later.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• There is no reliable laboratory test to define food‐induced anaphylaxis.
• Elevated serum tryptase, which may be present in other forms of anaphylaxis, are often not 
found in food‐induced cases.
• Elevated urine or serum, typically histamine, occurs during anaphylactic reactions, but requires 
special handling procedures because of the lability of histamine and therefore is not available 
in emergency room settings.
Lists of imaging techniques
• There are no imaging techniques routinely used in the diagnosis of food‐induced anaphylaxis.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis of disease
• Delay of self‐treatment because of fear of epinephrine use or under‐estimation of symptom 
severity are the major pitfalls seen outside of the professional setting.
Section 4: Treatment (Algorithm 22.1)
Treatment rationale
• When food‐induced anaphylaxis is suspected or recognized, self‐injection of epinephrine is the 
mainstay of treatment. Other methods of supportive care, such as supplemental oxygen or 
intravenous fluids, can be provided as needed in a hospital setting. Bronchodilators and intra-
venous steroids or antihistamines may be added as secondary management.
Table 22.1  Diagnosis of anaphylaxis
Anaphylaxis is highly likely when any one of the following 3 criteria are fulfilled
1.  Acute onset of an illness (minutes to several hours) with involvement of the skin, mucosal tissue, 
or both (eg, generalized hives, pruritus or flushing, swollen lips‐tongue‐uvula)
AND AT LEAST ONE OF THE FOLLOWING
     a.  Respiratory compromise (eg, Dyspnea, wheezed‐bronchospasm, stridor, reduced PEF, hypoxemia)
     b.  Reduced BP or associated symptoms of end‐organ dysfunction (eg, hypotonia [collapse], syncope, 
incontinence)
2.  Two or more of the following that occur rapidly after exposure to a likely allergen for that patient 
(minutes to several hours):
     a.  Involvement of the skin‐mucosal tissue (eg, generalized hives, itch‐flush, swollen lips‐tongue‐uvula)
     b.  Respiratory compromise (eg, dyspnea, wheeze‐bronchospasm, stridor, reduced PEF, hypoxemia)
     c.  Reduced BP or associated symptoms (eg, hypotonia [collapse], syncope, incontinence)
     d.  Persistent gastrointestinal symptoms (eg, crampy abdominal pain, vomiting)
3.  Reduced BP after exposure to known allergen for that patient (minutes to several hours):
     a.  Infants and children: low systolic BP (age specific) or greater than 30% decrease in systolic BP*
     b.  Adults: systolic BP of less than 90 mmHg or greater than 30% decrease from that person’s baseline
PEF, Peak expiratory flow; BP, blood pressure.
*Low systolic blood pressure for children is defined as less than 70 mmHg from 1 month to 1 year, less than 
(70 mm Hg + [2 × age]) from 1 to 10 years, and less than 90 mmHg from 11 to 17 years.
Source: Sampson HA, et al. Second symposium on the definition and management of anaphylaxis: summary 
report—Second National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease/Food Allergy and Anaphylaxis Network symposium. 
Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 2006;117:391–7. Reproduced with permission of Elsevier.
196  Part 1: Allergy
When to hospitalize
• Any patient suspected of having a severe allergic reaction should seek medical care in an emer-
gency room setting immediately, and all patients are advised to call 911 or go to the nearest 
emergency room after administering injectable epinephrine.
• Cases of severe food allergy can often be managed in the emergency room with close attention 
to vital signs and patency of the airway. Further doses of epinephrine or treatment with IV 
antihistamines, steroids, and fluids may be warranted.
Is the history consistent with a previous
episode of anaphylaxis?
Consider
consultation with
allergist/immunologist
Is cause readily identiﬁed by history?
Are further diagnostic
tests indicated: allergy
skin tests or in vitro tests,
challenge tests?
Testing identiﬁes speciﬁc
cause of anaphylaxis?
Diagnosis made for speciﬁc cause of anaphylaxis
Management of anaphylaxis
General: Patient education
Speciﬁc: Avoidance (e.g., food)
Risk assessment
Consider appropriate discontinuation of ACE inhibitors and beta blockers
Medication: self-administered epinephrine
Immunotherapy (e.g., Hymenoptera)
Desensitization (e.g., penicillin)
Graded challenge (e.g., local anesthetic)
Premedication (e.g., radiocontrast)
Reconsider clinical diagnosis
Reconsider idiopathic anaphylaxis
Consider other triggers
Consider further testing
Management    See box 10
Consider idiopathic anaphylaxis.
See box 10
• Diagnosis established on basis of history
• Risk of testing
• Limitations of tests
• Patient refuses tests
• Other management options available
• Management      See box 10
1
1A
3
4
6
8
5
7
9
10
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
2
Pursue other diagnoses or
make appropriate referral
Algorithm 22.1  Management of anaphylaxis
Source: Lieberman P, et al. The diagnosis and management of anaphylaxis practice parameter: 2010 update. 
J Allergy Clin Immunol 2010;126:477–80. Reproduced with permission of Elsevier.
Food Allergy‐Induced Anaphylaxis  197
• Patients with severe symptoms or those needing intensive treatment should be admitted for 
further observation until resolution of symptoms.
Managing the hospitalized patient
• If a patient is hospitalized, attention must be paid to serial evaluation of vital signs, O2 satura-
tion, physical examination, and symptoms such as shortness of breath, abdominal pain, and 
mucocutaneous irritation. This will guide the need for further treatment or supportive care.
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comment
Conservative
Oral antihistamines are used in the management 
of minor food allergic reactions but are second 
line treatment for anaphylaxis
Medical
Injectable epinephrine is the mainstay of treatment
Intravenous steroids and antihistamines can also 
be used for symptom control
Radiological
Chest X‐ray should be considered in cases where 
foreign body aspiration is high on the differential 
diagnosis
Psychological
Some patients, particularly in the pediatric 
population, can suffer anxiety and fear after an 
episode of anaphylaxis. Behavioral therapy is 
recommended in this population of patients
Prevention/management of complications
• Injectable epinephrine will likely cause a sensation or rapid heartbeat or sometimes palpita-
tions, and patients should be educated on this when the injector is prescribed.
Section 5: Special populations
Pregnancy
• Management of food‐induced anaphylaxis in a pregnant patient is no different, because emer-
gency epinephrine use is equally important for survival of mother and fetus.
Children
• Food‐induced anaphylaxis is more prevalent in the pediatric population. Injectable epinephrine 
is available in a pediatric dose. Education and avoidance of allergens in this population is key, 
as children may not be able to distinguish allergens, and there is a propensity for food sharing 
among young children. Allergy to foods such as milk, egg and soy is more prevalent in children 
but often outgrown by school age.
Clinical pearls
• Injectable epinephrine should be used at the first suspicion of a serious food allergic reaction 
or for any signs of anaphylaxis.
• Particularly in the pediatric population, err on the cautious side and treat a possible 
anaphylactic event, rather than delay treatment as symptoms develop.
• Patients should call 911 or go to the nearest emergency room once epinephrine is used.
198  Part 1: Allergy
Elderly
• There is no change in management for elderly patients.
Others
• Certain medications, such as beta‐blockers, may blunt the effect of epinephrine and render 
anaphylaxis more difficult to treat. Glucagon may be needed as a beta‐blocker antagonist in 
this population.
Section 6: Prognosis
Natural history of untreated disease
• Untreated, anaphylaxis can lead to death through respiratory or cardiovascular collapse.
Prognosis for treated patients
• Treated patients experience a full recovery.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
• In patients who experience a first‐time episode of anaphylaxis, thorough allergy testing should 
be undertaken to identify potential triggers. This includes a detailed history as well as skin prick 
testing and serum IgE analysis.
Section 7: Reading list
Lieberman P. Biphasic anaphylactic reactions. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2005;95:217
Lieberman P, Nicklas RA, Oppenheimer J, Kemp SF, Lang DM, Bernstein DI, et al. The diagnosis and manage-
ment of anaphylaxis practice parameter: 2010 Update. Joint Task Force on Practice Parameters, represent-
ing the AAAAI, ACAAI, and the Joint Council of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology. J Allergy Clin Immunol 
2010;126:477–80
Sampson HA, Munoz‐Furlong A, Campbell RL, Adkinson NF Jr, Bock SA, Branum A, et al. Second symposium 
on the definition and management of anaphylaxis: Second National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Disease/Food Allergy and Anaphylaxis Network Symposium. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2006;117:391–7
Sampson, HA. Anaphylaxis and emergency treatment. Pediatrics 2003;111:1601–8
Sicherer SH, Sampson HA. Food allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2010;125(Suppl 2):S116–25
Wang J, Sampson HA. Food anaphylaxis. Clin Exp Allergy 2007;37:651–60
Suggested websites
www.foodallergy.org
www.aaaai.org
www.acaai.org
www.niaid.nih.gov
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• If managed appropriately, food‐induced anaphylaxis is completely treatable.
• Patients who have one episode of anaphylaxis are at increased risk of experiencing a second 
episode.
• Anxiety and fear of certain foods is a common side effect, particularly in the pediatric patient, 
for patients who have experienced anaphylaxis.
Food Allergy‐Induced Anaphylaxis  199
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
International society guidelines
Section 9: Evidence
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 10: Images
Not applicable for this topic.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at: 
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for  
patients, and ICD codes
Guideline title
Source
Date
Guidelines for the Diagnosis and 
Management of Food Allergy in 
the United States: Report of the 
NIAID-Sponsored Expert Panel
NIH, National Institute of Allergy 
and Infectious Disease
2010
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/21134576)
Guideline title
Source
Date
The diagnosis and management 
of anaphylaxis practice 
parameter
American Academy of Allergy, 
Asthma & Immunology
2010
(http://www.aaaai.org/
practice-resources/statements-
and-practice-parameters/
practice-parameters-and-other-
guidelines-page.aspx)
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
200 
Adverse Reactions to Food 
and Drug Additives
Julie Wang
Department of Pediatrics, Division of Allergy/Immunology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 23
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• Food and drug additives serve a range of functions, including coloring, flavoring, binding 
agent, antimicrobial, and preservative. Many of these additives have been reported to cause 
adverse reactions such as contact dermatitis, urticaria, asthma, and anaphylaxis.
Disease classification
Not applicable for this topic.
Incidence/prevalence
• Based on several large studies, the prevalence of adverse reactions to food additives is approxi-
mately 0.01–0.23%.
• The prevalence of adverse reactions to drug additives is unknown, but is less than that of food 
additives.
Economic impact
Not applicable for this topic.
Etiology
• A variety of food and drug additives have been reported to cause adverse reactions.
• Natural food colorants that have been reported to cause adverse reactions, including anaphy-
laxis, are annatto (extract from the seeds of the fruit of the Bixa orellana tree) and carmine 
Overall Bottom Line
• The prevalence of adverse reactions to food additives ranges from 0.01–0.23%.
• A variety of food and drug additives have been reported to cause symptoms including 
urticaria, asthma, and anaphylaxis.
• The majority of these adverse reactions have not been confirmed with controlled challenge 
procedures.
• Management entails avoidance of the triggering agent and preparedness to treat reactions in 
case of inadvertent exposures.
Adverse Reactions to Food and Drug Additives  201
(derived from dried female insects of the species Dactylopius coccus). As these are extracts 
of seeds and insect bodies, they are likely to contain proteins and could elicit IgE‐mediated 
reactions.
• Synthetic food colorants such as tartrazine, sunset yellow (FD&C Yellow #6), and brilliant blue 
(FD&C Blue #1) have been associated with various symptoms, however, there is no compelling 
evidence for the involvement of these colors in urticaria, angioedema, asthma, or atopic 
dermatitis.
• Sulfites, which are used as food and drug additives, also occur naturally in foods. In addition, 
to urticaria and angioedema, sulfites can trigger severe bronchoconstriction in sensitive 
patients, particularly in those with more severe, persistent asthma.
• Monosodium glutamate (MSG) symptom complex (also known as Chinese restaurant syndrome) 
is a mild, transient, subjective syndrome characterized by a burning sensation, facial pressure 
or tightness, headaches, nausea, chest pain, palpitations, numbness, tingling, and weakness. 
MSG has also been linked to asthma, atopic dermatitis, and persistent rhinitis. These associa-
tions have not been definitively established, but seem to occur at very high levels of exposure.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• The pathology/pathogenesis of adverse reactions to food and drug additives is unknown. 
Mechanisms include immunologic, pharmacologic, toxic, or irritant effects. Sulfite‐induced 
asthma may be caused by release of sulfur dioxide, an airway irritant, but other mechanisms 
including IgE‐mediated mechanisms and cholinergic reflex mechanisms have been suggested.
Predictive/risk factors
• There are no known risk factors.
• Atopic individuals are at higher risk.
• The prevalence is 0.01–0.23% in the general population compared to 2–7% in atopic individuals.
Section 2: Prevention
No interventions have been demonstrated to prevent the development of this disease.
Screening
Not applicable for this topic.
Primary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Secondary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 3: Diagnosis (Algorithm 23.1)
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• The diagnosis of adverse reactions to food and drug additives is based on medical history.
• The clinician taking the history should inquire about the types and severity of symptoms, 
timing between exposure and onset of symptoms, reproducibility of symptoms, amount 
consumed, and association with modifying factors such as alcohol consumption or exercise.
• There are no standardized laboratory tests to diagnose allergies to food and drug additives.
202  Part 1: Allergy
History of adverse reaction 
to 
food or drug
Reproducible reactions
occur with exposure to
different forms of the food or
drug, regardless of whether 
additives are present
Evaluate for food allergy or 
drug allergy
Reactions to a variety of 
unrelated food or drugs or 
reactions to foods/drugs only 
in certain forms or 
formulations
Skin prick testing or serum 
IgE testing may be 
considered for additives such 
as carmine or annatto 
A trial of avoidance may be 
used to assess whether 
symptom resolution occurs  
Challenge procedures using 
appropriate controls can be 
used to conﬁrm an adverse 
reaction to a food or drug 
additive. Single-blind 
challenges may be used as 
the initial test. If a positive 
challenge is seen, then a 
double-blind challenge may 
be needed for conﬁrmation
Yes
No
Algorithm 23.1  Diagnosis of adverse reactions to food and drug additives
Adverse Reactions to Food and Drug Additives  203
Differential diagnosis
Typical presentation
• Symptoms of adverse reactions to food and drug additives are varied and can range from 
­urticaria or contact dermatitis to asthma and anaphylaxis.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• Adverse reactions to food or drug additives should be suspected if a patient has reactions to a 
variety of unrelated foods or reactions to foods only in certain forms (i.e. reactions to commer-
cially packaged foods, but not home‐cooked foods).
• Adverse reactions to drug additives should be suspected if symptoms arise with different 
medications or different formulations of medications.
• The diagnosis of adverse reactions to food and drug additives is based on history, which should 
include the type and severity of symptoms, timing between exposure and onset of symptoms, 
duration and reproducibility of symptoms, and amount consumed to trigger a reaction. 
Additional questions should ascertain whether reactions are associated with modifying factors 
such as alcohol consumption or exercise.
Physical examination
• Physical examination may reveal urticaria or dermatitis if these are the symptoms associated 
with the adverse reactions.
• Other signs of atopy may be observed on examination.
• For many, the physical examination will be unrevealing if the patient is not acutely reacting.
Useful clinical decision rules and calculators
Not applicable for this topic.
Disease severity classification
Not applicable for this topic.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• There are no standardized laboratory studies available to diagnose adverse reactions to food 
and drug additives.
• If the history is suggestive of an adverse reaction to food or drug additive, skin prick testing or 
serum IgE testing may be considered for additives such as carmine or annatto.
• A trial of avoidance of the agent may be used to assess whether symptom resolution 
occurs.
Differential diagnosis
Features
Allergy to food
Reproducible reactions will occur with exposure to different forms of 
the food, regardless of whether additives are present
Positive skin prick test or serum IgE to the food allergen
Allergy to drugs
More common than reactions to drug additives
204  Part 1: Allergy
• Challenge procedures using appropriate controls are used to confirm an adverse reaction to 
a food or drug additive. Single‐blind challenges may be used as the initial test. If a positive 
challenge is seen, then a double‐blind challenge may be needed for confirmation.
• The criterion for a positive challenge for inducing asthma symptoms is a 20% or greater 
decrease in FEV1 from the baseline.
Lists of imaging techniques
No imaging studies are indicated for adverse reactions to food and drug additives.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis  
of disease
• A detailed history and testing should exclude the possibility of a food allergy to a hidden 
ingredient.
• Current evidence does not support routinely recommending patients with chronic urticaria to 
avoid foods containing additives.
• Challenges performed to determine the association between a food or drug additive with 
chronic urticaria can result in a false positive test if the patient is taken off antihistamines prior 
to the challenge. However, a false negative challenge may be seen if the patient is on chronic 
antihistamines.
• Similarly, for challenges to determine the association between a food or drug additive 
with asthma, false positive challenge results may be seen if the patient’s asthma is unstable 
and false negative challenges can occur if the patient used a beta‐agonist prior to the 
procedure.
• Guidelines advise against routinely instructing asthmatic patients to avoid sulfites or other food 
additives unless prior reactions to sulfites have occurred.
• Food additive avoidance should not be advised for the management of hyperactivity/attention 
deficit disorder.
Section 4: Treatment (Algorithm 23.2)
Treatment rationale
• People who experience adverse reactions to a food or drug additive should be educated on 
avoidance strategies for the offending agent, including label reading as additives are listed 
in food ingredient labels and package inserts of drugs. It is important to note that a few 
groups of ingredients can be declared collectively without listing individual components; 
these include spices, natural flavors, and artificial flavors. For those who have bronchocon-
striction with sulfite exposure, use of inhaled corticosteroids that do not contain sulfites is 
recommended.
• As inadvertent exposures are possible, preparedness to manage reactions (i.e. anaphylaxis, 
asthma exacerbations) is essential.
When to hospitalize
• Adverse reactions to food and drug additives are typically managed in the outpatient setting.
• Anaphylactic reactions or severe asthma exacerbations may require management in the emer-
gency department or inpatient admission (see Chapters 29 and 14, on Anaphylaxis and Asthma).
Managing the hospitalized patient
Not applicable for this topic.
Adverse Reactions to Food and Drug Additives  205
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comment
Conservative
• Avoidance of the triggering agent is advised
• Patients are instructed to read all ingredient labels
This is applicable to all patients
Medical
Acute reactions should be managed as follows:
• If a severe reaction leading to anaphylaxis occurs, 
intramuscular epinephrine (0.01 mg/kg) is the treatment  
of choice
• For mild, cutaneous reactions, oral antithistamines are 
indicated (i.e. diphenhydramine, cetirizine, loratadine, 
fexofenadine)
• Short‐acting bronchodilators are used to treat asthma 
exacerbations (i.e. albuterol 2 puffs every 4 hours as needed)
• Topical corticosteroids can improve symptoms of contact 
dermatitis
For severe allergic reactions (i.e. 
anaphylaxis), immediate medical 
attention should be sought after 
epinephrine is administered. These 
patients should be observed to ensure 
resolution of symptoms as biphasic 
reactions are possible
Avoidance of 
triggering agent
Education on avoidance 
strategies
Read food ingredient 
labels and package inserts 
for drugs
Be aware that groups of 
ingredients can be 
declared collectively 
without listing individual 
components
Management of 
acute allergic 
reactions
Severe reaction leading to 
anaphylaxis: 
intramuscular 
epinephrine (0.01mg/kg) 
is the treatment of choice
Mild, cutaneous 
reactions: 
oral antithistamines are 
indicated
Short-acting 
bronchodilators are used 
to treat asthma 
exacerbations 
Algorithm 23.2  Management of adverse reactions to food and drug additives
206  Part 1: Allergy
Prevention/management of complications
• Anaphylaxis and asthma exacerbations should be managed with physician supervision to 
­prevent mortality.
Section 5: Special populations
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 6: Prognosis
Natural history of untreated disease
Not applicable for this topic.
Prognosis for treated patients
Not applicable for this topic.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 7: Reading list
Ardern KD, Ram FS. Tartrazine exclusion for allergic asthma. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2001;4:CD000460
Nowak‐Wegrzyn A, Assa’ad AH, Bahna SL, Bock SA, Sicherer SH, Teuber SS; Adverse Reactions to Food 
Committee of American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology. Work Group report: oral food chal-
lenge testing. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2009;123(6 Suppl):S365–83
Sampson HA, Aceves S, Bock SA, James J, Jones S, Lang D, et al. Food allergy: a practice parameter update – 
2014. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014;134:1015–25
Simon RA. Update on sulfite sensitivity. Allergy 1998;53(46 Suppl):78–9
Young E, Patel S, Stoneham M, Rona R, Wilkinson JD. The prevalence of reaction to food additives in a survey 
population. J R Coll Physicians Lond 1987;21:241–7
Zhou Y, Yang M, Dong BR. Monosodium glutamate avoidance for chronic asthma in adults and children. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012;6:CD004357
Suggested websites
American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology (AAAAI). www.aaaai.org
American College of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology (ACAAI). www.acaai.org
US FDA Center for Food Safety and Nutrition. http://www.fda.gov/Food/default.htm
Clinical pearls
• Avoidance of the offending agent is essential.
• Patients should be educated to read ingredient labels.
• Preparedness to manage reactions is necessary in cases of accidental exposures.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• With strict avoidance of the triggering agent, prognosis is good for adverse reactions to food 
and drug additives.
Adverse Reactions to Food and Drug Additives  207
Section 9: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Food Allergy: A practice 
parameter update—2014
Joint Task Force on  
Practice Parameters
2014
(http://www.allergyparameters.org/published-
practice-parameters/alphabetical-listing/ 
food-allergy-download/)
International society guidelines
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 9: Evidence
Type of evidence
Title, comment
Date
Cochrane Review
Tartrazine exclusion for allergic asthma
Comment: Insufficient evidence to conclude 
that tartrazine induces asthma exacerbations
2001
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pubmed/11687081)
Cochrane Review
Monosodium glutamate avoidance for chronic 
asthma in adults and children
Comment: Insufficient evidence support 
avoidance of MSG for patients with asthma
2012
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pubmed/22696342)
Section 10: Images
Not applicable for this topic.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at: 
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for  
patients, and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
208 
Celiac Disease
Mirna Chehade
Division of Allergy/Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 24
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• CD is a chronic, small intestinal, immune‐mediated enteropathy precipitated by exposure to 
dietary gluten and related prolamins in genetically predisposed individuals.
Disease classification
Not applicable for this topic.
Incidence/prevalence
• CD is thought to occur primarily in white people of northern European ancestry. However, 
despite a lack of worldwide epidemiologic information, further studies in other areas of the 
world have shown a similar prevalence.
• Epidemiologic studies using serologic assays for CD with biopsy verification have reported a 
prevalence of 1 in 70–300 in most countries.
• The frequency of CD is substantially increased in patients who have a first degree family 
­member affected with CD. The risk is highest in monozygotic twins, next in human leukocyte 
antigen (HLA) matched siblings, siblings, and finally parents and children of patients with CD.
Economic impact
Not applicable for this topic.
Overall Bottom Line
• Celiac disease (CD) is a chronic, small intestinal, immune‐mediated enteropathy precipitated 
by exposure to dietary gluten and related prolamins in genetically predisposed individuals.
• Clinical manifestations of celiac disease range from the completely asymptomatic patient to 
the severely affected patient with classic signs including bulky, foul‐smelling, floating stools 
due to steatorrhea and flatulence. A number of non‐gastrointestinal manifestations of CD can 
also be present.
• A hallmark of CD is the presence of antibodies directed against transglutaminase (anti‐TTG) 
that can be detected in the serum. Anti‐TTG antibodies (especially IgA) are highly sensitive 
and specific for the disease.
• Histopathologically, blunted or atrophic villi, crypt hyperplasia, mononuclear infiltration of 
the lamina propria, structural abnormalities in epithelial cells, and intraepithelial lymphocytic 
infiltration are seen in an intestinal biopsy.
• The cornerstone of treatment of CD is elimination of gluten from the patient’s diet.
Celiac Disease  209
Etiology
• Gluten (the commonly used term for the complex of water‐insoluble proteins from wheat, rye, 
and barley) and related prolamins act as the trigger in patients with CD.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• A hallmark of CD is the presence of antibodies directed against transglutaminase (anti‐TTG) that 
can be detected in the serum. Anti‐TTG antibodies (especially IgA) are highly sensitive and specific 
for the disease. The mechanism of autoantibody formation remains incompletely understood.
• Immune dysregulation in CD occurs at multiple levels:
• Dysregulation in the adaptive immune system: HLA‐DQ2 or DQ8 bind gluten on antigen‐­
presenting cells and present to T lymphocytes leading to anti‐gluten T‐cell response, which releases 
IFN‐γ and possibly IL‐21, leading to epithelial damage. In addition, up‐regulation of IL‐15 and IFN‐α 
in the lamina propria induces dendritic cells to acquire a pro‐inflammatory phenotype.
• Dysregulation in the innate immune system: intraepithelial lymphocytes undergo reprogram-
ming to acquire an NK phenotype characterized by up‐regulation of NKG2D and CD94/
NKG2C receptors that recognize major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I‐related 
chains A and B, and HLA‐E on epithelial cells mediating tissue damage. IL‐15 up‐regulates NK 
receptors and promotes T‐cell receptor‐independent killing as well as blocking Foxp3 
­regulatory T‐cell action on intraepithelial lymphocytes.
• Dysregulation in the humoral immune system: the humoral immune system produces gluten‐
specific antibodies that mediate systemic manifestations such as dermatitis herpetiformis.
• Histopathologically, the following changes are seen in an intestinal biopsy: blunted or atrophic 
villi, crypt hyperplasia, mononuclear infiltration of the lamina propria, structural abnormalities 
in epithelial cells, and intraepithelial lymphocytic infiltration.
Predictive/risk factors
Section 2: Prevention
No interventions are indicated unless the diagnosis of CD is made.
Risk factor
Estimated prevalence
First and second degree relatives of patients with CD
10% and 5%, respectively
Unexplained iron deficiency anemia
3–15%
Unexplained folic acid, iron, or vitamin B12 deficiency
N/A
Reduced serum albumin
N/A
Unexplained hypertransaminasemia
2–9%
Osteoporosis and osteomalacia of premature onset
2–4%
Recurrent abdominal pain or bloating
Other autoimmune disorders:
• Type 1 diabetes mellitus
• Thyroid dysfunction
• Addison’s disease
• Autoimmune hepatitis
2–15%
2–7%
N/A
3–6%
Ataxia and idiopathic neuropathy
N/A
Down’s and Turner’s syndromes
6% each
Irritable bowel syndrome
3%
210  Part 1: Allergy
Screening
• Widespread screening of asymptomatic individuals is not generally advocated at this time.
• Testing for CD is considered in the following groups of patients:
• Those with gastrointestinal symptoms including chronic or recurrent diarrhea, malabsorption, 
weight loss, abdominal distension, or bloating. In addition, screening should be considered in 
patients with symptoms suggestive of irritable bowel syndrome or severe lactose intolerance.
• Those without other explanations for iron deficiency anemia, folate or vitamin B12 deficiency, 
persistent elevation in hepatic transaminases, short stature, delayed puberty, recurrent fetal 
loss, reduced fertility, persistent aphthous stomatitis, dental enamel hypoplasia, idiopathic 
peripheral neuropathy, non‐hereditary cerebellar ataxia, or recurrent migraine headaches.
• Those with type 1 diabetes mellitus, autoimmune thyroiditis, Down’s syndrome, Turner’s 
syndrome, William’s syndrome, and those with first degree relatives of individuals with CD if 
they have signs, symptoms, or laboratory evidence of CD.
• Serum immunoglobulin A (IgA) anti‐TTG antibody is the single preferred test for the detection 
of CD in individuals over the age of 2 years. Total serum IgA should be measured, especially if 
IgA anti‐TTG is negative, to rule out IgA deficiency that precludes accurate interpretation of 
the test. In patients with IgA deficiency or those with very low serum IgA, IgG‐based testing 
(IgG anti‐deamidated gliadin peptides (DGPs) and IgG anti‐TTG) should be performed.
Primary prevention – bulleted pearls
Not applicable for this topic.
Secondary prevention
• Maintaining a gluten‐free diet assures continued disease remission.
Section 3: Diagnosis (Algorithm 24.1)
Positive
CD unlikely
CD
Negative
Both
negative
Both
positive
Discordant
results
Positive
CD
Duodenal biopsies
• HLA DQ2 and DQ8 genotyping
• TTG-IgG ± DGP IgG
• Investigation for other causes of
   villous atrophy
Low probability of CD
High probability of CD
Duodenal biopsies
+ TTG-IgA and IgA
TTG-IgA and total IgA
Positive TTG-IgA
Negative TTG-IgA
Low IgA
Negative TTG-IgA
Normal IgA
TTG-IgG ± DGP IgG
Algorithm 24.1  Diagnosis of celiac disease
Note: CD, celiac disease; DGP IgG, deamidated gliadin peptide IgG; TTG‐IgA, tissue transglutaminase IgA titer;  
TTG‐IgG, tissue transglutaminase IgG titer.
Celiac Disease  211
Differential diagnosis
Typical presentation
• Due to increased physician awareness and screening at risk populations, most patients present 
with minimal to no gastrointestinal symptoms, or non‐specific symptoms, such as fatigue, iron 
deficiency anemia, or otherwise unexplained elevation in hepatic transaminases. Some patients 
present with irritable bowel syndrome like symptoms. The typical patient with classic symptoms 
of abdominal pain and diarrhea with bulky, foul‐smelling, and floating stools is becoming less 
frequent. Patients can also present with a variety of non‐gastrointestinal manifestations, such 
as neuropsychiatric disorders, arthritis, and other manifestations listed above.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• The clinician should enquire about various gastrointestinal and non‐gastrointestinal features, in 
addition to family history of celiac disease.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Clinical manifestations of celiac disease fall into a large spectrum, ranging from the 
completely asymptomatic patient to the severely affected patient with classic signs including 
bulky, foul‐smelling, floating stools due to steatorrhea and flatulence. These symptoms can 
also be associated with those resulting from malabsorption, such as growth failure in children, 
weight loss, anemia, neurologic disorders from vitamin B deficiencies, and osteopenia from 
calcium and vitamin D deficiencies.
• A number of non‐gastrointestinal manifestations of CD have also been described, including 
neuropsychiatric disorders, rheumatologic disorders, osteomalacia, osteoporosis, and infertility. 
In some patients, they are the presenting symptoms and should prompt the consideration of 
serologic testing for CD.
• Physical examination may reveal abnormalities related to the various clinical manifestations 
described above.
• In addition to the screening serologic tests described above, the diagnosis of CD is confirmed 
by esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) with intestinal biopsies, looking for histologic 
features of CD. Multiple duodenal biopsies need to be obtained, since the disease is patchy 
in nature. HLA DQ2 and DQ8 genotyping may be helpful in the event of biopsy/serology 
disagreement, if the patient is already on a gluten‐free diet at the time of the diagnostic 
investigation, or in the case of equivocal duodenal biopsy findings in seronegative patients.
Differential diagnosis
Features
Eosinophilic enteritis
Predominantly eosinophilic infiltration of the duodenal lamina propria
Protracted infectious enteritis
Recovery of causative infectious agent upon stool testing
Autoimmune enteropathy
Giardiasis
Recovery of Giardia upon stool testing or on biopsies
Crohn’s disease
No intestinal villous atrophy, no intraepithelial lymphocytosis, 
histological features suggestive of Crohn’s disease such as 
granulomas may be present
Primary or acquired lactase 
deficiency
Failure to thrive is rare, symptoms resolve with avoidance of milk 
products
Irritable bowel syndrome
No histologic abnormalities are seen on intestinal biopsy
212  Part 1: Allergy
Physical examination
• Physical examination should include an abdominal examination for distension, increased tym-
panicity or tenderness, and a perianal examination that would be suggestive of other diseases 
such as Crohn’s disease. In addition, a complete examination should be done to detect signs of 
anemia, neurologic deficiencies, and other non‐gastrointestinal manifestations of, or associa-
tions with, CD.
Useful clinical decision rules and calculators
Not applicable for this topic.
Disease severity classification
Not applicable for this topic.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• Immunoglobulin A (IgA) anti‐TTG antibody is the single preferred test for the detection of CD 
in individuals over the age of 2 years. Total IgA should be measured, especially if IgA anti‐TTG 
is negative, to rule out IgA deficiency that precludes accurate interpretation of the test. In 
patients with IgA deficiency or those with very low serum IgA, IgG‐based testing (IgG anti‐
deamidated gliadin peptides (DGPs) and IgG anti‐TTG) should be performed.
• HLA DQ2 and DQ8 genotyping should not be used routinely, but should be considered in 
the event of biopsy–serology disagreement, if the patient is already on a gluten‐free diet at 
the time of the diagnostic investigation, or in the case of equivocal duodenal biopsy findings 
in seronegative patients.
• Endoscopy may reveal scalloped duodenal folds, though this finding is not common.
• Intestinal biopsies reveal the following features on hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining of 
biopsy sections to variable degrees: blunted or atrophic villi, crypt hyperplasia, mononuclear 
infiltration of the lamina propria, structural abnormalities in epithelial cells, and intraepithelial 
lymphocytic infiltration.
Lists of imaging techniques
• Radiologic tests are not routinely recommended for the diagnosis of CD.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding  
diagnosis of disease
• To under‐diagnose CD in patients because of non‐specific gastrointestinal symptoms, or because 
of a non‐gastrointestinal presentation.
• To under‐diagnose CD based on negative TTG‐IgA in patients with IgA deficiency.
• To over‐diagnose CD based only on symptoms or symptom response to a gluten‐free diet 
alone, because these alone do not differentiate CD from non‐celiac gluten sensitivity.
Section 4: Treatment (Algorithm 24.2)
Treatment rationale
• The cornerstone of treatment of CD is elimination of gluten from the patient’s diet, because 
CD is triggered by gluten. Treatment of the patient begins with dietary counseling by a 
­registered dietitian who is knowledgeable in CD. Foods containing wheat, rye, and barley 
Celiac Disease  213
should be avoided, as well as gluten‐contaminated oats. The dietitian should also educate 
the patient about other sources of gluten besides food, such as certain alcoholic beverages. 
Education regarding food label reading and monitoring for adequate caloric intake and 
­balance while on this restricted diet is important. In addition, early in the course of therapy, 
dairy products may not be tolerated because of secondary lactose intolerance, and lactose‐
containing foods may be avoided until intestinal villous regeneration occurs. Presence of any 
nutritional deficiencies should be investigated and corrected. Treatment with a gluten‐free 
diet is life‐long. Therefore, education of the patient and his/her family about the disease is 
important, and access to an advocacy group, if needed, should be made available. Finally, 
continuous long‐term follow‐up is important, and screening of family members at risk for CD 
should be carried out.
When to hospitalize
Not applicable for this topic.
Managing the hospitalized patient
Not applicable for this topic.
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comments
Dietary
Gluten‐free diet
Education and monitoring with the help of a dietitian with expertise in CD is important
GFD for CD
Follow-up in 3–6 months
• Symptoms
• Serology
• Other tests
Expected response
• Improvement of symptoms
• Improvement of serology
• Improvement of nutritional deficiencies
Inadequate response
• Persistent symptoms
• Serology titers still elevated
Evaluation by dietitian
• Adherence to GFD
Yearly follow-up
• Monitor symptoms
• Monitor serology
• Monitor nutrition
• Monitor adherence
• Monitor for co-morbidities
Good GFD adherence
• Observation
• Investigation for other causes
Lack of GFD adherence
• Education and counseling
Algorithm 24.2  Management of celiac disease
Note: CD, celiac disease; GFD, gluten‐free diet.
214  Part 1: Allergy
Prevention/management of complications
• Dietary therapy with a gluten‐free diet can be associated with decreased quality of life, 
malnutrition, or lack of adherence if not properly monitored and difficulties addressed.
Section 5: Special populations
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 6: Prognosis
Natural history of untreated disease
• In addition to nutritional complications, patients with CD have a higher risk of small bowel 
adenocarcinoma. The predominant celiac‐associated lymphoma is the enteropathy‐associated 
T‐cell lymphoma.
Prognosis for treated patients
• A gluten‐free diet to treat CD is thought to be protective against the development of malignant 
disease.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 7: Reading list
Bai J, Fried M, Corazza GR, Schuppan D, Farthing M, Catassi C, et al. World Gastroenterology Organisation 
global guidelines on celiac disease. J Clin Gastroenterol 2013;47:121–6
Fasano A, Araya M, Bhatnagar S, Cameron D, Catassi C, Dirks M, et al. Federation of international societies of 
pediatric gastroenterology, hepatology, and nutrition consensus report on celiac disease. J Pediatr 
Gastroenterol Nutr 2008;47:214–9
Husby S, Koletzko S, Korponay‐Szabó IR, Mearin ML, Phillips A, Shamir R, et al. European Society for Pediatric 
Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition guidelines for the diagnosis of coeliac disease. J Pediatr 
Gastroenterol Nutr 2012;54:136–60
Ludvigsson JF, Leffler DA, Bai JC, Biagi F, Fasano A, Green PH, et al. The Oslo definitions for coeliac disease and 
related terms. Gut 2013;62:43–52
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Patients with CD seem to be at a small increased risk of mortality.
• Patients with CD seem to have an increased risk of lymphoproliferative malignancy and a 
short‐term excess risk of gastrointestinal malignancy.
Clinical pearls
• Monitor patients on a gluten‐free diet to ensure adequate caloric intake and balance, and 
good adherence. A dietitian with expertise in CD is important for this.
• Check for any nutritional deficiencies and correct those as needed.
• Monitor patients for any decreased quality of life or coping difficulties and provide counseling 
when needed. A mental health professional may be needed for this.
Celiac Disease  215
Rubio‐Tapia A, Hill ID, Kelly CP, Calderwood AH, Murray JA; American College of Gastroenterology. ACG 
­clinical guidelines: diagnosis and management of celiac disease. Am J Gastroenterol 2013;108: 
656–76
Suggested websites
Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics. www.eatright.org
American Gastroenterological Association. www.gastro.org/patient‐center/digestive‐conditions/
celiac‐disease
American Celiac Disease Alliance. www.americanceliac.org
Celiac Disease Foundation. www.celiac.org
Gluten Intolerance Group of North America. www.gluten.net
National Foundation for Celiac Awareness. www.celiaccentral.org
North American Society for the Study of Celiac Disease. www.nasscd.org
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
ACG clinical guidelines: diagnosis  
and management of celiac disease
American College of 
Gastroenterology (ACG)
2013
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pubmed/23609613)
International society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
European Society for Pediatric 
Gastroenterology, Hepatology, 
and Nutrition guidelines 
for the diagnosis of coeliac 
disease
European Society for 
Pediatric Gastroenterology, 
Hepatology, and Nutrition 
(ESPGHAN)
2012
(http://espghan.med.up.pt/
position_papers/Guidelines_on_
coeliac_disease.pdf)
World Gastroenterology 
Organization global guidelines 
on celiac disease
World Gastroenterology 
Organization (WGO)
2013
(http://www.worldgastroenterology.
org/celiac‐disease.html)
Section 9: Evidence
Type of evidence
Title, comment
Date
Clinical guidelines
ACG clinical guidelines: diagnosis and 
management of celiac disease
Comment: Summary of what is known and what 
still needs to be investigated on CD, with evidence 
grading for each statement or recommendation
2013
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pubmed/23609613)
216  Part 1: Allergy
Section 10: Images
Figure 24.1  Histopathologic features of an intestinal biopsy from a patient with celiac disease (hematoxylin 
and eosin stain, magnification 100×): Blunted villi, crypt hyperplasia, mononuclear infiltration of the lamina 
propria, and intraepithelial lymphocytic infiltration. The latter is made visually clear in the inset (magnification 
400×). Source: Courtesy of Margret Magid, MD, Pediatric Pathology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai. See color plate 24.1.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at:  
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for  
patients, and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
  217
Oral Food Challenges (Procedure)
Hugh A. Sampson
Jaffe Food Allergy Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 25
Section 1: Indications
• Indications for oral food challenge:
• To confirm clinical reactivity to foods suspected of inducing allergic reactions based on history, 
skin test results, and/or serum food‐specific IgE levels;
• To determine whether a patient has “outgrown” their food allergy; and
• To establish a threshold of clinical reactivity (lowest eliciting dose) to a food allergen (used 
predominantly in clinical trials of immunotherapy for food allergy).
Section 2: Procedure
• Patient must be off antihistamine medications for approximately 5 half‐lives of the specific medication.
• Oral food challenges may be performed in three basic formats: double‐blind placebo‐controlled 
(neither the physician nor the patient are aware of the contents of the challenge), single‐blind 
(patient is unaware of the contents of the challenge), or open (both the physician and patient 
are aware of the contents of the challenge).
• For practical reasons, an open challenge may be the first approach when the probability of a 
negative challenge seems high and in infants and children <3 years of age, who are unlikely to 
have any psychological component influencing the outcome.
• The double‐blind, placebo‐controlled oral food challenge (DBPCFC) is considered the “gold 
standard” for diagnosing food allergy.
Overall Bottom Line
• The clinical history, skin prick tests, and serum food‐specific IgE antibody levels are useful for 
making the diagnosis of food allergy. However, without an unequivocal allergic reaction to an 
isolated food ingestion with supportive laboratory data, some form of oral food challenge is 
necessary to establish the diagnosis of a food allergy.
• The double‐blind placebo‐controlled oral food challenge is the “gold standard” for diagnosing 
food allergy. However, in the routine clinical setting, a single‐blind or open challenge is more 
practical and often adequate.
• When the food challenge is negative, or when ingestion of a food induces the same 
symptoms as reported in the history, the single‐blind or open challenge is sufficiently specific 
to confirm the diagnosis of food allergy.
• In clinical practice, oral food challenges are typically used to confirm the presence of food 
allergy or demonstrate that a patient, typically a child, has outgrown their food allergy.
218  Part 1: Allergy
• A negative DBPCFC must always be followed by an open, normal serving of the challenged 
food in order to avoid the rare false negative outcome due to destruction of the allergen during 
preparation of the blinded challenge material.
• A single‐blind or open food challenge may be considered diagnostic under the following 
circumstances: if either of these challenges elicits no symptoms (i.e. the challenge is negative) 
food allergy is ruled‐out; and when either challenge elicits objective symptoms (i.e. the 
challenge is positive) and those objective symptoms correlate with the medical history and are 
supported by laboratory tests.
• Before undertaking an oral food challenge, the patient should be avoiding the food to be chal-
lenged and have attained a stable baseline with regard to atopic disease. The length of time a 
patient needs to eliminate a food in order to improve a chronic disease (e.g. atopic dermatitis) 
varies by disease and individual patient, but at least 2 weeks is suggested.
Oral food challenge
• Starting dose: it is advisable to start with a dose less than the expected “threshold” dose to 
elicit symptoms. If unknown, it is recommended starting with a dose equivalent to 1–10 mg 
of food protein (e.g. 2–20 mg of peanut flour), depending on the expected degree of 
sensitivity.
• For investigating immediate (IgE‐mediated) food allergy, an interval of 20–30 minutes between 
successive doses is adequate. For non‐IgE‐mediated food allergy, longer intervals between 
doses increasing the dose by ½ logs (e.g. Practall schedule – 1, 3, 10, 30, 100, 300 mg, etc.) or 
a doubling of the dose (e.g. 5, 10, 20, 40, 80, 160, 320, 640 mg, etc.) until a cumulative dose 
of 10 g food protein has been ingested. Individuals with a past history of food‐induced anaphy-
laxis, persistent asthma, and/or reacting to trace food contaminants are at increased risk for 
severe reactions and should have their dosage titrated upwards cautiously.
• Vehicles (matrix) selected to mask the taste, odor, texture, and color of the challenge food are 
dependent upon the patient’s preferences. For most challenges in infants and young children, infant 
formulas and applesauce are convenient vehicles. Other vehicles used for masking purposes include 
fruit juices, oatmeal, puddings, potato pancakes, ground lean meat patties, and fruit smoothies.
• Non‐fat dried milk and egg powders, and wheat, rye, oat, rice, barley, corn, potato, and soy 
flours can be added to almost any food vehicle. Peanut and various nut flours must be mixed 
with vehicles that have strong flavors. Meats and fish can be masked in another tolerated 
ground meat, and fish and shellfish can be mixed with canned tuna, which is tolerated even by 
most tuna‐allergic patients.
• If a placebo is utilized, it must consist of another food that is in similar texture, look, smell, 
mouth feel, and taste to the challenge food and known to be tolerated by the patient.
• When evaluating IgE‐mediated reactions, the patient should not eat for at least 4 hours prior 
to the challenge, which enhances the absorption of the challenge material and ensures that the 
challenge results are caused by the food administered in the challenge. When evaluating non‐
IgE‐mediated reactions, longer fasting times may be necessary.
• Before beginning the food challenge, baseline vital signs (respiratory rate, heart rate, and blood 
pressure), peak flow, and physical findings should be evaluated and documented to serve as a 
reference. Emergency medications must be readily accessible, including access to oxygen, intra-
venous fluids, and a crash cart.
• With the first symptom or sign of an allergic reaction, the physician should immediately inspect 
the skin and oropharynx and auscultate the chest. Vital signs should be measured, and oxygen 
saturation if available. The food challenge should be stopped with any objective finding of an 
allergic reaction, and treatment initiated immediately (see Table 25.1 for guidance on scoring 
Table 25.1  Oral food challenge symptom scoring.
I. SKIN
    A. Erythematous rash ‐ % area involved_________
    B. Pruritus
    0 = Absent
    1 = Mild, occasional scratching
    2 = Moderate – scratching continuously for >2 minutes at a time
    3 = Severe – hard continuous scratching – excoriations
    C. Urticaria/angioedema
    0 = Absent
    1 = Mild – <3 hives, or mild lip edema
    2 = Moderate – <10 hives but >3, or significant lip or face edema
    3 = Severe – generalized involvement
    D. Rash
    0 = Absent
    1 = Mild – few areas of faint erythema
    2 = Moderate – areas of erythema
    3 = Severe – generalized marked erythema (>50%)
II. UPPER RESPIRATORY
    A. Sneezing/itching
    0 = Absent
    1 = Mild – rare bursts, occasional sniffing
    2 = Moderate – bursts <10, intermittent rubbing of nose, and/or eyes or frequent sniffing
    3 = Severe – continuous rubbing of nose and/or eyes, periocular swelling and/or long bursts 
of sneezing, persistent rhinorrhea
III. LOWER RESPIRATORY
    A. Wheezing
    0 = Absent
    1 = Mild – expiratory wheezing to auscultation
    2 = Moderate – inspiratory and expiratory wheezing
    3 = Severe – use of accessory muscles, audible wheezing
    B. Laryngeal
    0 = Absent
    1 = Mild – >3 discrete episodes of throat clearing or cough, or persistent throat tightness/pain
    2 = Moderate – hoarseness, frequent dry cough
    3 = Severe – stridor
IV. GASTROINTESTINAL
    A . Subjective complaints
    0 = Absent
    1 = Mild – complaints of nausea or abdominal pain, itchy mouth/throat
    2 = Moderate – frequent c/o nausea or pain with normal activity
    3 = Severe–notably distressed due to GI symptoms with decreased activity
    B . Objective complaints
    0 = Absent
    1 = Mild – 1 episode of emesis or diarrhea
    2 = Moderate – 2–3 episodes of emesis or diarrhea or 1 of each
    3 = Severe – >3 episodes of emesis or diarrhea or 2 of each
V. CARDIOVASCULAR/NEUROLOGIC
    0 = normal heart rate or BP for age/baseline
    1 = Mild‐subjective response (weak, dizzy), or tachycardia
    2 = Moderate‐drop in blood pressure and/or >20% from baseline, or significant change in 
mental status.
    3 = Severe‐cardiovascular collapse, signs of impaired circulation (unconscious)
	
- Not usually an indication to alter dosing. Not generally sufficient to consider a challenge positive.
	
- Caution, dosing could proceed, be delayed, have a dose repeated rather than escalated. If clinically 
indicated, dosing is stopped. Symptoms that recur on 3 doses, or persist (e.g., 40 minutes) are more 
likely indicative of a reaction than when such symptoms are transient and not reproducible. 3 or 
more scoring areas in orange more likely represent a true response.
	
- Objective symptoms likely to indicate a true reaction. Usually an indication to stop dosing.
Color coding provides guidance on when to discontinue an oral food challenge and designate it as “positive.”
Source: adapted from Practall Guidelines; Sampson et al. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2012;130:1260–74.
220  Part 1: Allergy
the outcome of oral food challenges). Patients should be checked prior to each successive food 
challenge dose and every 15 minutes thereafter for approximately 2 hours, or at the first 
symptom or sign of a possible reaction.
• A challenge may also be considered positive if subjective symptoms follow three successive 
doses of the test food, but not the placebo. In non‐verbal children, clues to the onset of a 
reaction may be subtle signs such as ear picking, scratching at the tongue, inside of the mouth, 
or neck; or a change in general behavior (e.g. becoming quiet, withdrawn, or insisting on being 
held by the parent). Similarly, isolated subjective symptoms in older patients (e.g. complaints of 
throat tightness or pruritus, nausea, abdominal pain, or general malaise) may represent early 
signs of a more severe reaction.
• When an oral food challenge results in an allergic reaction, treatment should be initiated 
promptly according to guidelines for anaphylaxis treatment (see Chapters 22 and 29).
• When patients experience a reaction during the oral food challenge (i.e. a “positive chal-
lenge”), they should remain under observation following the resolution of symptoms with 
treatment based on the clinical judgment of the physician conducting the challenge. 
However, 2–4 hours following the resolution of symptoms for immediate hypersensitivity 
reactions and about 4–6 hours for food protein‐induced enterocolitis syndrome are usually 
recommended.
Section 3: Management of complications
• Systemic allergic reactions from oral food challenges are fairly common. Consequently, 
­physicians must have the appropriate expertise, equipment, and medical personnel to treat 
anaphylactic reactions (see Chapters 22 and 29).
• Patients should be observed for at least 2 hours following a food challenge to ensure that the 
challenged food has not provoked an allergic reaction. Follow‐up may need to be longer if the 
clinical history suggests a more prolonged period between ingestion and the development of 
symptoms.
Section 4: Follow‐up
• Physicians should discuss the relevance, implications, and associated treatment instructions of 
positive and negative food challenges in the context of the patient’s medical history.
• Physicians should discuss the need for and timing of follow‐up food challenges in children who 
are likely to “outgrow” their food allergy (e.g. milk and egg allergy).
Section 5: Reading list
Bernhisel‐Broadbent J, Strause D, Sampson HA. Fish hypersensitivity. II: Clinical relevance of altered fish 
allergenicity caused by various preparation methods. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1992; 90:622–9
Bindslev‐Jensen C, Ballmer‐Weber BK, Bengtsson U, Blanco C, Ebner C, Hourihane J, et al. Standardization of 
food challenges in patients with immediate reactions to foods: position paper from the European Academy 
of Allergology and Clinical Immunology. Allergy 2004;59:690–7
Bock SA, Sampson HA, Atkins FM, Zeiger RS, Lehrer S, Sachs M, et al. Double‐blind placebo‐controlled food 
challenge (DBPCFC) as an office procedure: a manual. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1988;82:986–97
Boyce JA, Assa’ad A, Burks AW, Jones SM, Sampson HA, Wood RA, et al. Guidelines for the diagnosis and 
management of food allergy in the United States: report of the NIAID‐sponsored expert panel. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol 2010;126(Suppl):S1–58
Niggemann B, Beyer K. Pitfalls in double‐blind, placebo‐controlled oral food challenges. Allergy 2007;62: 
729–32
Oral Food Challenges (Procedure)  221
Nowak‐Wegrzyn A, Assa’ad AH, Bahna SL, Bock SA, Sicherer SH, Teuber SS. Work Group report: oral food 
challenge testing. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2009;123:S365–83
Sampson HA, Gerth van Wijk R, Bindslev‐Jensen C, Sicherer S, Teuber SS, Burks AW, et al. Standardizing double‐
blind, placebo‐controlled oral food challenges: American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology–
European Academy of Allergy and Clinical Immunology PRACTALL consensus report. J Allergy Clin Immunol 
2012;130:1260–74
Suggested websites
www.foodallergy.org
www.aaaai.org
www.acaai.org
Section 6: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Standardizing double‐blind, 
placebo‐controlled oral 
food challenges: American 
Academy of Allergy, Asthma 
and Immunology–European 
Academy of Allergy and 
Clinical Immunology PRACTALL 
consensus report
American Academy of Allergy, 
Asthma and Immunology 
(AAAI); European Academy of 
Allergy and Clinical Immunology 
(EAACI)
2012
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ 
pubmed/23195525)
Section 7: Evidence
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 8: Images
Not applicable for this topic.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at:  
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for  
patients, and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
222 
Acute Urticaria
Amanda L. Cox
Division of Pediatric Allergy/Immunology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 26
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• Urticaria is characterized by skin findings of spontaneously erupting, pruritic, short‐lived wheals 
(or hives), which may be caused by a variety of triggers or may be idiopathic, and may be asso-
ciated with angioedema. Acute urticaria refers specifically to urticaria that does not exceed 
6 weeks in duration.
Disease classification
• Urticaria may be classified as: (i) acute urticaria; (ii) chronic urticaria; (iii) physical urticaria 
(reproduced by specific stimuli); or (iv) contact urticaria (secondary to skin contact with 
allergens or chemicals). Underlying diseases such as urticarial vasculitis and autoinflamma-
tory syndromes, or acute infections may also present with acute or chronic urticaria.
Incidence/prevalence
• Acute urticaria affects up to 20% of the population at some point in their lives and occurs 
across all ages.
Overall Bottom Line
• Urticarial lesions (“hives” or “welts”) are vascular skin reactions characterized by extremely 
pruritic, circumscribed, raised, erythematous plaques or papules, often with a pale center. 
Individual lesions are transient and generally resolve within 24 hours.
• The majority of cases of new onset urticaria are acute (<6 weeks in duration) and self‐limited.
• The lesions of acute and chronic urticaria are identical, so when they first develop it is not 
possible to differentiate acute from chronic urticaria by physical examination.
• There are numerous possible causes of acute urticaria, and for many patients no specific 
etiology can be identified.
• In some cases, urticaria may be a presenting feature of a systemic disorder or may persist and 
represent the beginning of chronic urticaria.
• Non‐sedating second generation H1 antihistamines are the mainstay of therapy for acute 
urticaria.
Acute Urticaria  223
• Acute urticaria is most commonly seen in the pediatric population, and is often associated with 
atopy; boys are affected at the same rates as girls.
• Atopy seems to be more prevalent in individuals with urticaria than in the general population.
• Acute urticaria is less likely to progress to chronic urticaria in children, but overall, 20–30% of 
patients with acute urticaria will progress to chronic or recurrent urticaria.
Economic impact
• The economic impact of acute urticaria has not been determined.
Etiology
• There are many potential causes of new onset acute urticaria, and in some cases no etiology 
can be identified.
• Common causes include viral and bacterial infections, parasitic infections, IgE‐mediated reac-
tions to medication, vaccination, stinging or biting insects, latex exposure, blood product trans-
fusion, skin contact with allergens, and ingestion of foods. Non‐IgE‐mediated reactions to 
medications and transfusions can also cause urticaria. In children, infectious causes are believed 
to be by far the most common etiology for acute urticaria.
• Urticaria can also be triggered by specific physical stimuli as in physical urticarial disorders, 
which include dermatographism, delayed pressure urticaria, cholinergic urticaria, adrenergic 
urticaria, solar urticaria, aquagenic urticaria, and vibratory urticaria/angioedema.
• Food‐dependent exercise‐induced urticaria/anaphylaxis is a unique IgE‐mediated allergic con-
dition that presents with acute hives (or systemic allergic reaction) only when exercise follows 
ingestion of a specific food that is otherwise tolerated.
• Serum sickness and hormone‐associated disorders can cause acute urticaria.
• Urticaria is often an early manifestation of a systemic disorder such as urticarial vasculitis, 
­autoimmune disease, mastocytosis/mast cell disorder, or malignancy.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• Cutaneous mast cells in the superficial dermis are primarily responsible for the appearance of 
urticaria (or hives), although basophils may be involved in some lesions. Mast cells express 
high‐affinity IgE receptors (FcεRIs), which interact with the constant domain of IgE antibodies. 
Mast cells degranulate when IgE forms a complex with FcεRI on the mast cell, when adjacent 
FcεRIs cross‐link, or if receptor‐bound IgE binds to allergen, anti‐IgE, or anti‐FcεRI antibodies. 
Opioids, complement, anaphylatoxin, stem cell factor, and neuropeptides can cause direct mast 
cell degranulation without interacting with the FcεRIs. Immune complexes can also cause acute 
urticaria, although the mechanism for this is unclear.
• Mast cell degranulation ultimately involves fusion of intercellular storage granules with the 
mast cell membrane, such that granule contents including histamine, prostaglandin D2 
(PGD2), leukotrienes, tumor necrosis factor α (TNF‐α), and other cytokines are released from 
the cell into surrounding tissues. Histamine and leukotriene C4 (LTC4) mediate a wheal‐and‐
flare skin reaction, itching, and vasodilatation that causes swelling in the upper layers of skin. 
Histamine, TNF‐α, and IL‐8 also up‐regulate adhesion molecule expression on endothelial 
cells and promote inflammatory cell migration into urticarial lesions. Angioedema is similar 
to urticarial lesion formation, but involves mast cells of the deeper dermis and subcutaneous 
tissues.
Predictive/risk factors
Not applicable for this topic.
224  Part 1: Allergy
Section 2: Prevention
• No interventions have been demonstrated to prevent the development of acute urticaria, 
because acute new onset urticaria is spontaneous and generally unpredictable.
• In the majority of cases, which are infection‐related or idiopathic, acute urticaria resolves 
­without recurrence.
• No intervention has been shown to prevent acute urticaria from progressing to chronic 
urticaria.
Screening
Not applicable for this topic.
Primary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Secondary prevention
• Avoidance of food/inhalant/contact allergens, medications, or physical stimuli will prevent fur-
ther episodes of acute or recurrent urticaria in individuals for whom these triggers have been 
identified.
• Specific allergen immunotherapy may be indicated in patients with inhalant, contact, or insect 
venom allergy, especially when there is a risk of anaphylaxis.
Section 3: Diagnosis
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• The appearance of urticaria on physical examination does not provide clues about the 
etiology.
• History should be positive for the sudden appearance of hives with or without angioedema. 
Patients report wheals on any area of the skin surface, of variable size, surrounded by 
erythema and associated with itching, and occasionally a burning sensation. No individual 
hive should persist more than 24 hours, and no hive or wheal should leave any residual 
ecchymosis, bruising, or pigmentation.
• History should also focus on any potential inciting factors or triggers for hives, such as 
recent medications, illnesses, food exposures, exercise, insect stings, travel, and sexual 
history.
• The clinician must ask about associated signs or symptoms of a generalized allergic 
reaction or anaphylaxis including respiratory, gastrointestinal, or circulatory symptoms 
(see Chapter 29). The clinician should also enquire about signs and symptoms such as 
fever, weight loss, arthralgia, and arthritis, which might suggest an underlying systemic 
disorder.
• Skin lesions should be visualized directly in order to make a diagnosis of urticaria, as the term 
“hives” is used often by patients to describe any rash or exanthem.
• For patients who have acute urticaria (<6 weeks’ duration), laboratory testing is not 
absolutely necessary unless there is a suspicion of an underlying disorder or urticarial 
vasculitis.
• Laboratory studies may be used to investigate an IgE‐mediated (allergic) cause for acute 
urticaria. If an allergic cause is suspected, the patient should be referred to an allergist or 
immunologist for evaluation.
Acute Urticaria  225
Differential diagnosis
Typical presentation
• The presenting feature of acute urticaria is hives, which are circumscribed, raised, pink–red 
edematous plaques with central pallor that are intensely pruritic. Hives may be round, oval, or 
serpiginous, and range from millimeters to centimeters in diameter. Hives may also become 
confluent. Individual lesions are transient, and can appear and enlarge over minutes to hours. 
Surrounding erythema should blanch with pressure. Individual hives disappear within 24 hours 
and leave no residual skin marking. Urticaria can appear on any area of the body, and may be 
found where clothing compresses the skin or where skin rubs another skin surface (e.g. axillae). 
There may be associated angioedema, or swelling of the lower dermis and subcutaneous layer, 
usually of the face, lips, extremities, or genitals.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• Acute urticaria arises spontaneously, with or without angioedema. Acute urticaria may be 
­isolated to one eruption, may occur continuously, or may be intermittent over the course of a 
6‐week (or shorter) period. Patients describe extreme pruritus, and, occasionally, burning, but 
should not report pain. It is important to ask about symptoms suggesting anaphylaxis or an 
acute systemic allergic reaction. Patients may complain that the pruritus disrupts their daily 
activities and sleep, and that it is most intense at night. In some cases, the history reveals a 
temporal relationship to a suspected eliciting trigger, such as a food ingestion, insect sting, 
medication exposure, environmental exposure, recent/concurrent illness, or physical stimulus. 
Past history and family history of urticaria should also be noted.
Differential diagnosis
Features
Viral exanthem
Fixed, non‐pruritic, maculopapular eruption that persists for days, often 
with fever, common in children, caused by many different viruses
Auriculotemporal syndrome
Transient post‐prandial non‐pruritic flushing of skin over cheeks and 
jawline, generally unilateral
Sweet’s syndrome
Recurrent episodic painful rash of papules and plaques associated 
with fever, arthralgia, and peripheral leukocytosis
Atopic dermatitis
Intensely pruritic erythematous patches with papules and scaling, 
lasting in patches for days to weeks or longer
Contact dermatitis
Irritant or allergic dermatitis arising from direct skin exposure to a 
substance, erythematous or papular, and sometimes maculopapular
Drug eruptions
Maculopapular rash with lesions that become larger and confluent 
over time, associated with a medication exposure, may or may not 
be pruritic
Bullous pemphigoid
Pruritus with or without urticarial lesions that progresses to 
blistering lesions, occurs in older adults
Erythema multiforme
Erythematous macules, vesiculobullous lesions with a target 
appearance, may be painful or pruritic, distributed on extensor 
surfaces of extremities, and individual lesions last for several days, 
associated with fever and malaise
Serum sickness
Pruritic urticarial, macular, or raised serpiginous rash, associated 
with fever, polyarthralgias, polyarthritis, and malaise. Individual 
urticarial lesions may last for several days to weeks
226  Part 1: Allergy
Physical examination
• For a patient presenting with acute urticaria, vital signs, circulatory, neurologic, respiratory, and 
gastrointestinal systems should be fully evaluated to differentiate acute urticaria from anaphylaxis.
• A comprehensive physical examination is essential, with close examination of the skin. Urticarial 
lesions are pruritic, circumscribed, raised, erythematous plaques of a few millimeters to several 
centimeters in diameter. Wheals may arise in crops on any area of the body, enlarge, develop 
central pallor, and/or coalesce with other wheals. Each lesion is usually short‐lived and resolves 
within a few hours, leaving no residual skin marks.
• If a patient is currently taking H1‐blocking antihistamine, the lesions may appear flat.
• Angioedema, defined as deep dermal, subcutaneous tissue, or mucous membrane swelling, 
may also be present.
• Note any non‐urticarial exanthem, other rash, pigment changes, ecchymosis, or purpura, as 
these findings suggest other underlying conditions.
• As individual hives are evanescent, the patient may have no urticaria at the time of examination 
and photographs may be helpful.
• If a patient states individual hives persist for days or longer, a single lesion may be circled with 
pen and monitored for resolution or persistence beyond 24–48 hours.
Useful clinical decision rules and calculators
Not applicable for this topic.
Disease severity classification
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• Laboratory tests are not required for most cases of acute spontaneous urticaria without 
other symptoms or signs of illness, but may be considered for chronic urticaria of over 6 weeks’ 
duration (see Chapter 27).
• Physical provocation tests may be used to evaluate physical urticaria:
• Assess for dermatographism by stroking the skin with a firm object;
• Conduct physical testing with suspected stimuli (e.g. ice, heat, pressure) if feasible in the 
clinical setting.
• Specific allergen IgE levels (for foods, latex, insect venom, select medications, and inhalant aller-
gens) may be measured or allergy skin testing pursued if an allergic trigger is strongly suspected 
or if clinical history suggests an allergic cause.
Scoring system for severity of acute urticaria. Total score of severity is sum of grades for wheals and 
­pruritus (0–4).
Symptom
Grade
Criteria
Wheals
0
None
1
<20 wheals/24 hours
2
>20 wheals/24hours
Pruritus
0
No pruritus
1
Mild–moderate: tolerable, does not interfere with activities or sleep
2
Severe: intolerable, interferes with activities and/or sleep
Source: Frigas E, Park MA. Acute urticaria and angioedema: diagnostic and treatment considerations. Am J Clin 
Dermatol 2009;10:239–50. Reproduced with permission of Elsevier.
Acute Urticaria  227
• Laboratory tests to confirm a suspected infection may be performed if clinically indicated.
• If a single wheal persists >24 hours, does not respond to antihistamine, leaves pigmentary 
changes, or is associated with petechiae, or palpable purpura, a skin biopsy should be 
performed.
Lists of imaging techniques
Imaging studies are not indicated for acute spontaneous urticaria.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis of disease
• For a patient with acute urticaria, it is essential that anaphylaxis is not overlooked. Anaphylaxis 
is a potentially life‐threatening condition and requires emergency medical intervention.
• The skin lesions of acute and chronic urticaria are identical so, at initial onset, it is not possible 
to differentiate acute from chronic forms of urticaria.
• Urticaria that is recurrent or persistent for 6 weeks or longer is considered to be chronic 
­urticaria and warrants further diagnostic evaluation.
• Angioedema without urticaria requires a different course of evaluation and management (see 
Chapter 28).
Section 4: Treatment (Algorithm 26.1)
Discontinue or remove
inciting trigger if identiﬁed
Non-sedating second generation H1 
antihistamine – increase if needed to
effective dose
Try different non-sedating second 
generation H1-antihistamine
Addition of ﬁrst generation H1-
antihistamine at bedtime
Addition of H2-antihistamine
Switch to ﬁrst generation H1 
antihistamine (every 4–6 hour dosing)
Caution patient about sedative effects
Short course (5–7 days) of  oral 
glucocorticoid, while continuing 
antihistamine therapy 
Note: Evaluate for chronic urticaria if ≥6 weeks of symptoms
If not effective, proceed
to next treatment option
Algorithm 26.1  Treatment of acute urticaria
228  Part 1: Allergy
Treatment rationale
• Acute management of anaphylaxis is critical if systemic symptoms such as hypotension/shock, 
syncope, bronchospasm, or severe gastrointestinal distress are also present. If acute urticaria is 
not associated with a systemic allergic reaction, begin with elimination or discontinuation of 
the causative agent, if identified, as this may result in rapid resolution of urticaria as well as 
prevent recurrence. Appropriate and prompt treatment should be considered for any underly-
ing infection or illness if suspected.
• Acute urticaria without anaphylaxis or underlying illness is generally benign, and not life‐threat-
ening. Treatment is focused on providing short‐term symptom relief of pruritus and urticaria. 
The first line pharmacotherapeutic agents are non‐sedating oral antihistamines, titrated to the 
lowest effective recommended daily dosage. In some cases urticaria will occur once without 
recurrence, or resolve after a few days, and the antihistamine may be discontinued. If urticaria 
persists despite this regimen, a first generation sedating oral antihistamine may be added to 
the regimen, starting with a low dose at bedtime and increased gradually, if needed, to the 
dosage that controls symptoms. An H2 receptor antagonist may also be added to the antihis-
tamine regimen. An effective antihistamine regimen should be continued for 4–6 weeks before 
being tapered or discontinued. When antihistamines alone are not effective, a short course of 
systemic oral glucocorticoids (5–7 days) may be added to the antihistamine regimen.
When to hospitalize
• Emergent stabilization and possible hospitalization is required for acute urticaria with life‐
threatening symptoms of anaphylaxis including:
• Syncope;
• Rapid onset of unresponsiveness or lethargy;
• Hypotension and/or hypovolemic shock;
• Bronchospasm, stridor, wheezing, or respiratory distress;
• Hypotonia;
• Severe vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain.
Managing the hospitalized patient
• Acute urticaria associated with anaphylactic shock may require all or some of the following 
treatment measures (see Chapter 29):
• Intramuscular epinephrine (multiple doses may be required);
• Rapid and continuous intravascular volume replacement;
• Continuous intravenous pressor administration;
• H2 antihistamine (PO, IM, or IV);
• Systemic glucocorticoid (PO or IV);
• Inhaled beta‐agonist;
• H1 antihistamine (PO or IV).
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comment
Conservative
Avoidance, removal or discontinuation of 
causative agent or physical trigger
May be sufficient treatment for patients who have 
an identifiable allergen trigger (food, medication, 
latex) or pseudoallergen trigger, or for patients who 
have physical urticaria with known physical stimulus 
(e.g. dermatographism, cold, cholinergic, pressure)
Treatment
Comment
Medical (oral dosing only)
Second generation H1 antihistamines
• Cetirizine (children 6 months–2 years, 2.5 mg 
QD; children 2–5 years, 5 mg QD; children 
6 years and older, 5–10 mg QD; adults,  
10 mg QD to BID)
• Levocetirizine (children 6–11 years, 2.5 mg QD; 
12 years and older, 5 mg QD; adults, up to 
5 mg BID)
• Loratadine (children 2–5 years, 5 mg QD; 
6 years and older, 10 mg QD)
• Desloratadine (children 6 months–1 year, 1 mg 
QD; 1–5 years, 1.25 mg QD; 6–11 years, 2.5 mg 
QD; 12 years and older, 5 mg QD up to 5 mg 
BID in adults)
• Fexofenadine (children 6 months–2 years, 15 mg 
BID; 2–11 years, 30 mg BID; 12 years and older, 
180 mg QD up to 180 mg BID in adults)
First generation H1 antihistamines
• Diphenhydramine (children, 5 mg/kg/24 hr ÷ 
every 6 hr, max dose 300 mg/24 hr; adults, 
10–50 mg/dose every 4–8 hr, max dose 
400 mg/24 hr)
• Chlorpheniramine (children 2–6 years, 1 mg 
every 4–6 hr; 6–11 years, 2 mg every 4–6 hr; 
12 years and older, 4 mg every 4–6 hr, max 
dose 24 mg/24 hr)
• Hydroxyzine (children, 2 mg/kg/24 hr ÷ every 
6–8 hr PRN; adult, 25–100 mg/dose every 4–6 hr 
PRN, max dose 600 mg/24 hr)
H2 antihistamines
• Ranitidine HCL (infants/children 1 month–
16 years, 5–10 mg/kg/24 hr ÷ every 12 hr, 
max dose 300 mg/24 hr; adults, 150 mg/dose 
BID or 300 mg QHS)
• Famotidine (children, 1 mg/kg/24 hr ÷ every 
12 hr, max dose 80 mg/24 hr; adolescent and 
adult, 20 mg BID)
• Cimetidine (children, 20–40 mg/kg/24 hr ÷ every 
6 hr; adult, 300 mg/dose QID or 400 mg BID or 
800 mg/dose QHS)
Glucocorticoids
• Prednisone (adults, 30–60 mg QD, tapered over 
5–7 days)
• Prednisolone (children, 0.5–1 mg/kg/day, 
max 60 mg QD, tapered over 5–7 days)
• Second‐generation H1 antihistamines are the 
recommended first line therapy for acute 
urticaria
• Evidence for effectiveness of second generation
• H1 antihistamines is very high, and these are 
safe and well tolerated by most patients, with 
minimal sedation and anticholinergic side 
effects, and minimal interaction with other 
medications
• Response to and tolerance of individual H1 
antihistamine agents varies between patients
• Drowsiness can be experienced at higher doses
• Dosage adjustments for all H1 antihistamines 
are necessary for patients with renal or hepatic 
insufficiency
• First generation H1 antihistamines are second 
line agents, but may be helpful at bedtime in 
combination with a non‐sedating agent taken 
during the day, or when second generation 
agent is not effective
• Many patients experience sedative and 
anticholinergic side effects with first 
generation antihistamines
• Diphenhydramine or hydroxyzine can be given 
intravenously
• Combination of H1 and H2 antihistamine may 
be more effective than H1 antihistamine alone, 
although data are limited
• H2 antihistamines are generally well tolerated
• Cimetidine can increase circulating levels of 
other medications so should be used with 
caution
• A short course of glucocorticoid may be added 
to antihistamine for severe or persistent 
symptoms, or when angioedema is present
• Repeat courses of oral glucocorticoids should 
be avoided
• Optimal dosing and duration of glucocorticoid 
therapy has not been established
• Tapering or withdrawal of glucocorticoids can 
result in resurgence of urticaria; anthistamine 
should be continued for duration of 
glucocorticoid course and for several days after 
glucocorticoid course is complete
Other
Referral to an allergist or immunologist
• Appropriate when allergic etiology is suspected
230  Part 1: Allergy
Prevention/management of complications
• First generation H1 antihistamines have sedative and anticholinergic side effects, to which very 
young and elderly patients may be more susceptible.
• Anticholinergic effects of first generation H1 antihistamines include dry mouth, diplopia, blurred 
vision, urinary retention, and vaginal dryness. Sedative effects can cause fine motor skills, driving 
skills, and reaction times to be impaired.
• First generation H1 antihistamines can cause cognitive impairment and sleep disturbance in 
children.
• First generation H1 antihistamines are contraindicated in patients with gastrointestinal (GI) or 
urinary obstruction.
• For second generation H1 antihistamines, dose adjustments (lower doses and decreased 
­frequency of administration) are required in patients with renal or hepatic impairment.
• All H1 antihistamines should be used with caution in patients with glaucoma and prostatic 
hyperplasia.
• Prolonged use of glucocorticoids is associated with osteopenia, adrenal suppression, Cushingoid 
effects, cataracts, diabetes, and GI bleeding. Short‐term use may cause mood changes, appe-
tite changes, hyperglycemia, diarrhea, nausea, and abdominal distension.
Section 5: Special populations
Pregnancy
• Avoidance of all antihistamines is generally recommended during the first trimester, even though 
none has been proven to be teratogenic. There are no oral antihistamines with a Category A listing 
for pregnancy. Hydroxyzine is specifically contraindicated during the early stages of pregnancy. 
Chlorpheniramine, loratadine, cetirizine, and levocetirizine are listed by the US FDA as Category B 
medications. Chlorpheniramine or diphenydramine (first generation H1 antihistamines) are most 
often recommended, followed by second generation agents, loratadine and cetirizine, for which 
there is some evidence of safety when used in pregnancy. However, antihistamines should only be 
given as needed, and at the lowest effective dose. Short courses of glucocorticoids can be given 
during pregnancy, but should be avoided during the first trimester, and should always be closely 
monitored. Glucocorticoids are given for other conditions during pregnancy. Areas of concern 
include congenital malformations, neonatal adrenal insufficiency, and low birth weight, although 
the risks are low for short courses of low‐dosage glucocorticoids during pregnancy.
Clinical pearls
• The physician must assess a patient who presents with acute spontaneous urticaria for possible 
anaphylaxis because this is a life‐threatening emergency that requires prompt and specific treatment.
• Urticaria may present as a single acute episode for which no treatment or only a limited 
course of treatment is indicated.
• Medical treatment for acute urticaria is intended to provide relief from symptoms, 
predominantly pruritus.
• Non‐sedating oral second generation H1 antihistamines are the first line treatment, 
while first generation H1 antihistamines may be added or substituted if second generation 
H1 antihistamines are not effective. H2 antihistamines may be helpful in combination with 
H1 agents for some patients.
• A short course of glucocorticoids is a last resort, but may be considered if symptoms are 
severe and if H1 and H2 antihistamines are not effective.
• Acute urticaria is by definition a temporary condition (≤6 weeks) with a benign course, so 
chronic therapy is not necessary.
Acute Urticaria  231
Children
• In children, the most common cause of acute urticaria is viral infection, and may be associated 
with only transient urticaria.
• Food allergy is also more prevalent in children, and should be considered in the evaluation of 
any child presenting with acute urticaria, as dietary restrictions may be essential to preventing 
recurrence and repeat exposure may trigger severe allergic reactions.
• Treatment of children with first generation H1 antihistamines can lead to cognitive impairment 
and sleep disturbances, and parents should be told to observe for these changes.
Elderly
• Elderly patients may be more susceptible to the anticholinergic and sedative effects of H1 anti-
histamines and should be monitored closely for these symptoms. Dosage adjustments may be 
necessary for these patients.
Others
• If acute urticaria progresses to chronic urticaria, further diagnostic evaluation and additional 
medical therapies may be indicated.
• For patients with treatable infectious causes of acute urticaria, treatment of the underlying 
infection should result in resolution of urticaria.
• Urticaria associated with systemic disorders is often persistent, chronic, and more difficult to treat.
Section 6: Prognosis
Natural history of untreated disease
• Regardless of treatment, some cases (20–30%) of acute urticaria will persist or recur for >6 weeks, 
and thus progress to chronic urticaria. This is more common for adults than for children.
Prognosis for treated patients
• As treatment of acute urticaria is meant only to control appearance of urticaria and relieve pruritus, 
and is a not a cure, the prognosis for treated patients does not differ from that of untreated patients.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
• Patients with acute urticaria should be followed to determine whether there is recurrence or 
persistence of urticaria. Clinical response and tolerance of medical therapy should be assessed, 
as the medication regimen may require adjustment. For those who have urticaria due to an 
infectious etiology, resolution of infection should be assessed. If an allergic or physical trigger is 
suspected, the patient should be referred to an allergy/immunology specialist for additional test-
ing and management. Diagnostic and treatment considerations differ for patients who ­progress 
to develop chronic urticaria, and are not reviewed here.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• The overall prognosis for acute urticaria, without associated underlying disease, is excellent. 
Most cases resolve spontaneously or within days.
• For those for whom an allergic cause of acute urticaria is identified, symptoms resolve with 
removal or avoidance of the trigger, and do not recur if there is no further exposure.
• Acute urticaria is by definition self‐limited, resolves within 6 weeks, with no residual or 
permanent skin changes, and no adverse health sequelae.
• Acute urticaria may be a manifestation of an underlying condition, for which the prognosis 
depends on the specific diagnosis.
232  Part 1: Allergy
Section 7: Reading list
Frigas E, Park MA. Acute urticaria and angioedema: diagnostic and treatment considerations. Am J Clin 
Dermatol 2009;10:239–50
Greaves M. Chronic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2000;105:664–72
Kanani A, Schellenberg R, Warrington R. Urticaria and angioedema. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol 
2011;7(Suppl 1):S9.
Poonawalla T, Kelly B. Urticaria: a review. Am J Clin Dermatol 2009;10: 9–21
Saini S. Urticaria and angioedema. In: Adkinson F, Bochner B, Burks AW, et al. (eds). Middleton’s Allergy: 
Principles and Practice, 8th edn, Vol 1. St. Louis, MO: Mosby, 2014, pp. 575–87
Sánchez‐Borges M, Asero R, Ansotegui IJ, Baaiardini I, Bernstein JA, Canonica GW, et al. Diagnosis and treat-
ment of urticaria and angioedema: worldwide perspective. World Allergy Organ J 2012; 5:125–47
Winters M. Initial evaluation and management of patients presenting with acute urticaria or angioedema. 
American Academy of Emergency Medicine (AAEM); 2006, Position Statement. Available at: http://www.
aaem.org/em‐resources/position‐statements/2006/clinical‐practice‐guidelines (accessed October 17, 2014)
Zuberbier T, Balke M, Worm M, Edenharter G, Maurer M. Epidemiology of urticaria: a representative cross‐
sectional population survey. Clin Exp Dermatol 2010;35:869–73
Zuberbier T, Asero R, Bindslev‐Jensen C, Walter Canonica G, Church MK, Giménez‐Amau A, et al. EAACI/
GA2LEN/EDF/WAO guideline: definition, classification and diagnosis of urticaria. Allergy 2009;64:1417–26
Suggested websites
www.aaaai.org
www.acaai.org
www.aad.org
www.uptodate.com/new‐onset‐urticaria (Note: uptodate membership to access required)
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Initial evaluation and 
management of patients 
presenting with acute 
urticaria or angioedema
American Academy of 
Emergency Medicine (AAEM)
2006
(http://www.aaem.org/em‐resources/
position‐statements/2006/ 
clinical‐practice‐guidelines)
International society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Guidelines for definition, 
classification and 
diagnosis of urticaria
European Academy of Allergology and 
Clinical Immunology (EAACI), Global 
Allergy and Asthma European Network 
(GA2LEN), European Dermatology 
Forum (EDF), and the World Allergy 
Organization (WAO)
2009
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/19772512)
Diagnosis and 
Treatment of Urticaria 
and Angioedema: a 
Worldwide Perspective
World Allergy Association (WAO)
2012
(http://www.waojournal.org/
content/5/11/125)
Section 9: Evidence
Not applicable for this topic.
Acute Urticaria  233
Section 10: Images
Figure 26.1  Superficial urticarial lesions often have central pallor and raised erythematous edematous borders, 
but can vary in size, shape, and color. See color plate 26.1. From Habif TP. Clinical Dermatology: A Color Guide 
to Diagnosis and Therapy. 5th edition. 2010 Philadelphia, PA, Mosby/Elsevier. Reproduced with permission.
Figure 26.2  Confluent urticaria. See color plate 26.2. From Habif TP. Clinical Dermatology: A Color Guide to 
Diagnosis and Therapy. 5th edition. 2010 Philadelphia, PA, Mosby/Elsevier. Reproduced with permission.
234  Part 1: Allergy
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at:  
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for 
patients, and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
  235
Chronic Urticaria
Julie Wang
Department of Pediatrics, Division of Allergy/Immunology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 27
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• Urticaria is characterized by erythematous, blanching, circumscribed, pruritic lesions that wax 
and wane, and individual lesions do not persist in any given location for more than 24 hours. 
Chronic urticaria (CU) is defined as persistent or recurring urticaria for at least 6 weeks in 
duration.
Disease classification
• Chronic urticaria may be caused by physical stimuli (physical urticaria), infections, autoreactive 
mechanisms, or may be idiopathic.
Incidence/prevalence
• Lifetime prevalence rate of CU is estimated to be 1.8%.
• More women develop CU than men.
• Peak age is 20–40 years in most studies.
Economic impact
• The mean estimated annual costs of chronic urticaria patients conventionally treated with anti-
histamines are >$2000 per patient per year.
• In addition to medical costs, indirect costs are also accrued as a result of absence from work 
and/or reduced productivity and efficiency at work.
Overall Bottom Line
• Chronic urticaria (CU) is defined as recurrent, spontaneous hives persisting for at least  
6 weeks.
• CU impacts people of any age, with peak incidence at 20–40 years of age.
• CU has a significant negative impact on quality of life.
• In many cases, no identifiable triggers are found.
• The main goal of management is symptom relief to improve quality of life.
236  Part 1: Allergy
Etiology
• CU may be caused by physical triggers, infections, or autoreactive mechanisms; however, for 
many patients there is no identifiable trigger.
• Thyroid auto‐antibodies are often found in patients with CU, but their clinical relevance is not clear.
• 30–50% of patients with CU produce IgG antibodies against the FcεR1α subunit of the high 
affinity IgE receptor.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• Urticarial lesions are characterized by pruritic, erythematous, blanching, circumscribed, raised 
lesions involving the epidermis and dermis. Biopsy typically shows non‐necrotizing peri‐vascular 
mononuclear cell infiltrates. Mast cells in the skin have a key role and histamine is the predomi-
nant mediator, but other cells and mediators are also involved. A predominantly lymphocytic 
infiltrate with a Th0 pattern can be found in urticarial lesions.
• Autoreactive mechanisms have been implicated because nearly one‐quarter of patients with 
CU have thyroid autoantibodies, 30–50% have anti‐IgE receptor antibodies, and 10% have 
anti‐IgE antibodies. The pathogenesis of autoantibody associated urticaria is still unclear, but 
studies suggest that T cells, soluble CD40 ligand, and basophil histamine responsiveness are 
involved.
Predictive/risk factors
• There are no known risk factors.
• Female : male ratio ranges from 7 : 3 to 4 : 1.
Section 2: Prevention
No interventions have been demonstrated to prevent the development of this disease.
Screening
Not applicable for this topic.
Primary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Secondary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 3: Diagnosis (Algorithm 27.1)
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• The diagnosis of CU is based on the episodic appearance of characteristic urticarial lesions for 
6 weeks or longer.
• Physical examination will typically reveal urticaria affecting any part of the body.
• Extensive laboratory testing is not indicated for patients with CU who present with an 
otherwise unremarkable history and physical examination because no identifiable trigger is 
found in most cases; it is not cost‐effective and it does not improve patient outcomes.
Chronic Urticaria  237
Urticaria/angioedema
>6 weeks
Refer to diagnosis of acute 
urticaria
Urticarial lesions persist
 >24 hours
Detailed history and
physical examination
Laboratory tests: consider
CBC with differential, CRP or
ESR, TSH
Other tests may be indicated
based on history and physical
examination
Physical urticaria testing, if
indicated for 
dermatographism, cold 
urticaria, vibratory urticaria,
aquagenic urticaria, etc.
History, physical examination
and testing identiﬁes trigger
Medical management for 
idiopathic chronic urticaria
Avoid triggers or physical 
stimuli; adjunctive 
pharmacotherapy
Evaluate for urticarial
vasculitis
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Algorithm 27.1  Diagnosis of chronic urticaria
• Guidelines suggest initial limited testing with complete blood count with differential,  
C‐reactive protein (CRP) or erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and thyroid stimulating hormone 
(TSH) level.
• Utility of testing for autoantibodies for IgE or the IgE receptor has not been established.
238  Part 1: Allergy
Differential diagnosis
Typical presentation
• Urticaria (hives) are circumscribed, raised, erythematous lesions, often with central pallor.
• Lesions are pruritic and can affect any area of the body. Individual lesions resolve within 24 hours.
• Exacerbating factors may include physical stimuli (e.g. cold, pressure, vibration), stress, anti‐
inflammatory medications, and alcohol.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• History is important for the diagnosis of CU. Patients should be asked about the onset of 
symptoms, frequency and duration of individual lesions, chronicity of symptoms (6 weeks or 
longer), potential physical triggers (e.g. cold, vibration, pressure), exacerbating factors (e.g. 
medications, stress, physical factors), signs and symptoms associated with the lesions (e.g. 
angioedema, systemic symptoms), and personal and family history of urticaria and atopy.
• History should exclude other types of urticaria (acute urticaria), as well as the possibility of 
systemic disease (e.g. SLE, thyroid disorder).
• Treatments used and response to treatment should also be recorded.
Physical examination
• Physical examination may reveal urticaria on any part of the body.
Differential diagnosis
Features
Hereditary angioedema
Angioedema without urticaria, can have episodic 
abdominal pain. Unresponsive to antihistamines
Mast cell releasability syndromes  
(e.g. urticaria pigmentosa)
Pigmented papules with positive Darier’s sign 
(urtication when lesions of urticarial pigmentosa 
are stroked). Biopsy reveals focal collection of  
mast cells
Erythema multiforme minor
Preceded by prodromal symptoms such as malaise, 
fever, sore throat, and arthralgia. Cutaneous 
symptoms are frequently target‐like, non‐pruritic, 
have a dusky center, and are fixed
Urticarial vasculitis
Individual lesions persist >24 hours, may be palpable 
and purpuric, are painful rather than pruritic, leave 
residual pigmentation, and may be accompanied 
by systemic symptoms (i.e. fever, chills, arthralgias). 
Diagnosis confirmed with skin biopsy
Hypereosinophilic syndrome
Urticaria can be seen; however, angioedema and 
erythroderma are more common
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
Urticaria is one of the dermatologic manifestations 
of SLE. Often, these patients have other systemic 
symptoms, such as fever, weight loss, arthritis, 
lymphadenopathy, renal disease, pulmonary disease, 
or cardiac disease
Cryoglobulinemia
Urticarial and vasculitis can be seen in hepatitis B or 
C infection. Lesions are primarily on the buttocks 
and lower back
Chronic Urticaria  239
Useful clinical decision rules and calculators
Not applicable for this topic.
Disease severity classification
Not applicable for this topic.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• The most common physical urticaria is dermatographism. Stroking the skin with a tongue blade 
will elicit wheal formation within 1–3 minutes.
• Methacholine intradermal challenge or partial immersion using hot water (42°C) is used for the 
diagnosis of cholinergic urticaria.
• Other challenge procedures for physical urticarias include ice cube test for cold‐induced urticaria, 
applying vortex to forearm for vibratory urticaria, and water compress for aquagenic urticaria.
• If the clinical history is not suggestive of an underlying allergic etiology or systemic disease, 
then it is unlikely that routine laboratory tests would be informative.
• Guidelines suggest initial limited testing with complete blood count with differential, CRP or 
ESR and TSH levels.
• Complete blood count with differential may reveal eosinophilia, which suggests evaluation for 
atopic disorder or parasitic disease is indicated.
• Significantly elevated CRP or ESR should prompt investigations for systemic disease (i.e. 
­autoimmunity, rheumatologic, infectious, or neoplastic disease).
• Abnormal TSH level would be suspicious for thyroid disease.
• Investigational tests include the autologous serum skin test and anti‐FcεRIα antibodies, which 
are used to screen for autoimmunity.
• Expanded laboratory testing and/or skin biopsy may be considered if CU is not responsive to 
therapy.
• Skin testing and serum IgE testing to foods or other allergens are not recommended for the 
routine investigation of CU.
Lists of imaging techniques
No imaging studies are indicated for chronic urticaria.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis of disease
• IgE‐mediated food allergies do not typically cause CU.
• Helicobacter pylori infection does not cause CU.
• If individual lesions persist beyond 24 hours, are painful, have associated petechiae or purpura, 
leave residual pigmentation, or are associated with elevated CRP/ESR and/or systemic symp-
toms, then skin biopsy is recommended to exclude urticarial vasculitis.
Section 4: Treatment (Algorithm 27.2)
Treatment rationale
• The goal of pharmacotherapy is to provide symptom relief to improve quality of life while mini-
mizing side effects of therapy. Avoidance of triggers or physical stimuli for physical urticaria is 
advised. First line medical treatment of CU is with non‐sedating second generation antihistamines 
(e.g. cetirizine, fexofenadine, loratadine). First generation antihistamines are not routinely used 
given their major side effects of sedation and anticholinergic effects. For patients who do not 
respond adequately to standard doses of H1 antihistamines, guidelines suggest increasing the 
dosage up to fourfold. Modest improvements may be seen for some with the addition of H2 
240  Part 1: Allergy
• Dosing is based on severity of urticaria and sedation effects
• e.g. diphenhydramine, hydroxyzine, doxepine
• Indicated for those refractory to H1 antihistamines
• Dosing is not dependent on serum IgE or body weight
H2 
antihistamine
• Can provide additional relief for some
• e.g. ranitidine or cimetidine
Non-sedating H1 
antihistamine
• Should be taken daily rather than as needed
• Doses can be increased up to fourfold
• e.g. cetirizine, fexofenadine, loratadine
Sedating H1 
antihistamine
Omalizumab
Leukotriene
receptor 
antagonist
• Can be used as add-on therapy
Systemic 
corticosteroids
• Used for short-term relief of severe symptoms
• Should be tapered as rebound of symptoms can occur when 
   corticosteroids discontinued
Anti-inflammatory
 or immunosup-
pressive agents
• Limited data regarding use of these agents for CU
• Reserved for cases where antihistamines are insufficiently 
   effective
Algorithm 27.2  Managment of chronic urticaria
Chronic Urticaria  241
antihistamines. Those who experience exacerbations of CU with aspirin or NSAIDs may derive 
the benefit from leukotriene modifiers.
• Omalizumab has been shown to be effective in treating CU refractory to H1‐antihistamine ther-
apy. Significant improvements in itching and hives are observed after a 12‐week treatment period, 
with effects seen as early as 1–2 weeks. It is now FDA approved for patients 12 years and older.
• Systemic glucocorticoids are generally reserved for short‐term relief of severe symptoms or CU 
refractory to antihistamines. Prolonged use is not advised given the known adverse effects of 
systemic glucocorticoids and, in many cases, rebound symptoms are seen as glucocorticoids are 
tapered or discontinued.
• Although evidence of efficacy is limited for anti‐inflammatory agents (i.e. dapsone, sulfasala-
zine, colchicine, hydroxychloroquine), these medications may be considered given their favora-
ble cost and safety profile.
• For patients with CU unresponsive to antihistamines and anti‐inflammatory agents or who are 
glucocorticoid dependent, immunosuppressive agents are used (i.e. cyclosporine, tacrolimus, 
sirolimus, mycophenolate).
When to hospitalize
• Chronic urticaria is managed in the outpatient setting.
Managing the hospitalized patient
Not applicable for this topic.
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comment
Medical
• Non‐sedating H1 antihistamines: cetirizine 
10 mg/day), fexofenadine (180 mg/day), 
loratadine (10 mg/day) – doses can be increased 
up to fourfold
• Sedating H1 antihistamines: diphenhydramine or  
hydroxyzine (200 mg/day divided into 3–4 doses)
• Doxepine is particularly sedating, but can be 
considered because it has H1 and some H2 
receptor activity (25–50 mg at bedtime)
• Omalizumab: 150 or 300 mg subcutaneous 
injection every 4 weeks. Unlike for allergic 
asthma, dosing for CU is not dependent on 
serum IgE level or body weight
• H2 antihistamines can provide additional relief 
for some: ranitidine (150 mg twice a day) or 
cimetidine (300–400 mg twice a day)
• Leukotriene receptor antagonists can be used as 
add‐on therapy: montelukast, zafirlukast
• Systemic corticosteroids are used for short‐term 
relief of severe symptoms
• Anti‐inflammatory agents: dapsone, 
sulfasalazine, colchine, hydroxychloroquine
• Immunosuppressive agents: cyclosporine, 
tacrolimus, sirolimus, mycophenolate
• Medications should be taken daily rather than 
as needed
• Dosing of sedating antihistamines is based on 
severity of urticaria and sedation effects
• Systemic corticosteroids should be tapered as 
rebound of symptoms can occur when 
corticosteroids discontinued
• Few data are available regarding the use of 
anti‐inflammatory and immunosuppressive 
agents. These are reserved for cases where 
antihistamines are insufficiently effective
242  Part 1: Allergy
Prevention/management of complications
• Corticosteroids may be considered for short‐term use to gain control of severe symptoms; 
however, rebound of urticaria may occur as corticosteroids are withdrawn.
Section 5: Special populations
Pregnancy
• Pruritic urticarial plaques and papules of pregnancy can occur in the third trimester and can 
cause severe pruritus. Symptoms commonly resolve within 2 weeks of delivery, but may also 
resolve beforehand. Management entails antihistamines and topical steroids to relieve symp-
toms. In severe cases, systemic corticosteroids may be needed.
• Gestational pemphigoid is the abrupt onset of pruritic urticaria that starts on the trunk and 
then becomes generalized.
• Prurigo of pregnancy is characterized by pruritic papules and nodules that primarily affect the 
extensor surfaces. Lesions start in the latter half of the pregnancy and can last for weeks to 
months after delivery.
Section 6: Prognosis
Natural history of untreated disease
• Natural history of CU is not altered by treatment.
• Patients with evidence of autoimmunity are more likely to have severe disease that responds 
poorly to H1 antihistamines.
Prognosis for treated patients
Not applicable for this topic.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
Not applicable for this topic.
Clinical pearls
• The goal of therapy is to improve quality of life while minimizing side effects of therapy.
• Non‐sedating second generation antihistamines are first line therapy and can be increased in 
dosage up to fourfold.
• Omalizumab is indicated for those with symptoms refractory to H1 antihistamine therapy.
• Long‐term use of systemic glucocorticoids should be avoided; short‐term use for the 
management of severe symptoms may be considered, but rebound symptoms may occur 
when it is discontinued.
• Anti‐inflammatory or immunosuppressive agents can be considered for refractory cases.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• CU is a self‐limited disorder for most, with the average duration being 2–5 years.
• 30–50% of patients have spontaneous resolution within 1 year and another 20% resolve 
within 5 years.
• More severe disease tends to be associated with a longer duration.
• In those with moderate to severe symptoms, up to 30% have symptoms that persist >5 years.
Chronic Urticaria  243
Section 7: Reading list
Bernstein JA, Lang DM, Khan DA, Craig T, Dreyfus D, Hsieh F, et al. The diagnosis and management of acute 
and chronic urticaria: 2014 update. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014;133:1270–7
Joint Task Force on Practice Parameters. The diagnosis and management of urticaria: a practice parameter Part I: 
acute urticaria/angioedema Part II: chronic urticaria/angioedema. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2000; 
85:521–44
Maurer M, Weller K, Bindslev‐Jensen C, Giménez‐Arnau A, Bousquet PJ, Bousquet J, et al. Unmet clinical 
needs in chronic spontaneous urticaria. A GA2LEN task force report. Allergy 2011; 66:317–30
Sánchez‐Borges M, Asero R, Ansotegui IJ, Baiardini I, Bernstein JA, Canonica GW, et al. Diagnosis and treatment 
of urticaria and angioedema: a worldwide perspective. World Allergy Organ J 2012;5:125–47
Suggested websites
American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology (AAAAI). www.aaaai.org
American College of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology (ACAAI). www.acaai.org
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
The diagnosis and management 
of urticaria: a practice 
parameter Part I: acute urticaria/
angioedema Part II: chronic 
urticaria/angioedema
Joint Task Force on Practice 
Parameters
2000
(http://www.allergyparameters.
org/published‐practice‐parameters/
alphabetical‐listing/urticaria‐
download/)
International society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Diagnosis and treatment of 
urticaria and angioedema: a 
worldwide perspective
World Allergy Organization
(WAO)
2012
(http://www.waojournal.org/
content/5/11/125)
Section 9: Evidence
Type of evidence
Title, comment
Date
Cochrane Review
Histamine H2‐receptor antagonists 
for urticaria
2012
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/22419335)
Phase 3, multicenter,  
randomized, double‐blind  
study
Omalizumab for the treatment of 
chronic idiopathic or spontaneous 
urticaria
Comment: Omalizumab 
significantly reduced itch‐severity 
scores in patients unresponsive to 
antihistamine therapy
2013
(http://www.nejm.org/doi/
full/10.1056/NEJMoa1215372)
244  Part 1: Allergy
Section 10: Images
Not applicable for this topic.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at:  
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for 
patients, and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
  245
Hereditary Angioedema
Paula J. Busse
Department of Medicine, Division of Clinical Immunology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 28
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• Hereditary angioedema is a disease characterized by recurrent non‐pruritic and non‐pitting 
swelling of subcutaneous or submucosal tissues (without hives) typically affecting the face, 
extremities, abdomen, genitals, and larynx due to dysfunction of the C1‐inhibitor protein. 
Episodes of angioedema do not respond to antihistamine and corticosteroid treatment and, 
without appropriate medication, may lead to asphyxiation if swelling occurs in the larynx. The 
underlying mechanism of HAE is unregulated C1‐INH function leading to excess bradykinin 
generation.
Disease classification
• HAE is classified as either type I or II, although the clinical presentations and treatment do not 
differ significantly. HAE type I is seen in approximately 85% of patients and is a result of under‐
production of functional C1 INH. HAE type II is seen in approximately 15% of patients and is 
Overall Bottom Line
• Hereditary angioedema (HAE) is a rare and potentially life‐threatening disease characterized by 
recurrent episodes of angioedema (without urticaria – hives) typically involving the extremities 
(e.g. hands, feet), abdomen, face, larynx, and genitourinary track.
• HAE is secondary to mutations in the C1‐inhibitor gene (C1‐INH) which results in excess 
­generation of bradykinin, subsequent vascular leak, and swelling.
• Approximately 75% of patients with HAE have an inherited form (transmitted in an 
­autosomal dominant fashion) and 25% of patients have a spontaneous mutation in the  
C1‐INH gene.
• Although some triggers of HAE may be identified (estrogens, ACE‐I, trauma, surgery, stress, 
infection), many episodes of angioedema in HAE occur unpredictably.
• Treatment of angioedema due to HAE with antihistamines and corticosteroids is not ­effective. 
Treatment of HAE is directed at replacement of C1‐INH and inhibition of the bradykinin 
­pathway.
• All patients with HAE must have easy access to an on‐demand medication to treat an acute 
attack.
246  Part 1: Allergy
due to the expression of dysfunctional C1 INH. The severity of HAE is variable, both between 
patients and with a patient over time, and there are no standardized definitions to classify 
disease severity.
Incidence/prevalence
• HAE is estimated to occur in 1 in 30 000–80 000 individuals (approximately 4000–10 000 
people in the United States).
• There are no known ethnic or gender differences.
• Patients’ first symptoms of HAE typically present before the age of 10 years; however, the time 
between symptom onset and diagnosis of HAE may be closer to 9 years.
Economic impact
• Total average annual per‐patient cost is estimated at $42 000.
• The total average annual per‐patient cost in patients with severe disease is > $100 000.
Etiology
• HAE is an inherited autosomal dominant disease in 75% of patients; a spontaneous mutation 
in the C1 INH gene accounts for the remaining 25% of patients.
• >280 mutations in the C1‐INH have been identified.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• C1‐INH is a serine protease inhibitor that has key regulatory functions in the activation of the 
complement system (inhibiting C1r and C1s proteases) and contact system (activated factor XII 
(factor XIIa) and kallikrein), and to a lesser extent regulation of factor XI in the coagulation 
system, and the fibrinolytic pathway.
• Factor XIIa activates additional factor XII, cleaving prekallikrein to kallikrein, which then cleaves 
high molecular weight kininogen, generating the vasoactive peptide bradykinin.
• Bradykinin binds to the BK2 receptor inducing vascular permeability, vasodilatation, and 
­contraction of non‐vascular smooth muscle, resulting in the pain and swelling associated with 
an HAE attack.
Predictive/risk factors
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 2: Prevention
Bottom line
• No interventions have been demonstrated to prevent the development of the disease in 
genetically predisposed individuals; however, education about HAE and its possible triggers 
must be discussed with the patient and his/her family and/or caregivers.
• There is no evidence to suggest that early treatment of HAE alters the natural history of 
disease.
• Patients with HAE (whether symptomatic or asymptomatic) should avoid the use of estrogens 
and angiotensin‐converting enzyme inhibitors (ACE‐I) as these can exacerbate angioedema.
• Patients undergoing invasive dental work or surgery should receive short‐term prophylaxis 
prior to the procedure to reduce the risk of an episode of angioedema.
Hereditary Angioedema  247
Screening
• A serum C4 level is an initial screening test for HAE, and if low, measurement of C1‐INH protein 
and function should be obtained (if clinically indicated).
• Offspring of patients with HAE (whether inherited or due a spontaneous mutation in C1‐INH) 
have a 50% chance of inheriting HAE. Screening of HAE in first degree relatives should be 
offered.
• Cord blood is not reliable to measure complement levels to screen newborn infants; by age 
1 year of life, screening can be performed reliably.
• Genetic studies may be performed on amniotic fluid or chronic villus samples to screen for HAE, 
but is not standard of care.
Primary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Secondary prevention
• A critical factor for management of patients with HAE is education about potential triggers and 
coordination of care with their other health care providers. The following are potential triggers 
of HAE attacks:
• Estrogen containing medications. Patients may safely receive progesterone for oral birth 
control;
• ACE‐I;
• Surgery, invasive dental work (general cleaning is generally not a trigger), and oral surgery 
can trigger an attack of angioedema. If patients have a planned procedure, they should 
receive short‐term prophylaxis (see Section 4). They must also have access to a rescue medi-
cation at the time and for several days after procedure as attacks typically develop 24 hours 
after procedures;
• Trauma may trigger attacks and, for some patients, administration of C1‐INH after trauma is 
advisable to prevent a possible attack.
Section 3: Diagnosis
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• A history of one or more of the following may suggest HAE:
• Recurrent swelling (without urticaria) of the extremities (hands, feet), abdomen, face, 
oropharynx, genitourinary;
• Angioedema not improving with antihistamines and corticosteroids;
• Unexplained recurrent abdominal pain;
• A history of laryngeal edema.
• The diagnosis of HAE I or II is confirmed with at least two sets of complement testing with 
similar results, ideally carried out without recent use of HAE medications and separated by 
1 month.
• Results of laboratory testing for complement studies takes >24 hours; an immediate diagnosis 
of HAE with initial presentation may be difficult.
248  Part 1: Allergy
Differential diagnosis
Typical presentation
• HAE frequently presents with recurrent and unexplained episodes of angioedema (without 
hives) that occur in the extremities, abdomen (mimicking a “surgical abdomen”), face (can be 
disfiguring), larynx (risk of death), or genitals.
• An attack usually involves one site of the body, although it can migrate; abdominal and periph-
eral attacks are the most common sites.
• The frequency and location of attacks is variable in patients and in family members with the 
same mutation of C1‐INH. Onset of swelling is prolonged (over 24 hours) and, if untreated, 
resolves in 2–5 days.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• Angioedema often severe and unpredictable.
• Recurrent abdominal pain.
• Attacks without urticaria; some patients may have a “prodromal” rash described as serpentine, 
resembling erythema marginatum, prior to an attack.
Differential diagnosis
Features
Allergic angioedema
Often presents with hives and itching
Swelling onset more rapid than HAE
Responds to antihistamines and corticosteroids, epinephrine
Frequently a clear trigger such as food, drug, insect bite
ACE‐I induced angioedema
Angioedema usually involves the face and airway only
History of ACE‐I use
Autoimmune diseases (systemic 
lupus erythematosus, scleroderma)
Swelling is usually persistent
Superior vena cava syndrome
Edema of neck, face that does not resolve
Acquired C1‐INH deficiency
Due to consumption of C1‐INH; typically associated with 
underlying malignancy or autoimmune disease. Patients 
should have screen for malignancy and MGUS (monoclonal 
gammopathy of unknown significance)
Presents later in life
No family history of HAE
Decreased C1q
Edema secondary to hydrostatic 
changes from cardiac or liver failure, 
or protein losing enteropathy
Pitting edema
Usually symmetric distribution in dependent areas of the body
HAE with normal C1‐INH deficiency
Family history with a first relative with symptoms
Usually in women only with estrogen exacerbation
Angioedema typically in face or upper airway
Hypothyroidism
Skin changes that develop and resolve slowly, mimicking 
angioedema
Idiopathic angioedema
Diagnosis of exclusion
May be histamine or bradykinin mediated
Hereditary Angioedema  249
• Family history present approximately 75% of the time.
• Angioedema frequently worse at puberty, menses, estrogen‐containing medications, and ACE‐I.
Physical examination
• Normal physical examination during asymptomatic periods.
• During an attack, angioedema is non‐pitting and in non‐dependent areas of the body.
• No hives.
• Careful examination to check for airway patency if the patient is having an airway attack.
• Abdomen may be distended (lack of this finding does not exclude the presence of an abdomi-
nal attack).
Laboratory diagnosis
• A diagnostic algorithm is presented in Algorithm 28.1. Results of complement studies may be 
inaccurate if not performed by a certified laboratory and if not carried out on fresh serum, or 
serum frozen shortly after collection:
• C4: a low C4 suggests HAE and is the initial screening test. C4 is also low during asympto-
matic periods;
• C1‐INH function: low in both HAE I and II. Requires special handling of serum. Two assays 
can be used: ELISA (commercially available) and chromogenic (higher sensitivity and lower 
variability, available at National Jewish Laboratories);
• C1‐INH protein: low in HAE I;
• C1q: low in acquired C1‐INH deficiency.
Lists of imaging techniques
• CT: rarely used unless documenting the extent of angioedema or evaluating other causes of 
abdominal pain in a patient with known HAE is required.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding  
diagnosis of disease
• HAE may be confused with allergic or histamine‐mediated angioedema. Hives, onset of symp-
toms within less than 60 minutes, and/or pruritus suggest allergic or histamine‐mediated 
angioedema.
• HAE is frequently not in a symmetric distribution or in dependent areas of the body (to distin-
guish from edema secondary to hydrostatic etiologies including heart failure, protein loss).
• Family history of angioedema is not always present; 25% of patients have a new onset muta-
tion in C1‐INH.
Interpretation of complement testing (Table 28.1)
Type
C1‐INH Level
C1‐INH Function
C4 Level
C1q Level
HAE type I
<30%
<30%
Low
Normal
HAE type II
Normal
<30%
Low
Normal
HAE with normal C1-INH
Normal
Normal
Normal
Normal
Acquired C1‐INH I/II
Low
Low
<30%
Low
ACE inhibitor
Normal
Normal
Normal
Normal
Idiopathic angioedema
Normal
Normal
Normal
Normal
250  Part 1: Allergy
Section 4: Treatment
Treatment rationale
• Treatment of HAE is generally classified as:
• Treatment of acute attacks: needed by all patients regardless of severity and attack 
frequency;
• Prophylactic therapy: not needed by all patients, depends upon frequency of attacks, sever-
ity, and patient preference; and
• Short‐term prophylaxis: to prevent attacks prior to procedures.
• Some patients treat each attack as they occur, which is called “on‐demand” therapy.
• The medication options for acute therapy include plasma‐derived (pd) C1‐INH replacement 
(given intravenously; many patients self‐infuse or have a family member infuse via a butterfly 
Measure: serum complement factor 4 (C4),
 C1 inhibitor (C1-INH) antigenic protein
C1 inhibitor (C1-INH) functional level if available
C4, C1-INH protein
normal
Conﬁrm C4, C1-INH
normal during attack
Consider angioedema (AE)
types other than HAE-C1-INH
types I and II
AE from medications
eg. ACE inhibitors
HAE-
C1-INH-
Type II
Consider
other
non-HAE
causes of C4
consumption
Consider
Acquired
Angioedema
Later age of 
onset
and/or low C1q
Family history
of angioedema
Measure C1q and 
consider age of 
onset of symptoms
Determine C1-INH
function and repeat C4
and C1-INH protein levels
C4 quantity low but 
C1-INH protein normal
or elevated
Conﬁrm dereased
C4 and C1-INH protein
by second measurement
C4 and C1-INH protein
quantities decreased
 No family 
history
of angioedema
Earlier age of 
onset
and C1q
normal
C1-INH
function
normal
C1-INH
function
decreased
HAE with normal C1-INH function
- FXII mutation 
- Unknown etiology
Consider Hereditary Angioedema (HAE):
- Recurrent angioedema (without urticaria)
- Recurrent episodes of abdominal pain and vomiting
- Laryngeal edema
- Positive family history of angioedema
HAE-
C1-INH-
Type I
Algorithm 28.1   Diagnosis of hereditary angioedema
Source: Modified from Bowen. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol 2010;6:24.
Hereditary Angioedema  251
needle), a bradykinin receptor antagonist (icatibant, subcutaneous), or a kallikrein inhibitor 
(ecallantide, subcutaneous).
• Options for prophylactic therapy include C1‐INH administered every 3–4 days, anabolic andro-
gens, or antifibrinolytics.
• Options for short‐term prophylaxis include C1‐INH (administered 1–6 hours prior to procedure), 
fresh frozen plasma (2 units, 1–2 hours prior), or high dose androgens (started 5 days before 
and continued 5 days after).
• Many patients will be initially treated with on‐demand therapy. However, based upon attack 
frequency, severity, and patient preference, they may be changed to prophylactic therapy. 
Patients may be treated prophylactically for periods of time and later changed to on‐demand 
therapy depending upon their symptoms.
When to hospitalize
• The goal of HAE treatment is to prevent hospitalizations and decrease morbidity and mortality.
• If patients are treated in the emergency room for an acute attack, they can be discharged if 
stable after a few hours. They do not need to be kept overnight for observation if they respond 
to administration of 1–2 doses of acute therapy within approximately 2 hours.
• Intubation for airway attacks.
• Hemodynamically unstable (some patients will develop hypovolemia due to fluid shifts).
• Lack of response to two doses of acute therapy.
• Severe abdominal attacks with protracted vomiting and complications such as pancreatitis and ascites.
Table of treatment
Acute attacks 
Treatment
Comment
Conservative
Fluid replacement
Hemodynamic instability
Medical
pdC1‐INH (20 U/kg IV)
Ecallantide (30 mg SC)
Icatibant (30 mg SC)
Fresh frozen plasma (2 units)
Analgesics
Can be self‐administered
Must be administered by a health care professional; 
approx. 3% risk of anaphylaxis
Medication can be kept at room temperature; pre‐loaded 
into syringe
Use with caution; may exacerbate ongoing attack
Surgical
Preparation for intubation or tracheostomy
Airway attacks
Prophylactic treatment
Treatment
Comment
Medical
pd C1‐INH (1000 units IV every 3–4 days)
Anabolic androgens
• Danazol (50–600 mg/day)
• Stanozolol (1–6 mg/day)
Antifibrinolytics
• Aminocaproic acide (1 g po TID)
• Tranexamic acid (0.25 g BID–1.5 g TID)
Can be self‐administered
Not effective in an acute attack; contraindications 
(see Prevention/management of complications 
section), side effects (see Prevention/management 
of complications section), therapeutic goal is 
lowest possible dose
May be less effective than pd C1‐INH or 
androgens; aminocaproic acid may be particularly 
useful for acquired C1‐INH deficiency
252  Part 1: Allergy
Short‐term prophylaxis
Treatment
Comment
Medical
C1‐INH (20 U/kg IV)
Fresh frozen plasma (2 units)
High dose androgens
Administer 1–6 hours prior to procedure
Administer 1–2 hours prior to procedure
Start 5 days prior and continue 5 days post procedure
Other
Coordination of care with other providers 
about HAE care
Discuss with provider of procedure management of an 
acute attack and have plan in place
Prevention/management of complications
• Androgens: contraindicated in pregnancy, lactating women, liver disease, children (before 
Tanner stage V), cancer, nephrotic syndrome. Follow LFTs, lipid panel every 6 months, and 
abdominal ultrasound every 12 months. Side effects include virilization, weight gain, mood 
changes, headache, generalized ache, and hepatocellular adenoma.
• Plasma derived C1‐INH: low risk potential for blood‐borne pathogens, care of IV access, con-
cern for use of ports (infection, clotting), possible administration of hepatitis B vaccination prior 
to starting pd C1‐INH.
• Fresh frozen plasma: small risk of blood‐borne pathogens.
• Antifibrinolytics: may cause nausea, vertigo, muscle cramps, fatigue.
• Ecallantide: small risk of allergic reaction – should be administered by a health care provider 
with epinephrine on hand.
• Icatibant: burning or pain at injection site.
Section 5: Special populations
Pregnancy
• One‐third of patients have worsening of HAE during pregnancy, one‐third have improvement 
of symptoms, and one‐third are without change.
• Androgens are contraindicated.
• Cesarean section may trigger an attack. Administer C1‐INH prior to C‐section delivery. If C‐sec-
tion is emergent, administer C1‐INH after delivery as attacks may develop 24 hours after the 
procedure.
Children
• Androgens are contraindicated.
• C1‐INH can be safely given to children.
Clinical pearls
• All patients require easy access to on‐demand therapy for acute attacks, some of which can 
be self‐administered.
• Patients must be educated that, regardless of past HAE history or family HAE history, they 
may experience a life‐threatening airway attack, highlighting the importance of on‐demand 
treatment for all patients.
• HAE does not respond clinically to treatment with antihistamines or corticosteroids. 
Epinephrine may cause a transient benefit in airway symptoms, but should not be considered 
standard of care.
Hereditary Angioedema  253
• Puberty often worsens disease.
• Education of school and caregivers on administration of rescue medication.
Section 6: Prognosis
Natural history of untreated disease
• Without appropriate treatment, mortality from laryngeal edema is approximtely 30%.
• HAE may produce a substantial effect on quality of life.
Prognosis for treated patients
• Education for patients about HAE and easy access to on‐demand treatments (including self‐
administration of medication) for acute attacks significantly improves quality of life.
• Goals of HAE treatment include decreasing morbidity and mortality and improving quality of life.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
• For patients prescribed androgens, LFTs and lipid panel every 6 months, and yearly abdominal 
ultrasound scanning.
• Once the diagnosis of HAE has been established, it is not necessary to repeat complement test-
ing; these levels do not generally reflect disease activity or control by medications. Treatment 
based upon clinical symptoms and response to medications.
• Ongoing education about disease triggers.
• Review of self‐administration techniques.
• Follow‐up of frequency of on‐demand therapy; frequent use may suggest a patient to be 
treated with prophylactic therapy.
Section 7: Reading list
Bowen T. Hereditary angioedema consensus 2010. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol 2010;6:13
Bowen T, Brosz J, Brosz K, Hebert J, Ritchie B. Management of hereditary angioedema: 2010 Canadian 
approach. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol 2010;6:20
Caballero T, Farkas H, Bouillet L, Bowen T, Gompel A, Fagerberg C, et al. International consensus and practical 
guidelines on the gynecologic and obstetric management of female patients with hereditary angioedema 
caused by C1 inhibitor deficiency. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2012;129:308–20
Cicardi M, Bork K, Caballero T, Craig T, Li HH, Longhurst H, et al. Evidence‐based recommendations for the 
therapeutic management of angioedema owing to hereditary C1 inhibitor deficiency: consensus report of 
an International Working Group. Allergy 2012;67:147–57
Craig T, Aygoren‐Pursun E, Bork K, Bowen T, Boysen H, Farkas H, et al. WAO Guideline for the Management 
of Hereditary Angioedema. World Allergy Organ J 2012;5:182–99
Lang DM, Aberer W, Bernstein JA, Chng HH, Grumach AS, Hide M, et al. International consensus on hereditary 
and acquired angioedema. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2012;109:395–402
Wahn V, Aberer W, Eberl W, Fasshauer M, Kuhne T, Kurnik K, et al. Hereditary angioedema (HAE) in children 
and adolescents: a consensus on therapeutic strategies. Eur J Pediatr 2012;171:1339–48
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Most patients are healthy, although slightly increased rates of autoimmune diseases.
• 50% of subjects may have an airway attack; without treatment there is a 30% chance of 
mortality.
• Prognosis is variable and the frequency and severity of attacks can change through life.
• At present, there is no cure for HAE and it is a lifetime disease.
254  Part 1: Allergy
Zuraw BL. Clinical practice: hereditary angioedema. N Engl J Med 2008;359:1027–36
Zuraw BL, Banerji A, Bernstein JA, Busse PJ, Christiansen SC, Davis‐Lorton M, et al. Hereditary Angioedema 
Association Medical Advisory Board 2013 recommendations for the management of hereditary angioedema 
due to C1 inhibitor deficiency. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 2013;5:458–67
Suggested websites
Hereditary Angioedema Association. www.haea.org
Section 8: Guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Consensus Report of 
Hereditary Angioedema 
Working Group
Allergy
2012
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/22126399)
WAO Guideline for 
Management of HAE
World Allergy Organization
2012
(http://www.waojournal.org/content/
pdf/1939‐4551‐5‐12‐182.pdf)
International Consensus 
Algorithm on HAE
Allergy, Asthma and Clinical 
Immunology
2010
(http://www.aacijournal.com/
content/6/1/24)
Recommendations for the 
management of hereditary 
angioedema due to C1 
inhibitor deficiency
Journal of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology
2013
(http://www.jaci‐inpractice.org/article/
S2213‐2198(13)00296‐1/pdf)
Section 9: Evidence
See guidelines in Section 8.
Section 10: Images
Figure 28.1  Extremity attack. Source: Bowen T. Hereditary angioedema consensus 2010. Allergy Asthma 
Clin Immunol 2010;6:13. Creative Commons Attribution License CC BY 4.0. See color plate 28.1.
Hereditary Angioedema  255
Figure 28.2  Abdominal swelling (arrow). See color plate 28.2.
Figure 28.3  Airway angioedema. See color plate 28.3.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at:
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for 
patients, and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
256 
Anaphylaxis
Jacob D. Kattan
Division of Allergy/Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 29
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• Anaphylaxis has been defined as a serious allergic reaction that typically occurs suddenly after 
contact with an allergy‐causing substance, is rapid in onset, and may cause death.
• A meeting of experts in the field of allergy and immunology developed a definition of anaphy-
laxis in 2006, describing it as one of three clinical scenarios:
• The acute onset of a reaction (minutes to hours) with involvement of the skin, mucosal tissue, 
or both, and at least one of the following: (i) respiratory compromise; (ii) reduced blood 
­pressure or symptoms of end‐organ dysfunction;
• Two or more of the following that occur rapidly after exposure to a likely allergen for that 
patient: involvement of the skin/mucosal tissue, respiratory compromise, reduced blood 
pressure or associated symptoms, and/or persistent gastrointestinal symptoms; or
• Reduced blood pressure after exposure to a known allergen.
Disease classification
Not applicable for this topic.
Overall Bottom Line
• Anaphylaxis is an acute, life‐threatening, systemic allergic reaction that typically occurs 
­suddenly after contact with an allergy‐causing substance, and has varied causes, mechanisms, 
clinical presentations, and severity.
• The history and physical examination are the most important tools in making the diagnosis 
of anaphylaxis, as well as the cause of the episode.
• In the outpatient setting, food is the most common cause of anaphylaxis.
• Epinephrine is the initial drug of choice in the treatment of anaphylaxis and should be 
­administered as soon as the diagnosis is suspected.
• Patient education is an important preventative strategy and should be individualized. Allergen 
avoidance measures may not always be successful, and education should include instruction 
in self‐management of anaphylaxis.
Anaphylaxis  257
Incidence/prevalence
• The lifetime prevalence of anaphylaxis in the general US population is at least 1.6% and probably 
higher.
• Numerous studies have reported that the prevalence of anaphylaxis appears to be increasing 
worldwide.
Economic impact
• While data for costs of anaphylaxis alone are lacking, food allergy and anaphylaxis in the 
United States was estimated to cost $225 million in direct medical costs, and $115 million in 
indirect costs in 2007; 43.5% of this cost was due to emergency department visits (20%), 
inpatient hospitalizations (11.8%), ambulance runs (3%), and epinephrine devices (8.7%).
Etiology
• The etiology of anaphylaxis is often due to allergic reactions to food, drugs, biologics, insect 
sting, radiocontrast media, and so on.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• Anaphylaxis can be classified as immunologic or non‐immunologic.
• In immunologic IgE‐mediated anaphylaxis, the activation of mast cells, eosinophils, and baso-
phils results in the release of preformed inflammatory mediators, including histamine, tryptase, 
heparin, platelet activating factor, histamine releasing factor, and chymase. Cellular activation 
also stimulates the production of lipid‐derived mediators such as prostaglandins and cysteinyl 
leukotrienes.
• In non‐immunologic anaphylaxis, agents or events induce sudden, massive mast cell or baso-
phil degranulation in the absence of immunoglobulins.
Predictive/risk factors
Risk factors for the development of anaphylaxis are unknown.
Section 2: Prevention
Screening
Not applicable for this topic.
Primary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Secondary prevention
• Avoidance of known allergens is the mainstay of anaphylaxis prevention.
• Desensitization to a medication that is known to have caused anaphylaxis can temporarily 
prevent reoccurrence, if the medication is required in the future.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• No interventions have been demonstrated to prevent the development of the disease.
• Avoidance of known allergens is the mainstay of prevention of anaphylaxis, but even when 
the allergen is known, avoidance measures are not always successful.
• Education may be the most important preventive strategy.
258  Part 1: Allergy
(Continued)
• Venom immunotherapy is successful in preventing anaphylaxis in up to 98% of patients who 
have previously experienced venom‐induced anaphylaxis.
• Pharmacologic prophylaxis with glucocorticoids and H1 antihistamines can prevent recurrent 
anaphylactic reactions in idiopathic anaphylaxis.
Section 3: Diagnosis
Differential diagnosis
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• The history is the most important tool in determining whether or not a patient has had 
anaphylaxis and the cause of the episode.
• The most common symptoms seen in anaphylaxis include urticaria and angioedema, flushing, 
dyspnea, wheezing, rhinitis, dizziness, syncope, hypotension, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea.
• Anaphylaxis may be confirmed by measurement of elevated concentrations of plasma 
and urinary histamine or serum tryptase levels, although elevations in these mediators are 
transient and samples for measuring histamine require special handling. The serum tryptase is 
seldom elevated in food‐induced anaphylaxis.
• In addition to the history, skin testing, serum testing for allergen‐specific IgE, and challenge 
tests may help to identify the cause of anaphylaxis.
Differential diagnosis
Features
Generalized urticaria
Limited to the skin
Circumscribed, raised erythematous plaques that are intensely itchy
Lesions are transient
Angioedema
Localized swelling of the skin or mucosal tissues
Patients with non‐allergic hereditary or acquired angioedema typically 
have intermittent swelling episodes that are unilateral and not 
associated with itching or urticaria
C4 is low and C1 esterase inhibitor is deficient or functionally absent 
in most patients with hereditary angioedema
Acute asthma 
exacerbation
Intermittent dyspnea, cough, and wheezing
Symptoms often occur in a pattern with exposure to triggers such as 
exercise or viral infection
Symptoms other than wheeze, cough, or shortness of breath, such as 
urticaria, angioedema, vomiting or diarrhea, are more likely to occur 
with anaphylaxis
Vasovagal syncope
Syncope is typically preceded by stress or standing
Usually relieved by recumbency
Patient may have a history of syncope
Associated with pallor while anaphylaxis is more likely to be associated 
with flushing
Heart rate is typically bradycardic
Panic disorder
Episodes of intense fear that begin suddenly and last several minutes 
to an hour
Symptoms include chest pain or shortness of breath
Can occur in other anxiety disorders
Anaphylaxis  259
Typical presentation
• Patients typically present with symptoms within minutes to 4–6 hours after exposure to a food, 
drug, insect bite or sting, or other allergen, although signs and symptoms often develop within 
minutes of exposure to the offending agent. A total of 85–90% of patients with anaphylaxis 
will have urticaria or angioedema, so a lack of cutaneous symptoms may put the diagnosis in 
doubt. Other common symptoms include flushing, dyspnea, wheezing, upper airway angi-
oedema, rhinitis, dizziness, syncope, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, or crampy abdominal pain.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• In making a clinical diagnosis of anaphylaxis, one should ask about manifestations that the 
patient may be aware of, such as urticaria, angioedema, flushing, pruritus, difficulty breathing, 
gastrointestinal symptoms, syncope, or dizziness. It is important to obtain a detailed history of 
all medications and foods consumed within 6 hours of the episode, as well as any stings or 
bites that occurred. The activities that the patient was participating in, such as exercise, should 
be reviewed. One should also obtain a detailed history of any known allergies or past allergic 
reactions, other allergic disorders such as atopic dermatitis, asthma, or allergic rhinitis, as well 
as a family history of any known allergic disorders.
Physical examination
• On physical examination, attention should initially be paid to airway, breathing, and circulation, 
along with the patient’s level of consciousness.
• Patients with anaphylaxis may have physical examination findings related to upper and lower 
airway impairment including stridor, cough, or wheezing, cardiovascular dysfunction, including 
hypotension or cardiac arrhythmias, and skin involvement, including erythema, urticaria, or 
angioedema.
• While not every patient will have cutaneous symptoms, 85–90% of patients with anaphylaxis 
will have urticaria or angioedema, so a lack of these symptoms may put the diagnosis in 
doubt.
Useful clinical decision rules and calculators
See Algorithm 29.1.
Differential diagnosis
Features
Vocal cord dysfunction
Stridor that may be inspiratory, expiratory, or both, accompanied by 
respiratory distress
Albuterol typically has little or no beneficial effect
In a symptomatic patient, direct observation of the adducted vocal 
cords by laryngoscopy is diagnostic
Patients will lack uvular edema often associated with anaphylaxis
Myocardial infarction
Chest pain may be associated with radiation to shoulders/arms and 
may be preceded by exertion
Similar to anaphylaxis, tryptase level may be elevated
May see findings on electrocardiogram such as pathologic Q waves, 
ST elevation, new left bundle branch block, or T wave inversions
Troponin or the MB isoenzyme of creatinine kinase (CK‐MB) are 
elevated in an acute myocardial infarction
260  Part 1: Allergy
Disease severity classification
• Allergic reactions are defined as mild when features are limited to the skin and subcutaneous tissues.
• Moderate reactions have features suggesting respiratory, cardiovascular, or gastrointestinal 
involvement.
• Severe reactions involve hypoxia, hypotension, or neurologic compromise, including cyanosis or 
oxygen saturation ≤92%, hypotension, confusion, loss of consciousness, or incontinence.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• An elevated serum or plasma total tryptase can support the clinical diagnosis of anaphylaxis. It 
needs to be obtained from 15 minutes to 3 hours after symptom onset. The tryptase level is 
often not elevated in individuals with food‐induced anaphylaxis.
• An elevated plasma histamine level can also support the clinical diagnosis of anaphylaxis. Due 
to the short half‐life, it is usually only elevated within 60 minutes of the onset of symptoms. 
Samples require special handling.
• The tryptase and histamine levels are not necessary for making the diagnosis of anaphylaxis, 
but may help to confirm it if the diagnosis is unclear.
Do the history and physical examination ﬁt one of the following criteria for anaphylaxis?
Criteria 1: Acute onset of an illness with involvement of the skin and/or mucosal tissue (generalized
hives, pruritus, swollen tongue or lips) and at least one of the following:
(a) Respiratory compromise (dyspnea, wheeze/bronchospasm, stridor, hypoxemia)
(b) Reduced blood pressure or associated symptoms of end organ dysfunction (hypotonia, collapse,
syncope, incontinence) 
Criteria 2: Two or more of the following that occur rapidly after exposure to a likely allergen for that 
patient (within minutes to several hours):  
(a) Involvement of the skin/mucosal tissue (generalized hives, itch/ﬂush, swollen lips/tongue/uvula)
(b) Respiratory compromise (dyspnea, wheeze/bronchospasm, stridor, hypoxemia)
(c) Reduced blood pressure or associated symptoms (hypotonia, collapse, syncope, incontinence)
(d) Persistent gastrointestinal symptoms (crampy abdominal pain, vomiting)
Criteria 3: Reduced blood pressure after exposure to a known allergen for that patient (within minutes 
to several hours). 
(a) Infants and children: low systolic BP (age speciﬁc) or greater than 30% decrease in systolic BP for 
that patient
(b) Adults: systolic BP of less than 90 mmHg or greater than 30% decrease from that patient’s baseline
Is the cause readily identiﬁable by history, allergy skin tests, in vitro tests, or challenge tests?
Yes
No
Reconsider clinical diagnosis
Consider idiopathic anaphylaxis
Consider other triggers
Consider further testing
Diagnosis made for speciﬁc cause of anaphylaxis
Algorithm 29.1  Diagnosis of anaphylaxis
Anaphylaxis  261
Lists of imaging techniques
Not applicable for this topic.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis  
of disease
• While many physicians do not diagnose anaphylaxis when hypotension is absent, a drop in 
blood pressure is not required to make the diagnosis.
• Skin symptoms and signs, such as hives, itching, or angioedema, can be missed if an individual 
is not undressed or fully examined, and may be lacking if the patient has taken an H1 
antihistamine.
• Many patients experiencing anaphylaxis may also have known asthma, and the episode may be 
mistaken for an asthma exacerbation if other signs and symptoms are missed.
Section 4: Treatment (Algorithm 29.2)
Treatment rationale
• Epinephrine is the treatment of choice for anaphylaxis. It is best delivered intramuscularly into 
the lateral thigh (vastus lateralis muscle). The administration of epinephrine may be repeated 
every 5 minutes if necessary to control symptoms.
• In addition to epinephrine, a patient who presents with anaphylaxis should receive an H1 
antagonist such as diphenhydramine, an H2 antagonist such as ranitidine, fluid resuscita-
tion with normal saline, and a systemic corticosteroid such as methylprednisolone. While 
the use of steroids is not helpful acutely, it may help prevent recurrent or protracted 
anaphylaxis.
• Supplemental oxygen should be administered by face mask and the patient should be placed 
in a recumbent position with the lower extremities elevated.
• Other treatments that patients may require include an inhaled beta‐agonist, a vasopressor, and 
glucagon. Glucagon may be required in patients taking beta‐blockers who have treatment‐
refractory anaphylaxis.
When to hospitalize
• Observation periods must be individualized to each patient. The minimum observation period 
should be 4–6 hours.
• In general, those with severe anaphylaxis involving hypoxia, hypotension, or neurologic 
­compromise, or moderate reactions that do not respond promptly to epinephrine should be 
admitted to a hospital.
Managing the hospitalized patient
• Monitoring of airway, breathing, and circulation
• As up to 23% of patients may have a biphasic reaction, epinephrine should be readily 
available.
• Continue H1 antagonist for 48–72 hours.
• Continue H2 antagonist for 48–72 hours.
• Continue corticosteroids for 48–72 hours.
• Provide patient education on allergen avoidance, recognition and management of future 
­reactions, and proper use of the epinephrine auto‐injector.
262  Part 1: Allergy
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comment
Medical
Epinephrine (0.01 mg/kg up to 0.5 mg IM every  
5–15 minutes as necessary)
Rarely, and especially after overdose or 
IV administration, may lead to ventricular 
arrhythmias, myocardial infarction, pulmonary 
edema, or a sharp increase in blood pressure
H1 antagonist (diphenhydramine 1–2 mg/kg up to 
50 mg)
Often causes drowsiness
Immediate administration of epinephrine and assessment of airway, 
breathing and circulation
• Epinephrine 0.01 mg/kg up to 0.5 mg IM every 5–15 minutes as necessary
• Place patient on continuous cardiorespiratory monitor
• High-ﬂow oxygen should be administered
• Obtain IV access
• Place patient in recumbent position with lower extremities elevated unless 
precluded by emesis or shortness of breath
Additional medications
•  H1 antagonist (diphenhydramine), IV, IM or, for mild symptoms, orally, at 1–2mg/kg 
    up to 50 mg  
•  H2 antagonist (ranitidine) 50 mg IV in adults, 1 mg/kg up to 50 mg IV in children 
•  Corticosteroid (methylprednisolone) loading dose of 2 mg/kg IV, up to 125 mg 
•  Glucagon 20–30 μg/kg IV, (maximum dose 5 mg in adults, 1 mg in children) over
    5 minutes, followed by an infusion of 5–15 μg/min, titrated to clinical response, for
    patients on beta-blockers who may be refractory to treatment 
•  Bronchodilator (albuterol) 2.5–5 mg via nebulizer for bronchospasm refractory to 
    epinephrine 
•  Normal saline bolus 1–2 L in adults, 20 mL/kg in children
Anaphylactic symptoms still present?
Yes
No
Observation (minimum 4–6 hours) 
Maintenance or discharge medications 
•  Continue H1 antagonist every 6–8 hours for 48–72 hours
•  Continue H2 antagonist twice daily for 48–72 hours
•  Continue corticosteroids twice daily for 48–72 hours
•  Epinephrine auto injector, 0.15 mg for children below 
    25 kg, 0.3 mg for children weighting 25 kg or more, as 
    needed
Discharge plan
•  Prescribe an anaphylaxis action plan; a sample can be 
   downloaded at http://www.foodallergy.org
•  Education on allergen avoidance
•  Follow-up with an allergist or immunologist
Reassess airway, breathing, and circulation
Contact critical care medicine department for possible further
management in the ICU
IV epinephrine is an option in the setting of severe 
hypotension or cardiac arrest unresponsive to IM doses of 
epinephrine and ﬂuid resuscitation
Potent vasopressors, such as norepinephrine or vasopressin
may be required if unable to maintain adequate BP 
Algorithm 29.2  Treatment of anaphylaxis
Anaphylaxis  263
Treatment
Comment
H2 antagonist (ranitidine 50 mg IV in adults, 1 mg/kg 
up to 50 mg IV in children)
Corticosteroid (methylprednisolone 2 mg/kg up to 
125 mg IV)
Although unproven, some believe it may help 
prevent a protracted or biphasic reaction
Glucagon (20–30 µg/kg over 5 minutes, maximum 
dose 5 mg in adults, 1 mg in children IV, followed 
by an infusion of 5–15 µg/min, titrated to clinical 
response)
Must protect the airway as glucagon frequently 
causes emesis
Normal saline bolus (1–2 L in adults, 20 mL/kg in 
children)
Bronchodilator (2.5–5 mg albuterol via nebulizer)
Prevention/management of complications
• Particular attention should be paid to the dosage of epinephrine that is administered. Incorrect 
dosing can occur when an inappropriate dilution (1:1000) is injected IV (as opposed to the 
1:10 000 dilution). This can lead to ventricular arrhythmias, myocardial infarction, a sharp 
increase in blood pressure, angina, or pulmonary edema.
• Glucagon can induce nausea and vomiting. One should make sure to take steps to protect the airway 
when administering this medication.
Section 5: Special populations
Pregnancy
• During labor and delivery, the patient should be positioned on her left side.
• It is important to maintain a systolic blood pressure of at least 90 mmHg, and supplemental 
oxygen should be administered by face mask.
• There should be continuous fetal monitoring. Even when maternal outcome is favorable, 
maternal hypoxemia and hypotension in anaphylaxis are associated with a high risk of fetal 
asphyxia or death.
Children
• It may be difficult to make the diagnosis of anaphylaxis in infants as they cannot describe symp-
toms such as difficulty swallowing, chest tightness, or pruritus; symptoms may be similar to 
those seen in healthy infants, such as spitting up or loss of sphincter control; and the episode 
may only manifest with sudden onset of lethargy or clinging to a caregiver.
Clinical pearls
• Epinephrine is the medication of choice for anaphylaxis.
• Individuals taking beta‐blockers may not respond to epinephrine. If the patient does not 
respond, glucagon should be administered.
• Glucocorticoids may help prevent a biphasic reaction, but onset of action takes several hours. 
Steroids should not be administered as the first line therapy for the initial signs and symptoms 
of anaphylaxis.
264  Part 1: Allergy
Others
• Patients who are taking beta‐blockers may be resistant to treatment with epinephrine. In these 
cases, glucagon should be administered.
• While there may be reluctance to administer epinephrine to patients with cardiovascular 
­disease, there are no absolute contraindications to the use of epinephrine in anaphylaxis.
Section 6: Prognosis
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
• Consultation with an allergist or immunologist for diagnosis of allergies, prevention, and treat-
ment should occur for individuals who have experienced anaphylaxis. The allergist or immu-
nologist can identify possible triggers of anaphylaxis using a detailed history and allergy 
diagnostic testing including skin testing, serum IgE levels, and/or oral food challenges. They can 
also help assess the risks and benefits of potential therapies, provide counseling on avoidance 
measures, and train the patient and his or her family on how to administer epinephrine.
Section 7: Reading list
Bock SA, Muñoz‐Furlong A, Sampson HA. Further fatalities caused by anaphylactic reactions to food, 2001–2006. 
J Allergy Clin Immunol 2007;119:1016–18
Lieberman P, Nicklas RA, Oppenheimer J, Kemp SF, Lang DM, Bernstein DI, et al. The diagnosis and manage-
ment of anaphylaxis practice parameter: 2010 update. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2010;126:477–80
Patel DA, Holdford DA, Edwards E, Carroll NV. Estimating the economic burden of food‐induced allergic reactions 
and anaphylaxis in the United States. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2011;128:110–5
Sampson HA, Muñoz‐Furlong A, Campbell RL, Adkinson NF Jr, Bock SA, Branum A, et al. Second symposium 
on the definition and management of anaphylaxis: summary report. Second National Institute of Allergy 
and Infectious Disease/Food Allergy and Anaphylaxis Network symposium. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2006; 
117:391–7
Simons FE, Gu X, Simons KJ. Epinephrine absorption in adults: intramuscular versus subcutaneous injection. 
J Allergy Clin Immunol 2001;108:871–3
Simons FE, Schatz M. Anaphylaxis during pregnancy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2012;130:597–606
Simons FE. Anaphylaxis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2010;125:S161–81
Wood RA, Camargo CA Jr, Lieberman P, Sampson HA, Schwartz LB, Zitt M, et al. Anaphylaxis in America: the 
prevalence and characteristics of anaphylaxis in the United States. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014;133:461–7
Suggested websites
American Academy of Allergy Asthma and Immunology. www.aaaai.org
American College of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology. www.acaai.org
Food Allergy Research and Education. www.foodallergy.org
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Prompt use of epinephrine is vital in the management of anaphylaxis. In the majority of 
anaphylaxis deaths, epinephrine was either not administered or was administered after 
respiratory or cardiac arrest.
• Patients who have experienced anaphylaxis are at risk for future episodes, which can be 
limited with risk reduction measures.
• Avoidance measures are the most effective treatment for preventing recurrent episodes of 
anaphylaxis.
Anaphylaxis  265
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
The diagnosis and management 
of anaphylaxis practice 
parameter: 2010 update
Joint Task Force on Practice 
Parameters representing the 
American Academy of Allergy, 
Asthma and Immunology 
(AAAAI), the American College 
of Allergy, Asthma and 
Immunology (ACAAI)
2010 (http://www.jacionline.org/
article/S0091‐6749(10)01004‐3/
abstract)
Second Symposium on the 
definition and management of 
anaphylaxis: summary report—
Second National Institute of 
Allergy and Infectious Disease/
Food Allergy and Anaphylaxis 
Network symposium
National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Disease (NIAID)
2006
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/16546624)
International society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
World Allergy Organization 
anaphylaxis guidelines: summary
World Allergy Organization 
(WAO)
2011
(http://www.worldallergy.org/
anaphylaxis/)
2012 Update: World Allergy 
Organization Guidelines for the 
assessment and management 
of anaphylaxis
World Allergy Organization 
(WAO)
2012
(http://www.bsaci.org/guidelines/
wao_anaphylaxis_guideline_2012.
pdf)
Section 9: Evidence
See guidelines of the Joint Task Force (AAAAI and ACAAI) and the NIAID
Type of evidence
Title, comment
Date
Guidelines
Food allergy: a practice parameter 
update—2014
2014
(http://www.jacionline.org/article/
S0091‐6749(14)00672‐1/abstract)
Guidelines
Food allergy: a practice parameter 
update—2014
Practice Parameters and Other 
Guidelines (AAAAI)
2014
(http://www.aaaai.org/practice‐
resources/statements‐and‐practice‐
parameters/practice‐parameters‐and‐
other‐guidelines‐page.aspx)
Guidelines
Guidelines for the Diagnosis and 
Management of Food Allergy in the 
United States (NIAID)
2011
(http://www.niaid.nih.gov/topics/
foodallergy/clinical/Pages/default.aspx)
266  Part 1: Allergy
Section 10: Images
Not applicable for this topic.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at:  
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for 
patients, and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
  267
Mastocytosis
Amanda L. Cox
Division of Pediatric Allergy/Immunology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 30
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• Mastocytosis is a primary mast cell disorder in which there is an abnormal accumulation of 
­tissue mast cells in one or more organ systems.
Disease classification
• Mastocytosis falls into the category of primary mast cell activation syndromes (MCAS), which also 
includes monoclonal MCAS. Cutaneous mastocytosis (CM) subtypes include urticaria pigmen-
tosa (UP), telangiectasia macularis eruptiva perstans (TMEP), diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis 
(DCM), and solitary mastocytoma. Systemic mastocytosis (SM) subtypes include indolent systemic 
­mastocytosis (ISM), systemic mastocytosis with an associated hematologic non‐mast cell lineage 
disorder (SM‐AHNMD), aggressive systemic mastocytosis (ASM), and mast cell leukemia (MCL).
Incidence/prevalence
• All forms of mastocytosis are rare disorders, and the exact incidence is not known.
• In children, onset occurs in the first year of life in 80% of cases, and most are limited to ­cutaneous 
forms that resolve by adolescence.
• In adults, systemic forms of mastocytosis are more common, and tend to be persistent disorders.
Economic impact
Not applicable for this topic.
Overall Bottom Line
• Chemical mediators released from mast cells are responsible for the symptoms of mast cell 
disorders which often manifest as allergic and anaphylactic reactions.
• Mastocytosis is a primary mast cell disorder characterized by excessive mast cell proliferation 
and infiltration of one or several tissues.
• There are several subtypes of mastocytosis. Classification is based on the tissues and cell-lines 
involved.
• Cutaneous mastocytosis describes forms of mastocytosis limited to the skin without other 
organ involvement, whereas systemic mastocytosis involves bone marrow and other 
­extracutaneous tissues.
• Activating mutations of KIT (the gene for the c‐kit receptor protein) are strongly associated 
with and involved in the pathogenesis of mastocytosis.
268  Part 1: Allergy
Etiology
• Primary mast cell disorders, including mastocytosis, are caused by intrinsic defects of mast cells 
that affect mast cell proliferation and activation.
• The basis for disease is due most often to a somatic genetic mutation in a mast cell surface receptor.
• The tissues and organs where these activated mast cells accumulate result in various disease 
manifestations, severities, and complications.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• The molecular pathogenesis of mastocytosis is not completely understood and is an area of 
ongoing investigation. Stem cell factor (SCF), or kit ligand, is a growth factor required for 
expansion of mast cells from hematopoietic progenitors. Mast cells express the surface receptor 
c‐kit (CD 117), a tyrosine kinase, which is a receptor for SCF. Many molecular defects associ-
ated with mastocytosis are secondary to gain‐of‐function mutations in the gene encoding the 
c‐kit receptor. The most common KIT mutation, Asp816Val, is present in most patients with 
systemic mastocytosis. This mutation leads to clonal expansion and apoptotic defects of mast 
cells, and results in accumulation of mast cells in tissues.
Predictive/risk factors
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 2: Prevention
No interventions have been demonstrated to prevent the development of mastocytosis.
Screening
Not applicable for this topic.
Primary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Secondary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 3: Diagnosis
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Consider a mast cell disorder in any individual with a constellation of symptoms suggestive of 
mast cell activation or who has recurrent allergic reactions/anaphylaxis without an identifiable 
trigger.
• Examination should include skin inspection for UP or mastocytomas. Darier’s sign may be 
elicited upon rubbing a small UP skin lesion.
• Examination should also include palpation for organomegaly (spleen, liver) and 
lymphadenopathy.
• Skin biopsy should be considered for patients with cutaneous mastocytosis lesions and 
specimens should be stained for tryptase and c‐kit (CD117).
• CBC, liver function tests (LFT), and serum tryptase should be drawn.
• Bone marrow biopsy and/or aspiration with staining for mast cells should be ordered for any 
adult with UP, or any patients with signs and symptoms of SM or elevated serum tryptase levels.
Mastocytosis  269
Differential diagnosis
Typical presentation
• Presentations of mastocytosis and other mast cell disorders vary and depend on the specific 
disorder and tissues involved. Individuals typically present with manifestations of mast cell 
­activation, including episodic flushing, tachycardia, hypotension, abdominal pain, nausea, 
vomiting, diarrhea, fatigue, musculoskeletal pain, or syncope. They may present with recurrent 
allergic reactions or anaphylaxis without any identifiable or consistent trigger.
• Cutaneous mastocytosis (CM) presents most often in children, with maculopapular hyperpig-
mentated lesions that urticate when rubbed (urticaria pigmentosa, or UP), as well as symptoms 
of dermatographism.
• UP lesions may also be found in patients who have systemic mastocytosis. Patients with UP may 
have pruritus especially with certain triggers, as well as flushing, blistering skin, or urticaria.
• In diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis (DCM) there are no discrete skin lesions, but skin may be 
­yellowish‐brown and thick. DCM may present with bullous eruptions that can hemorrhage. 
Additional symptoms in systemic forms of mastocytosis are associated with specific organ 
­infiltration and hematologic abnormalities.
• MMAS presents with recurrent episodes of mast cell activation symptoms, including anaphylaxis, 
but without UP or increase in mast cell numbers in tissues.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• Mastocytosis involves dermatologic symptoms arising from mediator release (in CM, SM, solid 
mast cell tumors, MCAS), and non‐cutaneous symptoms secondary to organ infiltration (SM only). 
Patients may complain of pruritus, flushing, or blister formation with certain physical ­triggers 
(e.g. irritation or heat) with or without the presence of UP. CM and SM may present with the above 
sporadic symptoms of mast cell mediator release, or with hypotensive syncope, or anaphylaxis, 
in association with certain triggers (medications, exercise, massage, temperature changes, ­surgical 
procedures, alcohol ingestion, infections, stress, hymenoptera stings). Patients with CM and SM 
Differential diagnosis
Features
Monoclonal mast cell activation syndrome 
(MMAS)
Mast cell activation symptoms +1 or 2 minor diagnostic 
criteria for systemic mastocytosis
Anaphylaxis, idiopathic anaphylaxis
Elevated beta tryptase during acute events but normal 
baseline serum tryptase
Mast cell activation syndrome (MCAS)
Recurrent mast cell activation symptoms affecting 
≥2 organ systems, with no KIT mutations or mast 
cell CD25 expression, and favorable response to 
medications that counteract mast cell mediators
Hereditary/acquired angioedema
Episodic angioedema of skin, larynx, bowel walls 
Abnormal complement studies
Carcinoid syndrome
Episodic flushing and diarrhea with elevated 24‐hr 
urine 5‐HIAA
Pheochromocytoma
Flushing, paroxysmal hypotension without other signs 
of mast cell activation
Vasoactive intestinal peptide‐secreting 
tumors
Flushing episodes and significant diarrhea, associated 
with increased levels of VIP
270  Part 1: Allergy
may have chronic gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms such as abdominal pain, diarrhea, nausea, 
­vomiting, peptic ulcer disease, and GI bleeding, all of which are secondary to release of mast cell 
mediators. Neuropsychiatric symptoms and neurologic symptoms such as headache, dizziness, 
and memory problems are often reported. Diffuse musculoskeletal pain and a fibromyalgia‐like 
pain syndrome occur in some patients with SM. A history of anemia or thrombocytopenia, orga-
nomegaly, intestinal malabsorption, and pathologic fractures suggests specific organ infiltration 
(bone marrow, liver, spleen, GI tract, lymph node, skeletal system) by mast cells in SM.
Physical examination
• Skin inspection: evaluate skin for UP lesions, bullous lesions, or mastocytomas. UP lesions are 
fixed, small, yellow–tan to reddish‐brown macules or slightly raised papules, and occasion-
ally form raised nodules or plaque‐like lesions. UP lesions most commonly affect extremities 
and trunk, and tend to spare palms and soles. While children may have scalp and face 
involvement, adults rarely do. Darier’s sign (urtication and erythema upon rubbing lesions) 
may be elicited. Petechiae, ecchymoses, or telangiectasias may be present in or next to UP 
lesions. Solitary or multiple mastocytomas may present in childhood, and are similar to UP 
lesions but are larger and may have yellow–orange coloration. Flushing can occur after irrita-
tion of the tumor, so rubbing these lesions is not recommended. Yellowish brown, thickened 
skin may be noted in DCM, along with generalized erythroderma or edema. Telangiectasia 
macularis eruptiva perstans (TMEP) is observed in <1% of CM patients. TMEP lesions are 
telangiectatic, red macules on a tan–brown base, 2–6 mm in diameter and without sharp 
borders. TMEP is not associated with blistering or pruritus.
• Abdominal and lymph node evaluation: in systemic forms of mastocytosis with organ infiltration 
by mast cells, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, or lymphadenopathy may be noted.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• CM is diagnosed by punch biopsy of skin lesions, with specific histopathologic stains. Mast 
cells may form perivascular infiltrates in papillary and upper dermis, sheet‐like infiltrates in the 
papillary body and upper reticular dermis, interstitial infiltrates, or nodular infiltrates. Mast cells 
in UP lesions may have irregular shapes or bi‐lobated nuclei.
• Recommended laboratory tests: CBC with differential, LFTs (including serum aminotransferases 
and alkaline phosphatase), and baseline serum tryptase. These laboratory studies are typically 
normal in CM, and more often abnormal in SM.
• Consider coagulation studies in patients with SM.
• A thorough allergy evaluation, with skin testing and in vitro allergen‐specific IgE testing, should 
be completed for any patients with unexplained anaphylaxis.
• Metabolites of mast cell activation (24‐hour urine N‐methyl histamine and 11‐beta‐prostaglandin 
F2) may be measured.
• Histologic evaluation of other organs (other than bone marrow) is generally not 
recommended.
• Bone marrow core biopsy and aspiration is needed to differentiate CM from SM, and should be 
completed in all adults with UP‐like skin lesions, or those who have mast cell activation symp-
toms and tryptase >20 ng/mL.
• Bone marrow core biopsy examination includes evaluation of histology, immunohistochemical 
staining with antibodies to tryptase and/or CD117 (c‐kit receptor) to identify mast cells, and 
CD25 staining, as CD25 is pathologically expressed by mast cells in mastocytosis.
Mastocytosis  271
• Bone marrow aspirate sample should be evaluated for morphology of mast cells (i.e. spindle‐
shaped mast cells) as well as undergo flow cytometry analysis, with assessment of surface 
markers CD2 and CD25 on CD117(c‐kit) expressing cells:
• D816V KIT mutational analysis of bone marrow aspirates should be completed;
• In patients who also have leukocytosis, eosinophilia, or both, examine for BCR/ABL and 
FIP1L1‐PDGFRA fusion genes and perform routine karyotype.
Lists of imaging techniques
• Bone scans or skeletal surveys, abdominal radiography, computed tomography (CT) scan, magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI), or endoscopy may be helpful in evaluating systemic disease and may be 
indicated depending upon the extent of organ infiltration and patient’s presenting symptoms.
• DEXA (bone densitometric) scan should be performed to monitor osteoporosis when there is 
skeletal system involvement.
World Health Organization (WHO) Diagnostic Criteria 
for cutaneous and systemic mastocytosis
Cutaneous mastocytosis: typical clinical findings and cutaneous lesions of UP, DCM, or solitary 
mastocytoma, with infiltrates of mast cells in a multifocal or diffuse pattern on skin biopsy.
Systemic mastocytosis: diagnosis is made if one major + one minor or three minor criteria are met:
• Major criterion: multifocal, dense infiltrates of mast cells (≥15 in aggregates) detected in 
sections of bone marrow and/or other extracutaneous organ and confirmed by tryptase 
immunohistochemistry stain or other special stain.
• Minor criteria:
• In bone marrow biopsy or other organ biopsy sections >25% mast cells in infiltrate are 
­spindle‐shaped or have atypical morphology, or >25% of mast cells in aspirate spear are 
immature or atypical;
• Detection of an activating point mutation at codon 816 of KIT in bone marrow, blood, or 
other extracutaneous organ;
• Mast cells in bone marrow, blood, or other extracutaneous organ express CD117 with CD2 
and/or CD25;
• Serum total tryptase persistently >20 ng/mL in the absence of an associated clonal myeloid 
disorder.
Variants of systemic mastocytosis
• Indolent systemic mastocytosis (ISM): meets criteria for systemic findings, no “C” findings 
(below), no evidence of an associated clonal, hematologic non‐mast cell lineage disease, mast 
cell burden is low, skin lesions usually present:
• Bone marrow mastocytosis: ISM with marrow involvement, no skin lesions;
• Smoldering systemic mastocytosis: ISM, but with ≥2 “B” findings, and no “C” findings.
• Systemic mastocytosis with associated clonal, hematologic non‐mast cell lineage disease (SM‐
AHNMD): meets criteria for SM and criteria for an associated AHNMD disorder (MDS, MPN, 
AML, lymphoma or other hematologic neoplasm).
• Aggressive systemic mastocytosis (ASM): meets criteria for SM with one or more “C” findings, 
with no evidence of mast cell leukemia, and usually no skin lesions.
• Lymphadenopathic mastocytosis with eosinophilia: progressive lymphadenopathy with 
peripheral blood eosinophilia, often extensive bone involvement, hepatosplenomegaly, with-
out skin lesions. Cases with PDGFRA rearrangement are excluded.
• Mast cell leukemia (MCL): meets criteria for SM, usually without skin lesions, bone marrow 
biopsy with diffuse infiltration by atypical, immature mast cells, BM aspirate with 20% or 
more mast cells. In typical MCL mast cells also account for 10% or more of peripheral white 
blood cells. In aleukemic MCL, <10% of peripheral white blood cells are mast cells.
(Continued)
272  Part 1: Allergy
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis of disease
• It is difficult to distinguish CM from SM based on clinical evaluation alone, as CM patients often 
have systemic symptoms due to mast cell mediator release.
• Skin biopsy does not provide any information about systemic involvement.
• Mast cell numbers can be elevated in skin biopsies in other inflammatory and neoplastic skin 
conditions.
• Bone marrow biopsy is generally unnecessary in children with UP unless there are CBC or 
peripheral smear abnormalities, or other signs of an aggressive form of mastocytosis.
• The absolute level of total tryptase does not determine the category of mastocytosis.
• Elevated tryptase can also occur in other conditions, including myeloproliferative or myelodys-
plastic disease, chronic renal failure, liver failure, and chronic eosinophilic leukemia.
• KIT mutational analysis (specifically for AsP816Val mutation) can also be performed on peripheral 
white blood cells or cells from skin or other organs, but this is much less sensitive than bone 
marrow analysis.
Section 4: Treatment
Treatment rationale
• There is currently no cure for mastocytosis, and treatment depends upon the classification and 
symptoms of disease.
• In CM, ISM treatment is aimed at reducing symptoms and blocking effects of mast cell mediator 
release.
• Patients with diagnosed SM should avoid triggers for mast cell degranulation, including physi-
cal triggers, alcohol, certain medications, emotional stress, and known allergens.
• Patients should be trained and prepared to treat anaphylaxis, and should have self‐injectable 
epinephrine (at least two doses) available at all times.
• Mast cell sarcoma (MCS): unifocal mast cell tumor, no evidence of SM, destructive growth 
pattern with high grade histology.
• Extracutaneous mastocytoma: unifocal mast cell tumor, no evidence of SM, no skin lesions. 
Non‐destructive growth pattern with low grade cytology.
“B” findings
• Bone marrow biopsy showing >30% infiltration by mast cells (focal, dense aggregates) and/or 
serum total tryptase level >200 ng/mL.
• Signs of dysplasia or myeloproliferation, in non‐mast cell lineages, but insufficient criteria 
for definitive diagnosis of a hematopoietic neoplasm with normal or slightly abnormal blood 
counts.
• Hepatomegaly without impairment of liver function and/or palpable splenomegaly without 
hypersplenism, and/or lymphadenopathy.
“C” findings
• Bone marrow dysfunction manifested by one or more cytopenia but no obvious non‐mast cell 
hematopoietic malignancy.
• Palpable hepatomegaly with impairment of liver function, ascites, and/or portal hypertension.
• Skeletal involvement with large osteolytic lesions and/or pathological fractures.
• Palpable splenomegaly with hypersplenism.
• Malabsorption with weight loss due to gastrointestinal mast cell infiltrates.
Source: Horny HP, et al. Mastocytosis. In Swerdlow SH, et al. (eds). WHO classification of tumors of 
haematopoietic and lymphoid tissues. Lyon: IARC Press; 2008.
Mastocytosis  273
• SM patients with reactions to Hymenoptera stings should be tested for venom allergy and 
treated with venom immunotherapy.
• Those with inhalant allergies should be managed with allergen avoidance and typical medica-
tions for allergic rhinitis, allergic conjunctivitis, or allergic asthma.
• Antihistamines: H1 antihistamines are administered to prevent and treat flushing and pruritus. 
H2 antihistamines may help control abdominal pain, heartburn, cramping, and diarrhea.
• Antileukotriene drugs may be added in patients with flushing, itching, and abdominal cramping 
that does not improve with H1 and H2 antihistamines.
• Aspirin (if patient is ASA‐tolerant) may be considered to control flushing not responsive to 
antihistamines.
• Oral cromolyn sodium, H2 antihistamines, and proton pump inhibitors may be used to treat GI 
symptoms.
• Patients with recurrent anaphylaxis should be treated with maximal doses of H1 and H2 anti-
histamines as well as antileukotriene drugs. Low‐dose maintenance glucocorticoids, IFN‐α, 
cladribine, or tyrosine kinase inhibitor (depending upon c‐kit mutational status) can be consid-
ered as second line treatments.
• Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (such as imatinib) are appropriate for some patients with SM who 
have an associated hematologic non‐mast cell lineage disorder (SM‐AHNMD), aggressive 
­systemic mastocytosis (ASM), or MCL. SM patients with the D816V KIT mutation are not 
­candidates for tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy.
• Mastocytosis with an associated clonal, non‐mast cell hematologic disorder should be treated 
as two separate diseases, and specific hematologic disorder and may require management by 
a hematologist.
• Patients with ASM with “C” findings are candidates for mast cell cyto‐reductive therapies 
including INF‐α‐2b, cladribine, glucocorticoids, or hydroxyurea. Tyrosine kinase inhibitor (imatinib) 
may also be considered in ASM patients who do not have a D816V KIT mutation.
• MCL is treated with cyto‐reductive polychemotherapy, similar to treatment for acute leukemia.
• Surgical treatment may be considered for benign mast cell tumors that cause excessive mast 
cell mediator release symptoms. Radiation and polychemotherapy, and tyrosine kinase inhibi-
tor, may be indicated for mast cell sarcomas.
When to hospitalize
• Patients with life‐threatening mast cell mediator‐related symptoms, blistering of skin, or bullous 
skin lesions may require hospitalization.
• Hospitalization is also necessary for any patient with acute hematologic complications, or 
organ failure in systemic forms of mastocytosis.
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comment
Conservative
Mast cell activation trigger avoidance
Isolated cutaneous mastocytosis, indolent 
mastocytosis and UP in children may not require 
treatment, or may be managed with topical local/
lesional skin care
Isolated CM in adults, without systemic 
involvement, may also be observed, but should be 
closely followed for development of SM signs or 
symptoms
(Continued )
274  Part 1: Allergy
Treatment
Comment
Medical
(with adult dosing where applicable)
H1 antihistamines (oral)
• Hydroxyzine (25 mg every 6 hours)
• Diphenhydramine (25–50 mg PRN up to QID)
• Doxepin (10–100 mg/day)
• Loratidine (10 mg/day)
• Fexofenidine (180–360 mg/day)
• Cetirizine (10–40 mg/day)
H2 antihistamines (oral)
• Ranitidine (150 mg BID)
• Cimetidine (400 mg BID)
• Famotidine (10–20 mg BID)
Leukotriene receptor antagonist
• Monteleukast (10 mg/day)
• Zafirleukast (20 mg/day)
• Zileuton (1200 mg BID)
Oral cromolyn sodium (100–200 mg up to 
4 times per day PRN)
Aspirin (up to 650 mg BID)
Self‐injectable epinephrine (0.15–0.3 mg 
per dose)
Tyrosine kinase inhibitor (imatinib)
Oral prednisone (20–60 mg/day for 2–3 weeks, 
then slowly tapered)
Interferon alpha 2b (initiated at 1 million units 
3 times weekly subcutaneously)
Cladribine (0.10–0.13 mg/kg/day for 5 days every 
4–8 weeks up to six cycles)
Cytoreductive chemotherapy
Self‐injectable epinephrine is for treatment of 
anaphylaxis (not reviewed here)
When considering aspirin, if patient’s tolerance of 
NSAID is not known, a first dose of aspirin should 
be administered in a supervised setting
Most patients with systemic mastocytosis are not 
candidates for imatinib because they have the 
D816V KIT mutation which results in imatinib 
resistance
INFα‐2b, cladribine, and oral glucocorticoids 
are therapeutic options for ASM requiring 
cytoreductive therapy
Chemotherapy is not a treatment for indolent 
mastocytosis
Surgical
Excision of benign mast cell tumors or 
extracutaneous mastocytomas
Surgical excision of mast cell sarcomas
Splenectomy
Surgical excision of benign mast cell tumors should 
be considered if they cause excessive mast cell 
mediator release and related symptoms
Mast cell sarcomas may also require radiation, 
chemotherapy, and imatinib therapy as well
Splenectomy may be considered for hypersplenism 
in ASM with severe anemia and thrombocytopenia
Radiological
Bone densitometry imaging should be used 
to monitor patients with mastocytosis‐related 
osteopenia/osteoporosis
Imaging should be used to monitor for recurrence 
of metastases in patients treated for mast cell 
sarcomas
Other considerations
Venom immunotherapy should be considered 
for those with SM who have Hymenoptera sting 
allergy
Pre‐treatment with diphenhydramine, ranitidine, 
montelukast, and prednisone for invasive surgical 
procedures should be considered
Mastocytosis  275
Prevention/management of complications
• Aspirin can precipitate mast cell mediator release in some patients, and prolonged therapy can 
result in gastric irritation.
• While venom immunotherapy is recommended in SM patients with documented Hymenoptera 
venom allergy, adverse reactions during venom immunotherapy can occur, and should be 
­considered especially during the build‐up phase.
• IFNα‐2b adverse effects include flu‐like symptoms, thrombocytopenia, cardiac toxicity, and 
depression.
• Cladribine side effects are related to bone marrow suppression.
Section 5: Special populations
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 6: Prognosis
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Prognosis depends upon the specific type of mastocytosis and differs for each disease 
category.
• Patients with CM and ISM have the best prognoses.
• UP may convert to a systemic form of mastocytosis, while in children with isolated UP, 50–70% 
will experience complete resolution by 21 years of age. Progression to mast cell sarcoma and 
MCL has been reported in some pediatric patients with UP.
• In 1–5%, ISM will convert to a more severe form of SM, such as ASM, MCL, or SM‐AHNMD. 
The prognosis then depends upon the specific hematologic disorder and/or response to therapy.
• The prognoses for MCL and ASM are generally poor. MCL progresses to multiple organ failure 
in weeks to months, with mean survival time of 12–24 months. Prognosis for ASM is generally 
poor, with an average of 2–4 years survival from onset of systemic disease.
• Poor prognostic indicators in patients with SM include older age of onset, weight loss, 
thrombocytopenia, hypoalbuminemia, elevated lactic dehydrogenase, high alkaline 
phosphatase, qualitative changes in red and/or white blood cells, organomegaly, ascites, and 
excess bone marrow blasts.
Clinical pearls
• Patients with isolated CM and ISM do not require cyto‐reductive therapy and may be treated 
for mast cell activation symptoms only. However, monitoring should occur yearly (tryptase, 
CBC, LFTs) as abnormalities or changes may indicate disease progression.
• There is currently no cure for SM. Treatment is intended to reduce symptoms and improve 
quality of life.
• All patients should be educated to avoid potential triggers for mast cell activation, as well as 
be prepared with self‐injectable epinephrine to treat anaphylaxis should it occur.
• Medical treatments are guided by mastocytosis classification and severity of manifestations.
• Patients with SM and an associated hematologic disorder should be treated as if there are two 
discrete diseases, and should be treated appropriately for the hematologic disorder.
• Patients with ASM and MCL may benefit from cyto‐reductive therapy, although this is rarely 
curative.
276  Part 1: Allergy
Natural history of untreated disease
Not applicable for this topic.
Prognosis for treated patients
Not applicable for this topic.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
• Patients with CM and ISM should be monitored for development of systemic disease.
• For patients with uncomplicated ISM, yearly monitoring should include physical examination, 
serum tryptase level, CBC with differential, serum chemistry, and LFTs, and yearly bone densi-
tometry if there is osteopenia or osteoporosis. Testing may be performed more frequently if 
symptoms worsen or if new symptoms develop.
• Patients with SM‐AHNMD should be monitored for mast cell activation symptoms during 
­therapy for hematologic disorder.
• Patients with ASM and organ tissue infiltration should be monitored for organ failure, as well 
as for side‐effects of mast cell cyto‐reductive therapy, if treated.
• Patients with mast cell sarcomas and extracutaneous mastocytomas should be monitored 
­periodically with imaging (CT, MRI, or PET scan) for recurrence or metastases.
Section 7: Reading list
Akoglu G et al. Cutaneous mastocytosis: demographic aspects and clinical features of 55 patients. J Eur Acad 
Dermatol Venereol 2006;20:969
Castells M, Metcalfe DD, Escribano L. Diagnosis and treatment of cutaneous mastocytosis in children: practical 
recommendations. Am J Clin Dermatol 2011;12:259
Gotlib J, Akin C. Mast cells and eosinophils in mastocytosis, chronic eosinophilic leukemia, and non‐clonal 
disorders. Semin Hematol 2012;49:128
Horny H‐P, Metcalfe DD, Bennett JM, et al. Mastocytosis. In: Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al. (eds) 
WHO Classification of Tumors of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues. Lyon: IARC Press, 2008: 
pp. 54–63
Pardanani A. Systemic mastocytosis in adults: 2012 update on diagnosis, risk stratification, and management. 
Am J Hematol 2012;87:401
Parker RI. Hematologic aspects of systemic mastocytosis. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 2000;14:557
Valent P, Akin C, Arock M, Brockow K, Brockow K, Butterfield JH, Carter MC, et al. Definitions, criteria and 
global classification of mast cell disorders with special reference to mast cell activation syndromes: a con-
sensus proposal. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 2012;157:215–25
Wolff K, Komar M, Petzelbauer P. Clinical and histopathological aspects of cutaneous mastocytosis. Leuk Res 
2001;25:519–28
Suggested websites
American Academy of Allergy Asthma and Immunology. www.aaaai.org
The Mastocytosis Society. www.tmsforacure.org
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Not applicable for this topic.
Mastocytosis  277
International society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
World Health Organization Diagnostic 
Criteria for Cutaneous and Systemic 
Mastocytosis
IARC
2008
(Lyon: IARC Press; 2008:54–63)
Section 9: Evidence
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 10: Images
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at:
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for 
patients, and ICD codes
Figure 30.1  Stroking one UP lesion has caused a linear raised area (wheal) with surrounding erythema to 
develop (Darier’s sign) on this child’s back. See color plate 30.1. From Habif TP. Clinical Dermatology: A Color 
Guide to Diagnosis and Therapy. 5th edition. 2010 Philadelphia, PA, Mosby/Elsevier. Reproduced with permission.
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
278 
Insect Sting Allergy
Scott H. Sicherer
Department of Pediatrics, Division of Allergy/Immunology, Mount Sinai Hospital, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 31
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• Stinging insect allergy is an IgE‐mediated response against proteins in insect venoms that may 
result in symptoms ranging from marked localized swelling to serious anaphylactic reactions 
that can be fatal.
Disease classification
• Reactions are categorized into three types that carry prognostic significance:
1.	 Large local reactions (swelling to more than 10 cm in diameter contiguous to the sting site);
2.	 Systemic reaction isolated to the skin (urticaria and angioedema); and
3.	 Systemic reaction not isolated to the skin (e.g. including respiratory, gastrointestinal, cardiac, 
and/or neurologic symptoms).
Incidence/prevalence
• Potentially life‐threatening systemic allergic reactions occur in approximately 3% of adults and 
0.4–0.8% of children.
• Anaphylactic sting reactions account for approximately 40 deaths/year in the United States.
Economic impact
Not applicable for this topic.
Overall Bottom Line
• Allergy to stinging insect venom can result in allergic reactions that may be fatal.
• The risk for severe anaphylaxis on subsequent stings is low for persons with large local 
reactions, or for children with reactions isolated to urticaria, but is high for adults with any 
systemic symptoms or children with systemic symptoms beyond the skin.
• Venom immunotherapy is highly effective in reducing the risk of subsequent anaphylaxis and 
is indicated for those at risk.
• Patients at risk for anaphylaxis should be instructed on prompt self‐injection of epinephrine, 
to seek emergency care if stung, to wear medical identification jewelry, and to take measures 
to avoid insect stings.
Insect Sting Allergy  279
Etiology
• Stinging insects of relevance are in the order Hymenoptera and include the families Apidae 
(honeybee, bumblebee, sweatbee), Vespidae (yellow jacket, yellow hornet, white‐faced hor-
net, paper wasp), and Formicidae (fire ant, jack jumper ant, harvester ant).
• Insect venom contains vasoactive amines, acetylcholine and kinins responsible for pain and 
swelling, and proteins that can trigger allergic responses.
• Allergy to salivary proteins of biting insects (e.g. mosquitos, kissing bugs, horsefly) is uncommon.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• Significant allergic reactions to stinging insect venoms are type 1 hypersensitivity responses 
(IgE‐mediated) where exposure to the allergen results in release of preformed mediators (e.g. 
histamine) from mast cells and basophils, resulting in rapid onset of symptoms.
Predictive/risk factors
Section 2: Prevention
Screening
• Routine screening tests are not recommended. Testing is recommended for patients who have 
experienced a reaction that could qualify for VIT.
Primary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Secondary prevention
• VIT is 95–98% effective in preventing systemic reactions.
• VIT may reduce the risk of large local reactions.
Risk factor
Percentage risk within  
10 years if re‐stung
Systemic reaction in an individual who experienced a large local reaction
10
Systemic reaction in a child (age 16 years and under) who experienced a 
cutaneous systemic reaction
10
Systemic reaction in an adult who experienced a cutaneous systemic 
reaction
20
Systemic reaction in a child who experienced a systemic reaction
40
Systemic reaction in an adult who experienced a systemic reaction
60
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• No interventions have been demonstrated to be effective for primary prevention. However, 
venom immunotherapy (VIT) is extremely effective and is indicated to prevent recurrence 
of severe anaphylactic reactions in patients who qualify for this treatment. VIT may also be 
considered for selected patients who experience large local reactions. Avoidance of insect 
stings is encouraged as a means of prevention.
280  Part 1: Allergy
• Avoidance of stings is recommended (remove nests from vicinity of patient’s home; avoid 
­wearing bright colors and scents; avoid walking barefoot or with open shoes; wear clothing 
that covers skin well and gloves when working outdoors; be cautious near bushes, eaves, 
attics, garbage containers, and other nesting and activity areas; have insecticides nearby that 
can be sprayed to kill insects at a distance; caution when eating and drinking outdoors, especially 
drinking from opaque containers).
Section 3: Diagnosis (Algorithm 31.1)
Differential diagnosis
Typical presentation
• Most insect stings result in transient, local reactions that resolve without treatment. Such 
responses are normal and do not indicate an increased risk of future allergic reactions.
• Patients may experience large local reactions, where the sting site swells over 24–48 hours 
to more than 10 cm in diameter. Large local reactions are allergic in nature and may 
take  5–10 days to resolve but there are no reactions that are non‐contiguous to 
the sting.
• Systemic reactions occur soon following the sting and may include any symptoms of 
anaphylaxis.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• The patient history should include the symptoms (especially whether there was a systemic 
reaction), possibility of an insect sting triggering the reaction (e.g. outdoor activity, 
observation of insects nearby), and information that may indicate the type of stinging insect.
• If the patient presents having recently been stung, the size of the localized reaction should 
be evaluated, or signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis should be sought (e.g. hives, wheezing, 
decreased blood pressure).
• For patients who may qualify for VIT, skin and/or serum testing to insect venom should be 
performed.
• Skin testing is optional for patients who do not qualify for VIT.
Differential diagnosis
Features
Anaphylaxis from another cause
No clear insect sting, other likely triggers such as a food or 
medication identified from the history
Mastocytosis
Patients experiencing anaphylaxis from insect stings with 
or without evidence of IgE antibodies to insect venom may 
have an underlying mast cell disorder identifiable with 
testing for serum tryptase
Toxic reactions to insect stings
Multiple simultaneous insect stings may result in toxic 
reactions with renal failure, seizures, adult respiratory 
distress syndrome, hemolysis, or diffuse intravascular 
coagulation
Insect Sting Allergy  281
Clinical diagnosis
History
• The history should identify if an insect sting was likely a trigger, the exact symptoms (to grade 
the type of reaction, see below), number of stings, and, if possible, the likely culprit insect (to 
facilitate treatment advice). Anaphylaxis can be triggered by many allergens and, if a sting was 
not noted, a history of possible triggers should be sought (e.g. exercise, food, drug). In the 
absence of a known sting, the patient’s activities and time of year might provide circumstantial 
evidence of a sting (e.g. warm weather outdoor activities, cutting hedges, proximity to nesting 
locations). If the patient can bring the insect in a jar, identification can be achieved. Otherwise, 
questions about nests and activities may help identification: yellow jackets (ground nesting, 
gardening, picnics, garbage cans), hornets (large tree/shrub nests), wasps (honeycombed nests 
in eaves, shrubs, scavenge like yellow jackets), honeybees (tree hollows), fire ants (mounds in 
the ground).
Localized pain, swelling
Large local reaction
Systemic reaction 
isolated to the skin
Systemic reaction beyond the skin 
(e.g., wheezing, vomiting)
Patient is a child age 16 years or
under?
No testing indicated
Testing generally not 
indicated unless 
immunotherapy is being 
considered for special 
circumstances (repeated 
large reactions, 
increased patient 
concerns)
Yes
No
Testing generally not 
indicated unless 
immunotherapy is being 
considered for special 
circumstances (repeated 
stings likely, increased 
patient concerns)
Testing indicated, skin 
tests are performed
Positive
Positive
Negative
Negative
Perform skin testing again 
in 3–6 weeks, and/or 
consider serum testing
Diagnosis of potentially 
severe insect sting 
allergy conﬁrmed
Diagnosis of potentially 
severe insect sting 
allergy may remain 
presumptive
History of a sting reaction
Algorithm 31.1  Diagnosis of insect sting allergy
282  Part 1: Allergy
Physical examination
• If a patient is presenting acutely, emergency management may be needed to treat an allergic 
reaction or anaphylaxis. A thorough examination to identify skin, respiratory, or cardiovascular 
signs and symptoms is required. If symptoms are present, the clinician can directly confirm if the 
response is localized or systemic, including whether it is systemic but isolated to the skin (e.g. solely 
urticaria), as these determinations may have consequences for deciding upon VIT. Stingers should 
be removed by scraping rather than grasping the venom sac, which could squeeze more venom 
into the patient. If fire ant stings are suspected, a ring of pseudopustules might be identifiable.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• Diagnostic testing is generally reserved for situations where VIT is or may be indicated (see 
Treatment section).
• Skin tests (prick, possibly followed by intracutaneous) should be used for initial measurement of 
venom‐specific IgE. Extracts of honeybee, yellow jacket, white‐faced hornet, ­yellow hornet, 
and wasp venom are available for testing. Cross‐sensitization and cross‐reactivity are high 
between hornet and yellow jacket, less for hornet and yellow jacket with wasp, and even less 
between honeybee and the others. Bumblebee venom has unique allergens with variable 
cross‐reactivity to honeybee. Skin prick tests may be performed with concentrations of up to 
100 μg/mL, and if negative followed by intracutaneous tests starting at 0.001 or 0.01 μg/mL 
and increasing 10‐fold up to 1.0 μg/mL. Skin tests should be repeated at another time if they 
are initially negative and there was a severe reaction. Positive tests (with appropriate negative 
and positive controls) of any size indicate potential allergy of any severity. Whole body extracts 
of fire ant are available for evaluating fire ant hypersensitivity. There is limited cross‐reactivity 
between fire ant venom and other Hymenoptera venom. Fire ant testing may begin with full 
strength extract and if negative proceed to intracutaneous testing of 1 : 1 million wt/vol up to 
1 : 1000 or 1 : 500. If the history clearly indicates a fire ant reaction, tests for flying Hymenoptera 
are generally not pursued. If there was a reaction to a sting, even from an identified flying 
Hymenoptera, testing to multiple Hymenoptera is generally pursued.
• In vitro testing for venom‐specific IgE is indicated if skin tests are negative in selected patients, 
particularly the patient who has experienced a severe reaction.
• Serum tryptase levels should be obtained in persons with negative tests and severe reactions, 
and considered in patients with severe reactions.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding  
diagnosis of disease
• Testing may be negative during a “refractory period” following a sting reaction; consider 
retesting in 3–6 weeks.
• A patient who had a serious sting reaction and then tolerated a subsequent sting may still be 
at risk for insect sting anaphylaxis and should be tested.
• Large local reactions might be misdiagnosed as cellulitis.
Section 4: Treatment (Algorithm 31.2)
Treatment rationale
• Mild local (non‐allergic) reactions can be approached with symptomatic treatment for pain, 
using cold compresses and analgesics. Large local reactions can be treated similarly, with 
Insect Sting Allergy  283
­antihistamines as additional therapy for itch and consideration of using oral corticosteroids 
(proof of efficacy with controlled studies is lacking). Insect sting‐induced anaphylaxis is treated 
like anaphylaxis from any cause with injectable epinephrine and supportive therapy. Delayed 
­treatment with epinephrine has been associated with fatal reactions. Cutaneous systemic 
­reactions can be treated with antihistamines.
• Immunotherapy is indicated for patients older than 16 years with isolated cutaneous systemic 
reactions, all patients with systemic reactions including organ systems other than skin when 
testing is positive because these patients are at higher risk for recurrence of a severe reaction 
upon re‐sting. VIT may be considered for other circumstances, including patients with large 
local reactions who are likely to sustain frequent stings, and children who experienced isolated 
cutaneous systemic reactions but are likely to experience frequent subsequent stings (especially 
if the trigger was fire ants). Controversy exists as to whether all venoms eliciting positive tests 
should be used for treatment, or fewer venoms based on insect identification and known 
cross‐reactivity.
• Treatment includes instruction on allergen avoidance, carrying self‐injectable epinephrine, and 
wearing medical identification jewelry.
When to hospitalize
• Patients with anaphylaxis who require supportive care may require hospitalization.
*Testing generally not indicated (see algorithm 31.1). 
Large local reaction*
Systemic reaction 
isolated to the skin 
age <16 years*
Allergy test 
positive
Immunotherapy 
indicated
Immunotherapy generally not 
indicated but may be 
considered in special 
circumstances (see text)
Immunotherapy 
not indicated
Allergy test 
positive
Allergy test 
positive
Allergy test 
negative
Allergy test 
negative
Immunotherapy dose adjustment 
and/or reassessment if evidence of 
failure. Consider discontinuation after 
3–5 years (see text)
Allergy test 
negative
Systemic reaction isolated to the skin 
age 17 and older or systemic 
reaction beyond the skin (e.g., 
wheezing, vomiting) at any age
Algorithm 31.2  Treatment of insect sting allergy  
284  Part 1: Allergy
Table of treatment
Treatment
Circumstances
Conservative
Cold compresses, 
analgesics
Local and large local reactions, pain
Antihistamines
Itch
Medical
Venom 
immunotherapy
VIT is typically started at a dose of 0.1–1 µg weekly and incrementally increased to 
a treatment dose of 100 µg of each venom (similar to two stings). Rapid schedules 
are an option. Dosing eventually may be every 6–8 weeks. VIT may elicit allergic 
reactions. Treatment doses might be increased if subsequent stings result in a 
reaction. Treatment is typically continued for 3–5 years, but may be extended 
depending on particular patient circumstances
Fire ant 
immunotherapy
Immunotherapy maintenance dose goals are 0.5 mL of 1 : 100 wt/vol or 
possibly a 1 : 10 concentration. Immunotherapy may elicit allergic reactions. 
Treatment duration is less well studied than VIT but is typically continued 
for 3–5 years; but it may be extended depending on particular patient 
circumstances
Prescription of 
epinephrine 
auto‐injector to 
self‐carry
Recommended for all patients who experienced a life‐threatening reaction (even 
if testing is negative) and may be considered for any patient with prior allergic 
reactions (e.g. those with large local reactions, children with isolated cutaneous 
systemic reactions)
Antihistamines
For treatment of allergic reactions (itch, swelling)
Prevention/management of complications
• Immunotherapy can induce allergic reactions, including anaphylaxis. Patients are kept under 
observation for 30 minutes following an injection and should carry self‐injectable epinephrine. 
Premedication with antihistamines can be considered to reduce local reactions. Rarely, VIT can 
induce a serum sickness type reaction.
• Although typical duration of therapy is 3–5 years, it may be extended for circumstances such 
as: high risk patients (near fatal reactions, honeybee allergy, increased baseline tryptase, under-
lying medical conditions, frequent exposures), quality of life considerations, and the fact that 
optimal treatment duration before any hypersensitivity is unknown.
Clinical pearls
• Indications for treatment with immunotherapy are based upon the clinical history and test 
results indicating an increased subsequent risk of anaphylaxis.
• For patients at risk of anaphylaxis, VIT is up to 98% effective in reducing the risk of 
subsequent severe sting reactions.
• Patients should be educated about allergen avoidance, carrying self‐injectable epinephrine, 
and wearing medical identification jewelry.
Insect Sting Allergy  285
Section 5: Special populations
Pregnancy
• Treatment of insect sting anaphylaxis is no different from treatment of anaphylaxis in 
pregnancy.
• VIT may be continued at the previously tolerated dose, but is generally not initiated or escalated 
during pregnancy.
Children
• The natural history of insect sting anaphylaxis in children is different from adults in that isolated 
cutaneous systemic reactions in children are not likely to portend future severe reactions. 
Therefore, indications for VIT differ between children and adults.
Elderly
Not applicable for this topic.
Others
• Concomitant medications: patients taking beta‐blockers or angiotensin converting enzyme 
inhibitors may be at greater risk for anaphylaxis to insect stings and VIT, and should be switched 
to an alternative medication if possible.
Section 6: Prognosis
Natural history of untreated disease
• For children with cutaneous systemic reactions, the risk of subsequent anaphylaxis decreases 
from 10% to 5% after 10 years.
• For adults with cutaneous systemic reactions, the risk of subsequent anaphylaxis decreases 
from 20% to 10% after 10 years.
• For children with systemic anaphylaxis, the risk of subsequent anaphylaxis decreases from 40% 
to 30% after 10 years.
• For adults with systemic anaphylaxis, the risk of subsequent anaphylaxis decreases from 60% 
to 40% after 10 years.
Prognosis for treated patients
• Immunotherapy is up to 98% effective in reducing the risk of anaphylaxis upon subsequent 
stings.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
• Repeat testing may be considered because the prognosis after 3–5 years of VIT may be better 
if tests have become negative.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Treatment with VIT is highly effective to prevent subsequent sting anaphylaxis.
• The risk of subsequent anaphylaxis generally decreases with time.
• The prognosis for children is generally better than for adults.
286  Part 1: Allergy
Section 7: Reading list
Bernstein IL, Li JT, Bernstein DI, Hamilton R, Spector SL, Tan R, et al. Allergy diagnostic testing: an updated 
practice parameter. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2008;100(Suppl 3):S1–148
Bonadonna P, Zanotti R, Caruso B, Castellani L, Perbellini O, Colarossi S, et al. Allergen specific immunotherapy 
is safe and effective in patients with systemic mastocytosis and Hymenoptera allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 
2008;121:256–7
Bonadonna P, Perbellini O, Passalacqua G, Caruso B, Colarossi S, Dal Fior D, et al. Clonal mast cell disorders in 
patients with systemic reactions to Hymenoptera stings and increased serum tryptase levels. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol 2009;123:680–6
Boyle RJ, Elremeli M, Hockenhull J, Cherry MG, Bulsara MK, Daniels M, et al. Venom immunotherapy for 
­preventing allergic reactions to insect stings. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012;10:CD008838
Cox L, Nelson H, Lockey R, Calabria C, Chacko T, Finegold I, et al. Allergen immunotherapy: a practice param-
eter third update. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2011;127(Suppl):S1–55
Golden DB, Kelly D, Hamilton RG, Craig TJ. Venom immunotherapy reduces large local reactions to insect 
stings. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2009;123:1371–5
Golden DB, Moffitt J, Nicklas RA, Freeman T, Graft DF, Reisman RE, et al. Stinging insect hypersensitivity: a 
practice parameter update 2011. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2011;127:852–4
Incorvaia C, Frati F, Dell’Albani I, Robino A, Cattaneo E, Mauro M, et al. Safety of hymenoptera venom 
immunotherapy: a systematic review. Expert Opin Pharmacother 2011;12:2527–32
Tracy JM. Insect allergy. Mt Sinai J Med 2011;78:773–83
Tracy JM, Khan FS, Demain JG. Insect anaphylaxis: where are we? The stinging facts 2012. Curr Opin Allergy 
Clin Immunol 2012;12:400–5
Suggested websites
www.aaaai.org
www.acaai.org
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Stinging insect hypersensitivity: a 
practice parameter update 2011
Joint Council
2011
(http://www.aaaai.org/conditions- 
and-treatments/allergies/stinging- 
insect-allergy.aspx)
Allergy diagnostic testing: an 
updated practice parameter
Joint Council
2008
(http://www.aaaai.org/Aaaai/media/
MediaLibrary/PDF%20Documents/
Practice%20and%20Parameters/
allergydiagnostictesting.pdf)
Allergen immunotherapy: a 
practice parameter third update
Joint Council
2011
(http://www.aaaai.org/Aaaai/media/
MediaLibrary/PDF%20Documents/
Practice%20and%20Parameters/ 
Allergen-immunotherapy-Jan-2011.pdf)
Section 9: Evidence
See Boyle et al. 2012 (see reading list).
Section 10: Images
Not applicable for this topic.
Insect Sting Allergy  287
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at:
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions (provided by 
Hugh Sampson), advice for patients, and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
288 
Latex Allergy
Jennifer S. Kim
NorthShore University HealthSystem, Evanston, IL, USA
Chapter 32
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• Clinical manifestations of latex allergy include non‐IgE‐mediated allergic contact dermatitis and 
IgE‐mediated urticaria, rhinoconjunctivitis, asthma, and anaphylaxis.
Disease classification
• Latex refers to natural rubber latex, a product manufactured from a milky fluid derived from the 
tropical rubber tree Hevea brasiliensis. There are 14 known Hevea latex allergens: Hev b 1 
through Hev b 14.
Incidence/prevalence
• Prevalence is highest in health care workers (8–17%) and patients frequently exposed to latex 
via multiple surgeries, such as those with spina bifida (up to 68%). Less than 1% of the general 
population is affected.
• In 1991, the US FDA convened an international symposium on latex allergy due to increasing 
prevalence, which peaked in the mid to late 1990s.
• As a result of the increased use of non‐latex gloves, prevalence rates have dramatically 
decreased.
Economic impact
• Conversion to a latex‐safe environment was associated with an initial increase in cost but has 
been offset by the decreased costs of diagnosis and disability incurred by latex sensitivity.
Overall Bottom Line
• Latex allergy prevalence peaked in the 1990s when universal precautions were instituted.
• Contact irritant (not allergic) dermatitis is the most common adverse reaction to latex medical 
glove wear.
• History is the most reliable indicator of latex allergy supported by a serologic test. Other 
­confirmatory tests are limited by reagent availability in the United States and lack of 
­standardization.
• Cross‐reactivity between latex and certain fruits (i.e. avocado, banana, chestnut, kiwi) may 
have clinical implications.
Latex Allergy  289
Etiology
• Universal precautions were implemented during the 1980s AIDS crisis. In 1992, the US Occupational 
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) issued the Blood‐born Pathogens Standard which 
required protective glove use. Increased demand for natural rubber latex combined with limited 
supply resulted in the use of stimulant chemicals that induced higher levels of latex allergen. Rapid 
turnover minimized latex protein denaturation, which occurs naturally during storage.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• Latex is ammoniated to prevent microbial growth and subsequently utilized to manufacture 
dipped products such as medical gloves and catheters. The majority of allergic reactions to latex 
result from exposure to dipped rubber products. In addition, the presence of powder in gloves 
permits latex allergen to aerosolize, thereby potentially inducing respiratory symptoms.
Predictive/risk factors
• Use of powdered latex products.
• Frequent exposure via occupation and frequent surgeries.
• Atopy.
Section 2: Prevention
Screening
• It is not recommended to screen patients for latex allergy in the absence of a suggestive history.
Primary prevention
• Avoid exposure to latex.
Secondary prevention
• Avoid contact with latex.
• Avoid areas where powder from latex gloves may be inhaled.
• Wear medical alert identification.
Section 3: Diagnosis
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Use non‐latex gloves for handling non‐infectious materials.
• If latex gloves are used, use powder‐free gloves.
• Avoid oil‐based creams and lotions that cause latex deterioration, thereby increasing allergen 
exposure.
• Wash and dry hands after latex exposure.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• The most reliable indicator of latex allergy is a strong clinical history.
• Examination findings immediately after latex exposure include urticaria, rhinoconjunctivitis, 
asthma symptoms, and anaphylaxis.
• Serologic testing for IgE sensitization to latex can be performed to confirm diagnosis, but 
negative serology does not absolutely exclude latex allergy.
290  Part 1: Allergy
Differential diagnosis
Typical presentation
• Symptoms usually begin within minutes to hours of exposure. Reactions may be more signifi-
cant with mucosal exposure. Mild reactions can present with erythema, urticaria, and itching. 
More severe reactions may produce respiratory symptoms such as rhinorrhea, laryngeal pruritus, 
cough, wheeze, or shortness of breath. Rarely, shock may occur. A life‐threatening reaction is 
seldom the first sign of allergy.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• Assess the patient’s symptoms and timing of reaction to potential latex exposure. Assess poten-
tial sources of latex exposure in medical, dental, school, and household supplies. Examples 
include toys, balloons, cleaning gloves, condoms, swim caps, erasers, pacifiers, adhesives, and 
elasticized fabrics.
Physical examination
• Evaluate skin for erythema, urticaria, and pruritus within 10–15 minutes of direct contact. If 
the patient is being evaluated during the reaction, evaluate for signs of rhinitis, asthma, or 
anaphylaxis.
Useful clinical decision rules and calculators
• Patients allergic to fruits have a significantly lower risk of latex reaction whereas patients 
with latex allergy have a relatively higher risk of reaction to fruits implicated in the latex–fruit 
syndrome. Examples of cross‐reactive foods include banana, avocado, kiwi, and chestnut as 
well as apple, carrot, celery, melon, papaya, potato, and tomato.
Disease severity classification
Not applicable for this topic.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• Testing for type I (immediate) hypersensitivity to latex can be performed via serology or skin 
prick testing to assess the presence of IgE sensitization to latex proteins. Sensitization without 
a history of a reaction, however, is not sufficient to make a diagnosis of latex allergy given the 
high rate of false positive test results.
• There is no commercial skin prick test reagent available in the United States. Individually pre-
pared extracts from latex products have been shown to vary widely in allergen content. 
Puncturing through a latex glove as an alternative is not encouraged because of the risk of 
systemic allergic reactions from a potentially high dose exposure.
• Type IV hypersensitivity (contact dermatitis) is diagnosed primarily via history. Patch testing may 
be performed if a reagent is available.
• Provocation testing is generally not recommended except by trained specialists.
Differential diagnosis
Features
Irritant contact dermatitis
Dry, itchy, irritated skin (usually hands)
Latex Allergy  291
Lists of imaging techniques
Not applicable for this topic.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis of disease
• Contact irritant dermatitis is the most common adverse reaction to latex and may be exacer-
bated by sweating caused by occlusion, prolonged contact with alkaline pH (powder), frequent 
handwashing, and use of chemical sanitizers. This is a relatively benign and non‐life‐threatening 
condition.
Section 4: Treatment
Treatment rationale
• Implementation of latex avoidance measures is key. Topical steroids may be used to treat 
­contact allergic dermatitis. Oral antihistamines may be used to treat pruritus, urticaria, or mild 
upper respiratory symptoms (i.e. rhinitis). Treatment of asthma symptoms and anaphylaxis are 
addressed fully in other chapters.
When to hospitalize
• Individuals experiencing severe anaphylactic reactions.
Managing the hospitalized patient
• It is recommended that patients who are latex allergic have surgical procedures performed as 
first cases in the morning when levels of latex aeroallergens are lowest. All medical products 
should be made of non‐latex materials.
Table of treatment
Not applicable for this topic.
Prevention/management of complications
• Prophylaxis with H1‐blockers, H2‐blockers, and steroids is not recommended for patients 
with a documented latex allergy undergoing a surgical procedure. Complete avoidance of 
latex‐containing materials is the treatment of choice.
Section 5: Special populations
• Prevalence is highest for patients receiving multiple surgeries and for individuals having 
­occupational exposures to latex gloves.
Section 6: Prognosis
Clinical pearls
• Prevention is the cornerstone in the management of latex sensitization.
• Non‐latex materials should be substituted for all latex‐containing items.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Avoidance of latex is the only way to prevent an allergic reaction.
• People at risk of anaphylaxis to latex should carry self‐injectable epinephrine with them at all times.
292  Part 1: Allergy
Natural history of untreated disease
Not applicable for this topic.
Prognosis for treated patients
Not applicable for this topic.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 7: Reading list
Bousquet J, Flahault A, Vandenplas O, Ameille J, Duron JJ, Pecquet C, et al. Natural rubber latex allergy among 
health care workers: a systemic review of the evidence. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2006:118:447–54
Cabañes N, Igea JM, de la Hoz B, Agustín P, Blanco C, Domínguez J, et al. Latex allergy: Position Paper. 
J Investig Allergol Clin Immunol 2012;22:313–30
Hamilton RG. Latex allergy. UpToDate, updated June 20, 2012.
Hepner DL, Castells MC. Latex allergy: an update. Anesth Analg 2003:96:1219–29
Suggested websites
www.Latexallergyresources.org
https://www.osha.gov/SLTC/latexallergy/
http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/latex/
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
The diagnosis and management 
of anaphylaxis: an updated 
practice parameter
Joint Task Force on Practice 
Parameters; American Academy 
of Allergy, Asthma and 
Immunology (AAAAI); American 
College of Allergy, Asthma and 
Immunology (ACAAI); Joint 
Council of Allergy, Asthma and 
Immunology
2005
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/15753926)
International society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Latex allergy: Position Paper
Committee of Latex Allergy; 
Spanish Society of Allergology 
and Clinical Immunology (SEAIC)
2012
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/23101306)
Section 9: Evidence
Not applicable for this topic.
Latex Allergy  293
Section 10: Images
Not applicable for this topic.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at: 
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for 
patients, and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
294 
Allergy to Antibiotics
Jennifer S. Kim
NorthShore University HealthSystem, Evanston, IL, USA
Chapter 33
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• Antibiotics can act as antigens and elicit an immune response. Reactions should be defined as 
allergic when an immunologic mechanism is demonstrated.
Disease classification
• Drug reactions can be classified clinically as immediate (within 1 hour of drug administration) 
and non‐immediate, as recommended by the World Allergy Organization.
Incidence/prevalence
• Antibiotic hypersensitivity reactions have an estimated prevalence of 5–10%.
Economic impact
• Over‐diagnosis of drug allergy creates an increase in treatment costs because of unnecessary 
use of broad‐spectrum antibiotics, which is a risk factor for development of multiple drug‐
resistant bacteria.
• Studies have shown penicillin skin testing in those patients with a history of penicillin allergy 
results in large decreases in use of vancomycin and quinolones. Use of expensive broad‐­
spectrum antibiotics results in higher medical costs and compromised clinical care because of 
the development of multiple drug‐resistant bacteria.
Etiology
• In order to cause an allergic reaction, the antibiotic must be recognized by the immune system.
Overall Bottom Line
• Hypersensitivity reactions to antibiotics are commonly reported but often over‐diagnosed.
• Penicillin is the most commonly reported drug allergy, but in large‐scale studies approximately 
90% of these individuals were able to tolerate penicillins.
• Skin tests have been well validated for beta‐lactams (penicillins and cephalosporins) but less 
so for other classes of antibiotics.
• Skin testing is indicated only for type I and IV hypersensitivity reactions.
Allergy to Antibiotics  295
Pathology/pathogenesis
• Immunologic hypersensitivity reactions can be classified into four categories according to the 
Gell and Coombs system:
• Type I: immediate in onset and mediated by IgE and mast cells and/or basophils;
• Type II: delayed in onset and caused by antibody (usually IgG) mediated cell destruction;
• Type III: delayed in onset and caused by IgG: drug immune complex deposition and complement 
activation; and
• Type IV: delayed in onset and T‐cell‐mediated.
• Types I, II, and III are antibody‐mediated while type IV is mediated by T cells.
Predictive/risk factors
• Female sex.
• Recurrent drug exposure.
• HIV/AIDS, particularly for sulfonamides.
• Certain HLA‐B alleles may represent risk factors for reactions to a particular drug. Examples 
include SJS/TEN to carbamazepine in Han Chinese is strongly associated with HLA‐B*15:02, 
drug‐induced hypersensitivity syndrome (aka DRESS) and STS/TEN to allopurinol with 
HLA‐B*58:01, and DRESS to abacavir in HLA‐B*57:01 patients.
Section 2: Prevention
No interventions have been demonstrated to prevent the development of the disease.
Screening
• HLA‐B typing is generally not recommended at this time. The exception is for patients being 
considered for therapy with abacavir as hypersensitivity occurs exclusively in HLA‐B*57:01 
patients.
Primary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Secondary prevention
• Based on limited data, 10–38% of patients selectively allergic to amoxicillin or ampicillin 
­(tolerant of penicillin) react to the corresponding cephalosporin. Thus, patients with amoxicillin 
allergy should avoid cephalosporins with identical R‐group side chains (cefadroxil, cefprozil, 
and cefatrizine). Similarly, patients with ampicillin allergy should avoid cephalexin, cefaclor, 
cephradine, cephaloglycin, and loracarbef.
Section 3: Diagnosis (Algorithm 33.1)
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Immunologic drug reactions may be divided into four categories according to the Gell and 
Coombs system. Types I and IV are far more common than types II and III.
• These different types of allergic reactions each have characteristic signs and symptoms 
although clinically there may be significant overlap.
• The diagnosis of type I (immediate) allergic reactions to antibiotics is based on clinical history, 
skin testing when available, and graded challenge if indicated. Patch testing can be used to 
confirm type IV reactions.
296  Part 1: Allergy
Differential diagnosis
• This is dependent on the clinical presentation of the individual patient as drug allergy repre-
sents a spectrum of hypersensitivity reactions with heterogeneous mechanisms and clinical 
presentations.
Typical presentation
Not applicable for this topic.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• Evaluation involves a meticulous history of past and present drug reactions, review of the 
­medical record, and analysis of temporal patterns between drug administration and onset of 
symptoms.
Physical examination
• Perform a meticulous skin examination. Assess for lymphadenopathy or organomegaly.
Useful clinical decision rules and calculators
• Patients having a history of severe delayed‐onset systemic reactions and/or exfoliating derma-
toses should not receive the suspected antibiotic again under any circumstances and need not 
undergo diagnostic testing.
Clinical history: urticaria/angioedema, erythema, bronchospasm, anaphylaxis
<1 h after the last BL administration
+
–
–
–
–
–
+
+
Non-allergic
BP   = benzylpenicillin
AX  = amoxicillin
BL   = beta-lactam
DPT= drug provocation test
Advice avoidance of positive
BL therapy or, if it is 
irreplaceable,
perform rapid desensitization
Prick tests
PPL/MDM/BP/AX/any suspect BL
Intradermal tests
PPl/MDM/BP/AX/any suspect BL
DPT
Allergic
Consider repeating in
2 – 4 weeks in patients
with history of severe reactions
Algorithm 33.1  Diagnosis of immediate allergic reactions to beta‐lactams 
Source: Romano A, Caubet JC. Antibiotic allergies in children and adults: from clinical symptoms to skin 
testing diagnosis. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 2014;2:3–12. Reproduced with permission of Elsevier.
Allergy to Antibiotics  297
Disease severity classification
Not applicable for this topic.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• Skin testing has been well validated for penicillins. The negative predictive value of penicillin 
skin testing (with PPL, penicillin G, and penicilloate and/or penilloate) for serious immediate‐
type reactions approaches 99%. Consider performing graded challenges in patients with 
a low likelihood of being allergic (e.g. those with distant (>10 years) or vague reaction 
histories).
• Specific IgE in vitro assays are available, although most are not adequately validated with 
unclear specificity and sensitivity and lack internal positive controls
• For moderate to severe allergic reactions, a complete blood count and differential and tests of 
liver and renal function should be obtained. This evaluation is indicated if the exanthema is 
substantial, bullous or pustular, confluent, involves a substantial portion of the body surface 
area, or if general symptoms (malaise, skin pain, lymphadenopathy) are present.
• Serum tryptase may be elevated if measured within 1–3 hours of symptom onset of 
anaphylaxis.
Lists of imaging techniques
Not applicable for this topic.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis  
of disease
• Maculopapular exanthems and delayed skin eruptions are common in children and are mainly 
associated with viral infections.
• Routine repeat penicillin skin testing is not indicated in patients with a history of penicillin 
allergy who have tolerated one or more courses of oral penicillin.
Section 4: Treatment
Treatment rationale
• There are three options for providing continued treatment in patients with confirmed drug 
allergy: administration of an unrelated medication, administration of a related medication, and 
desensitization to the culprit drug.
When to hospitalize
• Stevens–Johnson syndrome (SJS), toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN), and acute generalized exan-
thematous pustulosis (AGEP) are severe reactions that may require hospitalization depending 
on extent of skin involvement. Consider treatment in a burn care unit.
• Patients having drug reaction or rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptom (DRESS) must 
be monitored for progression of skin eruption and/or development of organ failure (liver, 
k­idney, lung).
Managing the hospitalized patient
Not applicable for this topic.
298  Part 1: Allergy
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comment
Conservative
Avoid antibiotic suspected to induce reaction. If 
continued antimicrobial therapy necessary, utilize 
drug from unrelated class
This is appropriate for patients in whom the 
diagnosis of drug allergy has been confirmed
Medical
Consult with infectious disease specialist to 
provide effective antibiotic alternatives. Allergist 
will then perform risk assessment to select 
antibiotic of lowest potential risk to patient
If skin test results are negative to a related drug 
(e.g. beta‐lactams), then graded challenge to the 
related drug can be performed
Prevention/management of complications
• Desensitization should be considered in patients who are proven or strongly suspected to have an 
immediate, IgE‐mediated allergy, for whom there are no acceptable alternative antibiotics. The 
potential benefits must outweigh the potential risks. Desensitization is temporary as sensitivity returns 
after the antibiotic is cleared from the body. This procedure should be performed in the hospital 
­setting by trained clinicians and experienced staff equipped to treat and manage anaphylaxis.
• Graded challenges are contraindicated in patients demonstrating exfoliative dermatitis, end‐
organ involvement, or mucous membrane involvement as part of their allergic reaction.
Section 5: Special populations
Pregnancy
Not applicable for this topic.
Children
• Children are more likely to present with a benign rash while taking antibiotic treatments. 
Immediate hypersensitivity to beta‐lactams is particularly rare in children.
Elderly
Not applicable for this topic.
Others
• Patients with positive penicillin skin test responses have a slightly increased risk of reacting to 
cephalosporins.
• Beside penicillins, sulfonamide antibiotics are the most common cause of drug‐induced allergic 
reactions. They most commonly cause delayed cutaneous eruptions; IgE‐mediated reactions 
are relatively infrequent. Sulfonamides are by far the most common cause of SJS and TEN.
Clinical pearls
• Immediate reactions (type I IgE‐mediated) develop within 1 hour of the administered dose.
• Delayed reactions typically begin after multiple doses and mostly consist of relatively benign 
rashes. However, rare delayed systemic reactions can be severe.
• Skin testing has been validated mainly for beta‐lactams. Use of graded challenges is 
recommended in those deemed as having low risk of reaction.
Allergy to Antibiotics  299
Section 6: Prognosis
Natural history of untreated disease
Not applicable for this topic.
Prognosis for treated patients
Not applicable for this topic.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 7: Reading list
Khan DA, Solensky R. Drug allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2010;125(Suppl 2):S126–37
Romano A, Caubet JC. Antibiotic allergies in children and adults: from clinical symptoms to skin testing diagnosis. 
J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 2014;2:3–12
Solensky R. Allergy to β‐lactam antibiotics. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2012;130:1442–2.e5
Suggested website
Uptodate.com
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Executive summary of 
disease management of 
drug hypersensitivity: a 
practice parameter
Joint Task Force on Practice Parameters; 
American Academy of Allergy, Asthma 
and Immunology (AAAAI); American 
College of Allergy, Asthma and 
Immunology (ACAAI); Joint Council of 
Allergy, Asthma and Immunology
1999
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/10616910)
The diagnosis and 
management of 
anaphylaxis: an updated 
practice parameter
Joint Task Force on Practice Parameters; 
American Academy of Allergy, Asthma 
and Immunology (AAAAI); American 
College of Allergy, Asthma and 
Immunology (ACAAI); Joint Council of 
Allergy, Asthma and Immunology
2005
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/15753926)
Drug allergy: an updated 
practice parameter
Joint Task Force on Practice Parameters; 
American Academy of Allergy, Asthma 
and Immunology (AAAAI); American 
College of Allergy, Asthma and 
Immunology (ACAAI); Joint Council of 
Allergy, Asthma and Immunology
2010
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/20934625)
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Limit antibiotic use. Obtain cultures to confirm diagnosis. Administer appropriate vaccines.
• Consider treating through mild cutaneous reactions if alternative treatments incur greater risk 
of adverse events.
• Initiate new medications at lower doses than normal when feasible.
300  Part 1: Allergy
Section 9: Evidence
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 10: Images
H
N
H
N
R
R'
O
O
O
N
N
R
S
S
CH3
CH3
COOH
Penicillin
Cephalosporin
COOH
Figure 33.1  The solid arrows indicate the core four‐member beta‐lactam ring within both penicillins and 
cephalosporins. Open arrows indicate the five‐ and six‐member side rings for penicillins and cephalosporins, 
respectively. R indicates additional side chain sites where substitutions of various chemical groups produce 
different antimicrobial spectra, pharmacokinetics, or stability to beta‐lactamases.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at: 
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for 
patients, and ICD code
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
  301
Allergy to Non‐Antibiotic Drugs
Jacob D. Kattan
Division of Allergy/Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 34
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• A drug allergy is a hypersensitivity drug reaction that results from a specific immunologic mech-
anism (either drug‐specific antibody or T cell) to a medication. It is usually unpredictable, occurs 
in a susceptible subgroup of patients, and has signs and symptoms that are not a result of the 
pharmacologic actions of the drug.
Disease classification
• The World Allergy Organization recommends dividing immunologic drug reactions into immedi-
ate reactions (typical onset within 1 hour of exposure) and non‐immediate (onset after 1 hour). 
Examples of immediate reactions include urticaria, angioedema, and anaphylaxis. Examples of 
non‐immediate reactions include fixed drug eruptions, Stevens–Johnson syndrome, and drug 
reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS).
Overall Bottom Line
• Drug allergy, or an immunologic drug reaction, is unpredictable, is unrelated to the 
­pharmacologic actions of the drug, and occurs in susceptible individuals.
• An allergic drug reaction results from a specific immunologic response to a medication.
• Immunologic reactions are classified into four types according to the Gell and Coombs system:
• Type I: immediate in onset and mediated by IgE and mast cells and/or basophils;
• Type II: delayed in onset and caused by antibody‐mediated cell destruction;
• Type III: delayed in onset and caused by immune complex deposition and complement 
activation;
• Type IV: delayed in onset and T‐cell mediated.
• In addition to antibiotics, drugs that commonly cause allergic reactions include cancer 
­chemotherapeutic agents, neuromuscular blocking agents, local anesthetics, opiates, 
radiocontrast media, aspirin, non‐steroidal anti‐inflammatory drugs, angiotensin‐converting 
enzyme inhibitors, biologic modifying agents, and medications for patients with HIV infections 
and AIDS such as antiretroviral drugs.
302  Part 1: Allergy
Incidence/prevalence
• Drug hypersensitivity reactions affect more than 7% of the general population.
• It is difficult to determine a precise prevalence as there may be under‐diagnosis of drug allergy 
due to under‐reporting or over‐diagnosis due to an overuse of the term allergy.
Etiology
• A drug allergic reaction is caused by recognition of the drug by the immune system.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• Immunologic reactions are classified into four types:
• Type I: immediate in onset and mediated by IgE and mast cells and/or basophils;
• Type II: delayed in onset and caused by antibody (usually IgG) mediated cell destruction;
• Type III: delayed in onset and caused by immune complex deposition and complement 
activation;
• Type IV: delayed in onset and T‐cell mediated.
Predictive/risk factors
• Amount and duration of drug exposure.
• Parenteral and cutaneous administration of the drug.
• Female sex.
• Prior history of allergic reaction to one or more drugs.
• HLA B 5701 in Caucasians (abacavir).
• HLA B 1502 in Han Chinese, Indian, and Thai populations (carbamazepine).
• HLA A 3101 in northern Europeans (carbamazepine).
• HLA B 5801 in Han Chinese and Caucasians (allopurinol).
• HIV/AIDS.
• Systemic lupus erythematosus.
Section 2: Prevention
There are no interventions that have been demonstrated to prevent the development of 
disease.
Screening
Not applicable for this topic.
Primary prevention
• Use of oral drugs when possible is likely to produce fewer drug reactions than the use of topical 
or parenteral medications.
• Avoid unnecessary prescribing of drugs that are often associated with adverse reactions.
Secondary prevention
• Withdrawal of the offending drug is the first step in preventing future reactions.
• Desensitization to a medication that is known to have caused an allergic reaction in the past 
can temporarily prevent reoccurrence if the medication is required in the future.
• Avoidance of cross‐reactive drugs may prevent other drug allergic reactions.
Allergy to Non‐Antibiotic Drugs  303
Section 3: Diagnosis (Algorithm 34.1)
Differential diagnosis
• The differential diagnosis is dependent on the clinical presentation of the individual patient as 
drug allergy represents a spectrum of hypersensitivity reactions with heterogeneous mechanisms 
and clinical presentations.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• The history should focus on previous and current medication use and the timing of onset of 
the reaction in relation to both the initiation of therapy and the precipitating dose.
• The different types of allergic reactions (see Pathology/pathogenesis section) may have different 
characteristic signs and symptoms, although cutaneous manifestations are the most common 
presentation for drug allergic reactions. The cutaneous findings include exanthems, angioedema, 
urticaria, erythema multiforme, bullous eruptions, purpura, and fixed drug eruptions.
• IgE‐mediated drug reactions may be confirmed by skin testing, while delayed type IV reactions 
may be confirmed by patch testing.
• Graded challenge, involving administration of a medication in a graduated manner, can 
exclude an allergy, and is most appropriate for a patient who is unlikely to be allergic to 
that drug. These challenges are contraindicated in patients with reactions such as exfoliative 
dermatitis (Stevens–Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis), blistering or sloughing of 
the skin, DRESS, or erythema multiforme.
Skin prick testing
Clinical history:
Did reaction occur within 1 hour of drug administration?
Did patient have exfoliative dermatitis, blistering or sloughing of the skin, 
a severe generalized hypersensitivity reaction with end-organ 
involvement, or mucous membrane involvement as part of the suspected 
drug reaction?
Yes
No further diagnostic testing necessary. Label 
patient as allergic and recommend avoidance of the 
suspected offending drug
No
Yes
No
Patch test and/or delayed reading intradermal test
+
–
Allergic
Immediate reading 
intradermal test
+
–
Allergic
Graded drug challenge*
+
Allergic
Non-allergic
–
+
–
Allergic
+
Allergic
Non-allergic
*Graded challenge is used to exclude an allergy to the drug in question, and is typically only performed in
patients considered unlikely to be allergic to that drug
–
Graded drug challenge*
Algorithm 34.1  Diagnosis of drug allergy
304  Part 1: Allergy
Typical presentation
• There are a wide variety of clinical presentations of drug allergy, as this disorder represents a 
spectrum of hypersensitivity reactions. Immediate drug reactions usually present with urticaria, 
angioedema, rhinitis, wheezing, vomiting, diarrhea, or anaphylaxis. Non‐immediate reactions 
usually present with a variety of cutaneous symptoms, although other organ symptoms are 
frequently also involved.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• The history should involve a detailed determination of past and present drug reactions, previ-
ous and current medication use, and the timing of onset of the reaction in relation to both the 
initiation of therapy and the precipitating dose.
Physical examination
• As cutaneous manifestations are the most common presentation for drug allergic reactions, 
the physical examination should involve a meticulous skin examination. The characterization 
of cutaneous lesions can be important in determining the cause of the reaction and manage-
ment decisions. On physical examination, one should also assess for symptoms of anaphylaxis, 
lymphadenopathy, organomegaly, and all systems that could account for the clinical 
presentation.
Useful clinical decision rules and calculators
• Severe exfoliative dermatitides, such as Stevens–Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrol-
ysis, are potentially life‐threatening reactions characterized by fever and mucocutaneous 
lesions leading to necrosis and sloughing of the epidermis.
• Patients having a history of delayed‐onset systemic reactions or exfoliating dermatitides should 
never again receive the suspected drug and do not need to undergo diagnostic testing.
Disease severity classification
Not applicable for this topic.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• Testing for drug allergy is limited. While skin testing can be helpful to confirm an immediate 
hypersensitivity reaction to medication, it has only been fully validated for penicillin.
• An elevated serum tryptase level can help confirm a diagnosis of anaphylaxis, although it may 
only remain elevated for 2–4 hours after symptom onset because of its short half‐life.
• With moderate to severe allergic reactions, a complete blood count and differential and tests 
of liver and renal function should be obtained.
• Laboratory abnormalities in patients with DRESS include leukocytosis with eosinophil counts 
>700/μL, increased serum alanine aminotransferase, increased serum creatinine, low grade 
proteinuria, human herpes virus 6 (HHV‐6) infection, and atypical lymphocytosis.
Lists of imaging techniques
Not applicable for this topic.
Allergy to Non‐Antibiotic Drugs  305
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis  
of disease
• Maculopapular exanthems and delayed skin eruptions are common in children and are mainly 
associated with viral infections.
• A drug allergy is different from a drug side effect. Drug allergy is a reaction to a drug that 
occurs as a result of a specific immunologic response in a small number of people while side 
effects are unwanted effects that anyone who is given enough of a drug can develop.
Section 4: Treatment
Treatment rationale
• Once a drug allergy is confirmed, there are three options for continuing treatment in a patient:
1.	 Administer a different, unrelated medication. This is the most straightforward option, 
although a second line therapy may have its own toxicities or a higher cost.
2.	 Administer a related medication. Providing a similar, but not identical medication to the 
offending drug is an option, although there are cross‐reactive reactions that are possible 
depending on the drug and type of allergic reaction in question.
3.	 Desensitize to the culprit drug. This option is available for patients with type I, IgE‐mediated 
drug allergy, and is typically approached when an equally effective alternative drug is not 
available.
When to hospitalize
• Patients suspected to have Stevens–Johnson syndrome or toxic epidermal necrolysis should be 
admitted to the hospital, possibly to the intensive care unit or a burn unit depending on the 
extent of skin involvement and presence of comorbidities.
• Patients with DRESS must be monitored for progression of skin eruption and/or development 
of organ failure (liver, kidney, lung).
• For patients with anaphylaxis, observation periods must be individualized to each patient, with 
a minimum observation period of 4–6 hours. In general, those with severe anaphylaxis involv-
ing hypoxia, hypotension, or neurologic compromise, or those with moderate reactions that do 
not respond promptly to epinephrine should be admitted to a hospital.
Managing the hospitalized patient
Not applicable for this topic.
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comment
Conservative
Discontinue and avoid the drug suspected to 
have induced the reaction. Administer a related 
or unrelated medication
This is appropriate for patients in whom a drug 
allergy has been confirmed
Medical
Desensitize to the offending drug
This is an option in patients with type I IgE‐mediated 
reactions when suitable alternatives are not available
306  Part 1: Allergy
Prevention/management of complications
• Graded challenges and future use of a drug is contraindicated in patients with a history of 
exfoliative dermatitis, end‐organ involvement, or mucous membrane involvement as part of 
their drug allergy.
Section 5: Special populations
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 6: Prognosis
Natural history of untreated disease
Not applicable for this topic.
Prognosis for treated patients
Not applicable for this topic.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 7: Reading list
Demoly P, Adkinson NF, Brockow K, Castells M, Chiriac AM, Greenberger PA, et al. International consensus on 
drug allergy. Allergy 2014;69:420–37
Joint Task Force on Practice Parameters; American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology; American 
College of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology; Joint Council of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology. Drug 
Allergy: an updated practice parameter. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2010;105:259–73
Khan DA. Cutaneous drug reactions. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2012;130:1225
Clinical pearls
• Epinephrine is the treatment of choice for anaphylaxis.
• Glucocorticoids may be necessary for immune complex reactions, drug‐induced hematologic 
diseases, early stages of erythema multiforme, and contact sensitivities.
• When an alternate non‐cross‐reacting medication cannot be used, induction of drug tolerance 
procedures can modify a patient’s response to a medication and temporarily allow treatment 
with it safely.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Avoidance measures are the most effective treatment for preventing recurrent episodes of 
anaphylaxis.
• Prognosis for patients with Stevens–Johnson syndrome or toxic epidermal necrolysis can 
be determined by applying a prognostic scoring system called SCORTEN, a system based 
on clinical and laboratory variables that include patient age, presence of malignancy, body 
surface area detached, tachycardia, serum urea, glucose, and bicarbonate.
• Most patients with DRESS recover completely in weeks to months after drug withdrawal, 
although there is a reported mortality rate of 5–10%.
Allergy to Non‐Antibiotic Drugs  307
Liu A, Fanning L, Chong H, Fernandez J, Sloane D, Sancho‐Serra M, et al. Desensitization regimens for drug 
allergy: state of the art in the 21st century. Clin Exp Allergy 2011;41:1679–89
Macy E, Ho NJ. Multiple drug intolerance syndrome: prevalence, clinical characteristics, and management. Ann 
Allergy Asthma Immunol 2012;108:88–93
Suggested websites
American Academy of Allergy Asthma and Immunology. www.aaaai.org
American College of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology. www.acaai.org
Uptodate.com
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Drug allergy: an 
updated practice 
parameter
Joint Task Force on Practice Parameters, 
representing the American Academy of 
Allergy, Asthma and Immunology (AAAAI), 
the American College of Allergy, Asthma and 
Immunology (ACAAI), and the Joint Council 
of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology (JCAAI)
2010
(https://www.aaaai.org/Aaaai/
media/MediaLibrary/PDF%20 
Documents/Practice%20 
and%20Parameters/drug‐allergy‐
updated‐practice‐param.pdf)
International society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
International 
consensus on 
drug allergy
The International Collaboration in Asthma, 
Allergy and Immunology (iCAALL), formed by 
the European Academy of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology (EAACI), the AAAAI, the ACAAI, 
and the World Allergy Organization (WAO)
2014
(http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/10.1111/all.12350/abstract)
Section 9: Evidence
See guidelines listed in Section 8.
Section 10: Images
Not applicable for this topic.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at: 
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for 
patients, and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
308 
Drug Desensitization
Julie Wang
Department of Pediatrics, Division of Allergy/Immunology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 35
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• Drug desensitization is a procedure that induces a temporary state of unresponsiveness to 
allow the safe administration of a drug. Drug desensitization is indicated for patients who 
require a drug that previously caused immediate hypersensitivity when use of alternative non‐
cross‐reacting drugs is not possible.
Disease classification
Not applicable for this topic.
Incidence/prevalence
Not applicable for this topic.
Economic impact
Not applicable for this topic.
Overall Bottom Line
• Desensitization entails the administration of incremental increases in doses of the drug to 
induce temporary unresponsiveness, allowing a patient with hypersensitivity to receive a 
course of medication safely.
• This procedure is indicated for those who have had IgE‐mediated or non‐IgE‐mediated 
­reaction to a drug. It is contraindicated for those who have had more severe reactions such 
as Stevens–Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis, and serum sickness.
• Protocols have been published for many drugs including antibiotics, chemotherapeutic 
agents, insulin, and aspirin.
• Allergic reactions can occur during the desensitization procedure, but are often mild and 
do not prevent the completion of the procedure.
• Hypersensitivity to the drug returns when the medication is discontinued or treatment is 
­interrupted.
Drug Desensitization  309
Etiology
• Many drugs can cause hypersensitivity reactions, including antibiotics and chemotherapeutic 
agents.
• Drugs known to cause IgE‐mediated reactions include penicillins, cephalosporins, and platinum‐
based chemotherapy agents.
• Medications such as trimethoprim‐sulfamethoxazole, vancomycin, aspirin, and taxane chemo-
therapeutic agents cause non‐IgE‐mediated reactions.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• The mechanisms underlying drug desensitization are not fully understood. Proposed mecha-
nisms include blocking IgG antibodies, sub‐threshold doses of drugs causing mast cells and 
basophils to be unresponsive to antigen stimulation, monomeric binding to IgE receptors 
­without cross‐linking so that cell activation does not occur, and depletion of mediators or 
­signal transduction components such as syk kinase.
Predictive/risk factors
There are no known risk factors.
Section 2: Prevention
No interventions have been demonstrated to prevent the development of the disease.
Screening
Not applicable for this topic.
Primary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Secondary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 3: Diagnosis
Differential diagnosis
Not applicable for this topic.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Drug desensitization is contraindicated for those who have had severe non‐IgE‐mediated 
reactions including Stevens–Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis, erythema 
multiforme, serum sickness, nephritis, and hepatitis.
• Prior to desensitization, asthma and other lung diseases should be optimally managed and 
medications that may impact the safety of the procedure or interfere with treatment of 
anaphylaxis should be discontinued (e.g. beta‐blockers).
• Informed consent should be obtained because desensitization involves the administration of a 
known or suspected allergen and there is a risk for allergic reaction.
• Drug desensitization should be performed by allergy specialists trained in the procedure 
in a monitored setting where personnel, medications, and equipment necessary to treat 
anaphylaxis are readily available.
310  Part 1: Allergy
Typical presentation
• Prior reactions to the medication in question should be reviewed to ensure that desensitization 
is an appropriate procedure to pursue. Desensitization is contraindicated for severe, non‐IgE‐
mediated reactions such as Stevens–Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis, and serum 
sickness. Desensitization is indicated for individuals who require the medication to which they 
have previously experienced a reaction and no alternative medication is available.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• The diagnosis of drug hypersensitivity should be confirmed by history and testing where indi-
cated. History should exclude the possibility that the prior reaction was caused by a severe 
non‐IgE‐mediated process for which desensitization is contraindicated (e.g. Stevens–Johnson 
syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis, serum sickness). Desensitization is considered when the 
patient requires treatment with the implicated medication and alternative medications are not 
possible.
Physical examination
• Prior to starting the desensitization procedure, a complete physical assessment of the patient 
should be performed to document the baseline status, including vital signs. Asthma or other 
chronic lung conditions should be stable. Frequent assessments are performed throughout the 
procedure to assess for any changes from baseline that would suggest an allergic reaction.
Useful clinical decision rules and calculators
Not applicable for this topic.
Disease severity classification
Not applicable for this topic.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• Identification of the triggering medication and associated symptoms should be determined 
prior to considering drug desensitization (see Chapters 33 and 34).
Lists of imaging techniques
No imaging studies are indicated for drug desensitization.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis  
of disease
• Reactions during the desensitization procedure can occur so appropriate treatments should be 
immediately available.
Section 4: Treatment
Treatment rationale
• Desensitization entails administering incremental doses of the drug administered via the oral, 
intravenous, or subcutaneous routes. Pretreatment with antihistamines and glucocorticoids is 
not used for IgE‐mediated reactions, but is often used for non‐IgE‐mediated reactions or when 
desensitizing to chemotherapeutic or biologic agents.
Drug Desensitization  311
• Specific protocols have been published for penicillin, cephalosporins, insulin, and other medications. 
Generally, the initial dose is 1/10 000 of the full dose. The dose is doubled every 15–30 minutes. The 
duration of the procedure depends on the drug and route of administration, but most are com-
pleted within 4–12 hours. If the intravenous route is used, a continuous infusion may be used.
• Once the desensitization procedure is completed, the drug is given normally for the duration of 
the treatment course. If future treatment courses are necessary, the desensitization procedure 
will need to be repeated.
When to hospitalize
• Drug desensitization procedures should be performed in a monitored setting with personnel, 
medications, and equipment necessary to treat anaphylaxis readily available.
Managing the hospitalized patient
The management of anaphylaxis is discussed elsewhere (see Chapter 29).
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comment
Conservative
• Mild reactions may be treated with slowing or 
temporarily stopping the desensitization procedure
• This is applicable to all patients
Medical
• Antihistamines are used to treat mild reactions
• If a severe reaction leading to anaphylaxis occurs, 
intramuscular epinephrine (0.01 mg/kg) is the 
treatment of choice
• Bronchodilators are used for respiratory 
symptoms, including wheezing
• Appropriate treatments for allergic reactions 
should be immediately available throughout 
the desensitization procedure
Prevention/management of complications
• Complications of drug desensitization generally involve reactions that can range from localized 
symptoms to systemic reactions or anaphylaxis. Approximately one‐third of penicillin desensiti-
zation procedures are associated with allergic reactions, and 11 % of patients undergoing 
desensitization to chemotherapeutic agents experience allergic reactions.
• In some cases, reactions such as serum sickness, hemolytic anemia, and nephritis have occurred 
following desensitization in patients who were treated with high doses or prolonged courses 
of medication.
• Other adverse reactions to drugs resulting from toxicity, intolerance, or idiosyncratic reactions 
are possible.
Clinical pearls
• The drug desensitization procedure should be performed by a physician trained in the 
procedure and in a monitored setting equipped to treat anaphylaxis.
• Allergic reactions during desensitization are common, but often do not prevent the 
completion of the procedure.
• Specific protocols for desensitization with various medications are published.
• Several sample desensitization protocols can be found in 2010 Drug allergy: an updated 
practice parameter (see Reading list).
312  Part 1: Allergy
Section 5: Special populations
Pregnancy
Desensitization has been safely performed in pregnant women.
Children
Drug desensitization can be performed in patients of any age.
Elderly
Drug desensitization can be performed in patients of any age.
Section 6: Prognosis
Natural history of untreated disease
Not applicable for this topic.
Prognosis for treated patients
Not applicable for this topic.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 7: Reading list
Joint Task Force on Practice Parameters; American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology; American 
College of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology; Joint Council of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology. Drug 
allergy: an updated practice parameter. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2010;105:259–73
Khan DA, Solensky R. Drug allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2010;125:S126–37
Liu A, Fanning L, Chong H, Fernandez J, Sloane D, Sancho‐Serra M, et al. Desensitization regimens for drug 
allergy: state of the art in the 21st century. Clin Exp Allergy 2011;41:1679–89
Scherer K, Brockow K, Aberer W, Gooi JH, Demoly P, Romano A, et al. Desensitization in delayed drug 
­hypersensitivity reactions: an EAACI position paper of the Drug Allergy Interest Group. Allergy 2013;68: 
844–52
Suggested websites
American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology (AAAAI). www.aaaai.org
American College of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology (ACAAI). www.acaai.org
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Desensitization can be successfully performed without significant adverse events in most cases 
to allow treatment with a medication that previously caused a reaction.
• Desensitization is a temporary state of unresponsiveness. Hypersensitivity returns within days 
of discontinuing the medication.
• Repeat desensitization is necessary if a repeat course of treatment with the medication is 
indicated.
Drug Desensitization  313
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source, comment
Date
Drug allergy: an updated 
practice parameter
Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol.
Comment: Includes several 
sample desensitization protocols 
for various drugs
2010
(http://www.allergyparameters.
org/published-practice-parameters/
alphabetical-listing/drug-allergy-
download/)
International society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Desensitization in delayed drug 
hypersensitivity reactions: an EAACI 
position paper of the Drug Allergy 
Interest Group
European Network on Drug Allergy 
(ENDA); European Academy of 
Allergy and Clinical Immunology 
(EAACI) Drug Allergy Interest Group
2013
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pubmed/23745779)
Section 9: Evidence
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 10: Images
Not applicable for this topic.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at: 
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for 
patients, and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
314 
Immunotherapy (Procedure)
Beth E. Corn
Department of Clinical Immunology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 36
Section 1: Background
• The first documented use of allergy immunotherapy was to grass pollen for the treatment of 
hay fever in the early 1900s. For immunotherapy, the particular allergens are extracted from 
source materials such as animal pelt, mold cultures, and pollens. Combinations of these pro-
teins and glycoproteins are mixed in a particular way to formulate a therapeutic immunother-
apy solution. This is prepared for individual patients, serially diluted, and used in sequentially 
increasing incremental treatment doses. Incremental treatment is usually performed in one of 
two ways. Conventionally, the build‐up phase involves giving an incrementally increasing 
weekly injection over 6 months to achieve maintenance therapy. An alternative approach is 
cluster immunotherapy, which involves administering several incrementally increasing doses in 
Overall Bottom Line
• Allergy immunotherapy: subcutaneous injections of allergen(s) causing a patient to be less 
sensitive to the particular offending allergen.
• Approved for the treatment of allergic rhinitis, allergic conjunctivitis, allergic asthma, and 
atopic dermatitis caused by aeroallergens such as cat, dog, cockroach, dust mites, pollens, 
and molds. It is also indicated for Hymenoptera stings resulting in systemic reactions caused 
by honeybees, yellow jackets, white faced hornets, and fire ants.
• Candidates for aeroallergen immunotherapy are those patients who are not controlled 
by avoidance and medication, and those who experience untoward effects from current 
treatments.
• In the United States, only subcutaneous immunotherapy (SCIT) is an FDA‐approved form 
of immunotherapy. Recently, sublingual immunotherapy (SLIT) for grass pollen allergy was 
approved, but SLIT for many aeroallergens are currently approved in Europe and Canada. 
Many studies indicate that SLIT seems to be as efficacious as SCIT with fewer adverse effects.
• Potential adverse effects range from local erythema at the injection site to systemic reactions 
including rhinitis, respiratory symptoms, and even anaphylaxis. Treatment of local reactions is 
mainly symptomatic: ice packs, topical corticosteroids, or antihistamines. Systemic reactions 
can be mild or severe. Mild systemic reactions can be treated with steroids and antihistamines. 
Epinephrine is indicated in moderate to severe systemic reactions and in the treatment of 
anaphylaxis.
Immunotherapy (Procedure)  315
a single day or non‐consecutive days thereby reaching the maintenance dose and symptom 
relief within 4–8 weeks. Of patients who achieve maintenance dose, 85% achieve some level 
of symptom relief. Monthly treatment is continued for 3–5 years.
Section 2: Prevention
• Allergen immunotherapy is used to prevent the progression of symptoms or the development 
of asthma in allergic patients and to prevent patients with allergy to one antigen from developing 
multiple allergies (i.e. sensitivity to many antigens).
Section 3: Diagnosis
• The initial steps involve examining and obtaining a detailed history from patients presenting 
with symptoms of rhinitis/conjunctivitis including rhinorrhea, congestion, post‐nasal drip, 
­allergic conjunctivitis, asthma, or systemic reactions to stinging insects.
• Following the initial history and physical examination, tests for IgE to particular environmental 
allergens are performed via allergy skin testing or by blood testing for specific IgE (usually 
allergen‐specific IgE levels). While both methods of testing reveal circulating IgE, the skin test 
offers immediate evidence of hypersensitivity to a particular allergen. Candidates for allergen 
immunotherapy are those patients with demonstrable IgE via skin or blood tests and clinical 
symptoms of allergy.
Section 4: Treatment (Algorithm 36.1)
See Section 1.
Section 5: Special populations
• Candidates for allergy immunotherapy include those patients with allergic symptomatology as 
well as objective measures of hypersensitivity demonstrated by a positive skin test or allergen‐
specific serum IgE, regardless of age.
• Immunotherapy is approved in patients who are pregnant, have an autoimmune disorder, and 
in immunodeficient patients including those with early or middle stages of HIV disease with 
CD4 counts of 400 or more and no history of opportunistic infections.
• The only population where the standard protocol differs is pregnant women. Pregnant women 
can continue to receive immunotherapy but must be maintained on the dosage they were 
receiving prior to becoming pregnant.
Section 6: Prognosis
• Allergen immunotherapy is very effective at controlling and decreasing the symptoms of ­allergic 
rhinitis. In a large retrospective study of both children and adults with allergic rhinitis, a signifi-
cant cost saving was demonstrated in those treated with allergen immunotherapy.
316  Part 1: Allergy
1 Patient presents with allergic rhinitis, allergic conjunctivitis, allergic asthma or
   insect allergy
No
No
Yes
4 Assess risks, beneﬁts and costs of appropriate management options
Immunotherapy
Allergen exposure reduction
Medications
Patient preferences
Response to prior treatment
Severity of disease
Yes
5 Is immunotherapy
   recommended for this
   patient?
6 Immunotherapy not
   given
8 Identify
Speciﬁc allergenic extracts
Starting dose and immunotherapy schedule
Maintenance dose
3 Not a candidate for
   immunotherapy
2 Evidence of speciﬁc
   IgE antibodies?
   Test results
   correlate with clinical
   symptoms and
   exposure?
7 Obtain informed consent
   Counsel and educate patient
   about the beneﬁts and risks of
   immunotherapy including
   anticipated duration and onset of
   efﬁcacy
Algorithm 36.1  Procedure of immunotherapy 
Immunotherapy (Procedure)  317
Section 7: Reading list
DiBona D, Plaia A, Leto‐Barone M, La Piana S, Di Lorenzo G. Efficacy of subcutaneous and sublingual immu-
notherapy with grass allergens for seasonal allergic rhinitis: a meta‐analysis‐bases comparison. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol 2012;130:1097–107
Dretzke J, Meadows A, Novielli N, Huissoon A, Fry‐Smith A, Meads C. Subcutaneous and sublingual immuno-
therapy for seasonal allergic rhinitis: a systematic review and indirect comparison. J Allergy Clin Immunol 
2013;131:1361–6
Hankin CS, Cox L, Bronstone A, Wang Z. Allergy immunotherapy: reduced heath care costs in adults and 
children with allergic rhinitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2013;131:1084–91
Lieberman P, Nicklas RA, Oppenheimer J, Kemp SF, Lang DM, Bernstein DI, et al. The diagnosis and management 
of anaphylaxis practice parameter: 2010 update. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2010;126:477–80
Nieto García A, Nevot Falcó S, Carrillo Díaz T, Cumplido Bonny JA, Izquierdo Calderón JP, Hernández‐Peña J. 
Safety of cluster specific immunotherapy with a modified high‐dose house dust mite extract. Eur Ann 
Allergy Clin Immunol 2013;45:78–83
9 Administer immunotherapy
10 Reactions to
     immunotherapy
     injections?
Yes
No
12 Follow-up every 6–12 months while on immunotherapy or more frequently for
     evaluation/management of immunotherapy reactions and/or underlying allergic
     disease or co-morbid conditions
Assess at follow up
Clinical response to immunotherapy (e.g., symptoms, medication use)
Immunotherapy schedule, reactions, compliance
Continuation of immunotherapy treatment
11 Manage reaction:
Reassess risk–beneﬁt of immunotherapy
Consider dose/schedule adjustment
Consider discontinuing immunotherapy
Safety equipment and procedures in place
Medical personnel appropriately trained to identify and treat immunotherapy reactions
At least 30 minutes wait in ofﬁce after injection
Source: Cox L. Allergen immunotherapy: a practice parameter third update. J Allergy Clin Immunol 
2011;127:S1–S55. Reproduced with permission of Elsevier.
318  Part 1: Allergy
Suggested websites
www.aaaai.org
www.acaai.org
www.eaaci.org
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Allergen immunotherapy: a 
practice parameter third update
American Academy of Allergy, 
Asthma and Immunology 
(AAAAI)
2011
(www.aaaai.org/practice‐
resources/statements‐
and‐practice‐parameters/
practice‐parameters‐and‐other‐
guidelines‐page.asp/)
Section 9: Evidence
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 10: Images
Not applicable for this topic.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at:www.
mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for 
patients, and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
  319
Allergy Testing (Procedures: Skin Testing; 
Blood Tests)
Scott H. Sicherer
Department of Pediatrics, Division of Allergy/Immunology, Mount Sinai Hospital, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 37
Section 1: Skin prick testing
Indications
• To confirm clinical sensitization to aeroallergens, foods, some insect venoms, some drugs, and 
a few chemicals.
• Importantly, the test detects sensitization, but this may not indicate clinical reactivity upon 
exposure to the allergen.
• The number of skin tests and the allergens selected should be determined based on the medical 
history, taking into consideration factors such as age, environment and living conditions, occu-
pation, activities, and diet. Routine use of large batteries of tests or routine annual testing 
without a clinical indication are not justified.
Procedure
• Patient must be off antihistaminic medications for approximately 5 half‐lives of the specific agent.
• A number of sharp instruments are available for prick–puncture testing. Some comparative 
studies champion specific devices, but objective comparisons have not shown a clear‐cut 
advantage of a specific device. Optimal results are expected from choosing a single device and 
properly training users.
• To ensure proper interpretation, positive (histamine) and negative (saline) controls should be 
performed at the same time as test allergens.
• The test site, which should be rash‐free, is cleansed with alcohol before placement of the tests. 
The volar aspect of the arm is typically used, but the back is another site that may be used, 
especially in young children.
Overall Bottom Line
• Allergy testing with prick or intradermal skin tests or with serum immunoassays are a means 
to detect allergen‐specific IgE antibodies. These tests are used to confirm IgE sensitization  
to aeroallergens, foods, some drugs, and a few chemicals.
• The test must be selected and interpreted in context of the clinical history because positive 
tests (sensitization) may occur without any clinical implications.
• Patch testing is performed to identify contactant allergens that are triggers of allergic or 
­irritant contact dermatitis.
320  Part 1: Allergy
• Measurement (e.g. diameter in millimeters) of wheal and erythema should be made at the peak 
of reactivity, approximately 15–20 minutes, and compared with controls. Results are expressed 
by size rather than comparison to controls (e.g. 1+, 2+ is not recommended).
• Reliability depends upon the skill of the tester, the test instrument, skin color, reactivity, patient 
age, and potency of extracts.
Management of complications
• Discomfort (itch) at the site of test placement is expected and transient. Antihistamines may be 
administered, if needed, after the tests are completed.
• Systemic allergic reactions from skin prick tests are uncommon. They are more likely if large 
numbers of tests are applied, or when using fresh foods rather than extracts, especially in 
infants. However, patients should be observed for systemic reactions and medical personnel 
and equipment to treat anaphylaxis should be readily available.
Follow‐up
• Physicians should discuss the relevance, implications, and associated treatment instructions of 
positive and negative tests in the context of the medical history.
Section 2: Intradermal (intracutaneous) skin testing
Indications
• Compared with skin prick testing, intracutaneous tests are more sensitive and will identify a 
larger number of patients with lower skin test sensitivity. These tests are therefore indicated 
when increased sensitivity is the main goal of testing.
• Intracutaneous tests are not recommended for foods because of safety concerns and a lack of 
need for increased sensitivity.
• Intracutaneous tests may be useful in evaluating anaphylaxis to insect stings and penicillin.
• Pre‐screening with prick–puncture tests is generally undertaken, with intracutaneous tests 
­considered when sensitivity needs to be higher with negative skin prick tests.
• There are limited data about equivalency of intracutaneous testing to skin prick testing and 
relationship to end‐organ responses. Clinical use is usually restricted to a single test dose 
(i.e. 1 : 1000 wt/vol) which may be an irritant and so predictive accuracy is often confounded by 
false positive results.
Procedure
• Intracutaneous tests are performed with small volumes (0.02–0.05 mL) injected intracutane-
ously to raise a small bleb.
• The starting dose is generally 100‐ to 1000‐fold more dilute than that used for skin prick tests.
• See Skin prick testing section for information on patient preparation and measurement of results.
Management of complications
• Immediate systemic reactions are more common with intracutaneous tests than skin prick tests; 
six fatalities were reported in a retrospective survey.
• If skin prick test pre‐screening is not used, preliminary intracutaneous serial threshold dilutions 
that begin with low concentrations should be considered, especially when evaluating anaphy-
lactic allergies.
• Patients should be observed for systemic reactions and medical personnel and equipment to 
treat anaphylaxis should be readily available.
Allergy Testing  321
Follow‐up
• Physicians should discuss the relevance, implications, and associated treatment instructions of 
positive and negative tests in the context of the medical history.
Section 3: Patch testing (epicutaneous patch test)
Indications
• To identify contactant allergens that are triggers of allergic (ACD) or irritant contact dermatitis.
• In the evaluation of chronic eczematous dermatitis when allergic contact dermatitis is 
suspected.
• Patch tests are most effective when patients are selected on the basis of a clinical suspicion and 
tests are performed to relevant triggers.
• Limitations include lack of a gold standard, reproducibility, lack of known irritant thresholds 
and minimum eliciting concentrations, and ability to correlate results with patient exposures. 
Negative tests may result despite proper application because other circumstances of exposure 
are not duplicated, for example washing hands with solvents.
• A variation, the atopy patch test (APT), uses foods or drugs. The role of these tests in diagnosis 
is evolving. The APT is not recommended for routine evaluation of food allergy.
Procedure
• The operator may use individual Finn Chambers. In addition, an FDA approved screening 
method (T.R.U.E. TEST ®) is preloaded with 23 common contactants.
• The test remains in place for 48 hours and then removed with readings upon removal and 
again at 3–4 days or more to differentiate early irritant and later allergic responses.
• Results are read according to standard systems of evaluation developed by two major ACD 
research groups: the International Contact Dermatitis Research Group and the North American 
Contact Dermatitis Group.
Management of complications
• Approximately 6% of patients develop “angry back” where generalized erythema develops 
and reduces the ability to determine test results, whether irritant or allergic.
• Systemic ACD after patch testing is rare.
• Sensitization by patch testing is possible, particularly with plant contactants such as poison ivy 
and aniline dyes.
Follow‐up
• Physicians should discuss the relevance, implications, and associated treatment instructions of 
positive and negative tests in the context of the medical history.
Section 4: Serum tests for detection of specific IgE
Indications
• To confirm clinical sensitization to aeroallergens, foods, and some drugs.
• Importantly, the test detects sensitization but this may not indicate clinical reactivity upon 
­exposure to the allergen.
• The number of tests and the allergens selected should be determined based on the medical 
history, taking into consideration factors such as age, environment and living conditions, occu-
pation, activities, and diet. Routine use of large batteries of tests, or routine annual testing 
without a clinical indication, is not justified.
322  Part 1: Allergy
• The test may be preferable to skin prick testing under conditions such as widespread rash, use 
of antihistamine medications, or for following responses over time.
• There are three FDA‐cleared automated test systems: Thermofisher, Siemens, and Hycor. Each 
has excellent test characteristics (e.g. reliability, reproducibility). However, the assays either 
detect different populations of IgE antibody or do not measure the same antibodies with 
­comparable efficiencies and so the results from the three assays are not interchangeable or 
equivalent.
• Tests that determine IgE binding to specific proteins within foods (component testing) are 
becoming available and may be indicated when there is clinical suspicion of sensitization 
­without significant clinical consequence and differentiation of reactivity may impact clinical 
decision‐making.
Procedure
• A blood or serum sample is procured and tested.
Management of complications
• Pain, infection, and vasovagal reactions may occur as for any blood test.
Follow‐up
• Physicians should discuss the relevance, implications, and associated treatment instructions of 
positive and negative tests in the context of the medical history.
Section 5: Reading list
American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology; American College of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology. 
Contact dermatitis: a practice parameter. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2006; 97(3 Suppl 2):S1–38
Bernstein IL, Li JT, Bernstein DI, Hamilton R, Spector SL, Tan R, et al. Allergy diagnostic testing: an updated 
practice parameter. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2008;100(Suppl 3):S1–148
Boyce JA, Assa’ad A, Burks AW, Jones SM, Sampson HA, Wood RA, et al. Guidelines for the diagnosis and 
management of food allergy in the United States: report of the NIAID‐sponsored expert panel. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol 2010;126(Suppl):S1–58
Hamilton RG, Williams PB. Human IgE antibody serology: a primer for the practicing North American allergist/
immunologist. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2010;126:33–8
Sicherer SH, Wood RA. Allergy testing in childhood: using allergen‐specific IgE tests. Pediatrics 2012; 
129:193–7
Suggested websites
www.aaaai.org
www.acaai.org
www.contactderm.org
Section 6: Guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Allergy diagnostic testing: an 
updated practice parameter
Joint Council
2008
(http://www.aaaai.org/Aaaai/media/
MediaLibrary/PDF%20Documents/
Practice%20and%20Parameters/
allergydiagnostictesting.pdf)
Allergy Testing  323
Section 7: Evidence
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 8: Images
Not applicable for this topic.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at: 
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions (provided by 
Hugh Sampson), advice for patients, and ICD code
Part 2
Clinical Immunology
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
  327
Evaluating the Child with Recurrent 
Infections
Shradha Agarwal
Division of Allergy/Immunology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 38
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• Recurrent infections are defined as infections that occur too frequently in number, are too 
severe, or last too long (chronic). However, sometimes even one infection with an unusual 
pathogen could warrant an immune evaluation. Severe infections are those that fail to respond 
to oral antibiotics, require hospitalization, or involve unusual pathogens. Chronic infections fail 
to respond to treatment and often require prophylactic antibiotics.
Disease classification
Not applicable for this topic.
Incidence/prevalence
Not applicable for this topic.
Economic impact
Not applicable for this topic.
Overall Bottom Line
• A child with a history of recurrent or unusual infections presents a diagnostic challenge to 
pediatricians.
• The main causes of recurrent and chronic infections in children include atopic disorders, 
­anatomic and functional defects, and primary or secondary immunodeficiency.
• Careful attention to the medical history and physical examination will help differentiate 
­children who are healthy from those with underlying disorders.
• Early diagnosis and treatment can help improve the quality of life for these children.
• For children suspected to have a primary immunodeficiency, prompt referral to an 
­immunologist will provide life‐saving treatment, and genetic counseling may help identify 
future affected individuals.
328  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Etiology
• At birth the immune system is not fully developed and therefore transplacentally acquired 
maternal antibodies continue to protect the infant in the first 6–9 months of life. The immune 
system may continue to mature in some children until school age.
• Even healthy children with normally functioning immune systems can develop up to 6–8 
­respiratory tract infections per year in the first 5 years of life.
• Children attending day care or who have siblings attending school can have even more infec-
tions because of increased exposure.
Pathology/pathogenesis
Not applicable for this topic.
Predictive/risk factors
• Increased exposure to infections from day care or school‐age siblings.
• Atopic disease.
• Anatomic or functional defects.
• Primary immunodeficiency.
• Secondary immunodeficiency.
Section 2: Prevention
No interventions have been demonstrated to prevent the development of the disease.
Screening
• Currently, the states of Wisconsin, Massachusetts, New York, California, Connecticut, Michigan, 
Colorado, Mississippi, Delaware, Florida, Texas, Minnesota, Iowa, Pennsylvania, and Utah 
include severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) on their newborn screening panel.
Primary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Secondary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 3: Diagnosis (Algorithm 38.1)
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• The age of onset, frequency, duration, and severity of infections as well as response to various 
treatments are important to note.
• Those who present for medical attention have variable examination findings from a normal 
physical examination to eczema, post‐nasal drip, or rales on chest examination. A thorough 
physical examination including height and weight should be performed.
• Initial laboratory evaluation includes complete blood count with differential, quantitative 
immunoglobulins with specific and functional antibody responses, and complement assay. 
More advance testing should be performed based upon the results of the initial screening 
tests.
Evaluating the Child with Recurrent Infections  329
Differential diagnosis
Evidence of recurrent infections deﬁned as 
too frequent in number, too severe, or 
lasting too long (chronic)  
Evidence of infections that fail to respond to 
oral antibiotics, require hospitalization, or 
involve unusual pathogens 
History of chronic infections that fail to 
respond to treatment and require 
prophylactic antibiotics
Comprehensive history (including 
detailed family history) and physical 
examination
Imaging including 
chest X-ray and/or CT scan
Laboratory evaluation including 
complete blood count, HIV, sweat 
chloride testing, comprehensive 
metabolic panel, CH50, quantitative
immunoglobulins, speciﬁc antibody 
responses (depending on age), 
lymphocyte panel
Algorithm 38.1  Evaluating the child with recurrent infections
Differential diagnosis
Features
Atopy
Seasonal or year round symptoms depending on allergic 
sensitivities. Total IgE and eosinophil count may be elevated. 
Development of cough or wheezing following viral respiratory 
infections. Symptoms resolve with antihistamines and asthma 
treatments
Anatomic/functional defects
Persistent cough, wheezing, repeated infections with 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa or Staphylococcus aureus, 
and bronchiectasis are suggestive of cystic fibrosis
Epigastric pain, vomiting, nausea, and aspiration indicate 
gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)
Secondary immunodeficiencies
HIV/AIDS, chronic immunosuppressive therapies 
(corticosteroids), malignancies, protein losing enteropathy, 
nephrotic syndrome
B‐cell deficiencies
Recurrent sinopulmonary infections commonly due to 
encapsulated bacteria such as Haemophilus influenza 
or Streptococcus pneumonia. Chronic or recurrent 
gastroenteritis. Autoimmune diseases such as immune 
thrombocytopenic purpura
T‐cell deficiencies
Lymphopenia (<1500 cells/μL) during neonatal period. 
Onset of recurrent bacterial and opportunistic infections 
in early infancy. Chronic candidiasis. Chronic diarrhea. 
Mycobacterium avium‐intracellulare and Pneumocystis carinii 
are typical infections seen in patients with T‐cell defects
Phagocytic defects
Delayed separation of the umbilical cord. Recurrent infections 
with catalase‐positive pathogens. Poor wound healing. 
Abscesses
Complement deficiencies
Early complement component deficiency, such as C1, C2, and 
C4 are associated with lupus‐like disorders. Late complement, 
C5–C9, deficiencies are associated with neisserial infections
330  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Typical presentation
• Typical presentation is a young child with recurrent otitis media, sinusitis, and/or pneumonia. 
Patients often have coexisting allergic rhinitis or asthma that may be difficult to control lead-
ing to frequent sinopulmonary infections. Infections often persist or recur despite treatment 
with antibiotics. Cultures may reveal encapsulated bacteria such as pneumococcus or unusual 
organisms such as Aspergillus. Other patients may present with coexisting autoimmune 
disease.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• History should begin with birth, including maternal diseases (HIV) and alcohol use. Birth history 
should include length of gestation, birth weight, neonatal problems, or need for hospitaliza-
tions. Family history of frequent infections, early infancy deaths, or autoimmune disorders 
should be obtained. Immunization history should be reviewed. Infections following live vacci-
nations suggest primary immunodeficiency. Relevant factors of social history include exposures 
to smoke, animals, and whether the child attends day care or has other school‐aged siblings.
• The onset of infections and the specific pathogen involved will provide clues towards the type 
of immune defect present. For instance, recurrent sinopulmonary infections with encapsulated 
organisms (pneumococcus, Haemophilus influenza type B) suggest B‐cell defects. Chronic can-
didiasis may indicate T‐cell defects. Children with recurrent abscesses caused by gram‐negative 
organisms such as Escherichia coli, Serratia sp., or Klebsiella sp., may have abnormalities in 
phagocyte function. Recurrent staphylococcal skin infections, abscesses, and lung cysts are 
characteristic of hyper‐IgE syndrome. Infections with invasive infections with Neisseria spp. sug-
gest defects in the late complement components, C5–C9. Delayed detachment of the umbilical 
cord may be suggestive of a leukocyte adhesion defect.
Physical examination
• Physical examination should start with growth and development as documented in growth 
chart and milestones.
• Any facial anomalies should be noted.
• Examination of head and neck for boggy nasal turbinates, nasal discharge, sinus tenderness 
suggests allergic rhinitis or chronic rhinosinusitis.
• Examination of the ear for otitis media and hearing evaluation should be carried out in a child 
with recurrent upper respiratory tract infections.
• Oral pharynx should be examined for dentition, ulcers, and candidiasis.
• Lung examination significant for decreased breath sounds or wheezing suggests infectious 
process or asthma.
• Cardiac anomalies should be noted.
• Skin examination for eczema, infection, petechiae, and abscesses.
• Examination of the lymphatic system for presence or absence of adenopathy and hepatosple-
nomegaly is important.
• Of note, a normal physical examination does not rule out underlying immunodeficiency.
Useful clinical decision rules and calculators
Not applicable for this topic.
Disease severity classification
Not applicable for this topic.
Evaluating the Child with Recurrent Infections  331
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• Initial evaluation for all children includes complete blood count with differential, metabolic 
panel including protein, albumin, globulin, and HIV testing if appropriate.
• Testing for atopy includes skin prick testing or serum allergen‐specific IgE testing.
• For evaluating humoral immunity, quantitative serum immunoglobulins with reference to age 
and antibody titers to previously administered vaccinations should be performed. In children 
who have not been vaccinated, these titers are not useful. In children with low antibody levels, 
booster immunizations can be helpful to determine capacity to make functional antibody.
• Total hemolytic complement (CH50) assay can evaluate the functional integrity of the classic 
complement pathway. Individual complement components are measured if the CH50 is 
reduced or absent.
• Lymphocyte subset analysis should be ordered when a B or T‐cell defect is suspected. This can 
be followed by delayed hypersensitivity skin tests and lymphocyte proliferation assays for further 
assessment of B or T‐cell function.
• More specific testing can be ordered if these screening tests are abnormal for a particular 
immunodeficiency, which is usually performed in a specialized laboratory.
Lists of imaging techniques
• A chest X‐ray is indicated for any child with chronic cough or recurrent infections or symptoms 
involving the lung.
• A sinus CT for a history of recurrent sinusitis.
• A high resolution chest CT if suspicious for bronchiectasis.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis of disease
• Serum immunoglobulins should be compared with reference to the patient’s age.
• Vaccination titers are not indicative of functional antibody capacity in infants who have not 
been vaccinated.
• A common reason for abnormal complement components is inappropriate handling of the 
specimen as complement is temperature labile.
Section 4: Treatment
Treatment rationale
• Treatment is according to underlying disease identified. Live attenuated vaccines such as oral 
polio, varicella, and MMR (measles/mumps/rubella), should be avoided in children with sus-
pected or diagnosed T‐cell deficiencies because vaccine‐induced infection is a risk in these 
patients. Irradiated, leukocyte‐poor products should be used in patients with T‐cell defects who 
require blood transfusions to avoid graft versus host disease. Currently available treatments for 
primary immunodeficiency include prophylactic antibiotics, immunoglobulin replacement, 
enzyme‐replacement, and bone marrow transplantation. Treatment for specific immunodefi-
ciencies is discussed elsewhere in this book.
When to hospitalize
• Inability to tolerate fluids, decreased urinary output.
• Symptoms persist or worsen despite treatment with antibiotics.
• Persistent high fever, elevated heart rate, elevated respiratory rate.
• Change in mental status.
332  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Managing the hospitalized patient
Not applicable for this topic.
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comment
Conservative
Asymptomatic patients require no treatment but should 
be followed at regular intervals or sooner depending on 
frequency of infection
Medical
Antibiotics (treatment or prophylactic)
Immunoglobulin (400–600 mg/kg) IV or SC
Choice and frequency of antibiotics is based on type of 
infection and culture/sensitivity results
In a child found to have antibody deficiency who has 
recurrent infections despite prophylactic antibiotics
Surgical
Bone marrow/stem cell transplantation
Certain cases of SCID and T‐cell deficiencies
Radiological
Chest X‐ray or CT scan
Patient with significant upper or lower respiratory infections
Prevention/management of complications
• Infants with a history of infections found to have lymphocyte counts below 2500 cell/mm3 or 
abnormal T‐cell receptor excision circle (TREC) number on newborn screening require prompt 
referral to an immunologist to evaluate for SCID.
Section 5: Special populations
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 6: Prognosis
Natural history of untreated disease
Not applicable for this topic.
Clinical pearl
• In patients who are considering treatment with replacement immunoglobulin, a thorough 
evaluation of the immune system should be performed prior to initiating immunoglobulin 
therapy.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• The signs and symptoms for a particular immunodeficiency may vary but most commonly 
patients with primary immunodeficiency are susceptible to infections that are often recurrent 
and prolonged.
• Untreated infections or delayed diagnosis of primary immunodeficiency can be fatal.
• Immunoglobulin replacement is used in patients who do not generate or maintain antibodies. 
This treatment can reduce the frequency of infections and improve their quality of life.
Evaluating the Child with Recurrent Infections  333
Prognosis for treated patients
Not applicable for this topic.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
• Patients with suspected immunodeficiencies should be referred to an immunologist for 
­additional diagnostic tests and prompt treatment. Prenatal diagnosis and genetic counseling 
are available for some diseases.
Section 7: Reading list
Ballow M. Approach to patient with recurrent infections. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol 2008;34:129–40
Bonilla FA, Bernstein IL, Khan DA, Ballas ZK, Chinen J, Frank MM, et al. Practice parameter for the diagnosis 
and management of primary immunodeficiency. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2005;94:S1–63
Bush A. Recurrent respiratory infections. Pediatr Clin North Am 2009;56:67
Notarangelo LD, Fischer A, Geha RS, Casanova JL, Chapel H, Conley ME, et al. Primary immunodeficiencies: 
2009 update. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2009;124:1161–78
Steihm ER, Ochs HD, Winkelstein JA. Immunodeficiency disorders: general considerations. In: Stiehn ER, 
Ochs HD, Winkelstein JA (eds) Immunologic Disorders in Infants and Children, 5th edn. Sauders/Elsevier: 
2004
Suggested websites
American Academy of Allergy Asthma and Immunology. www.aaaai.org
Clinical Immunology Society. www.clinimmsoc.org
Immune Deficiency Foundation. http://primaryimmune.org/
Jeffrey Modell Foundation. www.info4pi.org
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Practice parameter for the 
diagnosis and management of 
primary immunodeficiency
American Academy of Allergy, 
Asthma and Immunology 
(AAAAI) and American College 
of Allergy, Asthma and 
Immunology (ACAAI)
2005
(https://www.aaaai.org/Aaaai/
media/MediaLibrary/PDF%20 
Documents/Practice%20 
and%20Parameters/
immunodeficiency2005.pdf)
International society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Primary immunodeficiency diseases: an 
update from the International Union 
of Immunological Societies Primary 
Immunodeficiency Diseases Classification
Committee
International Union of 
Immunological Societies (IUIS)
2007
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pubmed/17952897)
334  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Section 9: Evidence
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 10: Images
Not applicable for this topic.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at: 
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, and advice 
for patients
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
  335
Evaluating the Adult with Recurrent 
Infections
Charlotte Cunningham‐Rundles
Departments of Medicine and Pediatrics, The Immunology Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 39
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• The immune system is composed of a large network of cells and organs working together. 
As strong immunity is so important for health, nature has provided a number of overlapping 
immune systems to cope with an entire range of microbes. Depending on the type and size 
of the immune defect, the clinical manifestations vary widely. As the immune system is also 
important to control infections, loss of some of these controls can result in various types of 
infectious diseases. However, recurrent infections can be brought about by many other 
causes, and these should be eliminated in any investigation so that best treatments can be 
instituted.
Disease classification
• To determine whether an immune defect might be present, immunologists use a classification 
system based on the component of the immune network at fault:
1.	 T cells: arise in the thymus and help control viruses, and aid in antibody production;
2.	 B cells: produce antibodies;
3.	 Combined defects: in which both T and B cells are defective;
Overall Bottom Line
• Adults with chronic, recurrent, or acute infections may have a primary or secondary immune 
defect.
• Recurrent infections can result from many causes and these should be ruled out in the 
­investigation.
• Other causes include untreated allergy, anatomic changes, other diseases, or medications used 
to treat these disorders.
• Subjects with infections caused by immune defects may be of either sex, and of any age.
• Diagnosis of the immune defect relies on the combination of clinical and laboratory data, and 
the exclusion of alternative diagnoses.
• The diagnostic strategies include blood tests aimed at investigating the various compartments 
of the immune system.
• The goal of treatment is to define the immune system deficits to provide a means to either 
substituting or bypassing the immune defect.
336  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
4.	 Phagocytic cells: go to the site of infection and attempt to engulf and digest the bacteria;
5.	 Complement: a system of proteins that interact to aid the function of antibodies but also 
control immune reactions;
6.	 Innate immunity: a group of cells that do not need to be primed to work.
Incidence/prevalence
• The incidence of primary (genetic) immune defects in adults is unknown.
• Adults may also have defects that are considered “secondary” which means that a non‐genetic 
cause can be identified: this may be a drug such as chemotherapy, another disease (such as 
chronic lymphocytic leukemia), or a virus (such as Epstein–Barr virus, or of course, HIV, as dis-
cussed in Chapters 51 and 52).
• In both cases, immune defects can lead to a variety of infections and also inflammatory and/or 
autoimmune disease.
Etiology and pathology/pathogenesis
• Immune defects result from loss or abnormality of one or more of the many components of the 
immune system.
• These may be due to genetic causes or may be secondary to other causes.
• Infections can also be due to untreated allergy (e.g. recurrent pneumonias), other diseases, or 
treatments used in these diseases.
• If a genetic cause is present, in many cases there is no family history, as complex inheritance 
patterns may obscure genetic contributions.
• Pathology: as the immune system contains many components and various members of 
this  network are found in all organs, the pathology of immune defects is based on the 
organ itself:
• Infections in adults commonly involve the respiratory tract (e.g. pneumonia, bronchitis, 
sinusitis);
• Acute bacterial infections include skin infections, meningitis, sepsis, and solid organ abscesses;
• Gastrointestinal infections may occur, leading to loss of absorptive surfaces, diarrhea, and 
malnutrition.
Section 2: Prevention
• The first step is to determine the cause of the infections, and treat these.
Screening
Not applicable for this topic.
Prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 3: Diagnosis (Algorithm 39.1)
• Diagnosis of immune defects as contributors to recurrent infections relies upon laboratory tests 
to assess immune competence.
• These include testing the numbers of lymphocytes, granulocytes, lymphocyte subsets, immuno-
globulins (IgG, IgA, and IgM, and, if pertinent, IgE) and also specific antibody production (e.g. 
antibodies to tetanus, diphtheria, pneumococcal serotypes after vaccination).
• More detailed tests may be needed in some cases, best ordered and interpreted by an 
immunologist.
Evaluating the Adult with Recurrent Infections  337
Differential diagnosis
• Exclusion of other causes of recurrent infections is the necessary first step: untreated allergic 
diseases, asthma, diabetes mellitus, HIV, cirrhosis, environmental causes, nephrotic syndrome, 
hemoglobinopathies, neurologic disease, inflammatory bowel disease, autoimmunity, splenec-
tomy, malignancy, radiation therapy, and immunosuppressive agents.
Typical presentation
• The typical scenario is an adult who presents with a history of chronic infections such as sinusi-
tis or several episodes of pneumonia. In some cases, weight loss and fatigue are other present-
ing signs. These lead to a suspicion of an immune defect. Physical examination may not reveal 
unusual features, although cervical lymphadenopathy or chest findings such as wheezing or 
rales may be noted. Other common presentations include adults who have an episode of giar-
diasis, or other gastrointestinal parasite. After exclusion of other causes, blood tests to evaluate 
the immune system can be carried out.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• Symptoms are heterogeneous depending on the organs and systems affected and on the nature 
of the immune defect. In 80% of cases, lung infections occur, specifically pneumonia or chronic 
bronchitis. A history of difficult to treat chronic sinusitis is very common; a history of having one 
or more previous sinus surgeries is often found. Gastrointestinal disease is seen in some. Details 
sought in the clinical history should include duration and onset of symptoms, fatigue, fever, 
weight loss, and shortness of breath. Weight loss is common. Obtaining a detailed family history 
is always important, as well as questions about smoking, drug use, and various medications tried.
Physical examination
• Physical examination should start with an evaluation for signs of systemic illness, including 
weight loss. Fever may be present with acute infections, otherwise chronic fever would be 
uncommon. Patients with lung disease may be short of breath, have a productive or non‐­
productive cough, and may have pulmonary signs such as rhonchi or rales on examination. 
Lymphadenopathy is common, and enlarged spleen may be detected. Skin changes include 
scarring from previous herpes zoster infection; vitiligo appears to be common. Chronic 
­conjunctivitis, iritis, or episcleritis may be observed. Joint complaints include changes due to 
previous joint infections, or autoimmune, chronic arthritis.
Stage 1: General
1. History and physical examination, height and weight
2. CBC and differential
3. Exclude other causes of infections
Stage 2: Immunologic tests
1. IgG, IgA and IgM
2. IgE where allergic symptoms are present
3. Speciﬁc antibody responses (tetanus, diphtheria)
4. Responses to pneumococcal vaccine (for ages 3 and up)
5. IgG subclass analyses in some cases
6. Lymphocyte markers CD3/CD4/CD8
7. Complement screening CH50, C3, C4
Algorithm 39.1  Evaluation of recurrent infections
338  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Laboratory diagnosis
• Complete blood count.
• Chemistry panel to exclude other causes.
• Rheumatologic tests if indicated.
• Serum IgG, IgA, IgM.
• Tests for functional antibody (e.g. tetanus, diphtheria, pneumococcal serotypes).
• CRP and sedimentation rate.
• Microbial cultures where applicable.
• Microbiologic studies to exclude infectious etiologies.
Pathology
• Biopsies are necessary when tissue inflammation or other abnormality is present. Common 
areas that might be biopsied include:
• Lymph nodes if these are chronically enlarged and the reasons are unclear;
• Bone marrow if there are peripheral blood cell abnormalities;
• Gastrointestinal tissues if gastrointestinal disease is found;
• Skin biopsy for issues that need clarification.
Lists of imaging techniques
• Chest X‐ray.
• Complete lung functions (spirometry and diffusion capacity).
• High‐resolution CT of the chest.
• Ultrasound for splenomegaly.
• CT of the abdomen to examine organ size, lymphadenopathy.
• MRI may be preferred to minimize exposure to ionizing radiation.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis of disease
• Not diagnosing immune defects in adults leads to excess morbidity.
• Missing the correct diagnosis leads to lack of appropriate treatment.
• Over‐diagnosis leads to excess medical costs as therapies can be expensive.
Section 4: Treatment
• The goals of therapy are to provide protection against infections and, where possible, to use 
any available therapy to enhance the immune system.
• Antibiotics: when an immune deficiency has been documented, antibiotics should be started 
immediately for fevers and other manifestations of infection after appropriate cultures have 
been obtained. These cultures are important to direct further therapy if the infection does 
not respond to the initial antibiotic chosen. Prophylactic antibiotics can be of benefit, espe-
cially for subjects with chronic lung disease. A satisfactory combination of antibiotics includes 
amoxicillin‐clavulanate, erythromycin, trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole, or a cephalo-
sporin. In adults, amoxicillin‐clavulanate, trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole, tetracyclines, 
or a cephalosporin are useful. Quinolones are best saved to treat acute infections.
• Immunoglobulin: when significant loss of antibody production has occurred and this has 
been fully documented by laboratory testing, the optimum treatment is immunoglobulin 
replacement. The usual starting dose for the intravenous forms is 400–600 mg/kg/month; 
IV immunoglobulin can be given at home. Subcutaneous treatment is also quite effective; 
smaller doses are given once a week.
Evaluating the Adult with Recurrent Infections  339
• Specific treatment for T‐cell deficiency: there are few specific treatments for T‐cell 
­immunodeficiencies aside from bone marrow and stem cell transplants for the most severe 
forms (SCID). Other therapies, such as cytokines, remain investigational.
• Specific treatment of phagocytic disorders: there are very few treatments for the phagocytic 
disorders, aside from the use of antibiotics as needed, or granulocyte colony‐stimulating factor 
(G‐CFS) to raise the neutrophil count if low.
• Specific treatment for complement deficiency: fresh frozen plasma from healthy donors can 
transiently replace specific complement components in patients with isolated complement 
component defects and severe infections.
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comment
Medical (antibiotics)
Prophylactic:
• 60 mg trimethoprim and 800 mg 
sulfamethoxazole (DS)
• Amoxicillin 500 mg/day
• Ciprofloxacin (250 mg/day)
Treatment:
• Trimethoprim‐sulfamethoxazole (DS) 2× day
• Amoxicillin 500 mg 3× day
• Ciprofloxacin (250 mg 2× day)
• Azithromycin (250–500 mg/day)
Take cultures; monitor for resistance
Immunoglobulin:
• Intravenous (400–600 mg/kg/month)
• Subcutaneous (400–600 mg/kg/month but 
given weekly SC)
Only when antibody deficiency is fully documented
Section 5: Special populations
Pregnancy
• The evaluation of the pregnant patient is not different from other individuals; antibiotics used 
are those chosen to be acceptable at this time. All immunoglobulin products may be used.
Elderly
• Elderly subjects receive the same treatments as other subjects.
Section 6: Prognosis
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Adults with frequent infections may require evaluation for immune defects
• These may be primary or secondary.
• However, there are other causes of recurrent infections that should be excluded before 
immune functions are examined.
• With appropriate treatment the prognosis is good.
340  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Natural history of untreated disease
• This depends on the nature of the immune defect, and whether organ damage has occurred.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
• The follow‐up will depend on the causes of the frequent infections. Follow‐up will be dictated 
by these issues.
Section 7: Reading list
Boyle JM, Buckley RH. Population prevalence of diagnosed primary immunodeficiency diseases in the United 
States. J Clin Immunol 2007;27:497–502
Srinivasa BT, Alizadehfar R, Desrosiers M, Shuster J, Pai NP, Tsoukas CM. Adult primary immune deficiency: 
what are we missing? Am J Med 2012;125:779–86
Yarmohammadi H, Estrella L, Doucette J, Cunningham‐Rundles C. Recognizing primary immune deficiency in 
clinical practice. Clin Vaccine Immunol 2006;13:329–32
Suggested websites
http://primaryimmune.org/about‐primary‐immunodeficiencies/relevant‐info/laboratory‐tests/
http://www.uptodate.com/contents/laboratory‐evaluation‐of‐the‐immune‐system
http://www.worldallergy.org/professional/allergic_diseases_center/suspected_immune_ 
deficiency/
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Practice parameter for the 
diagnosis and management of 
primary immunodeficiency
American Academy of Allergy, 
Asthma and Immunology 
(AAAAI)
2005
(https://www.aaaai.org/Aaaai/
media/MediaLibrary/PDF%20 
Documents/Practice%20 
and%20Parameters/
immunodeficiency2005.pdf)
Section 9: Evidence
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 10: Images
Not applicable for this topic.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at:
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes multiple choice questions, advice for patients,  
and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
  341
Antibody Deficiencies
Charlotte Cunningham‐Rundles
Departments of Medicine and Pediatrics, The Immunology Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 40
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• Antibody protection is important to prevent disease. Loss of production of either immuno­
globulins or the ability to create a functioning IgG antibody can lead to recurrent infections. As 
the immune system is also important to control inflammation, in some cases loss of some 
normal controls can be associated with autoimmunity.
Disease classification
• Antibody defects result from impaired production of IgG, IgG subclasses, IgA, or IgM.
• When IgG, IgA, and/or IgM are deficient and loss of antibody is documented, the diagnosis of 
common variable immunodeficiency is made, if no other cause is elucidated.
• When IgG or IgG subclasses are subnormal in amount (compared with age‐matched criteria), 
this would be another diagnosis. These subjects have variable defects in antibody 
production.
• When IgA or IgM alone are absent, the diagnosis is selective IgA or IgM deficiency.
• These may be due to either primary (genetic) causes, or B‐cell defects can be due to other 
diseases, the most common being malignancy (i.e. chronic lymphocytic leukemia, CLL) or, in 
rare cases, drug reactions (e.g. antiepileptics, chemotherapy, rituximab).
Overall Bottom Line
• Adults with chronic, recurrent, or acute infections may lack antibodies or antibody function.
• These may be due to genetic causes, or secondary to another illness or medication.
• Subjects with antibody defects may be either sex and of any age.
• The diagnosis relies on a combination of clinical, laboratory tests, and exclusion of alternative 
diagnoses.
• The diagnostic strategy includes blood tests to examine the levels of serum immunoglobulins, 
and also the functions of these immunoglobulins.
• The goal of treatment is to determine if there is a significant lack of antibody function and 
determine the origin.
342  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Incidence/prevalence
• The incidence of primary or secondary antibody immune defects, taken as a whole, is unknown.
• For IgA deficiency, the incidence varies in different ethnic groups, from 1 in 500 in Finland, to 
a considerably less common incidence in Asian populations.
• Subjects on chemotherapy, including rituximab, may have a loss of antibody function.
Economic impact
• Unrecognized immune defects that lead to a significant loss of antibody production may lead 
to increased morbidity and mortality.
Etiology
• In most cases, the mechanisms for primary antibody defects are unknown.
• Medical causes of antibody deficiency include B‐cell diseases such as leukemias, chemotherapy, 
some antiepileptic medications (e.g. Phenytoin (Dilantin)®, Carbamazepine (Tegretol)®).
Pathology/pathogenesis
• As above, antibody defects may be either primary or secondary to other causes.
• The role of genetics in some cases is clear from family studies, but complex inheritance patterns 
usually obscure the actual genetic contributions.
• Pathology: lack of immunoglobulin or antibody can lead to the following:
• Acute bacterial infections of the lungs, blood, brain, joints, or solid organs;
• Autoimmunity, in particular immune thrombocytopenia or hemolytic anemia;
• Chronic gastrointestinal inflammation with loss of absorptive surfaces leading to diarrhea, 
malnutrition, iron deficiency anemia, hypoalbuminemia, and so on.
• IgA deficiency may be common in subjects with celiac disease;
• IgA deficiency with IgG2 deficiency can be found in association with lung disease.
Predictive/risk factors
• A family history of an immune defect suggests that an immune defect should be considered.
Section 2: Prevention
Screening
• Patients with medical histories suggestive of antibody defects (recurrent infections, auto­
immunity, lymphadenopathy, etc.) can be tested to determine if serum immunoglobulins are 
normal. To test antibody function, selected vaccines are given to determine the production of 
antibodies. If the serum IgG, IgA, and IgM are very low, the number of circulating B cells can 
also be assessed.
Primary prevention
There are no primary preventative measures.
Secondary prevention
There are no secondary preventative measures.
Section 3: Diagnosis
• Antibody defects, from whatever cause, generally lead to acute or recurrent bacterial ­infections, 
infections with unusual organisms, or infections that prove difficult to eliminate.
Antibody Deficiencies  343
• In some cases, significant infections have not occurred but various forms of inflammatory or 
autoimmune disease have occurred instead (e.g. interstitial lung disease, arthritis, gastrointestinal 
disease, hematologic cytopenias, gastrointestinal infections, or inflammation).
• The clinical examination can be normal or show non‐specific signs such as lung abnormalities 
(rales, rhonchi) or lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, pallor, or evidence of malnutrition of 
­gastrointestinal disease.
Differential diagnosis
Typical presentation
• The typical scenario for a patient with a very significant loss of antibody is a history of the 
­sudden onset of an acute bacterial infection such as pneumococcal pneumonia leading to an 
empyema. This person may or may not have a previous history of sinusitis or other more minor 
infections before this time.
• A second presentation is a patient who has an episode of acute immune thrombocytopenic 
purpura (ITP) or hemolytic anemia. The patient with autoimmunity may have had a previous 
episode as well, treated successfully with steroids, but who now presents with a recurrence.
• Other common presentations include an episode of giardiasis, or other gastrointestinal 
­parasites, or an otherwise unexplained enteropathy.
• Subjects with celiac disease or allergies are also more likely to have IgA deficiency.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• Symptoms are heterogeneous as the organs and systems affected vary; depends on the nature 
of the immune defect. In 80% of cases, lung infections occur, specifically pneumonia or chronic 
bronchitis. A history of “difficult to treat” chronic sinusitis or previous sinus surgery is often 
found. Gastrointestinal disease is seen in some. Details sought in the clinical history should 
include duration and onset of symptoms, fatigue, fever, weight loss, shortness of breath. 
Weight loss is common. Obtaining a detailed family history is always important, as well as 
­questions about smoking, drug use, the medications used and results obtained.
Physical examination
• Physical examination should start with evaluation for signs of systemic illness, including weight 
loss. However, patients with IgA or IgG deficiency may also look entirely healthy and have a 
normal physical examination. Fever may be present with acute infections, otherwise chronic 
fever would be uncommon. Patients with lung disease may be short of breath, have a produc­
tive or non‐productive cough, and may have pulmonary signs such as rhonchi or rales on 
examinination. Lymphadenopathy is common, and enlarged spleen may be detected. Skin 
changes may include scarring from previous herpes zoster; vitiligo appears to be common. 
Differential diagnosis
Features
Allergy/asthma
Recurrent infections; pneumonias
Chronic viral/parasitic infection
Infections, weight loss
Malignancy/lymphoma
Weight loss, fever
Medications
Rash, fever
344  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Chronic conjunctivitis, iritis, or episcleritis may be observed. Joint complaints include changes 
resulting from previous joint infections, or autoimmune and chronic arthritis.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• Complete blood count (anemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia).
• Serum IgG, IgA, IgM (based on appropriate age ranges).
• Unless the level of serum IgG is very low (perhaps less than 300 mg/dL), tests for functional 
antibody (tetanus, diphtheria, etc.) should be carried out to prove loss of function.
• For subjects with some retained serum IgG, immunization with pneumococcal or other ­vaccines 
and testing for antibody titers in about 1 month is useful to prove loss of antibody function.
• Microbial cultures where applicable.
• Microbiologic studies to define infectious etiologies.
Lists of imaging techniques
• Chest X‐ray.
• Complete lung functions (spirometry and diffusion capacity).
• High‐resolution CT of the chest.
• Ultrasound for question of splenomegaly.
• CT of the abdomen to examine organ size, lymphadenopathy.
• MRI may preferred to minimize exposure to ionizing radiation.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding  
diagnosis of disease
• Not diagnosing significant antibody defects leads to excess morbidity.
• Over‐diagnosis can lead to excess medical costs as therapies to correct these can be 
expensive.
Section 4: Treatment
Treatment rationale
• The goal of therapy is to provide protection against infections.
• Antibiotics: when an antibody deficiency has been documented, antibiotics should be 
started immediately for fevers or other manifestations of acute infection after appropriate 
cultures have been obtained. These cultures are important to direct further therapy if the 
infection does not respond to the initial antibiotic chosen. Prophylactic antibiotics can be 
of benefit, especially for subjects with chronic lung disease. A satisfactory combination of 
antibiotics includes amoxicillin‐clavulanate, erythromycin, trimethoprim and sulfamethoxa­
zole, or a cephalosporin. In adults, amoxicillin‐clavulanate, trimethoprim and sulfameth­
oxazole, tetracyclines, or a cephalosporin are useful. Quinolones are best saved to treat 
acute infections.
• Immunoglobulin: when significant loss of antibody production has occurred and this has 
been fully documented, the optimum treatment is immunoglobulin replacement. The 
usual starting dose for the intravenous forms (IVIg) is 400–600 mg/kg/month; IVIg can be 
given at home. Subcutaneous treatment is also quite effective; smaller doses are given 
once a week. The latter is useful for persons with busy schedules, who want more inde­
pendence for choosing times of treatment and poor venous access, amongst other 
reasons.
Antibody Deficiencies  345
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comment
Conservative
Antibiotics for acute care as needed
Prophylactic antibiotics for some
Medical
Immunoglobulin replacement when loss of antibody is 
documented; 400–600 mg/kg, IV or given subcutaneously
Antibiotics as above
Surgical
Biopsies if pathology suspected
Radiological
To examine lungs or other organs as needed
Complementary
Vitamins and nutrients as needed
Other
Encourage normal activities, schooling, work, etc.
Prevention/management of complications
• For a patient on immunoglobulin replacement therapy, testing the trough values (levels in the 
blood just before the next treatment) is important to assure satisfactory dosing.
Section 5: Special populations
Pregnancy
• Treatment is as usual but with medications approved in pregnancy. For those with loss of 
­antibody, the immunoglobulin replacement is given, but in a dosage that is in accordance with 
increased body weight.
Children
• Treatment is as usual but with medications and immunoglobulin given based on weight.
Elderly
• Treatment is as usual.
Section 6: Prognosis
Clinical pearls
• Smoking is a risk factor for progressive lung disease.
• Steroids and other immunosuppressants are to be avoided when the immune system is impaired.
• Do not start immunoglobulin therapy unless a very complete evaluation of antibody 
production has been carried out.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Patients with antibody defects will do well if the correct therapy is initiated.
• Careful evaluation of any new clinical findings that develop over time is important.
• Use of antibiotics: choices are based on the literature which outlines the most common 
organisms. When new infections arise, cultures are carried out where possible.
346  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Natural history of untreated disease
• Continued infections are likely and other complications may occur. These may lead to lung or 
other organ damage.
Prognosis for treated patients
• Prognosis varies with the degree of the antibody defect and with complications that may have 
developed but, with treatment, the prognosis is clearly improved.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
• Careful follow‐up for signs of new infections.
• For patients on immunoglobulin therapy, attention to trough values (the IgG at the lowest 
points before retreatment) is essential.
Section 7: Reading list
Primary immunodeficiency disease. In Goldman L, Schafer, AI (eds) Cecil Textbook of Medicine, 24th edition. 
Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012.
Suggested websites
American Associate of Asthma Allergy and Immune Deficiency (AAAAI). http://www.aaaai.org/
conditions‐and‐treatments/primary‐immunodeficiency‐disease.aspx
Immune Deficiency Foundation. www.primaryimmune.org
The Jeffrey Modell Foundation. http://www.info4pi.org/jmf
NIH. http://www.niaid.nih.gov/topics/immunedeficiency
Section 8: Guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Practice parameter for the 
diagnosis and management of 
primary immunodeficiency
American Academy of Allergy, 
Asthma and Immunology 
(AAAAI)
2005 (https://www. 
aaaai.org/Aaaai/media/
MediaLibrary/PDF%20 
Documents/Practice%20 
and%20Parameters/
immunodeficiency2005.pdf)
Section 9: Evidence
Not applicable for this topic.
Antibody Deficiencies  347
Section 10: Images
Figure 40.1  A 42‐year‐old healthy man developed pneumonia which led to an empyema. The culture grew 
Streptococcus pneumoniae.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at: 
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions,  
and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
348 
Selective IgA Deficiency
Shradha Agarwal
Division of Allergy/Immunology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 41
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• Selective IgA deficiency is a primary antibody immunodeficiency characterized by significantly 
decreased (<7 mg/dL) or lack of serum IgA in the absence of any other immunodeficiency 
­disorder in an individual older than 4 years of age. Serum levels of IgG and IgM are normal in 
patients with selective IgA deficiency.
Disease classification
Not applicable for this topic.
Incidence/prevalence
• The incidence varies depending on the ethnic background; however, in the United States the 
frequency is estimated to be 1 in 223–1000 in studies and 1 in 333–3000 in healthy blood donors.
• True incidence may be higher because most individuals with IgA deficiency are asymptomatic.
Economic impact
Not applicable for this topic.
Etiology
• The exact molecular basis for IgA deficiency is not known but is likely heterogeneous arising 
through several pathogenic mechanisms.
Overall Bottom Line
• Selective IgA deficiency is the most common primary immunodeficiency.
• The majority of patients with IgA deficiency are asymptomatic and require routine follow‐up 
and education regarding their disease.
• Symptomatic patients typically present with recurrent sinopulmonary infections, autoimmune 
disease, or gastrointestinal disorders (e.g. celiac disease, inflammatory bowel disease, nodular 
lymphoid hyperplasia).
• Symptomatic patients with recurrent sinopulmonary disease should be aggressively treated 
according to the underlying condition (e.g. allergy, asthma, chronic rhinosinusitis).
• Patient with severe symptoms or coexisting antibody deficiency may require treatment with 
antibiotics and/or immunoglobulin replacement.
Selective IgA Deficiency  349
Pathology/pathogenesis
• B cells from IgA deficient patients demonstrate defective terminal B‐cell differentiation and 
subsequently do not mature into IgA secreting plasma cells.
Predictive/risk factors
Section 2: Prevention
No interventions have been demonstrated to prevent the development of the disease.
Screening
Currently no populations are being screened for IgA deficiency.
Primary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Secondary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 3: Diagnosis (Algorithm 41.1)
Risk factor
Odds ratio
Family history of IgA deficiency or common variable 
immunodeficiency (CVID)
50‐fold relative risk for first degree relatives
Evidence of recurrent upper
respiratory tract infections
and/or pneumonia
Comprehensive history and
physical examination
Review imaging studies 
including chest X-ray, 
rhinoscopy, CT scan
Laboratory evaluation including
allergy skin prick or serum
testing, complete blood count,
quantitative immunoglobulins
(IgG, IgA, IgM, IgE)
IgA <7 mg/dI with normal 
levels of IgG and IgM
IgA >7 mg/dL or other
abnormalities detected
Repeat to conﬁrm for diagnosis 
of selective IgA deﬁciency 
Consider other diagnosis
including allergic rhinitis,
non-allergic rhinitis, 
cystic ﬁbrosis, other primary 
immunodeﬁciency, anatomical
Algorithm 41.1  Diagnosis of selective IgA deficiency
350  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Differential diagnosis
Typical presentation
• Typical presentation is a young patient with recurrent otitis media, sinusitis, and/or pneumonia. 
Patients often have coexisting allergic rhinitis or asthma that may be difficult to manage lead-
ing to frequent sinopulmonary infections. Patients with coexisting gastrointestinal symptoms 
may have symptoms of malabsorption, diarrhea, weight loss, or infection with Giardia lamblia. 
Other patients may present with unexplained autoimmune disease. A few patients present 
with a history of an anaphylactic reaction to blood products.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• Symptoms are heterogeneous. Details in the history to note include the onset and duration of 
infectious symptoms particularly sinopulmonary and/or gastrointestinal disorders.
• Physicians should enquire about symptoms of allergic disease such as nasal congestion, rhinor-
rhea, cough, and wheezing.
• Those with gastrointestinal disease may report abdominal pain, weight loss, malabsorption, 
and diarrhea.
• Patients with autoimmune symptoms may report joint pain, fatigue, and weight loss.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• The majority of patients with IgA deficiency are asymptomatic.
• Those who present for medical attention may have variable symptoms: recurrent 
sinopulmonary infections, allergic disease, autoimmunity, anaphylactic transfusion reactions, 
and gastrointestinal infections and diseases.
• The diagnosis should be considered in any patient who is symptomatic with unusual 
presentations of the diseases listed above or is difficult to manage with standard therapies.
• The diagnosis of IgA deficiency is confirmed by isolated deficiency of serum IgA (<7 mg/dL) 
with normal IgG and IgM levels. Testing should be repeated for confirmation.
• Laboratory examination is driven by the patient’s history and symptoms (e.g. IgE level in an 
allergic patient).
• Patients with a history of recurrent upper or lower respiratory tract infections should have IgG 
subclasses evaluated as IgG subclass deficiency can accompany IgA deficiency.
Differential diagnosis
Features
Transient hypogammaglobulinemia 
of infancy
Physiologic hypogammaglobulinemia of infancy presenting 
beyond 6 months of age. Usually have reduced IgG but may 
have isolated IgA deficiency with spontaneous recovery of 
immunoglobulin levels by 2–4 years of age
Evolving common variable 
immunodeficiency (CVID)
Reduced serum IgG, IgA, and/or IgM with impaired antibody 
response. History of recurrent upper/lower respiratory tract 
infections; autoimmunity
Medication induced IgA deficiency
Reduction in serum immunoglobulins are reversible when 
medications are withdrawn. Anti‐seizure medications, captopril, 
d‐penicillamine, fenclofenac, gold, sulfasalazine, thyroxine
Selective IgA Deficiency  351
• Patients with a history of reaction to blood products may report symptoms of anaphylaxis 
including pruritus, flushing, shortness of breath, and wheezing.
Physical examination
• Physical examination should begin with examination of head and neck for boggy nasal turbinates, 
nasal discharge, and sinus tenderness which suggest allergic rhinitis or chronic rhinosinusitis.
• Lung examination significant for decreased breath sounds or wheezing suggests infectious 
process or asthma.
• Patients with gastrointestinal symptoms may have abdominal tenderness indicating an inflam-
matory disorder.
• Physical examination should include a search for autoimmune manifestations, such as joint 
pain/tenderness, enlarged thyroid, and petechiae.
Useful clinical decision rules and calculators
Not applicable for this topic.
Disease severity classification
Not applicable for this topic.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• Measurement of serum immunoglobulins with reference to age. A repeat test to confirm 
­diagnosis is necessary.
Lists of imaging techniques
Not applicable for this topic.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis  
of disease
• Serum immunoglobulins should be drawn with reference to the patient’s age. Those younger 
than 4 years of age should be monitored for normalization of IgA levels over time.
Section 4: Treatment (Algorithm 41.2)
Treatment rationale
• Asymptomatic patients require no specific treatment for IgA deficiency.
• Patients should be educated that blood products can be screened for IgA antibodies to prevent 
infusion reactions.
• Symptomatic patients are treated according to their coexisting disease.
• Prophylactic antibiotics may be used in patients with recurrent infections. A trial of immuno-
globulin (Ig) may be given, particularly in patients with coexisting IgG subclass and antibody 
deficiency and recurrent infections.
When to hospitalize
Not applicable for this topic.
Managing the hospitalized patient
Not applicable for this topic.
352  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comment
Conservative
Asymptomatic patients require no treatment but should 
be followed at regular intervals or sooner depending on 
frequency of infection
Medical
Antibiotics (treatment or prophylactic)
Immunoglobulin (400–600 mg/kg) IV or SC
Choice and frequency of antibiotics is based on type of 
infection and culture/sensitivity results
In patients who have recurrent infections despite 
prophylactic antibiotics, particularly patients with antibody 
deficiency and/or IgG subclass deficiency
Radiological
Chest X‐ray or CT scan
Patients with significant upper or lower respiratory 
infections
Other
IgA washed blood products
For patients who have anti‐IgA antibodies
Education
•  For all patients
•  Asymptomatic patients do not require specific treatment and may be monitored
   periodically
Antihistamines,
allergy
immunotherapy
•  For those with underlying allergic rhinitis
Antibiotics
•  Choice of antibiotic may be according to past culture and sensitivity results and
    type of infection (bronchitis, otitis, pneumonia, sinusitis)
•  Trial of prophylactic antibiotics for patients with continued infections
Immunoglobulin
(IgG) therapy
•  A trial of immunoglobulin replacement therapy may be considered in patients
   with recurrent infections despite prophylactic antibiotics, particularly if there is
   an associated antibody deficiency and/or subclass deficiency
Algorithm 41.2  Treatment for selective IgA deficiency
Selective IgA Deficiency  353
Prevention/management of complications
• Patients who require blood transfusions should consult with a hematologist to advise how 
blood products can be washed to remove IgA.
• Patients who require immunoglobulin should receive products that are low in IgA content or 
subcutaneous preparations.
Section 5: Special populations
Pregnancy
Not applicable for this topic.
Children
• Serum immunoglobulins in infants are comprised of maternal IgG which typically decline 
beginning at 6 months of age. Therefore, reduced immunoglobulins in an infant or child should 
be monitored for normalization until the immune system has matured.
Elderly
Not applicable for this topic.
Others
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 6: Prognosis
Natural history of untreated disease
Not applicable for this topic.
Prognosis for treated patients
Not applicable for this topic.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
• Patient with IgA deficiency should have routine follow‐up of clinical history and laboratory 
evaluation of serum IgG, IgA, and IgM, as some cases may evolve to CVID.
Clinical pearls
• In patients with IgA deficiency, management of coexisting allergic, gastrointestinal, or 
autoimmune disorders should be according to standard treatment guidelines.
• A thorough evaluation of the immune system should be performed prior to initiating 
treatment with immunoglobulin replacement therapy.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• The prognosis for patients with IgA deficiency who have no significant disease is good.
• In others, the prognosis depends on the severity of associated disorders (i.e. allergy, autoimmune).
• Some patients with IgA deficiency may progress to CVID.
354  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Section 7: Reading list
Hammarström L, Smith CIE. Genetic approach to common variable immunodeficiency and IgA deficiency. In: 
Ochs HD, Smith CIE, Puck JM (eds) Primary Immunodeficiency Diseases: A Molecular and Genetic Approach, 
2nd edition. Oxford University Press, 2007: 313–25
Notarangelo LD, Fischer A, Geha RS, Casanova JL, Chapel H, Conley ME, et al. Primary immunodeficiencies: 
2009 update. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2009;124:1161–78
Pan‐Hammarström Q, Hammarström L. Antibody deficiency diseases. Eur J Immunol 2008;38:327–33
Wang N, Hammarström L. IgA deficiency: what is new? Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2012;12:602–8
Yel L. Selective IgA deficiency. J Clin Immunol 2010;30:10–6
Suggested websites
American Academy of Allergy Asthma and Immunology. www.aaaai.org/home.aspx
Clinical Immunology Society. www.clinimmsoc.org
Immune Deficiency Foundation. http://primaryimmune.org/
Jeffrey Modell Foundation. www.info4pi.org
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Practice parameter for the 
diagnosis and management of 
primary immunodeficiency
American Academy of Allergy, 
Asthma and Immunology (AAAAI); 
American College of Allergy, 
Asthma and Immunology (ACAAI)
2005
(https://www.aaaai.org/Aaaai/
media/MediaLibrary/PDF%20 
Documents/Practice%20 
and%20Parameters/
immunodeficiency2005.pdf)
International society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Primary immunodeficiency diseases: 
an update from the International 
Union of Immunological Societies 
Primary Immunodeficiency Diseases 
Classification Committee
International Union of 
Immunological Societies (IUIS)
2007
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pubmed/17952897)
Section 9: Evidence
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 10: Images
Not applicable for this topic.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at: 
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for 
patients, and ICD code
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
  355
Severe Combined Immunodeficiency
Kate Welch and Elena S. Resnick
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 42
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• SCID is a rare fatal syndrome of diverse genetic origin characterized by profound defects in the 
development and function of T‐ and B‐cells and leading to overwhelming infection in affected 
infants. There is high variability in the phenotype of circulating lymphocytes in patients with 
SCID, which is a result of the diverse genetic causes. Death in infancy is a universal result unless 
immune reconstitution can be achieved.
Disease classification
• Until a genetic diagnosis is established, SCID syndromes can be classified based upon molec-
ular defects affecting T cells and the presence or absence of defects affecting B and/or NK 
cells as T–, B+ and NK+; T–, B+ and NK–; T–, B– and NK+; or T–, B– and NK–. In some cases, 
only T‐cell function is affected. However, because B cells rely on T‐cell signaling for antibody 
production, T‐cell dysfunction precludes effective humoral immunity. These lymphocyte phe-
notypes are the result of at least 12 different gene mutations, which include defects in 
cytokine receptor genes, antigen receptor genes, and genes leading to deficiencies of adenosine 
deaminase and CD45.
Incidence/prevalence
• The incidence of SCID is estimated to be 1 in 40 000–50 000 live births.
• X‐linked SCID, related to a defect in a cytokine receptor gene (IL2RG), is the most common 
form and accounts for roughly 45% of cases in the United States.
Overall Bottom Line
• Severe combined immunodeficiency syndrome (SCID) is a rare genetic syndrome characterized 
by profound deficiencies of T‐ and B‐cell function and, in some cases, NK cell function.
• The classic symptoms of SCID manifest in the first few months of life and include recurrent 
infections, diarrhea, and failure to thrive.
• In infants with SCID, lymphopenia is present, serum immunoglobulins and antibodies are 
diminished to absent, and the thymus is very small (usually <1 g).
• SCID is a pediatric emergency. The most common widely available curative therapy for most 
forms of the disease is hematopoietic cell transplantation.
• Without treatment, the disease is uniformly fatal.
356  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Economic impact
Not applicable for this topic.
Etiology
• Mutations in 12 genes have been found to cause SCID.
• An absence of the enzyme adenosine deaminase (ADA) was the first causal gene identi-
fied (in 1972) and accounts for approximately 17% of SCID cases. ADA deficiency results 
in toxic ­accumulation of metabolites that cause T cell apoptosis.
• A defect in three cytokine receptor genes IL2RG, JAK3, and IL7Rα, lead to different T–B+ 
phenotypes.
• The products of other genes (e.g. RAG 1 and 2, Artemis, Ligase 4, and 3 CD3 subs) are essential 
for effecting antigen receptor gene rearrangement.
• A mutation in the gene that encodes the common leukocyte antigen, CD45, a phosphatase 
critical for regulating signaling thresholds in immune cells, also causes SCID.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• Infants with SCID are lymphopenic and have an absence of lymphocytic response to mitogens, 
antigens, and allogeneic cells in vitro. Serum immunoglobulin concentrations are diminished to 
absent, and there is no antibody formation after immunization. NK cells are present in approxi-
mately 50% of patients with SCID and may provide some degree of protection against bacte-
rial and viral infections. Affected infants look normal outwardly, and maternally derived 
antibodies provide some protection during early infancy. However, in the absence of both 
specific cellular and humoral immunity, infants with SCID have a profound susceptibility to 
infection that manifests in the first few months of life.
Predictive/risk factors
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 2: Prevention
No interventions have been demonstrated to prevent the development of the disease.
Screening
• Because early diagnosis of SCID improves outcomes, a screening method for SCID was added 
to the recommended uniform newborn screening panel in the United States in 2010. This 
method for screening for T‐cell lymphopenia uses dried blood spots, usually from a heel stick 
or cord blood, to measure T‐cell receptor excision circles (TRECs) as a marker of naïve T cells. 
SCID babies diagnosed at birth have a decreased number of infections and overall improved 
survival. US states that currently screen all newborns for SCID include Wisconsin, Massachusetts, 
New York, California, Connecticut, Michigan, Colorado, Mississippi, Delaware, Florida, Texas, 
Minnesota, Iowa, Pennsylvania, Utah, and Ohio.
Primary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Secondary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Severe Combined Immunodeficiency  357
Section 3: Diagnosis
Differential diagnosis
Typical presentation
• In the absence of effective newborn screening, the mean age at diagnosis of SCID is 6 months. 
Affected infants present within the first few months of life with recurrent fevers, chronic ­diarrhea, 
and failure to thrive. Recurrent infections with common and opportunistic organisms occur and 
can lead to death. These organisms include Candida albicans, Pneumocystis jiroveci, respiratory 
syncytial virus, varicella zoster virus, adenovirus, parainfluenza 3, herpesviruses, cytomegalovirus, 
Epstein–Barr virus, and influenza, among others. Patients also experience infections in response 
to live vaccines. They are susceptible to graft versus host disease from maternal T cells crossing 
into circulation in utero or from T lymphocytes in non‐irradiated blood products.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• In addition to a history of infections or failure to thrive, the clinician should enquire about a 
family history of SCID or infants in the family who died of unexplained causes.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Recurrent infections in a young infant should prompt a consideration of SCID.
• Persistent mucocutaneous candidiasis is a common early finding, and affected infants have 
problems with oral thrush, diarrhea, and failure to thrive in the first few months of life. 
Frequent episodes of pneumonia, otitis, and sepsis are also frequently seen.
• Growth appears normal initially, but extreme wasting develops with the onset of diarrhea and 
infections.
• Recognition of the characteristic lymphopenia seen in all forms of SCID can result in early 
diagnosis. Serum immunoglobulins and antibodies are diminished or absent.
• The thymuses of affected infants are very small (usually <1 g) and lack thymocytes, 
corticomedullary distinction, and Hassall’s corpuscles.
Differential diagnosis
Features
Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome
X‐linked disorder
Thrombocytopenia and eczema are often present
Complete DiGeorge syndrome
22q11.2 deletion
Hypocalcemia, palatal abnormalities, cardiac anomalies
Omenn’s syndrome
SCID‐related disorder but will have other findings 
of exudative skin rash, lymphadenopathy, and 
hepatosplenomegaly
HIV/AIDS
Presence of a thymic shadow on chest radiograph
Normal lymphocyte count
Normal lymphocyte proliferation
Elevated serum immunoglobulin levels
Extreme malnutrition
Normal lymphocyte count
Clinical history of poor feeding
358  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Physical examination
• Infants with SCID appear normal outwardly, but may become cachectic and appear malnourished 
with the onset of recurrent infections and diarrhea.
Useful clinical decision rules and calculators
Not applicable for this topic.
Disease severity classification
• There is no standard classification of disease severity, although different lymphocytic pheno-
types (T–, B+ and NK+; T–, B+ and NK–; T–, B– and NK+; or T–, B– and NK–) exist and are linked 
to the various known genetic defects.
• Adenosine deaminase deficiency (approximately 16% of patients):
➤
➤T–, B– and NK–;
➤
➤More profound lymphopenia than other types of SCID;
➤
➤Mean absolute lymphocyte counts of <500/mm3 and a deficiency of all three types of 
immune cells;
➤
➤Characterized by multiple skeletal abnormalities related to chondro‐osseous dysplasia.
• Common gamma chain deficiency (approximately 46% of patients):
➤
➤T–, B+ and NK–;
➤
➤Seen in X‐linked recessive SCID;
➤
➤B cells are present in the circulation but do not undergo class switch recombination.
• Jak3 deficiency (approximately 6% of patients):
➤
➤T–, B+ and NK–;
➤
➤Autosomal recessive inheritance;
➤
➤Lymphocyte characteristics closely resemble those of patients with X‐linked SCID, with 
an elevated percentage of B cells.
• IL‐7 receptor alpha chain deficiency (approximately 11% of patients):
➤
➤T–, B+ and NK+;
➤
➤Profoundly deficient in T‐ and B‐cell function;
➤
➤Normal NK cell function.
• Recombinase‐activating gene deficiencies (RAG1/RAG2) (approximately 4% of patients):
➤
➤T–, B– and NK+;
➤
➤Mutations result in functional inability to form antigen receptors through genetic 
recombination;
➤
➤More common in Europe than the United States.
• CD3δ, ε, ζ chain deficiencies (approximately 2% of patients):
➤
➤T–, B+ and NK+;
➤
➤Mutations in in the genes encoding CD3ε and CD3ζ chains result in only a partial arrest of 
T‐cell maturation and therefore only moderate immunodeficiency;
➤
➤Nearly normal‐sized thymus on chest X‐ray.
• CD45 deficiency (0.5% of patients):
➤
➤T–, B+ and NK+;
➤
➤Normal protein functions to regulate Src kinases required for T‐ and B‐cell antigen receptor 
signal transduction.
• Artemis deficiency (1% of patients):
➤
➤T–, B– and NK+;
➤
➤Inability to repair DNA after cuts have been made by RAG1 or RAG2 gene products;
➤
➤Increased radiation sensitivity of skin fibroblasts.
Severe Combined Immunodeficiency  359
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• Laboratory diagnosis of SCID requires evaluation of humoral and cellular immunity.
• Studies include the absolute numbers and percentages of lymphocyte subsets (T, B, and NK), 
measurement of immunoglobulin levels, and assessment of T‐cell function.
• At the age of 6–7 months when most infants with SCID are diagnosed, the normal absolute 
lymphocyte count is high, and any count <4000 cells/mm3 is lymphopenic. Flow cytometry and 
T‐cell function studies should be performed to further evaluate lymphopenia.
• T‐cell function is usually determined by measurement of responses to mitogens such as 
­phytohemagglutinin and concanavalin A.
• A diagnosis of SCID is made if the absolute lymphocyte count is <2500 cells/mm3, T cells make up less 
than 20% of the total lymphocytes, and the response to mitogens is less than 10% of the control.
Lists of imaging techniques
• Chest radiograph of infants with SCID is notable for the absence of the thymic shadow.
• Patients with the ADA deficiency variant of SCID will have other skeletal abnormalities on 
radiographic examination, including chondro‐osseous dysplasia, with flaring of the costochon-
dral junctions and a bone‐in‐bone anomaly in the vertebral bodies.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding  
diagnosis of disease
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 4: Treatment
Treatment rationale
• SCID is a pediatric emergency. The most common curative therapy for all forms of SCID is bone 
marrow transplantation from HLA‐identical or haploidentical donors. Without this, death usu-
ally occurs by 1 year of age and invariably before the patient’s second birthday. No chemothera-
peutic conditioning is required to achieve engraftment because the recipient is devoid of T cells 
at the time of transplantation.
• Some patients with ADA deficiency may be treated with enzyme replacement therapy 
(PEG‐ADA); however, most receive transplant.
• Gene therapy has been on the horizon as a promising treatment for SCID. However, serious 
adverse events, including development of leukemic‐like processes in treated infants, have 
halted its progress.
When to hospitalize
Not applicable for this topic.
Managing the hospitalized patient
Not applicable for this topic.
Table of treatment
Not applicable for this topic.
Prevention/management of complications
Not applicable for this topic.
360  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Section 5: Special populations
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 6: Prognosis
Natural history of untreated disease
• If untreated, the disease is invariably fatal.
Prognosis for treated patients
• Transplantation in the first 3.5 months of life confers a >96% chance of survival.
• Death after transplant usually occurs from infectious complications.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 7: Reading list
Brown L, Xu‐Bayford J, Allwood Z, Slatter M, Cant A, Davies EG, et al. Neonatal diagnosis of severe combined 
immunodeficiency leads to significantly improved survival outcome: the case for newborn screening. Blood 
2011;117:3243–6
Buckley RH. Advances in the understanding and treatment of human severe combined immunodeficiency. 
Immunol Res 2000;22:237–51
Buckley RH. Molecular defects in human severe combined immunodeficiency and approaches to immune 
reconstitution. Annu Rev Immunol 2004;22:625–55
Buckley RH, Schiff RI, Schiff SE, Markert ML, Williams LW, Harville TO, et al. Human severe combined immuno-
deficiency: genetic, phenotypic and functional diversity in one hundred eight infants. J Pediatr 
1997;130:378–87
Lipstein EA, Vorono S, Browning MF, Green NS, Kemper AR, Knapp AA, et al. Systematic evidence review of 
newborn screening and treatment of severe combined immunodeficiency. Pediatrics 2010;125: 
e1226–35
Roifman CM, Somech R, Kavadas F, Pires L, Nahum A, Dalal I, et al. Defining combined immunodeficiency. 
J Allergy Clin Immunol 2012;130:177–83
Suggested websites
National Human Genome Research Institute. http://www.genome.gov/13014325
Immune Deficiency Foundation. http://primaryimmune.org/
http://www.scid.net/
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Immune reconstitution after transplant is due to thymic education of the transplanted 
allogeneic stem cells.
• Thymic output appears sooner and to a greater degree in those infants transplanted in the 
neonatal period, thus making early diagnosis the key to survival.
Severe Combined Immunodeficiency  361
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Practice parameter for the diagnosis 
and management of primary 
immunodeficiency
The American Academy 
of Allergy, Asthma, and 
Immunology
2005
(http://www.aaaai.org/Aaaai/ 
media/MediaLibrary/PDF%20 
Documents/Practice%20 
and%20Parameters/ 
immunodeficiency2005.pdf)
Section 9: Evidence
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 10: Images
Not applicable for this topic.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at: 
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions,  
and ICD code
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson.  
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.  
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
362 
Wiskott–Aldrich Syndrome
Elena S. Resnick
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 43
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome (WAS) is a rare, X‐linked disease caused by a mutation in the 
gene for the Wiskott‐Aldrich syndrome protein (WASp). Clinical features are variable, and 
include immune deficiency, thrombocytopenia, eczematous dermatitis, autoimmunity, and 
malignancy.
Disease classification
• Specific WASp gene mutations may cause diverse clinical manifestations, usually including 
immune deficiency, thrombocytopenia, and eczema. Classic WAS can be severe and include 
symptoms of autoimmunity and malignancy. X‐linked thrombocytopenia (XLT) is a less severe 
phenotype consisting of isolated thrombocytopenia. X‐linked neutropenia (XLN) is caused by 
yet another WASp mutation.
Incidence/prevalence
• The incidence of WAS is estimated at 1 in 250 000 live male births.
• The XLT phenotype accounts for approximately 50% of WASp mutations.
• The XLN phenotype is extremely rare, with <12 patients in four families having been reported 
in the literature.
Economic impact
Not applicable for this topic.
Overall Bottom Line
• Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome (WAS) is a rare, X‐linked disease caused by a mutation in the gene 
for the Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome protein (WASp).
• Mutations in WASp cause classic WAS, X‐linked thrombocytopenia, or X‐linked neutropenia.
• Clinical features are variable, and include immune deficiency, microthrombocytopenia, 
eczematous dermatitis, autoimmunity, and malignancy.
Wiskott–Aldrich Syndrome  363
Etiology
• WAS is a genetic disease caused by a mutation in the gene for the WASp on the 
X‐chromosome.
• Many unique WAS gene mutations account for the disease phenotype, with missense mutations 
most common.
• A WAS‐like phenotype is also seen with mutations in the gene for WIPF1, encoding the WASp‐
interacting protein (WIP) necessary to stabilize WASp.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• WASp is required for remodeling of the cellular actin cytoskeleton and cell chemotaxis as well 
as the appropriate formation of the immunologic synapse. The absence of a functional WASp 
leads to the WAS phenotype, which can be severe and lead to death if not recognized and 
treated. Mutations in WASp cause defective T‐cell and NK cell function as well as decreased 
B‐cell numbers, accounting for the immune deficiency phenotype observed in WAS patients. 
WASp defects also lead to a decrease in regulatory T‐cell (Treg) function, which along with B‐cell 
dysfunction and impaired cellular apoptosis can lead to increased autoimmune phenomena. 
Thrombocytopenia observed in WAS patients may be autoimmune in nature or due to impaired 
platelet formation or survival.
Predictive/risk factors
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 2: Prevention
No interventions have been demonstrated to prevent the development of the disease.
Screening
No screening is currently routinely performed.
Primary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Secondary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 3: Diagnosis
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Classic WAS typically presents in a young male presenting with recurrent infections 
(immunodeficiency), eczematous dermatitis, and bleeding diathesis (microthrombocytopenia).
• Malignancy and/or autoimmunity may develop later in life.
• T‐ and B‐cells numbers may be reduced and/or function may be impaired.
• Definitive diagnosis is made with the identification of a mutation in the WAS gene and/or the 
WASp is found to be deficient or non‐functional.
364  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Differential diagnosis
Typical presentation
• WAS is most often seen in a young male presenting with immune deficiency, eczematous 
­dermatitis, and microthrombocytopenia. Thrombocytopenia may manifest as bleeding, 
petechiae, purpura, gastrointestinal bleeding, epistaxis, hematuria, and/or life‐threatening 
hemorrhage. Immune deficiency may manifest as recurrent infections due to impaired 
T‐ and B‐cell numbers and function. Severe infections with encapsulated bacteria may occur, 
and splenectomy performed for thrombocytopenia will worsen this propensity to infection. 
Opportunistic infections can also be seen; fungal infections are more rare. Eczematous der-
matitis is common and may be severe. Autoimmunity is present in as many as 70% of 
patients. Malignancy is also observed, most commonly B‐cell lymphomas associated with 
Epstein–Barr virus.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• The history will likely be remarkable for a young male with manifestations of thrombocyto-
penia, sometimes present since birth. All male infants with thrombocytopenia should be 
investigated for WAS. Other manifestations include a history of eczema and/or frequent 
infections. Other autoimmune diseases such as vasculitis, autoimmune renal disease, inflam-
matory bowel ­disease, neutropenia, and autoimmune hemolytic anemia may occur. A history 
of malignancy, most often lymphoma, may also be present.
Physical examination
• The physical examination may reveal a young male with eczematous dermatitis, ranging 
from mild to severe. Physical manifestations of thrombocytopenia may include bleeding, 
petechiae, purpura, gastrointestinal bleeding, epistaxis, or hematuria. Evidence of infection 
due to immune deficiency may include fever, lethargy, or other localizing symptoms.
Useful clinical decision rules and calculators
Not applicable for this topic.
Differential diagnosis
Features
X‐linked thrombocytopenia
Mild clinical phenotype including thrombocytopenia 
and mild eczema
X‐linked neutropenia
Frequent infections due to neutropenia
WIPF1 mutation
Clinical features similar to WAS, WIPF1 sequencing 
necessary to confirm diagnosis
Severe combined  
immunodeficiency (SCID)
Frequent severe infections from infancy
Immune dysregulation,  
polyendocrinopathy, X‐linked (IPEX)
Immunodeficiency, autoimmune disease, severe 
gastrointestinal disease
Wiskott–Aldrich Syndrome  365
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• CBC with differential.
• T‐cell number and functional studies.
• B‐cell number and functional studies.
• NK cell number and functional studies.
• Immunoglobulin levels.
• Sequence of WAS gene necessary to confirm diagnosis.
Lists of imaging techniques
Not applicable for this topic.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis of disease
• As this is a relatively rare disease, it must be considered in the differential of any young male 
presenting with thrombocytopenia.
Section 4: Treatment
Treatment rationale
• Patients diagnosed with WAS should receive prophylactic treatment for frequent infections. 
This may include intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) therapy for patients found to be antibody 
deficient. Prophylactic antibiotic therapy with trimethoprim‐sulfamethoxazole and acyclovir should 
Disease severity classification
Disease severity scoring system for disorders associated with WAS mutations
Disease
XLN
iXLT
XLT
Classic WAS
Score
0
<1
1
2
3
4
5
Thrombocytopenia
–
–/+
+
+
+
+
+
Small platelets
–
+
+
+
+
+
+
Eczema
–
–
–
(+)
+
++
–/(+)/+/++
Immunodeficiency
–/(+)
–
–/(+)
(+)
+
+
(+)/+
Infections
–/(+)
–
–
(+)
+
+/++
–/(+)/+/++
Autoimmunity and/or 
malignancy
–
–
–
–
–
–
+
Congenital neutropenia
+
–
–
–
–
–
–
Myelodysplasia
–/+
–
–
–
–
–
–
Scoring system:
– Absent.
–/(+) Absent or mild.
–/+ Intermittent thrombocytopenia, possible myelodysplasia.
(+) Mild, transient eczema or mild, infrequent infections not resulting in sequelae.
+ Thrombocytopenia, persistent but therapy‐responsive eczema, and recurrent infections requiring antibiotics 
and often intravenous immunoglobulin prophylaxis.
++ Eczema that is difficult to control and severe, life‐threatening infections.
iXLT: intermittent X‐linked thrombocytopenia; WAS, Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome; XLN: X‐linked neutropenia;  
XLT: X‐linked thrombocytopenia.
Adapted from Stiehm ER, Ochs HD, Winkelstein JA, Rich E (Eds). Immunologic disorders in infants and children, 
5th edn. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2004.
366  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
also be used. Platelet transfusions may be necessary for bleeding manifestations. Splenectomy has 
been recommended in the past for thrombocytopenia but is no longer recommended because 
of the increased risk of infection with encapsulated bacteria. Immunosuppressive therapies 
such as rituximab may be used for autoimmune disease; however, the risk of infection must be 
carefully considered. Hematopoitic stem cell transplant is the only definitive treatment for WAS. 
Gene therapy for WAS is currently under investigation and is not yet used in clinical practice.
When to hospitalize
• Patients with WAS often present with thrombocytopenia and/or severe infections and associ-
ated complications that require immediate hospitalization.
• Hospitalization should occur in a tertiary care institution with access to physicians familiar with 
the disease as well as immunologists, pediatric intensivists, and other pediatric specialists.
Managing the hospitalized patient
See When to hospitalize section.
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comment
Medical
IVIG
Prophylactic antibiotics (Bactrim®, acyclovir)
Immunosuppressive medications
400–600 mg/kg/month
Dosage based on weight
As necessary for autoimmune disease
Other
HSCT
Only curative therapy
Prevention/management of complications
See Treatment rationale section.
Section 5: Special populations
Pregnancy
Not applicable for this topic.
Children
See Treatment rationale section.
Elderly
Not applicable for this topic.
Others
Not applicable for this topic.
Clinical pearls
• In order to make the diagnosis, WAS must first be considered in the differential diagnosis.
Wiskott–Aldrich Syndrome  367
Section 6: Prognosis
Section 7: Reading list
Aldrich RA, Steinberg AG, Campbell DC. Pedigree demonstrating a sex‐linked recessive condition characterized 
by draining ears, eczematoid dermatitis and bloody diarrhea. Pediatrics 1954;13:133
Griffith LM, Cowan MJ, Kohn DB, Notarangelo LD, Puck JM, Schultz KR, et al. Allogeneic hematopoietic cell 
transplantation for primary immune deficiency diseases: current status and critical needs. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol 2008;122:1087–96
Kim AS, Kakalis LT, Abdul‐Manan N, Liu GA, Rosen MK. Autoinhibition and activation mechanisms of the 
Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome protein. Nature 2000;404:151
Massaad MJ, Ramesh N, Geha RS. Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome: a comprehensive review. Ann N Y Acad Sci 
2013;1285:26–43
Ozsahin H, Cavazzana‐Calvo M, Notarangelo LD, Schulz A, Thrasher AJ, Mazzolari E, et al. Long‐term outcome 
following hematopoietic stem‐cell transplantation in Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome: collaborative study of the 
European Society for Immunodeficiencies and European Group for Blood and Marrow Transplantation. 
Blood 2008;111:439
Sullivan KE, Mullen CA, Blaese RM, Winkelstein JA. A multiinstitutional survey of the Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome. 
J Pediatr 1994;125:876
Wolff JA. Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome: clinical, immunologic, and pathologic observations. J Pediatr 1967;70:221
Section 8: Guidelines
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 9: Evidence
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 10: Images
Not applicable for this topic.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Life expectancy in WAS is reduced.
• Causes of death include infection, bleeding complications, autoimmunity, and malignancy.
• Patients with platelet counts below 10 000/mm3 are at greater risk for bleeding complications.
• Patients with autoimmunity are at greater risk of malignancy.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at: 
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions,  
and ICD code
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
368 
DiGeorge Syndrome
Kate Welch and Elena S. Resnick
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 44
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• DiGeorge syndrome most often occurs as a result of a heterozygous deletion of chromosome 
22q11.2 and classically encompasses the triad of hypoplastic thymus, cardiac anomalies, and 
hypocalcemia as a result of parathyroid hypoplasia. The immune system is affected in approxi-
mately 75% of cases, and the phenotype can range from absent thymus with no circulating 
T cells to completely normal T‐cell counts.
Disease classification
• Most cases of DiGeorge syndrome occur as a result of hemizygous deletion of chromosome 
22q11.2. However, 5–10% of patients with the clinical manifestations of the syndrome do not 
have the deletion. Most patients have a mild to moderate immune deficiency, and the majority 
have a cardiac abnormality. Additional features vary in presentation and include renal anomalies, 
hypoparathyroidism, skeletal defects, and developmental delay. In an effort to eliminate confu-
sion, there has been an effort toward labeling patients with the classic chromosome deletion as 
having “22q11.2 deletion syndrome” and those with a distinct or no known cause as having 
“DiGeorge syndrome.” For the sake of simplicity, they will be used interchangeably here.
Overall Bottom Line
• DiGeorge syndrome encompasses a constellation of symptoms due to defective development 
of mesenchyme affecting the embryologic pharyngeal pouches.
• It typically occurs in association with a heterozygous chromosomal deletion of chromosome 
22q11.2. Chromosome 22q11.2 deletion syndrome includes DiGeorge and similar syndromes, 
such as velocardiofacial syndrome.
• The classic features include hypoplastic thymus, as well as cardiac anomalies and 
hypocalcemia, as a result of parathyroid hypoplasia.
• The hypoplastic thymus results in a range of T‐cell deficits and varying degrees of immune 
deficiency. Most patients have only mild defects and few clinical manifestations. Other 
patients, with a complete absence of the thymus known as “complete DiGeorge syndrome,” 
manifest similarly to severe combined immunodeficiency and need immediate treatment with 
immune reconstitution.
DiGeorge Syndrome  369
Incidence/prevalence
• The incidence of chromosome 22q11.2 deletions has been estimated as 1 in 3000–6000 births. 
The deletion may in fact be under‐reported because the phenotypic findings can be very mild.
• The incidence is thought to be increasing because the detection and treatment of cardiac and 
immune anomalies has led to affected parents bearing affected offspring.
Economic impact
Not applicable for this topic.
Etiology
• Approximately 90–95% of infants with the classic constellation of cardiac anomaly, diminished 
T cells, and hypocalcemia have the deletion of chromosome 22q11.2. The deletion usually 
arises via unequal meiotic exchange of discrete blocks of four low copy number repeats. These 
blocks are thought to be inherently unstable because the deletion is roughly 10 times more 
common than the next most frequent human deletion syndrome. There are over 35 genes 
within the commonly deleted region of chromosome 22.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• The development of a TBX1 knockout mouse has demonstrated the importance of this 
gene in cardiac development. Its absence leads to impaired formation of the fourth 
branchial arch artery, a precursor to the right ventricle and outflow tract. In mice, TBX1 is 
expressed in the pharyngeal mesenchyme and endodermal pouch. The pharyngeal pouches 
give rise to the face and upper thorax. In humans, compromised development of the third 
and fourth pharyngeal pouches also affects the thymus and parathyroid glands. The 
­phenotype is extraordinarily ­variable, but the following defects can be seen as a result of 
various gene deletions:
• Cardiac anomalies: cardiac defects include tetralogy of Fallot, ventriculoseptal defect, 
­interrupted aortic arch, truncus arteriosus, and vascular rings.
• Thymic hypoplasia and immunodeficiency: the thymus is absent in patients with complete 
DiGeorge syndrome and hypoplastic in patients with partial DiGeorge syndrome. As a result, 
patients with the partial form will have varying degrees of T‐cell lymphopenia. The majority 
of these patients will be only modestly immunocompromised and will not develop opportun-
istic infections. Abnormal palatal anatomy may affect sinus drainage and lead to an increase 
in sinopulmonary infections. Some patients will have humoral immune deficiencies and func-
tional antibody defects. Complete DiGeorge syndrome, found in less than 1% of patients 
with 22q deletion syndrome, results in a severe combined immunodeficiency 
(SCID)‐like presentation and infant fatality without prompt recognition and treatment. 
Other ­consequences of immune deficiency include autoimmune disease, seen in roughly 
10% of patients, and an increase in allergic disease.
• Hypocalcemia: underdevelopment of the parathyroid glands develops in up to 60% of 
patients with DiGeorge syndrome. This may present with tetany, low serum calcium, ­elevated 
serum phosphorus, and very low parathyroid hormone levels.
• Craniofacial abnormalities: possible defects include low set and posteriorly rotated ears, 
­ocular hypertelorism, and nasal dysmorphism.
• Palatal and related problems: the most common defect is a muscular weakness that affects 
the ability to close off the nasopharynx when swallowing and speaking. Feeding difficulties, 
nasal regurgitation, and hypernasal speech may result. More significant defects such as 
­submucous clefts and frank anatomic clefts may be seen.
370  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
• Developmental and behavioral problems: developmental delay is common and highly varia-
ble, with mean IQ ranging from normal to moderately disabled. Speech delay is especially 
common.
Predictive/risk factors
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 2: Prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Screening
Not applicable for this topic.
Primary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Secondary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 3: Diagnosis
Differential diagnosis
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• The diagnosis of DiGeorge syndrome varies by age and the severity of the phenotypic variant. 
The emphasis of an examination in infancy should focus on high impact areas of cardiac 
anomaly, profound hypocalcemia, or severe immunodeficiency.
• Cardiac defects may manifest as cyanosis; hypocalcemia with tetany or seizure; and palatal 
abnormalities with feeding difficulty in early infancy.
• Immunodeficiency can be identified in infancy with T‐cell lymphopenia or later in life with a 
history of recurrent infection.
• Cardiac anomalies, some of which present with cyanosis, may be the first issue discovered 
after birth, and absence of a thymus seen in surgery or on preoperative X‐ray is a clue to the 
diagnosis.
Differential diagnosis
Features
CHARGE syndrome
Patients will have coloboma, choanal atresia and genital 
abnormalities
Zellweger’s syndrome
Hepatomegaly that may be associated with cirrhosis and biliary 
dysgenesis
Opitz G/BBB syndrome
Asymmetry of the skull and hypospadias
SCID
Profound deficiencies of T‐ and B‐cell function
Teratogen exposure
Phenotypic similarities may be seen with isotretinoin or ethanol 
exposure in utero, though genetic abnormalities are not identified
DiGeorge Syndrome  371
Typical presentation
• The presentation of disease varies based on age at diagnosis, which in turn depends on the 
severity of phenotypic abnormalities. From a cardiac standpoint, cyanosis is seen in infancy and 
occurs as a result of interrupted aortic arch, truncus arteriosus, or tetralogy of Fallot. Children 
with large septal defects may present with failure to thrive or heart failure. Vascular rings can 
cause feeding difficulties or varying degrees of airway obstruction. Profound hypocalcemia is a 
life‐threatening complication in the newborn period, whereas complications of hypocalcemia 
are unusual later in life due to compensatory hyperplasia of existing parathyroid tissue. 
Immunodeficiency, if severe, as in the complete form of DiGeorge syndrome, can be detected 
on newborn screening. Later in life, a history of recurrent sinopulmonary infections may be the 
clue to diagnosis.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• If the syndrome is not detected in early infancy based on such emergencies as cyanosis, 
hypocalcemic tetany, or complete immunodeficiency, other clues to diagnosis may manifest as 
the patient ages. Evaluation should be considered in any newborn infant with a cleft palate or 
persistent feeding difficulties. In older children and adults, a history of recurrent infection or 
developmental delay, in conjunction with typical physical examination findings, can lead to 
diagnosis.
Physical examination
• Craniofacial and palate abnormalities may be the first abnormalities detected on physical 
examination. Other findings that may be seen include ocular hypertelorism, low‐set posteri-
orly rotated ears, micrognathia, short philtrum, upslanting palpebral fissures, and hooded 
eyelids.
Useful clinical decision rules and calculators
Not applicable for this topic.
Disease severity classification
Not applicable for this topic.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• Complete blood count with differential to evaluate for lymphopenia.
• Complete lymphocyte screen and immunoglobulin levels.
• Serum calcium and phosphorus levels, as well as parathyroid hormone and thyroid stimulating 
hormone (TSH).
• Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) for 22q11.2 deletion; if negative, gene sequencing of 
TBS1 can be performed.
• Psychiatric and cognitive assessment for children and older adults.
Lists of imaging techniques
• Cardiac evaluation and echocardiogram is urgent for any infant with suspected anomalies.
• Chest radiograph to evaluate for thymic shadow.
• Renal ultrasound.
372  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding  
diagnosis of disease
• As this is a rare disease, it must be considered in the differential diagnosis in order for the 
appropriate diagnosis to be made.
Section 4: Treatment
Treatment rationale
• Management of the syndrome depends on phenotype and age at diagnosis. Most patients are 
identified shortly after birth due to a cardiac anomaly and should undergo prompt cardiac 
evaluation and surgical correction, if indicated. Neonatal hypocalcemia is treated with 
­intravenous calcium supplementation. Oral supplementation can then be used, but it is impor-
tant to monitor levels, because patients may outgrow the need for supplementation as existing 
parathyroid tissue hypertrophies. During times of stress, these patients may require transient 
supplementation.
• For patients with partial DiGeorge syndrome and only mild to moderate immune deficiency, 
no  immunologic treatment is needed, and targeted antimicrobial therapy can be used as 
­infections arise.
• For patients with complete DiGeorge syndrome and thymic aplasia, immune reconstitution is a 
pediatric emergency, and treatment may involve thymus transplant or a fully matched T‐cell 
transplant.
• Palatal abnormalities are addressed on an individual basis with functional testing done to assess 
if surgical repair is indicated.
• As patients enter early childhood, individualized assessments of the need for speech or 
­behavioral therapy are warranted.
When to hospitalize
Not applicable for this topic.
Managing the hospitalized patient
Not applicable for this topic.
Table of treatment
Not applicable for this topic.
Prevention/management of complications
Not applicable for this topic.
Clinical pearls
• Assessment for neonatal emergencies includes cardiac anomalies, profound hypocalcemia, 
and evaluation for immunodeficiency and athymia.
• Further treatment is patient‐specific and focused at addressing the phenotypic abnormalities.
• Emphasis on language development and educational needs of growing children should not be 
underestimated.
DiGeorge Syndrome  373
Section 5: Special populations
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 6: Prognosis
Natural history of untreated disease
Not applicable for this topic.
Prognosis for treated patients
Not applicable for this topic.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
• Children with DiGeorge syndrome should be monitored for hearing difficulties, speech prob-
lems, delayed growth, as well as learning and behavioral disabilities. Schizophrenia and major 
depression can be seen in adolescents and adults.
Section 7: Reading list
Bassett AS, Chow EW, Husted J, Weksberg R, Caluseriu O, Webb GD, et al. Clinical features of 78 adults with 
22q11 Deletion Syndrome. Am J Med Genet 2005;138:307–13
Botto LD, May K, Fernhoff PM. A population‐based study of the 22q11.2 deletion: phenotype, incidence and 
contribution to major birth defects in the population. Pediatrics 2003;112:101–7
Conley M, Notarangelo L, Etzioni A. Diagnostic criteria for primary immunodeficiencies. Clin Immunol 
1999;93:190–7
McDonald‐McGinn D, Sullivan K. Chromosome 22q11.2 Deletion Syndrome. Medicine 2011;90:1–18
Sullivan K. The clinical, immunological, and molecular spectrum of chromosome 22q11.2 deletion syndrome 
and DiGeorge syndrome. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2004;4:505–12
Suggested websites
Immune Deficiency Foundation. http://primaryimmune.org/
Genetics Home Reference. http://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/condition/22q112‐deletion‐syndrome
Section 8: Guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Practice parameter for the 
diagnosis and management of 
primary immunodeficiency
The American Academy of Allergy, 
Asthma, and Immunology
2005
(http://www.aaaai.org/Aaaai/ 
media/MediaLibrary/PDF%20 
Documents/Practice%20 
and%20Parameters/ 
immunodeficiency2005.pdf)
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• For patients with complete DiGeorge syndrome who do not undergo transplantation, life 
expectancy is less than 1 year.
• For patients with partial DiGeorge syndrome or those who survive transplant, prognosis 
depends on the severity of cardiac defects, degree of hypocalcemia, and level of intellectual 
development.
• A thorough individualized treatment plan will necessitate a multidisciplinary approach for 
affected patients.
374  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Section 9: Evidence
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 10: Images
Not applicable for this topic.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at: 
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions,  
and ICD code
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
  375
Chronic Mucocutaneous Candidiasis
Shradha Agarwal
Division of Allergy/Immunology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 45
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• CMC refers to susceptibility to recurrent or chronic candidiasis of the skin, nails, and mucous 
membranes occurring within a spectrum of immunologic, endocrine, and autoimmune disorders. 
The infection is rarely invasive and unlikely to cause sepsis. The clinical manifestation, severity, and 
genetic features can vary according to the underlying defect.
Disease classification
• CMC can be classified according to its association with other conditions such as endocrinopathy, 
autoimmunity, and immune dysregulation.
Incidence/prevalence
• There is no racial preference for CMC.
• The male : female ratio for CMC is equal.
Economic impact
Not applicable for this topic.
Overall Bottom Line
• Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis (CMC) is characterized by persistent or recurrent 
mucocutaneous infections caused by the Candida sp. affecting the nails, skin, and 
mucosa.
• CMC can be an isolated phenomenon or seen in patients with severe acquired or primary 
T‐cell immunodeficiency and/or in patients on immunosuppressive, antibiotic, or steroid 
therapies.
• In addition to the chronic candidiasis, patients may have associated endocrinopathies, 
autoimmune manifestations, or thymoma.
• CMC secondary to primary immunodeficiency has been associated with defects in STAT3, 
IL‐17, AIRE, DOCK8, CARD9, and dectin‐1.
• Patients with CMC are managed with antifungal medications and treatment of the associated 
primary immunodeficiency, endocrinopathy, or autoimmune disorder.
376  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Etiology
• Candida albicans is an opportunistic yeast that is part of the normal flora. Defects in immune 
regulation, specifically cell‐mediated immunity, are responsible for infection by Candida 
organisms.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• The molecular basis of CMC varies according to the associated immunodeficiency, although in 
some cases the exact etiology is unknown.
Predictive/risk factors
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 2: Prevention
No interventions have been demonstrated to prevent the development of the disease.
Screening
Currently no populations are being screened for CMC.
Primary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Secondary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 3: Diagnosis (Algorithm 45.1)
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Patients present with recurrent or chronic superficial Candida infections of the oral cavity, 
intertriginous or peri‐orificial areas.
• Examination of the oral cavity may reveal white plaques of thrush. Nails may be thickened, 
split, and discolored. Skin may be erythematous with hyperkeratotic plaques which may 
involve the scalp.
• Scraping from the infected area in 10–20% KOH examined microscopically for the presence 
of yeast cells and pseudohyphae can confirm a cutaneous diagnosis.
• Screening tests for associated endocrinopathy include glucose levels, thyroid function, 
comprehensive metabolic panel, and cortisol levels. Complete blood count and lymphocyte 
panel screening for leukopenia and HIV testing should be performed. Lymphocyte 
proliferation to Candida antigen is typically reduced.
• Advanced immune testing including quantitative immunoglobulins should be considered in 
patients with a history of recurrent infections.
Chronic Mucocutaneous Candidiasis  377
Differential diagnosis
Typical presentation
• Typical clinical presentation varies according to the underlying cause but features include chronic 
non‐invasive candidiasis of the nail, skin, and oral mucous membranes resistant to topical therapies.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• Associated symptoms vary according to the underlying cause, for example symptoms of endo-
crinopathy are particular to the organ involved. Hypoparathyroidism and adrenal insufficiency are 
the most common endocrinopathies seen in patients with APECED. Autoimmune phenomena 
may occur such as vitiligo, alopecia, hepatitis, and pernicious anemia.
Physical examination
• Cutaneous examination may be characterized by erythematous, pustular, crusted, and thickened 
plaques resembling psoriasis. Oropharyngeal candidiasis causes white plaques on buccal mucosa, 
tongue, and lips that may cause bleeding when scraped. The corners of the mouth may show 
cracks and fissures infected with Candida. The intertriginous and peri‐anal areas will reveal 
erythematous patches and are pruritic. Vulvovaginal candidiasis can also cause pruritus and 
discharge. Distal separation of fingernails with white or yellow discoloration of the subungual 
area can be seen in cases of chronic paronychia.
Useful clinical decision rules and calculators
Not applicable for this topic.
Disease severity classification
Not applicable for this topic.
Differential diagnosis
Features
Overgrowth of Candida
Responsive to treatment. Can occur in setting of 
chronic antibiotic or inhaled/oral corticosteroid 
therapy; in persons with hyperglycemia, diabetes 
mellitus, iron deficiency. In infants, oral thrush is 
common in the first 3 months of life; however, this is 
self‐limited and resolves within a few days
Persistent oral thrush
T‐cell immunodeficiencies such as DiGeorge syndrome, 
SCID, and HIV
Autosomal dominant hyper IgE syndrome
Elevated IgE, recurrent staphylococcal skin abscesses, 
recurrent bacterial pneumonias, eczematous 
dermatitis, connective tissue defects
Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy, 
candidiasis, and ectodermal dystrophy 
(APECED)
CMC associated with autoimmune 
polyendocrinopathy, commonly hypoparathyroidism 
and adrenal insufficiency, skin dystrophy
378  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• Scraping from the infected site in 10–20% KOH examined under a microscope will reveal the 
presence of yeast cells and pseudohyphae. Additional staining with chlorazol black E stain or 
Parker blue–black ink may be used to highlight the organism.
• Laboratory tests including glucose levels, thyroid function, blood chemistries, liver function, 
and cortisol levels should be performed as screening for associated endocrine dysfunction.
• Complete blood count and lymphocyte panel screening for leukopenia and HIV testing should 
be performed.
Evidence of candidial
infection 
Resistant or recurrent
despite treatment with
standard therapy 
Comprehensive history and
physical examination
Particular attention to
history and/or features of
infection, autoimmunity and
endocrinopathies
Laboratory evaluation
including HIV, CBC, metabolic
panel, quantitative
immunoglobulins, T and 
B cell numbers
More detailed laboratory
evaluation as appropriate
Additional immunologic
evaluation including in vitro
lymphocyte proliferation
assay
Additional hormone and
electrolyte levels to evaluate
for endocrinopathies; genetic
testing for AIRE if suspicion
for APECED
Responsive to standard
therapy
Algorithm 45.1  Diagnosis of chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis
Chronic Mucocutaneous Candidiasis  379
• Quantitative immunoglobulins (IgG, IgA, IgM, IgE) should be considered in patients with a 
history of recurrent infections.
• In vivo and in vitro T‐cell responses to Candida antigens are poor or absent.
• More advanced immune testing in cases of CMC associated with primary immunodeficiency 
examining the associated gene or molecular defect is available in specialized laboratories.
Lists of imaging techniques
Not applicable for this topic.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis of disease
• Invasive candidiasis is rare and other diagnoses should be considered.
Section 4: Treatment (Algorithm 45.2)
Treatment rationale
• Topical therapies such as clotrimazole troches or oral nystatin solution can be given as a thera-
peutic trial; however, these drugs are generally not effective in cases of CMC.
• Systemic antifungal therapy with azoles is the treatment of choice and can be use alone or in 
combination with an immunomodulatory agent. Patients on systemic antifungal therapy must 
be monitored for toxicity, recurrence following completion of therapy, and resistance.
• Endocrine dysfunction should be treated according to the abnormalities found with hormone 
and/or electrolyte replacement.
• Primary immunodeficiency with antibody deficiency should be treated with immunoglobulin 
replacement.
Antifungals
•  Prolonged therapy with monitoring for toxicity and
    resistance may be required depending on extent of disease
•  Fluconazole is generally first line
•  Itraconazole, voriconazole and posaconazole
•  Amphotericin in severe cases
Hormone or
metabolic
replacement
•  For those with underlying endocrinopathies
Immunoglobulin
replacement
•  Considered in those with recurrent bacterial infections and
    evidence of antibody deficiency
Algorithm 45.2  Treatment of chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis
380  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
When to hospitalize
Not applicable for this topic.
Managing the hospitalized patient
Not applicable for this topic.
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comment
Medical
Azole family antifungal therapy
Long‐term therapy may be used with monitoring 
for liver toxicity at regular intervals
Prevention/management of complications
• Long‐term systemic antifungal therapy may cause liver toxicity requiring reduction or discon-
tinuation of therapy.
Section 5: Special populations
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 6: Prognosis
Natural history of untreated disease
Not applicable for this topic.
Prognosis for treated patients
Not applicable for this topic.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
• Patient with CMC and associated endocrinopathies, autoimmunity, or immune dysregulation 
should have routine follow‐up with a specialist.
Section 7: Reading list
Engelhardt KR, Grimbacher B. Mendelian traits causing susceptibility to mucocutaneous fungal infections in 
human subjects. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2012;129:294–305; quiz 306–7
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• The prognosis is good in patients with CMC without associated endocrine or autoimmune 
disorders although persistent infections with Candida organisms should be expected.
• The lesions, while not life‐threatening, can be disfiguring and debilitating and impact the 
patient’s quality of life.
Clinical pearls
• Avoid use of proton pump inhibitors, which may increase the risk of esophageal candidiasis.
• Treatment can be challenging in patients with a history of recurrent bacterial infections 
requiring chronic antibiotics, which exacerbate the candidiasis.
Chronic Mucocutaneous Candidiasis  381
Eyerich K, Eyerich S, Hiller J, Behrendt H, Traidl‐Hoffmann C. Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, from bench 
to bedside. Eur J Dermatol 2010;20:260–5
Glocker E, Grimbacher B. Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis and congenital susceptibility to Candida. 
Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2010;10:542–50
Hanna S, Etzioni A. New host defense mechanisms against Candida species clarify the basis of clinical 
phenotypes. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2011;127:1433–7
Puel A, Cypowyj S, Maródi L, Abel L, Picard C, Casanova JL. Inborn errors of human IL‐17 immunity underlie 
chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2012;12:616–22
Suggested websites
American Academy of Allergy Asthma and Immunology. http://www.aaaai.org/home.aspx
Clinical Immunology Society. www.clinimmsoc.org
Immune Deficiency Foundation. http://primaryimmune.org/
Jeffrey Modell Foundation. www.info4pi.org
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Practice parameter for the 
diagnosis and management of 
primary immunodeficiency
American Academy of Allergy, 
Asthma and Immunology 
(AAAAI); American College 
of Allergy, Asthma and 
Immunology (ACAAI)
2005
(https://www.aaaai.org/Aaaai/
media/MediaLibrary/PDF% 
20Documents/Practice% 
20and%20Parameters/
immunodeficiency2005.pdf)
International society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Primary immunodeficiency diseases: an update 
from the International Union of
Immunological Societies Primary 
Immunodeficiency Diseases Classification
Committee
International Union 
of Immunological 
Societies (IUIS)
2007
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/17952897)
Section 9: Evidence
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 10: Images
Not applicable for this topic.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at: 
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions,  
and ICD code
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
382 
X‐linked Immune Dysregulation with 
Polyendocrinopathy (IPEX) Syndrome
Elena S. Resnick
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 46
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• Immunodysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X‐linked (IPEX) is a rare disease caused 
by an X‐linked mutation in the gene for the transcription factor Foxp3 (FOXP3). Patients with 
IPEX present with gastrointestinal enteropathy, autoimmune endocrinopathy, and dermatitis.
Disease classification
• Patients presenting with the triad of symptoms listed above are diagnosed with “IPEX” if a 
mutation is detected in FOXP3. Patients with similar symptoms but without identified mutations 
are designated “IPEX‐like.”
Incidence/prevalence
• IPEX is extremely rare, likely under‐diagnosed and epidemiologic data are scarce.
• One Australian study identified one case of IPEX in 10 cases of neonatal diabetes in a national 
registry 1989–2007, thus estimating incidence at 1 in 1 609 490.
Etiology
• IPEX is caused by a mutation in FOXP3, a member of the forkhead box P family of transcription 
factors, located on chromosome Xp11.23.
Overall Bottom Line
• Immunodysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X‐linked (IPEX) is a rare, X‐linked 
disease caused by a mutation in the gene for FOXP3.
• FOXP3 is essential for the immunosuppressive function of T‐regulatory cells; absence or 
dysfunction of FOXP3 leads to autoimmune and atopic manifestations.
• Cardinal signs and symptoms include severe chronic diarrhea due to autoimmune 
enteropathy, neonatal type 1 diabetes and/or thyroiditis due to autoimmune endocrinopathy, 
and eczematous dermatitis.
• Treatment includes referral to a tertiary care center and active management of disease 
complications until definitive treatment with hematopoietic stem cell transplantation can 
be performed.
IPEX Syndrome  383
• The etiology of IPEX‐like syndromes (IPEX triad of symptoms without identified FOXP3 mutation) 
is unknown. New evidence suggests that gain‐of‐function mutations in STAT1 can cause an 
IPEX‐like phenotype with normal frequency and function of T‐regulatory cells (Tregs).
Pathology/pathogenesis
• As described above, IPEX is caused by a mutation in FOXP3, a transcription factor essential to 
the function of CD4+ Treg cells. Tregs act as natural suppressors of autoimmune and atopic 
immune responses. Tregs are dependent on the cytokine IL‐2 to perform their suppressive 
function, and FOXP3 interacts with the IL‐2 promoter. Adequate levels of FOXP3 are neces-
sary, but not sufficient, for Tregs to suppress immune responses. IPEX‐causing mutations are 
usually loss‐of‐function mutations in FOXP3 that may be inherited or sporadic. Mutations in 
FOXP3 result in decreased numbers or impaired function of Tregs, thus increased autoimmune 
and atopic manifestations including the classic triad of chronic diarrhea due to autoimmune 
enteropathy, neonatal type 1 diabetes and/or thyroiditis due to autoimmune endocrinopathy, 
and eczematous dermatitis.
Predictive/risk factors
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 2: Prevention
No interventions have been demonstrated to prevent the development of the disease.
Screening
No routine screening methods are currently utilized to identify cases of this disease.
Primary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Secondary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 3: Diagnosis (Algorithm 46.1)
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• IPEX is most often seen in a male infant with autoimmune and atopic diseases, including but 
not limited to diarrhea, type 1 diabetes, thyroiditis, cytopenias, hepatitis, interstitial nephritis, 
severe food allergies, eczematous dermatitis, and exaggerated response to infections.
• Examination findings including failure to thrive, developmental delay, as well as the specific 
manifestations of the complications listed above.
• Pathology from affected tissues (e.g. gut) may show lymphocytic infiltrates and/or associated 
autoantibodies.
• Investigations include CBC, serum glucose, anti‐islet antibodies, thyroid function studies, 
antithyroid antibodies, anti‐enterocyte antibodies, immunoglobulin levels, IgE‐mediated 
food allergy testing, lymphocyte subset and proliferation assays, endoscopy with biopsy, skin 
biopsy, and Treg quantitative and functional studies.
• Confirmation of the disease is through genetic testing for mutations in FOXP3.
384  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Differential diagnosis
Differential diagnosis
Features
IPEX‐like syndrome
Clinical findings similar to IPEX without 
identifiable FOXP3 mutation. Can occur in 
females
CD25 or IL2RA deficiency
Infectious complications, antigen‐specific 
responses impaired, profound cytomegalovirus 
(CMV) infection, early onset enteropathy
STAT5b deficiency
Growth failure, chronic mucocutaneous 
candidiasis, CMV infection, lung disease
STAT1 deficiency
Polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, dermatitis, 
chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, disseminated 
fungal infections, arterial aneurysms, thyroid 
disease, short stature, squamous cell carcinomas, 
normal Treg function
Enteropathy of infancy
Includes food allergy, eosinophilic enteropathy, 
infectious enteropathy, celiac disease, microvillus 
inclusion disease, enteroendocrine cell 
dysgenesis, inflammatory bowel disease
Neonatal diabetes
Diabetes due to any cause (not only 
autoimmune)
Other immune deficiency: severe combined 
immune deficiency (SCID), neonatal onset 
multisystemic inflammatory disease (NOMID), 
autoimmune lymphoproliferative disorder (ALPS), 
autoimmune polyendocrinopathy, candidiasis, 
ectodermal dysplasia (APECED)
Severe immune deficiencies associated with 
infections, autoimmunity, and inflammation
Suspected
IPEX
Know mutation:
–  IPEX carrier
–  Family member
–  Prenatal diagnosis
Targeted
FOXP3 gene
sequencing
Signiﬁcant
growth delay
Low CD25
Low/absent
FOXP3
High clinical suspicion
STAT5B gene
sequencing
CD25 gene
sequencing
FOXP3 gene
sequencing
TREG ﬂow cytometry
CD4/CD25/FOXP3
Algorithm 46.1  Diagnosis of IPEX syndrome
Source: http://www.seattlechildrens.org/research/immunity‐and‐immunotherapies/ipex/ 
Last accessed November 2014. Reproduced with permission of Troy R. Torgerson, 
MD, PhD, Seattle Children’s Hospital.
IPEX Syndrome  385
Typical presentation
• IPEX presents in an acutely ill newborn male infant with failure to thrive and developmental 
delay. Cardinal features include severe diarrhea, neonatal type 1 diabetes, thyroiditis, and 
severe eczematous dermatitis. Other autoimmune and atopic manifestations may include 
cytopenias, hepatitis, interstitial nephritis, severe food allergies, and exaggerated response to 
infections.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• Clinical history will reveal a male infant who has likely been ill since birth with severe diarrhea 
and metabolic derangements. Failure to thrive and developmental delay are common. A family 
history of other severely ill male infants or male infants who died of unexplained causes may be 
present.
Physical examination
• Physical examination findings may include an acutely ill male infant with failure to thrive and 
developmental delay. Severe diarrhea, metabolic derangements from endocrinopathies, and 
severe eczematous dermatitis may be present on examination.
Useful clinical decision rules and calculators
Not applicable for this topic.
Disease severity classification
Not applicable for this topic.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• CBC.
• Serum glucose.
• Anti‐islet antibodies.
• Thyroid function studies.
• Antithyroid antibodies.
• Anti‐enterocyte antibodies.
• Immunoglobulin levels.
• IgE‐mediated food allergy testing.
• Lymphocyte subset and proliferation assays.
• Endoscopy with biopsy.
• Skin biopsy.
• Treg quantitative and functional studies.
Lists of imaging techniques
Not applicable for this topic.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis of disease
• As this disease is quite rare, it is often not included in the differential diagnosis of acutely ill 
infants.
• Any infant with autoimmune and atopic disease should be investigated for IPEX as described 
above.
386  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Section 4: Treatment
Treatment rationale
• IPEX patients are often acutely ill at baseline; however, they may also have disease “flares” as a result 
of infections, immunizations, or unknown triggers. Treatment requires hospitalization, preferably at 
a tertiary care institution with access to clinical immunologists and other pediatric specialists. Patients 
should be treated as severely immune compromised and placed in isolation; blood products should 
be irradiated and CMV‐negative. Vaccines should be strictly avoided. Immunosuppression with high 
dose steroids (1–2 mg/kg/day) may be necessary but the risks of active infection must be weighed 
carefully against the benefits of immunosuppressive therapy. Steroid‐sparing agents such as calcineu-
rin inhibitors and sirolimus should be used when possible. Enteropathy may require gut rest and total 
parenteral nutrition, as well as the use of extensively hydrolyzed formula to minimize exposure to 
food antigens. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is the only definitive treatment avail-
able; however, complications due to end‐organ damage often persist even after HSCT.
When to hospitalize
• Infants with IPEX are often acutely ill and must be managed in the hospital setting.
Managing the hospitalized patient
• Patients with IPEX should be treated as severely immunocompromised.
• Patients should be kept in isolation; blood products should be irradiated and CMV‐negative; 
vaccinations should be strictly avoided.
• Transfer to a tertiary care institution with access to a clinical immunologist familiar with the 
disease as well as pediatric intensivists and specialists is necessary.
• Treatment involves immunosuppression and active management of the complications listed.
• Definitive treatment can be accomplished only with HSCT.
Table of treatment
No standardized or proven treatment exists.
Prevention/management of complications
• Immunosuppression with high dose steroids may be necessary to manage disease complica-
tions; however, the risks of active infection must be weighed carefully against the benefits of 
immunosuppressive therapy.
Section 5: Special populations
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 6: Prognosis
Clinical pearls
• IPEX patients are often acutely ill and should be managed by a team in a tertiary care center 
including a clinical immunologist and pediatric intensivists and specialists.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Prognosis for IPEX patients is generally quite poor.
• Even with HSCT, many cases are fatal.
IPEX Syndrome  387
Natural history of untreated disease
Untreated disease is likely to be uniformly fatal.
Prognosis for treated patients
Not applicable for this topic.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
As determined by clinical course and disease complications.
Section 7: Reading list
d’Hennezel E, Bin Dhuban K, Torgerson T, Piccirillo CA. The immunogenetics of immune dysregulation, 
polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X linked (IPEX) syndrome. J Med Genet 2012;49:291–302
Katoh H, Zheng P, Liu Y. FOXP3: genetic and epigenetic implications for autoimmunity. J Autoimmun 
2013;41:72–8
Ochs HD, Torgerson TR. Immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X‐linked inheritance: model 
for autoaggression. Adv Exp Med Biol 2007; 601:27
Powell BR, Buist NR, Stenzel P. An X‐linked syndrome of diarrhea, polyendocrinopathy, and fatal infection in 
infancy. J Pediatr 1982;100:731
Uzel G, Sampaio EP, Lawrence MG, Hsu AP, Hackett M, Dorsey MJ, et al. Dominant gain‐of‐function STAT1 mutations 
in FOXP3 wild‐type immune dysregulation‐polyendocrinopathy‐enteropathy‐X‐linked‐like syndrome. J Allergy 
Clin Immunol 2013;131:1611–23
Wiedemann B, Schober E, Waldhoer T, Koehle J, Flanagan SE, Mackay DJ, et al. Incidence of neonatal diabetes 
in Austria–calculation based on the Austrian Diabetes Register. Pediatr Diabetes 2010;11:18–23
Wildin RS, Smyk‐Pearson S, Filipovich AH. Clinical and molecular features of the immunodysregulation, 
polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X linked (IPEX) syndrome. J Med Genet 2002;39:537
Section 8: Guidelines
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 9: Evidence
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 10: Images
Not applicable for this topic.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at:
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions,  
and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
388 
Autoimmune Lymphoproliferative Syndrome
Charlotte Cunningham‐Rundles
Departments of Medicine and Pediatrics, The Immunology Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 47
Section 1: Background
• Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS), a lymphoproliferative syndrome with 
autoimmunity, results from genetic defects of programmed cell death, or apoptosis, which 
leads to abnormal lymphocyte homeostasis. Patients with ALPS have an enlarged spleen and 
lymph nodes, and various manifestations of autoimmunity. One of the cardinal features is the 
presence of a circulating population of “double negative T‐cells,” T lymphocytes bearing αβ 
T‐cell receptors but neither CD4 nor CD8 surface antigens. When lymphocytes from ALPS 
patients are cultured in vitro, they are more resistant to programmed cell death than cells from 
healthy controls. The incidence of lymphoma is increased in ALPS.
Disease classification
• ALPS is a syndrome caused by genetic defects of cell death.
• The inheritance of the most common forms are in a dominant pattern but family members may 
have very mild disease, which can only be detected in laboratory studies.
• The main features are enlarged spleen and lymph nodes.
• Patients have autoimmunity – hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and sometimes auto-
immune neutropenia.
Incidence/prevalence
The incidence of ALPS is unknown.
Overall Bottom Line
• Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS) is an inherited disorder of the immune 
system that affects both children and adults caused by a group of genetic defects.
• Genetic mutations responsible for ALPS can be passed on from generation to generation or 
can occur spontaneously.
• In this disorder, unusually high numbers of lymphocytes accumulate in the lymph nodes, liver, 
and spleen.
• These organs may be enlarged.
• The syndrome leads to anemia, thrombocytopenia, and sometimes neutropenia.
• Lymphoma is more common in ALPS.
Autoimmune Lymphoproliferative Syndrome  389
Economic impact
Unrecognized immune defects may lead to morbidity and mortality.
Etiology
• The causes are a group of genetic defects, which lead to delayed programmed cell death.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• Genetics: ALPS is generally inherited from a parent but spontaneous mutations also occur. 
Depending on the mutation, in some cases other family members may not display the 
syndrome, even though they carry the affected gene.
• Pathology: defects of the death (apoptotic) pathways can lead to the following:
• Enlarged spleen, lymph nodes, or both;
• Autoimmune blood cytopenias are common;
• Glomerulonephritis, Guillain–Barré syndrome, autoimmune hepatitis, uveitis, and vasculitis 
have also been observed.
Predictive/risk factors
• A family history of a similar clinical syndrome might suggest that an immune defect should be 
considered.
Section 2: Prevention
Screening
• Patients with medical histories suggestive of ALPS can be screened by determining if there is a 
gap between the sum of percentages of CD4 plus CD8 bearing cells as compared to the total 
T‐cell percentage as measured by CD3.
Primary prevention
There are no primary preventive measures.
Secondary prevention
There are no secondary preventive measures.
Section 3: Diagnosis
• Childhood onset of acute or recurrent immune thrombocytopenia (ITP).
• Hemolytic anemia.
• Lymphadenopathy.
• Splenomegaly.
• Skin rashes.
• Suggestive family history.
Differential diagnosis
Differential diagnosis
Features
Liver disease
Enlarged spleen with thrombocytopenia but with signs of liver disease
Hemophagocytic syndrome
Biopsy: signs of hemophagocytosis
Collagen vascular disease
Cytopenias
Lymphoma
Enlarged lymph nodes and spleen
Other immune defects
Features of Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome, common variable immunodeficiency
390  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Typical presentation
• A typical scenario of a child with ALPS includes acute or recurrent ITP or hemolytic anemia. The 
physical examination may reveal lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly. The family history may 
include a first degree relative who has had autoimmunity, or possibly a previous splenectomy, 
or, in some cases, a lymphoma or Hodgkin’s disease.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• Symptoms are heterogeneous as the organs and systems affected depend on the nature of the 
immune defect. In 80% of cases, lung infections occur, specifically pneumonia or chronic bron-
chitis. A history of difficult‐to‐treat chronic sinusitis or previous sinus surgery is often found. 
Gastrointestinal disease is seen in some. Details sought in the clinical history should include 
duration and onset of symptoms, fatigue, fever, weight loss, and shortness of breath. Weight 
loss is common. Obtaining a detailed family history is always important, as well as questions 
about smoking, drug use, the medications used, and results obtained.
Physical examination
• Physical examination should start with evaluation for signs of systemic illness, including weight 
loss. However, patients with IgA or IgG deficiency may also look healthy and have a normal 
physical examination.
• Fever may be present with acute infections, otherwise chronic fever would be uncommon.
• Patients with lung disease may be short of breath, have a productive or non‐productive cough, 
and may have pulmonary signs such as rhonchi or rales on examination.
• Lymphadenopathy is common, and enlarged spleen may be detected.
• Skin changes may include scarring from previous herpes zoster; vitiligo appears to be common.
• Chronic conjunctivitis, iritis, or episcleritis, may be observed.
• Joint complaints include changes due to previous joint infections, or autoimmune, chronic 
arthritis.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• Elevated numbers of double‐negative T cells.
• Elevations of B‐ and T‐cell numbers.
• Significant titers of autoantibodies.
• Serum IL‐10 levels are commonly elevated.
• Serum vitamin B12 levels are commonly elevated.
• Soluble Fas ligand.
• In vitro defective lymphocyte apoptosis (a research test).
• Genetic mutational studies.
Lists of imaging techniques
• Chest X-ray.
• Ultrasound for splenomegaly.
• CT of the abdomen to examine organ size, lymphadenopathy.
• MRI may be preferred to minimize exposure to ionizing radiation.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis of disease
• Not diagnosing immune defects leads to excess morbidity.
Autoimmune Lymphoproliferative Syndrome  391
Section 4: Treatment
Treatment rationale
• The goal of therapy is to provide amelioration of the cytopenias:
• Episodes of autoimmune hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia are generally responsive 
to short courses of high dose glucocorticosteroids;
• Splenectomy has been required in some, but is to be avoided as post‐splenectomy sepsis has 
occurred.
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comment
Conservative
Medical
Short‐term steroids for thrombocytopenia or hemolytic anemia
Recombinant granulocyte colony‐stimulating factor for  
neutropenia
IVIg for cytopenias with steroids
Rituximab in standard 375 mg/m2 for 4 weeks
Mycophenylate mofetil (MMF) 600 mg/m2
Rapamycin loading dose 3 mg/m2 and then tapered
Surgical
Node biopsies if indicated
Avoid splenectomy
Radiological
To examine organs as needed
Other
Hematopoietic stem cell transplant
Encourage normal activities, schooling, work, etc.  
Reserved for severe cases
Prevention/management of complications
• Steroids or other immunosuppressants used for only short periods as needed. Splenectomy is 
to be avoided.
Section 5: Special populations
Pregnancy
• Treatment is as usual but with medications approved in pregnancy.
Children
• Treatment is as usual but with medications given based on weight.
Elderly
• Treatment is as usual.
Clinical pearls
• ALPS is a genetic disease that leads to lymphadenopathy and cytopenias.
• It usually presents in childhood.
• Treatment is dictated by the medical need but immunosuppression is to be minimized.
• There is an increased risk of lymphoma.
392  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Section 6: Prognosis
Natural history of untreated disease
• Continued bouts of autoimmunity are likely.
• Increased splenomegaly and lymphadenopathy are likely.
Prognosis for treated patients
• Varying with the degree of the genetic defect.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
• Careful follow‐up for signs of autoimmunity.
Section 7: Reading list
Oliveira JB, Bleesing JJ, Dianzani U, Fleisher TA, Jaffe ES, Lenardo MJ, et al. Revised diagnostic criteria and 
classification for the autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS): report from the 2009 NIH International 
Workshop. Blood 2010;116:e35–40
Rao VK, Oliveira JB. How I treat autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome. Blood 2011;118:5741–51
Teachey DT. New advances in the diagnosis and treatment of autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome. Curr 
Opin Pediatr 2012;24:1–8
Suggested websites
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. http://www.niaid.nih.gov/topics/ALPS/
research/Pages/description.aspx
Section 8: Guidelines
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 9: Evidence
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 10: Images
Not applicable for this topic.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Patients with ALPS may do well with conservative treatment.
• Careful evaluation of any new clinical findings that develop over time is important.
• Some subjects, depending on the mutation, will require other medical treatments or possibly 
splenectomy.
• There is an increased risk of lymphoma.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at: 
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for  
patients, and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson.  
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.  
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
  393
Hyper IgE Syndrome
Shradha Agarwal
Division of Allergy/Immunology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 48
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• Hyper IgE syndrome (HIES) is a primary antibody immunodeficiency characterized by recurrent 
“cold” staphylococcal infections, severe eczema, pneumonia that can result in pneumatoceles, 
and elevated concentrations of serum IgE. Affected patients often have coarse facial features, 
skeletal, vascular, and connective tissue abnormalities.
Disease classification
Not applicable for this topic.
Incidence/prevalence
• The prevalence of HIES is unknown but the condition is rare.
• There is no reported gender or racial preference.
Economic impact
Not applicable for this topic.
Etiology
• Dominant negative mutations in STAT3 were identified as the cause of autosomal dominant 
HIES (AD‐HIES). An autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance, commonly associated with 
mutations in DOCK8, is rarer and represents a separate entity.
Overall Bottom Line
• Hyper IgE syndrome (HIES) was first described as Job’s syndrome in 1966 in two girls with 
recurrent staphylococcal abscesses, sinopulmonary infections, and severe eczema.
• The disorder was later expanded to include an associated increase in serum levels of IgE, coarse 
facial features, and skeletal abnormalities, which can be seen in both males and females.
• Laboratory levels of IgE typically range from 2000 to >50 000 IU/mL and variable eosinophilia.
• Mutations in the STAT3 signaling protein have been identified in both the sporadic and 
familial forms of HIES.
• Management focuses on skin care and prevention of infection, often with prophylactic 
administration of trimethoprim‐sulfamethoxazole. IFN‐γ has been used in the setting of  
life‐threatening infections.
394  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Patients with HIES often report a history of papulopustular rash within the newborn period. 
The rash is often on the face and scalp and later spreads to the trunk and progresses to 
an eczematous pruritic rash similar to atopic dermatitis. Skin lesions can lead to recurrent 
cellulitis, abscesses, or lymphadenitis often secondary to Staphylococcus aureus or Candida 
albicans.
• Patients present with recurrent upper respiratory infections and pneumonias complicated by 
bronchiectasis, fistulae, and pneumatoceles, which can become infected with Aspergillus or 
Pseudomonas.
• Non‐immunologic characteristics include characteristic features of facial asymmetry, broad 
nasal bridge, wide outer canthal distances, and deep-set eyes. Patients often retain primary 
teeth which may require extraction. Osteopenia, minimal trauma fractures, and scoliosis are 
noted. Vascular abnormalities including aneurysms can be seen.
• Laboratory examination is driven by IgE levels; serum IgE levels in affected patients range from 
2000 to >50 000 IU/mL, but normal levels have also been noted. IgE levels do not correlate 
with the severity of disease. Eosinophilia >700/μL is present in most patients.
• A clinical scoring system reflecting the heterogeneous manifestations has been developed by 
the National Institutes of Health (NIH) (see Table 48.1: A clinical scoring system). The scoring 
system includes 20 clinical features including total IgE level; for each clinical feature a point 
value 0–10 is assigned. A score >40 is suggestive of HIES and <20 makes it unlikely.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• HIES is caused by defects in the Janus activated kinase/signal transduced and activator of tran-
scription (JAK‐STAT) mediated cytokine signals such as IL‐6 and IL‐23. Defects in STAT3 lead to 
impaired TH17 function, which has been suggested to be the cause of susceptibility to 
infection.
Predictive/risk factors
• Those with a parent affected with AD‐HIES have a 50% chance of inheriting the mutation.
Section 2: Prevention
No interventions have been demonstrated to prevent the development of the disease.
Screening
Currently no populations are being screened for HIES.
Primary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Secondary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 3: Diagnosis (Algorithm 48.1)
Hyper IgE Syndrome  395
Differential diagnosis
Typical presentation
• Typical presentation includes recurrent staphylococcal skin infections or abscesses, recurrent 
respiratory infections leading to pneumatoceles, and increased concentrations of serum IgE.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• Symptoms are heterogeneous. Typical presentation begins with a rash in the newborn infant 
that develops into eczematoid dermatitis. Patients usually develop recurrent staphylococcal skin 
abscess and bacterial pneumonias after the first year of life. Complications of pneumatoceles 
Differential diagnosis
Features
Atopic dermatitis
Superficial skin infections can occur, but it is not common to 
have abscesses or pneumonia. Patients with atopic dermatitis 
do not have the bone abnormalities or the coarse facial features 
of HIES. Patients with atopic dermatitis often have food and/or 
environmental allergies, which is not common in HIES
Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome
Elevated total IgE presents with triad of recurrent infections, 
thrombocytopenia, and eczema
Omenn’s syndrome
Can present with a rash in the newborn period and 
elevated IgE similar to HIES. Affected individuals are typically 
sicker at a young age with associated lymphadenopathy, 
hepatosplenomegaly, and opportunistic infections
History of recurrent bacterial
infections
Comprehensive history and
physical examination 
Review imaging studies 
including 
chest X-ray, CT scan 
Laboratory evaluation including
complete blood count, 
quantitative immunoglobulins
(IgG, IgA, IgM, IgE) 
Molecular genetic testing of 
STAT3
conﬁrms diagnosis of AD-HIES 
History signiﬁcant for dermatitis, 
recurrent infections (principally 
bacterial), pneumonias with a
history of bronchiectasis and/or
pneumatoceles, history of
abscess, infections with 
Aspergillus or Pseudomonas,
examine for skeletal  and facial
anomalies 
IgE >2000
Algorithm 48.1  Diagnosis of hyper‐IgE syndrome
396  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
and bronchiectasis may develop. During adolescence, abnormal facies and coarse facial features 
are apparent.
• Opportunistic infections may be seen in patients with significant immunodeficiency. Skeletal 
deformities including scoliosis, delayed shedding of primary teeth, minimal trauma fractures, 
and osteopenia are common. Vascular abnormalities including aneurysms may develop. 
Symptoms of reflux, dysmotility, and fungal infections of the gastrointestinal tract can occur.
Physical examination
• Physical examination should start with the skin, looking for a papulopustular or eczematous 
rash similar to atopic dermatitis. Skin may be infected and abscesses may be present, especially 
on the face, neck, and scalp. Skeletal examination may reveal retained primary teeth, scoliosis, 
osteopenia. Facial features of prominence of the forehead or chin, wide set eyes, coarse skin, 
high arched palate, and broad nasal bridge.
Useful clinical decision rules and calculators
• A clinical scoring system (Table 48.1) to include manifestations of HIES developed by the NIH is 
available.
Disease severity classification
Not applicable for this topic.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• Measurement of serum IgE with reference to age. A repeat test to confirm diagnosis is necessary.
• Complete blood count with differential.
• Molecular genetic testing of STAT3 polymorphisms confirms diagnosis of AD‐HIES.
List of imaging techniques
• CT scan of the lungs should be performed in patients with recurrent lung infections to evaluate 
for bronchiectasis or pneumatoceles.
• Spine images examining scoliosis and bone density for osteopenia.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis of disease
• Serum immunoglobulins should be drawn with reference to the patient’s age.
Section 4: Treatment (Algorithm 48.2)
Treatment rationale
• Treatment is aimed at early recognition of the syndrome and resulting infections with aggressive 
management when actively infected. Prophylactic trimethoprim‐sulfamethoxazole is used for 
prevention of Staphylococcus aureus and may also be helpful in preventing bacterial infections 
such as abscesses, sinusitis, otitis media, and possibly pneumonia. Skin care consists of adequate 
hydration, use of emollients, and antihistamines to control pruritus.
When to hospitalize
• Deep infections may require surgical drainage and intravenous antibiotics.
Managing the hospitalized patient
Not applicable for this topic.
Table 48.1  A clinical scoring system to include manifestations of hyper-IgE syndrome (HIES) developed by the Natonal Institutes of Health (NIH) is available. A score >40 is 
suggestive of AD-HIES
Pointsa
Clinical Findings
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
10
Highest serum‐IgE level (IU/ml)b
<200
200–500
501–1000
1001–2000
>2000
Skin abscesses
None
1–2
3–4
>4
Pneumonia (episodes over lifetime)
None
1
2
3
>3
Parenchymal lung anomalies
Absent
Bronchiectasis
Pneumatocele
Retained primary teeth
None
1
2
3
>3
Scoliosis maximum curvature
<10°
10–14°
15°–20°
>20°
Fractures with minor trauma
None
1–2
>2
Highest eosinophil count (cells/μl)c
<700
700–800
>800
Characteristic face
Absent
Mildly present
Present
Midline anomalyd
Absent
Present
Newborn rash
Absent
Present
Eczema (worst stage)
Absent
Mild
Moderate
Severe
Upper respiratory infections per year
1–2
3
4–6
>6
Candidiasis
None
Oral
Fingernails
Systemic
Other serious infections
None
Severe
Fatal infection
Absent
Present
Hyperextensibility
Absent
Present
Lymphoma
Absent
Present
Increased nasal widthe
<1 SD
1–2 SD
>2 SD
High palate
Absent
Present
Young‐age correction
>5 years
2–5 years
1–2 years
≤1 year
a The entry in the furthest‐right column is assigned the maximum points allowed for each finding.
b Normal <130 IU/ml.
c 700/μl =1 SD, 800/μl =2 SD above the mean value for normal individuals.
d For example, cleft palate, cleft tongue, hemivertebrae, other vertebral anomaly, etc. (see Grimbacher et al. 1999a).
e Compared with age‐ and sex‐matched controls.
Source: Grimbacher B, et al. Genetic linkage of hyper‐IgE syndrome to chromosome 4. Am J Hum Genet 1999b;65:735–44. Reproduced with permission of Elsevier.
398  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comment
Medical
Antibiotics (treatment or prophylactic)
Choice and frequency of antibiotics is based on type of 
infection and culture/sensitivity results
In patients with recurrent staphylococcal infections, 
prophylactic administration of trimethoprim‐
sulfamethoxazole is recommended
Antifungal therapies to control mucocutaneous candidiasis 
may be necessary
Surgical
Patients with deep infections may require surgical drainage.
Patients with recurrent lung infections leading to 
pneumatoceles may require segmental removal of the lung 
or lobectomy
Radiological
Chest X‐ray or CT scan
Patients with significant upper or lower respiratory 
infections should have CT scan for bronchiectasis and 
pneumatoceles
Skin care,
antihistamines,
topical emollients,
topical steroids   
•  To control pruritus and eczematous dermatitis in order to prevent 
    occurrence of systemic infection
Prophylactic
antibiotics
•  Prophylactic trimethoprim- sulfamethoxazole used in the prevention of cutaneous 
   staphylococcal infections
Antifungals,
antibiotics,
antivirals  
•  Choice of therapy is according to culture and sensitivity results and type of 
    infection (bronchitis, otitis, pneumonia, sinusitis)
•  Deep infections may require surgical drainage and intravenous antibiotics.
IFN-γ
• A trial of IFN-γ therapy is reserved/considered in patients with serious infections
Algorithm 48.2  Treatment of hyper‐IgE syndrome
Hyper IgE Syndrome  399
Treatment
Comment
Complementary
Bleach baths and swimming in chlorinated pools may be 
used to control superficial skin infections
Vitamin D and calcium supplementation in patients with 
significant bone involvement should be considered
Other
IFN‐γ therapy can be considered in patients with serious 
infections such as pulmonary aspergillosis
Prevention/management of complications
• Patients with HIES are at increased risk for lymphoma and require chemotherapy and/or 
transplantation.
Section 5: Special populations
Pregnancy
• Termination of prophylactic antibiotics may be advised during pregnancy; however, the risk of 
infection should be considered.
• Female patients with significant pulmonary and skeletal disease such as scoliosis should discuss 
these complications with their physician, as they can affect pregnancy.
Children
• Children should be monitored for scoliosis. Bone fractures may occur following minor 
trauma and can be recurrent. Therefore additional precautions should be taken for children 
participating in sports.
Elderly
Not applicable for this topic.
Others
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 6: Prognosis
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Patients survive into adulthood but lifespan may be shortened secondary to complications.
• Pulmonary complications including pneumatoceles and bronchiectasis contribute to the 
majority of mortality in patients with HIES.
• Infected pneumatoceles can lead to recurrent pneumonia, sepsis, or pulmonary hemorrhage.
• Patients who develop lymphoma have a poor prognosis.
Clinical pearls
• Treatment of HIES is focused on skin care and prevention of systemic infection.
• Prophylactic trimethoprim‐sulfamethoxazole is recommended for the prevention of cutaneous 
infections.
• Antibiotic coverage may be extended if pulmonary complications develop with secondary 
infections commonly involving Pseudomonas or Aspergillus.
400  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Natural history of untreated disease
Not applicable for this topic.
Prognosis for treated patients
Not applicable for this topic.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
• Patients with HIES should have regular follow‐ups with an immunologist. Patients with HIES 
sometimes lack signs of systemic infection and a high index of suspicion for infection by an 
immunologist to initiate treatment to prevent complications is needed. Therapy should be 
culture directed whenever possible. Patients with significant pulmonary involvement may 
require periodic imaging.
Section 7: Reading list
Freeman AF, Holland SM. The hyper‐IgE syndromes. Immunol Allergy Clin North Am 2008;28:277–91
Grimbacher B, Puck JM, Holland SM. Hyper‐IgE syndrome. In: Ochs H, Smith HIE, Puck JM (eds) Primary 
Immunodeficiency Diseases: A Molecular and Genetic Approach, 2nd edn. New York, NY: Oxford University 
Press, 2007: 496–504
Grimbacher B, Schäffer AA, Holland SM, Davis J, Gallin JI, Malech HL, et al. Genetic linkage of hyper‐IgE syn-
drome to chromosome 4. Am J Hum Genet 1999;65:735–44
Holland SM, DeLeo FR, Elloumi HZ, Hsu AP, Uzel G, Brodsky N, et al. STAT3 mutations in the hyper‐IgE syn-
drome. N Engl J Med 2007;357:1608–19
Notarangelo LD, Fischer A, Geha RS, Casanova JL, Chapel H, Conley ME, et al. Primary immunodeficiencies: 
2009 update. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2009;124:1161–78
Woellner C, Gertz EM, Schäffer AA, Lagos M, Perro M, Glocker EO, et al. Mutations in STAT3 and diagnostic 
guidelines for hyper‐IgE syndrome. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2010;125:424–32
Suggested websites
American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology. http://www.aaaai.org/home.aspx
Clinical Immunology Society. www.clinimmsoc.org
Immune Deficiency Foundation. http://primaryimmune.org/
Jeffrey Modell Foundation. www.info4pi.org
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Practice parameter for the 
diagnosis and management of 
primary immunodeficiency
American Academy of Allergy, 
Asthma and Immunology 
(AAAAI); American College 
of Allergy, Asthma and 
Immunology (ACAAI)
2005
(https://www.aaaai.org/Aaaai/
media/MediaLibrary/PDF% 
20Documents/Practice% 
20and%20Parameters/
immunodeficiency2005.pdf)
Hyper IgE Syndrome  401
International society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Primary immunodeficiency 
diseases: an update from 
the International Union of 
Immunological Societies Primary 
Immunodeficiency Diseases 
Classification Committee
International Union of 
Immunological Societies (IUIS)
2007
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/17952897)
Section 9: Evidence
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 10: Images
Not applicable for this topic.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at: 
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for  
patients, and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
402 
Deficiencies of Complement
Paula J. Busse
Department of Medicine, Division of Clinical Immunology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 49
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• The complement system is part of the innate immune system and is an important defense 
against pyogenic organisms and promotes the inflammatory response. Depending upon the 
specific complement deficiency, patients may develop recurrent sinopulmonary infections, 
­sepsis and meningitis, or autoimmune disease.
Disease classification
• Complement deficiencies can be classified based upon whether it affects the classical, alternative 
or lectin pathway or an inhibitor of these pathways (see Table: Inherited complement deficiencies 
and clinical associations).
Incidence/prevalence
• Complement deficiencies are rare.
Etiology
• Most inherited disorders of the classic pathway are transmitted as autosomal co‐dominant 
(recessive) traits (Table 49.1).
Overall Bottom Line
• Deficiencies in early components of the classic complement pathway (e.g. C1, C4, C2) may 
predispose patients to autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) or 
recurrent infections.
• Deficiencies in later components of the classic pathway may put patients at risk for recurrent 
infections with encapsulated organisms (e.g. pneumococcus and Haemophilus influenzae, 
with C3 deficiency) and neisserial infections (with C5–C9 deficiency).
• Properdin deficiency is the most common deficiency in the alternative pathway and results 
in increased risk of neisserial infections in males.
• Patients with complement deficiencies should be educated to seek medical attention with 
early signs of infection.
• Patients with complement deficiencies, which can predispose to increased risk of infection, 
should receive vaccination against pneumococcus, H. influenzae, and meningococcal 
disease.
Deficiencies of Complement  403
Table 49.1  Inherited complement deficiencies and clinical associations.
Presenting syndrome
Component
Pathway
Inheritance
Major clinical correlates
Infection
C1q, C1r, 
C1s, C4, C2
CP
Autosomal
Most commonly 
autoimmune conditions, 
particularly SLE. Also 
higher than normal 
incidence of encapsulated 
bacterial infections.
C3
Common 
to CP, AP, LP
Autosomal
Severe, recurrent 
pyogenic infections early 
in life. Also might have 
glomerulonephritis.
C5, C6, C6, 
C8, or C9
MAC
Autosomal
Recurrent Neisseria 
infections, less common 
with C9.
Factor H, 
factor I
AP inhibitors
Autosomal
Recurrent pyogenic 
infections as a result of 
C3 deficiency. Factor H 
deficiency is also 
associated with 
glomerulonephritis and 
HUS.
Properdin
AP stabilizer
X‐linked
Recurrent Neisseria 
infections
MBL
LP
Autosomal
Pyogenic infections and 
sepsis in children and 
neonates; also an 
association with SLE
CR3
Receptor
Autosomal
Leukocyte adhesion defect: 
leukocytosis, pyogenic 
infections, delayed 
umbilical cord separation
Rheumatic disorders
C1, C2, C4
CP
Autosomal
As above; mainly SLE
MBL
LP
Autosomal
As above; SLE is 
associated as well.
HAE
C1‐Inh
CP inhibitor
Autosomal
HAE
Kidney damage
C3
Common to 
CP, AP, LP
Autosomal
Membranoproliferative 
glomerulonephritis and 
overwhelming infections
Factor H
AP inhibitor
Autosomal
Atypical HUS, 
glomerulonephritis
CD46
AP inhibitor
Autosomal
Atypical HUS
PNH
Decay 
accelerating 
factor, CD59
AP and 
MAC 
inhibitors
Somatic 
mutation 
on X 
chromosome
Hemolysis and thrombosis
AP, alternative pathway; CP, classic pathway; HAE, hereditary angioma; LP, lectin pathway.
Source: Wen L, Atkinson JP, Giclas PC. Clinical and laboratory evaluation of complement deficiency. J Allergy 
Clin Immunol 2004; 113: 585–93. Reproduced with permission of Elsevier.
404  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Pathology/pathogenesis
• There are three major pathways of the complement cascade that converge at component 
C3 (Figure 49.1). Activation of C3 then produces C3b, which attaches to antigens and 
targets them for ingestion by phagocytic cells (opsonization). Production of C5b by acti­
vated C3b generates the membrane attack complex (MAC). The three pathways are the 
following:
• Classic pathway: activated when IgM or IgG antibodies bind to antigens (e.g. virus, 
bacteria).
• Lectin pathway: similar activation as the classic pathway except that instead of an antibody 
binding to the antigen, a lectin (such as mannose‐binding protein, MBP) binds to the 
antigen.
• Alternative pathway: does not require antigen binding for activation. Activated by activated 
C3 binding to a target.
Section 2: Prevention
No interventions have been demonstrated to prevent the development of the disease.
Screening
• Indications for screening include the following:
• Recurrent, unexplained pyogenic infections in patients with normal immunoglobulin and 
white blood cell counts (classic pathway, CH50);
• Recurrent neisserial infections and families with multiple members with a history of neisserial 
infection;
• Any patient with SLE.
Primary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Secondary prevention
• Patients should be instructed to seek medical attention with high fevers and/or a stiff neck, 
which may suggest meningitis.
• Vaccination against pneumococcus, H. influenzae, and meningococcus.
Section 3: Diagnosis
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• A history of SLE may suggest a deficiency in early components of the classic complement 
pathway.
• A history of recurrent infections with pneumococcus and H. influenzae may indicate a defect 
in later components of the classic complement pathway.
• Males with a familial predisposition to neisserial infections (in particular meningitis) may have 
properdin deficiency.
Deficiencies of Complement  405
Differential diagnosis
Typical presentation
• The typical presentation depends upon the component of the complement cascade that is 
involved:
• C1 deficiencies (C1q, C1r, C1s): deficiencies of C1 can develop SLE and have recurrent infections. 
Patients with deficiencies of C1r or C1s are at increased risk of renal and cutaneous sequelae.
• C4 deficiency: partial C4 deficiency predisposes a patient to develop SLE; total deficiency of 
C4 is rare. Deficiency of C4A or C4B can be associated with scleroderma, IgA nephropathy, 
Henoch–Schönlein purpura, childhood diabetes.
• C2 deficiency: patients with complete C2 deficiency can present with SLE‐like illness; children 
can present with recurrent pyogenic infections from encapsulated bacteria; associated with 
IgG subclass deficiency. Partial C2 deficiency is asymptomatic.
• C3 deficiency: complete C3 deficiency results in severe, recurrent infections with encapsulated 
bacteria that begin shortly after birth. Partial C3 deficiency has no clinical significance.
• C5–C9 deficiency: associated with infection by Neisseria species (meningococcus and 
gonococcus) which are recurrent and clinically mild to moderate.
• Properdin deficiency: affects males (gene on X chromosome). Unusual subtypes of Neisseria 
meningitis.
• Mannose‐binding lectin (MBL) deficiency: neonates and infants presenting with infections 
from encapsulated bacteria.
• Mannan‐binding lectin‐associated protease 2 (MASP‐2): severe pneumococcal pneumonia.
• C1‐inhibitor deficiency: (see Chapter 28).
• Factor H or I: a complete deficiency may produce recurrent infections and glomerulo­
nephritis. Heterozygous mutations have been associated with atypical hemolytic uremic 
­syndrome (HUS).
• Complement receptor 3 (CR3): also known as leukocyte adhesion deficiency syndrome (see 
Chapter XX).
• Decay accelerating factor (DAF) and CD59: deficiencies predispose red blood cells to lysis and 
subsequent hemolytic anemia and paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH).
Clinical diagnosis
History
• History should be focused on infection history, both in early childhood and later in life; episodes 
of meningitis; joint pains (suggesting SLE).
Physical examination
No specific physical examination findings for complement deficiency.
Differential diagnosis
Features
Decreased C4
Low C4 may be secondary to consumption in patients with SLE and 
may not indicate C4 specific deficiency. Decreased C2 and C3 suggest 
consumption
Specific antibody deficiency
Complement deficiencies will have normal immunoglobulin levels 
and antibody responses (see Chapter 40)
406  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• CH50: a complete deficiency caused by a homozygous mutation in the classic pathway gives 
an undetectable CH50 (with the exception of homozygous C9 deficiency which can give a low, 
but detectable value). Heterozygous deficiencies will have a normal CH50.
• Specific complement proteins (e.g. C2, C4, C1q): performed if the CH50 is low.
• AH50: a low value suggests deficiency of C3, C5, C6, C7, C8 or C9, properdin, or factor D.
Lists of imaging techniques
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 4: Treatment
Treatment rationale
• The present goal of therapy of patients with complement deficiencies is to treat infection and 
autoimmunity. At present, there are no commercially available replacement complement compo­
nents available. The use of plasma or blood transfusions to replace missing complements is not 
standard of care. Inhibition of complement (with a monoclonal antibody to C5) for treatment of 
PNH has been approved for clinical use. Depending on the complement deficiency, patients at 
increased risk of infection should be educated to seek medical attention quickly for symptoms of 
fever, stiff neck, purpuric rash, and so on. In addition, patients should be vaccinated against 
meningococcus, pneumococcus, and H. influenzae.
Section 5: Special populations
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 6: Prognosis
• Deficiencies of C3 result in recurrent pyogenic infections with encapsulated bacteria and high 
rates of morbidity and mortality.
• Deficiencies of the early classic pathway (C1, C4, C2) are not usually associated with an 
increased risk of infection.
• Defects in the MAC (later complement pathway) do not have as high rates of morbidity and 
mortality as deficiencies of C3.
Section 7: Reading list
Botto M, Kirschfink M, Macor P, Pickering MC, Wurzner R, Tedesco F. Complement in human diseases: lessons 
from complement deficiencies. Mol Immunol 2009;46:2774–83
Frank MM. Complement deficiencies. Pediatr Clin North Am 2000;47:1339–54
Nilsson B, Ekdahl KN. Complement diagnostics: concepts, indications, and practical guidelines. Clin Dev Immunol 
2012;2012:962702
O’Neil KM. Complement deficiency. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol 2000;19:83–108
Walport MJ. Complement. First of two parts. N Engl J Med 2001;344:1058–66
Walport MJ. Complement. Second of two parts. N Engl J Med 2001;344:1140–4
Wen L, Atkinson JP, Giclas PC. Clinical and laboratory evaluation of complement deficiency. J Allergy Clin Immunol 
2004;113:585–93; quiz 94
Section 8: Guidelines
Not applicable for this topic.
Deficiencies of Complement  407
Section 9: Evidence
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 10: Images
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at:  
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions, advice for  
patients, and ICD code
Classical (C1 q,r,s C4 and C2) deﬁciencies:
are associated with an increased predisposition
for develpoing immune complex diseases such as SLE.
MBL deﬁciencies: are associated with an increased
risk of infection with the yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae
and with encapsulated bacteria.
Alternative pathway (factor D, B, Properdin and C3):
are associated with decreased opsonization ability and a 
subsequent increased risk of infection, especially with
encapsulated bacteria. 
MAC deﬁciencies: are associated with an increased risk
of infection, especially with the bacteria N. meningitidis,
but have decreased morbidity and mortality rates than C3
deﬁciencies.
C3 deﬁciencies: are associated with defective opsonization,
deﬁcient leukocyte chemotaxis, and decreased bactericidal
killing activity (because of decreased MAC formation). 
These deﬁciencies are associated with overwhelming 
infections with encapsulated bacteria. There is also a 79%
association with the development of immune complex disease.
Classical
Alternative
C3
C3
C4
C6 C8
5b
C9
C4
C1q
C1r
MASP1
MASP2
C1S
C2
C2
C8
C7
C6
C3b
C5
C3b
C3b
C5b
C5b
C4b
“C4Convertase”
“C5Convertase”
“C3Convertase”
“C3Convertase”
Properdin
Properdin
MAC
Bb
Bb
D
C4b
MBL
MBL
Figure 49.1  Complement pathways and deficiencies. Deficiencies in complement increase susceptibility for 
infection by decreasing the ability for opsonization, which is particularly important for encapsulated 
bacteria. Additionally, a defect in the MAC decreases the ability of the immune system to generate lytic 
activity, which also increases the risk of infection with encapsulated bacteria. Source: http://emedicine.
medscape.com/article/135478‐overview. Last accessed November 2014. Reproduced with permission of 
Medscape Reference.
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
408 
Phagocytic Cell Disorders
Charlotte Cunningham‐Rundles
Departments of Medicine and Pediatrics, The Immunology Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,  
New York, NY, USA
Chapter 50
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• Genetic phagocytic disorders can be divided into several groups:
• Defects of neutrophil differentiation (neutropenia);
• Defects of motility; and
• Defects of respiratory burst.
• The results in each case lead to recurrent and/or severe infections with fungi (e.g. Candida and 
Aspergillus spp.) and/or bacteria (e.g. Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas sp. and Nocardia 
sp.). While those discussed here are genetic defects, impaired phagocytic functions can also 
occur secondary to drug reactions, diabetes mellitus, metabolic storage diseases, malnutrition, 
immaturity, or burns, among others. In addition, loss of neutrophils may be associated with 
autoimmunity, or other immune deficiency diseases.
Disease classification
• Defects of neutrophil differentiation: circulating neutrophils are deficient (<1000 cells/mm). 
This may be due to different forms of agranulocytosis (Kostmann’s syndrome), cyclic neutrope-
nia, glycogen storage disease type Ib, or failure of release of neutrophils from bone marrow, 
one version of which is WHIM syndrome (warts, hypogammaglobulinemia, infections, and 
myelokathexis). This is a rare, dominantly inherited, congenital, immunodeficiency disorder 
characterized by chronic neutropenia and cutaneous warts. Neutropenia may also be caused by 
other immune defects (e.g. X‐linked hyper IgM, X‐linked agammaglobulinemia) or secondary 
to autoimmunity that accompanies Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome, common variable immune 
deficiency, or conditions such as hypersplenism.
Overall Bottom Line
• Phagocytic disorders can be the result of inherited defects of the immune system.
• However, exclusion of other medical causes may be important.
• The genetic disorders affect both children and adults.
• Genetic mutations responsible for these can be passed on from generation to generation in 
various inheritance patterns, or can occur spontaneously.
• Because of these defects, infections occur because there are too few neutrophils or there is 
impaired neutrophil function.
• Infections may be acute or recurrent.
Phagocytic Cell Disorders  409
• Defects of motility: leukocyte adhesion deficiency (LAD) type I results from mutations in the adhesion 
molecules on neutrophils, leading to an inability of these cells to leave the circulation. This leads to high 
peripheral blood leukocyte counts, recurrent bacterial sinopulmonary and skin infections, and poor 
wound healing. Delayed separation of the umbilical cord may be identified in the clinical history. LAD 
type II results from a defect of a fucose transporter needed to glycosylate selected leukocyte adhesion 
molecules. LAD‐3, caused by mutations in Kindlin gene, is associated with infections but also a bleed-
ing disorder. Shwachman–Diamond syndrome leads to neutrophil dysfunction, amongst other syndro-
mic features. The Shwachman–Diamond protein co‐localizes with the mitotic spindle; this binds to 
and stabilizes purified microtubules. Defects in this protein lead to poor neutrophil chemotaxis. Less 
well understood are the chemotactic syndromes, which lead to severe, early onset periodontitis.
• Defects of respiratory burst: chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) is caused by defects in genes 
contributing to phagocyte NADPH oxidase. These lead to recurrent life‐threatening bacterial and 
fungal infections, with the formation of granulomatous changes in tissues. The majority of 
patients with CGD are males with defects in the X‐linked gene encoding the gp91phox subunit 
of flavocytochrome b558, a membrane‐bound protein forming a main unit of the oxidase. More 
rarely, CGD is caused by autosomal mutations in genes encoding p47phox, p67phox, or 
p22phox. When neutrophils are exposed to inflammatory stimuli, these components assemble, 
become activated, and induce superoxide formation leading to killing of microbes.
• Other neutrophil defects: these include myeloperoxidase deficiency, which is quite common. In 
this autosomal recessive disease, myeloperoxidase, an enzyme found in the azurophilic granules 
of neutrophils and monocytes, is absent. While it can be involved in killing microbes, loss of this 
enzyme is not normally associated with any illnesses. A second defect, neutrophil‐specific granule 
deficiency, is quite rare but is associated with severe bacterial infections. Chediak–Higashi syn-
drome is a very rare autosomal recessive disorder with severe congenital neutropenia. The main 
features include recurrent pyogenic infections, partial oculocutaneous albinism, progressive neu-
rologic abnormalities, mild coagulation defects, and a lymphoma‐like accelerated phase in some.
Incidence/prevalence
• The overall incidence of phagocytic defects is unknown. Most of these are rare; the estimated 
incidence of CGD is 1 in 250 000 persons. Myeloperoxidase deficiency is more common, per-
haps 1 in 2727 persons in one estimate.
Economic impact
• Phagocytic defects can lead to severe and recurrent infections. As patients often present in 
childhood and are not readily cured, over time the economic impact of these diseases is quite 
great. Treatments to raise the neutrophil count can be used (G‐CSF) but are similarly expensive 
and may be lifelong. In some cases, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is needed, leading 
to an additional economic burden. Patients with unrecognized defects will have severe infec-
tions, surgical interventions, and increased morbidity and mortality.
Etiology
• The causes of the primary phagocytic defects are mutations in genes that are required for normal 
neutrophil numbers and functions. It is important to remember that secondary phagocytic 
defects may be observed in subjects with diabetes mellitus, metabolic diseases, or in those with 
medication‐induced neutropenia.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• Genetics: a number of genes can lead to phagocytic disorders. These are categorized according 
to whether genes are involved in phagocyte cell development, cell motility, or respiratory burst.
410  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Pathology
• Defects of the phagocytic pathways can lead to the following:
• Recurrent bacterial and fungal infections;
• Organ damage, fistulae;
• Skin abscesses, inflammatory bowel disease, oral ulcers, stomatitis, gingivitis, and periodontitis 
leading to loss of teeth.
Predictive/risk factors
• A family history of a similar clinical history might suggest that an immune defect should be 
considered.
Section 2: Prevention
Screening
• Patients with medical histories suggestive of phagocytic disorders can be screened by 
­evaluating neutrophil numbers, morphology, and function.
Primary prevention
There are no primary preventative measures.
Secondary prevention
There are no secondary preventative measures.
Section 3: Diagnosis
• Childhood onset of acute or recurrent bacterial or fungal infections.
• Oral ulcers; gingivitis.
• Rectal fistulae.
• Unexplained inflammatory bowel disease.
• Organ abscesses.
• Suggestive family history.
• Isolation of unusual organisms.
Differential diagnosis
Differential diagnosis
Features
Neutropenia, chronic
Drug reaction, autoimmunity and congenital 
causes (gene mutations: ELANE; GFI1; HAX1; 
G6PC3; G6PT1; ROBLD3; TAZ)
Neutropenia, cyclic
Congenital causes (ELANE)
Persistent neutrophilia
Chronic infection, leukocyte adhesion defects, 
LAD1, LAD2, LAD3
Staphylococcus aureus liver or organ abscess
Chronic granulomatous disease (CYBB; CYBA; 
NCF1; NCF2; NCF4)
Burkholderia cepacia pneumonia or other unusual 
infection such as Aspergillus or Nocardia
Chronic granulomatous disease (CYBB; CYBA; 
NCF1; NCF2; NCF4)
Severe early periodontitis
Localized juvenile periodontitis (FPR1)
Phagocytic Cell Disorders  411
Typical presentation
• A typical scenario for CGD is a 5‐year‐old male child, with a newly diagnosed liver abscess. His 
whole blood count is elevated to 18 000 with 80% neutrophils. On abscess drainage and 
culture, Staphylococcus aureus is isolated. On history, the mother recalls that at age 2, the child 
had a rectal abscess that was successfully treated with oral antibiotics. The child recovers 
well with intravenous antibiotics. There is no family history of an immune defect as far as 
the parents know.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• Symptoms are heterogeneous as the organs and systems affected, and depend on the phago-
cytic defect. For cases of neutropenia, severe and early onset bacterial infections are prominent. 
For subjects with CGD, lymphadenitis, organ abscesses, or pneumonias with typical organisms 
are common. In CGD, early onset gastrointestinal disease is not uncommon. Details sought in 
the clinical history should include the microbiology of any previous cultures. Obtaining a 
detailed family history is always important.
Physical examination
• Physical examination should start with evaluation for signs of systemic illness. Fever may be 
present with acute infections, otherwise chronic fever would be uncommon. Patients with 
acute lung infections may be short of breath, have a productive or non‐productive cough, and 
may have pulmonary signs such as rhonchi or rales on examination. Lymphadenitis is common. 
Gingivitis, oral ulcers, canker sores, and/or swollen gums are common findings in subjects with 
phagocytic defects.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• CBC with differential.
• Neutrophil oxidative burst.
• Genetic mutational studies as indicated.
Lists of imaging techniques
• Chest X‐ray and/or CT if lung findings are suspected.
• Ultrasound for organ abscesses.
• CT of the abdomen to examine organ size, lymphadenopathy.
• MRI may be preferred to minimize exposure to ionizing radiation.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis  
of disease
• Failing to diagnose phagocytic defects leads to excess morbidity.
Section 4: Treatment
Treatment rationale
• The goal of therapy is to provide amelioration of the phagocytic defect.
412  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comments
Conservative
(Medical)
Recombinant G‐CSF given at sufficient intervals to raise the neutrophil counts 
into the normal or near‐normal range, 3–5 µg/kg SC/IV every day, as needed
For neutopenic patients: chronic antibiotics are used, potentially trimethoprim‐
sulfamethoxazole (5 mg/kg twice daily), and perhaps itraconazole 100 or  
200 mg/day
If neutropenia is due to autoimmunity, short courses of steroids can be tried.  
If persistent, rituximab in standard 375 mg/m2 for 4 weeks may be of use
For CGD: standard of care includes trimethoprim‐sulfamethoxazole (5 mg/kg 
twice daily), and itraconazole 100 or 200 mg/day
IFN‐γ in some cases: patients with a body surface area of ~0.5 m2, 0.05 mg/m2; 
for those with a body surface area of ~0.5 m2, 0.0015 mg/kg; administered SC 
3 times weekly
For new infections, a first choice is often ciprofloxacin
Surgical
Drainage of abscesses
Radiological
To examine organs as needed
Other
Encourage normal activities, schooling, work, etc.
Hematopoetic stem  
cell transplantation
Required for cases of severe congenital neutropenia; reserved for selected cases  
of CGD
Prevention/management of complications
• Steroids or other immunosuppressants are used for only short periods as needed.
Section 5: Special populations
Pregnancy
• Treatment is as usual but with medications approved in pregnancy.
Children
• Treatment is as usual but with medications given based on weight.
Elderly
• Treatment is as usual.
Section 6: Prognosis
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Patients with phagocytic defects may do well with medical treatment.
• Careful evaluation of any new clinical findings that develop over time is important.
Clinical pearls
• Phagocytic disorders may lead to severe bacterial and fungal infections.
• These usually present in childhood.
• Inheritance may be X‐linked, autosomal dominant or recessive.
• Treatment is dictated by the medical need but immunosuppression is to be minimized.
• Stem cell transplant for the most severe forms can be curative.
Phagocytic Cell Disorders  413
Natural history of untreated disease
• Continued bouts of infections are likely.
• Organ damage may occur.
• Loss of teeth from oral inflammation is common in some of these defects.
Prognosis for treated patients
• Varying with the degree of the genetic defect.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
• Careful follow‐up for signs of infection.
Section 7: Reading list
Boxer, LA, How to approach neutropenia. Hematol Am Soc Hematol Educ Program 2012;2012:174–82
Holland SM. Chronic granulomatous disease. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol 2010;38:3–10
Lanza F. Clinical manifestation of myeloperoxidase deficiency. J Mol Med 1998;76:676–81
Suggested websites
NIH. http://rarediseases.info.nih.gov/gard/6100/chronic‐granulomatous‐disease/resources/1
http://www.aaaai.org/conditions‐and‐treatments/primary‐immunodeficiency‐disease/chronic‐ 
granulomatous‐disease.aspx
http://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/condition/chronic‐granulomatous‐disease
Section 8: Guidelines
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 9: Evidence
• The genetic defects are rare and for many, medical evidence of treatment plans are not available. 
For CGD studies on best practices:
Type of evidence
Title, comment
Date
Randomized, double‐blind, 
placebo‐controlled study
Itraconazole to prevent 
fungal infections in chronic 
granulomatous disease
Comment: Now routinely 
adopted
2003
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ 
pubmed/12802027)
International multicenter 
randomized prospective 
placebo‐controlled trial
A controlled trial of interferon 
gamma to prevent infection 
in chronic granulomatous 
disease — The International 
Chronic Granulomatous Disease 
Cooperative Study Group
Comment: Used in some centers
1991
(http://www.nejm.
org/doi/full/10.1056/
NEJM199102213240801)
414  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Section 10: Images
Figure 50.1  Phagocytic defect. A 16‐month‐old boy with no major past medical history developed fevers 
2 weeks prior to admission. A biopsy shows granuloma and Burkholderia cepacia was cultured.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at:  
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions,  
and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
  415
Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection 
in Infants, Children, and Adolescents
Gail F. Shust and Roberto Posada
Departments of Pediatrics and Medical Education, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 51
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• The term pediatric HIV is used to refer to children ≤13 years. Adolescent HIV refers to youth 
≥13 years living with HIV.
Disease classification
• Children with current or prior immunologic category 3 classification or category C symptoms 
(see Disease severity classification in the Clinical diagnosis section) are classified as having AIDS.
Incidence/prevalence
• As of 2011, there were 3.3 million children <15 years living with HIV worldwide.
• In 2011, there were approximately192 children <13 years and 2293 youth aged 13–19 newly 
diagnosed with HIV in the United States.
• In 2010, there were 10 798 people with perinatally acquired HIV in the United States. Fifty‐three 
infants were born with HIV in the United States that year.
Economic impact
• CDC estimates that the lifetime treatment cost of a patient with HIV infection is $379 668 
(in 2010 dollars). The cost effectiveness of antiretroviral therapy to treat HIV and to prevent 
mother to infant transmission of the virus has been demonstrated in several studies.
Etiology
• The vast majority of HIV cases in the United States are caused by the HIV‐1.
Overall Bottom Line
• In the United States, perinatal human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection occurs 
­infrequently, and currently most pediatric infections are acquired during adolescence.
• HIV screening should be part of routine adolescent care.
• Acute HIV infection can present as a mononucleosis‐like illness. When suspected, an HIV RNA 
assay is the diagnostic test of choice.
• HIV infection may be asymptomatic for years. Patients with HIV infection can present with an 
opportunistic infection or with end‐organ involvement.
• Treatment of HIV infection involves combination antiretroviral therapy (cART) and results in 
improved patient outcomes and decreased transmission rates.
416  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Pathology/pathogenesis
• HIV is present in blood, vaginal secretions, and semen of infected individuals and is transmitted 
through sexual contact, exposure to blood or body fluids, or from an infected woman to her 
newborn infant.
• HIV infects cells that express the CD4 receptor, and its RNA genome is reverse‐transcribed to 
DNA and integrated into the host DNA.
• Infection is followed by a gradual decline in the function and number of CD4+ lymphocytes and 
by immune activation and chronic inflammation.
Predictive/risk factors
• Children born to women with HIV, children who are victims of sexual abuse, or adolescents 
who are sexually active, or use intravenous drugs are at risk for HIV infection. Also at risk are 
children who have received blood products outside of the United States in countries where the 
blood supply is not considered safe.
Section 2: Prevention
Screening
• All individuals aged 13–64 should be screened for HIV infection at least once with an HIV 
­antibody immunoassay, with repeat screening at least annually for those considered at risk. All 
pregnant women should be screened at initiation of prenatal care, and in the third trimester in 
areas of high HIV prevalence.
• Infants born to women with HIV should be screened for infection with an HIV RNA assay. Two nega-
tive RNA assay results, one after 1 month of age and one after 4 months of age, exclude infection.
Primary prevention
• Use of cART for HIV infected women during pregnancy, combined with zidovudine for 6 weeks 
to the newborn infant and avoidance of breastfeeding, are highly effective for PMTCT of HIV. 
Cesarean section delivery can further decrease the risk of infant infection when the maternal 
HIV viral load (VL) is >1000 copies/mL close to the time of delivery.
• The use of cART by HIV infected individuals is associated with decreased transmission rates to 
sexual partners. Condom use decreases the risk of HIV infection in males and females, and 
male circumcision decreases the risk of HIV acquisition through vaginal intercourse in males.
• Oral tenofovir or tenofovir/emtricitabine can prevent HIV acquisition when used as PrEP by 
at‐risk HIV‐negative individuals.
• PEP can decrease HIV transmission following sexual contact or accidental needle‐stick exposures.
Secondary prevention
• Early detection and treatment of HIV infection prevents HIV related complications and decreases 
the risk of transmission of HIV to others.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Use of cART during pregnancy combined with zidovudine in the newborn period and 
avoidance of breastfeeding are highly effective for preventing mother‐to‐child transmission 
(PMTCT) of HIV.
• cART also prevents transmission of HIV from infected individuals to their sexual partners 
and antiretrovirals can be used as pre (PrEP) or post‐exposure (PEP) prophylaxis for 
uninfected individuals.
HIV Infection in Infants and Young Children  417
Section 3: Diagnosis (Algorithm 51.1)
HIV EIA
No HIV
infection 
Acute
HIV
infection
suspected?
HIV RNA
assay 
Acute HIV
infection 
HIV-1 WB
or IFA 
Chronic
HIV-1
infection* 
Acute
HIV
infection
suspected?
No HIV infection
consider HIV-2 testing
HIV RNA
assay
Acute HIV
infection
* If <18 months of age positive antibody test results need to be conﬁrmed by an HIV RNA assay.
No HIV
infection
(–)
(+)
No
No
Yes
Yes
(+)
(+)
(+)
(–)
(–)
(–)
Algorithm 51.1  Traditional HIV testing
Step 1. HIV-1/2 Ab/Ag assay (4th generation)
(+)
(–)
Step 2. HIV-1/2 antibody differentiation assay
Step 3. HIV-1 RNA assay
HIV-1 (+)
HIV-2 (–)
positive for
HIV-1 Abs*
HIV-1 (–) or indeterminate
HIV-2 (–)
HIV-1 (+)
HIV-2 (+)
(undifferentiated)
positive for HIVAbs*
HIV-1 (–)
HIV-2 (+)
positive for
HIV-2 Abs*
RNA (+)
positive for HIV-1
RNA (–)
negative for HIV-1
Negative for HIV -1 and HIV-2 Abs and HIV-1 p24 Ag
     (+) = reactive test result
     (–) = nonreactive test result
Italics= ﬁnal interpretation; No further testing required
* If <18 months of age positive antibody test results
need to be conﬁrmed by an HIV RNA assay.
Algorithm 51.2  New HIV testing
418  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Differential diagnosis
Typical presentation
• Acute HIV is often asymptomatic, but may present as a mononucleosis‐like illness, with fever 
and sore throat; a rash may be present. Children with chronic HIV may be asymptomatic or 
can have varied manifestations with involvement of any organ system. Common presenta-
tions include opportunistic infections (e.g. Pneumocystis pneumonia) or invasive bacterial 
infections; failure to thrive; prolonged fever; frequent, persistent, or more severe manifesta-
tions of common infections; chronic parotid gland enlargement; chronic dermatitis; compli-
cated varicella; recurrent herpes simplex or herpes zoster; or end‐organ involvement such as 
developmental delay, cardiomyopathy, hepatitis, nephropathy, anemia, thrombocytopenia, or 
leukopenia.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• A history of prior infections, including frequency, severity, causative pathogen, and response to 
treatment is important. The clinician should obtain a careful developmental history and enquire 
about school performance and learning or behavioral problems that may suggest CNS effects 
of HIV. A complete review of systems should be obtained to identify end‐organ involvement. 
When obtaining the family history it is important to enquire about known maternal HIV or 
symptoms that suggest undiagnosed infection in the mother. If the patient’s mother is known 
to be HIV infected, details about cART during pregnancy, maternal VL at the time of delivery, 
mode of delivery, use of neonatal zidovudine prophylaxis, and whether the patient was breast-
fed should be obtained.
Physical examination
• Height, weight, and head circumference (if <3 years old) should be assessed.
• The dermatologic examination should include an evaluation for atopic dermatitis, diaper 
rashes, and petechiae or bruising.
• The eyes, ears, nose, and throat examination should include a search for otitis media, thrush, 
gingivostomatitis, and aphthous ulcers.
• The cervical, axillary, epitrochlear, and inguinal areas should be examined for the presence of 
enlarged lymph nodes.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Patients with acute HIV can present with a mononucleosis‐like illness.
• Chronic HIV may be asymptomatic or present with opportunistic infections; frequent or more 
severe manifestations of common infections; wasting, fever, and failure to thrive; or end‐organ 
involvement.
• Acute HIV is diagnosed by a positive HIV RNA assay. The diagnosis of chronic HIV is confirmed 
by a positive HIV antibody immunoassay.
Differential diagnosis
Features
For chronic HIV infection: primary immunodeficiencies
HIV antibody test
For acute HIV infection: mononucleosis, pharyngitis, 
influenza
HIV RNA assay positive
Negative testing for other diagnoses
HIV Infection in Infants and Young Children  419
• The heart and lungs should be auscultated for possible tachycardia or abnormal breath sounds, 
and the abdomen should be evaluated for the presence of hepatosplenomegaly.
Useful clinical decision rules and calculators
Not applicable for this topic.
Disease severity classification
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• When acute HIV infection is suspected, the preferred diagnostic test is an HIV RNA assay 
because HIV RNA can generally be detected in plasma before antibody tests become positive.
• When chronic HIV infection is suspected, conventional testing with an HIV enzyme immunoassay 
(EIA) which detects antibodies in plasma against HIV‐1 and HIV‐2 should be performed. A positive 
result is automatically confirmed with a Western blot (WB) or immunofluorescent antibody (IFA) 
assay specific for HIV‐1.
• When available, newer “4th generation” HIV-1/2 Antigen/Antibody (Ag/Ab) assays are pre-
ferred over conventional EIA assays. These assays may be positive earlier in the window period 
than traditional EIA. If the result from this test is ‘Non-reactive’, no further testing is necessary. 
If the result is ‘Reactive’, this is considered preliminarily positive, and supplemental testing 
must be performed, beginning with an HIV-1/HIV-2 antibody differentiation immunoassay. If 
the result of the differentiation test is positive, the diagnosis is confirmed. If the result of the 
CDC classifies pediatric HIV based on clinical and immunological parameters
Category
Symptoms
Category N: non‐symptomatic
No symptoms or only one category A symptom
Category A: mildly symptomatic
Two or more of the following: lymphadenopathy, 
hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, dermatitis, parotitis, recurrent or 
persistent upper respiratory infections
Category B: moderately 
symptomatic
Includes persistent oral candidiasis; chronic diarrhea; recurrent 
herpes simplex virus stomatitis; complicated or recurrent 
varicella‐zoster infections; persistent fever; single episode 
of serious bacterial infection; and end‐organ manifestations 
of HIV
Category C: severely symptomatic
Includes recurrent serious bacterial infections,  
opportunistic infections, encephalopathy, and wasting 
syndrome
CD4+ lymphocyte count/μL (percentage of total lymphocytes)
> 12 months
1–5 years
6–12 years
Immunologic category 1
≥1500 (≥25%)
≥1000 (≥25%)
≥500 (≥25%)
Immunologic category 2
750–1499 (15–24%)
500–999 (15–24%)
200–499 (15–24%)
Immunologic category 3
<750 (<15%)
<500 (<15%)
<200 (<15%)
420  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
differentiation assay is negative or indeterminate, a HIV RNA assay must be performed to rule 
out acute infection.
• A positive antibody test in an infant <18 months of age may represent infection, or antibody 
transmitted through the placenta from the mother to the infant in the absence of infection of 
the child. Therefore, in this age group a positive antibody test result should be confirmed with 
an HIV RNA assay.
• An alternative to HIV antibody testing in blood samples is oral fluid testing which follows a 
similar algorithm to conventional testing.
• Rapid HIV antibody tests can provide a result in ≤30 minutes and can be used for point‐of‐care 
testing, but positive results must be confirmed with a WB or IFA assay.
List of imaging techniques
Not applicable for this topic. 
Potential pitfalls
Antibody HIV testing with EIA may miss acute HIV infection.
Section 4: Treatment
Treatment rationale
• Adherence to cART is critical to prevent development of drug resistance. Therefore, the decision 
to initiate cART should take into account the ability of the caregiver and child to adhere to the 
regimen. The goal of treatment is to decrease the HIV plasma VL to undetectable levels and 
improve immune function.
• Treatment is currently recommended for:
• All infants <12 months;
• All children ≥1 year with AIDS or CDC clinical category B or C symptoms;
• Asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic children in the following categories:
➤
➤children 1 to <3 years with CD4 cell count <1000 cells/mm3 or CD4 percentage <25%;
➤
➤children 3 to <5 years with CD4 cell count <750 cells/mm3 or CD4 percentage <25%;
➤
➤children ≥5 years with CD4 cell count ≤500 cells/mm3.
• Treatment should be considered for asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic children in the 
­following categories:
• Children 1 to <3 years with CD4 cell count ≥1000 cells/mm3 or CD4 percentage ≥25%;
• Children 3 to <5 years with CD4 cell count ≥750 cells/mm3 or CD4 percentage ≥25%;
• Children ≥5 years with CD4 cell count >500 cells/mm3.
• Treatment of adolescents follows the guidelines for treatment of HIV infected adults (see 
Chapter 52)
When to hospitalize
Patients with HIV infection are generally manged in the outpatient setting. Opportunistic infec-
tions or complications due to end organ effects of HIV may require inpatient management.
Managing the hospitalized patient
Management of the hospitalized patient depends on the nature of their complications. Every 
effort should be made to continue cART without interruption.
HIV Infection in Infants and Young Children  421
Table of treatment
Prevention/management of complications
• NRTIs can cause lactic acidosis and multi‐organ failure. Life‐threatening hypersensitivity can be 
caused by abacavir (in patients with the HLA B*5701 haplotype) or nevirapine (particularly 
in patients with relatively high CD4 counts). Several antiretroviral drugs are associated with 
hyeprlipidemia and lipodystrophy.
• Management of treatment complications involves substituting the suspected drug(s) with an 
alternative agent. For serious complications requiring treatment interruption, all agents should 
be discontinued simultaneously. Dose reduction is not recommended.
Treatment of HIV generally includes at least three drugs from at least two different classes. Drug resistance 
testing should be obtained prior to initiating therapy. The following are the preferred regimens for treat-
ment‐naïve children
Age
Preferred regimen
Children aged ≥14 days to <3 years
Two nucleoside reverse‐transcriptase inhibitors 
(NRTIs) plus lopinavir/ritonavira
Children aged ≥3 years
Two NRTIs plus efavirenzb
Two NRTIs plus lopinavir/ritonavir
Children aged ≥6 years
Two NRTIs plus atazanavir plus low‐dose 
ritonavir
Two NRTIs plus efavirenzb
Two NRTIs plus lopinavir/ritonavir
Two NRTI options
Abacavirc plus lamivudine or emtricitabine (children aged ≥3 months)
Tenofovir plus lamivudine or emtricitabine (adolescents, Tanner stage 4 or 5)
Zidovudine plus lamivudine or emtricitabine
a Lopinavir/ritonavir should not be administered to neonates before a post‐menstrual age of 42 weeks and a 
postnatal age of 14 days.
b Efavirenz should be used only in children aged ≥3 years with weight ≥10 kg. Unless adequate contraception can 
be ensured, efavirenz‐based therapy is not recommended for females of childbearing age.
c Abacavir should only be used in patients who are HLA B*5701 negative.
For treatment‐experienced children, resistance testing and prior antiretroviral history should be taken 
into account when designing cART regimens. Prophylaxis for opportunistic infections is required for 
children meeting the following criteria
Infection
Indication
Preferred agent
Pneumocystis pneumonia
All infants <12 months
Age >1 year and immunologic category C
Trimethoprim‐
sulfamethoxazole
Mycobacterium avium‐complex
Age ≥6 years and CD4 < 50 cells/mm3
Age 2–5 years and CD4 < 75 cells/mm3
Age 1–2 years and CD4 < 500 cells/mm3
Age <1 year and CD4 < 750 cells/mm3
Azithromycin
422  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Section 5: Special populations
Pregnancy
HIV pregnant women are managed similarly to other adults with HIV infection. Achieving an 
undetectable VL is associated with decreased transmission of HIV to the newborn infant. See 
Chapter 52.
Children
Not applicable for this topic.
Elderly
Not applicable for this topic.
Others
• Infants born to HIV‐positive mothers
• Chemoprophylaxis with zidovudine for 6 weeks is recommended for all HIV‐exposed 
infants.
• HIV‐exposed infants whose mothers did not receive antepartum cART should receive zidovu-
dine for 6 weeks plus three doses of nevirapine in the first week of life.
• Adolescents
• Medication adherence is often poor in this population. A multidisciplinary, motivational team 
approach may be helpful.
• Choice of cART for adolescents is complex and dependent upon many factors including body 
mass, Tanner Stage, and psychosocial factors.
• Care providers should prepare adolescents over time for transition to the adult care 
setting.
Section 6: Prognosis
• The risk of disease progression associated with a specific CD4 percentage or count varies with 
the age of the child.
• Infants ≤12 months old experience higher risks of morbidity and mortality than older children 
at any CD4 threshold.
• Treatment of HIV‐infected children has been associated with enhanced survival, reduction in 
opportunistic infections and other medical complications, improved growth and neurocogni-
tive function, and improved quality of life.
Clinical pearls
• The decision regarding when to initiate or change cART in children is multifactorial.
• Combination regimens should include at least three drugs from at least two drug  
classes.
• Drug‐resistant virus can develop while on cART due to poor adherence, a regimen that 
is not potent, or a combination of these factors, resulting in incomplete viral  
suppression.
HIV Infection in Infants and Young Children  423
Follow‐up tests and monitoring (see Algorithm 51.3)
Section 7: Reading list
Branson BM, Handsfield HH, Lampe MA, Janssen RS, Taylor AW, Clark JE, et al. Revised recommendations for 
HIV testing of adults, adolescents, and pregnant women in health‐care settings. MMWR Recomm Rep 
2006;55:1–17; quiz CE1–4
LK, Pickering, CJ Baker, DW Kimberlin (eds). Human immunodeficiency virus infection. Red Book, 29th Edition. 
Report of the Committee on Infectious Diseases. American Academy of Pediatrics, 2012;418–39.
Suggested websites
http://hivinsite.ucsf.edu/
http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/
www.cdc.gov/hiv/statistics/basics/index.html
www.hivguidelines.org
http://www.unaids.org/en
Infant or child diagnosed as HIV positive
Repeat test to conﬁrm diagnosis
If diagnosis conﬁrmed, baseline tests, including
CD4 lymphocyte count, HIV VL and
resistance testing, CBC, LFTs, creatinine,
electrolytes, lipid panel, urinalysis   
Based on clinical picture, laboratory ﬁndings
and readiness of patient and family, decision is
made when to initiate cART  
Once cART initiated, follow-up 2 weeks
later to assess adherence and side
effects/toxicities  
HIV VL, CD4 lymphocyte count,CBC, LFTs,
creatinine, electrolytes, lipid panel and
urinalysis checked
every 3–6 months thereafter
4–6 weeks after cART initiation check VL to
assess treatment response
Algorithm 51.3  Management of the HIV positive child
424  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Guidelines for the use of 
antiretroviral agents in pediatric 
HIV infection
Department of Health and Human 
Services (HHS)
2014
(http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/
guidelines/html/2/pediatric‐
arv‐guidelines/0)
Recommendations for use of 
antiretroviral drugs in pregnant 
HIV‐1‐infected women for 
maternal health and interventions 
to reduce perinatal HIV 
transmission in the United States
Department of Health and Human 
Services (HHS)
2014
(http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/
contentfiles/lvguidelines/
perinatalgl.pdf)
Guidelines for the prevention 
and treatment of opportunistic
infections among HIV‐exposed 
and HIV‐infected children
CDC, National Institutes of Health 
(NIH); HIV Medicine Association of 
the Infectious Diseases Society of 
America (HIVMA/IDSA); the Pediatric 
Infectious Diseases Society (PIDS); 
and the American Academy of 
Pediatrics (AAP)
2013
(http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/
contentfiles/lvguidelines/oi_
guidelines_pediatrics.pdf)
Section 9: Evidence
Type of evidence
Title 
Date
Retrospective cohort study
Decreasing rate of hospitalization 
for perinatal HIV infection 
(Clin Infect Dis 2004;39(5): i 
doi:10.1086/423392
2004
(http://cid.oxfordjournals.
org/content/39/5/i.full)
Population surveillance study
Low rates of mother-to-child 
transmission of HIV following 
effective pregnancy interventions 
in the United Kingdom and Ireland, 
2000–2006 
(AIDS 2008;22(8):973–81)
2004
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pubmed/18453857)
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at: 
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions,  
and ICD codes
HIV Infection in Infants and Young Children  425
Section 10: Images
Figure 51.2  Brain MRI image of an 18‐year‐old woman with perinatally acquired HIV and progressive 
multifocal leukoencephalopathy. She presented with left hemiparesis and a CD4+ lymphocyte count of 8/μL. 
The MRI revealed T2 hyperintensities without contrast enhancement. A PCR for JC virus on the cerebrospinal 
fluid was positive.
Figure 51.1  Chest X‐ray of an 18‐year‐old man with perinatally acquired HIV and Pneumocystis pneumonia 
showing bilateral reticulonodular densities. The patient’s CD4+ lymphocyte count is 18/μL and the percentage 
CD4 lymphocyte count is 3%. At the time of presentation he had been non‐adherent with trimethoprim‐­
sulfamethoxazole which had been prescribed for Pneumocystis pneumonia prophylaxis.
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
426 
Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection 
in Adults
Timothy Sullivan and Michael Mullen
Division of Infectious Diseases, Mount Sinai Hospital, New York, NY, USA
Chapter 52
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• HIV is a single‐stranded RNA retrovirus that causes AIDS. AIDS is defined as HIV infection 
associated with either a serum CD4+ T‐lymphocyte level of <200 cells/μL, or with an “AIDS‐
defining condition,” which includes 24 opportunistic infections, malignancies, and other 
conditions.
Disease classification
• HIV classification and staging systems have been developed by the CDC and World Health 
Organization (WHO) for epidemiologic purposes. The CDC system ranges from stage A to C 
and the WHO system from stage I to IV, with later stages representing more advanced 
disease.
Incidence/prevalence
• The United Nations estimated that in 2012 there were 35.3 million people living with HIV, 
2.3 million new HIV infections, and 1.6 million deaths due to AIDS worldwide.
• The burden of disease is highest in sub‐Saharan African, where the prevalence in some countries 
exceeds 20%.
Overall Bottom Line
• The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is a single‐stranded RNA virus that causes the 
acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS)
• HIV infection is typically transmitted via sexual contact, intravenous drug use, other exposure 
to infected blood products, or via perinatal transmission.
• HIV infection causes the destruction of CD4+ T lymphocytes, which can result in profound 
immunosuppression, susceptibility to severe infections, and higher rates of certain 
malignancies, such as non‐Hodgkin’s lymphoma and cervical cancer.
• HIV infection is also a chronic inflammatory process that may cause cardiac, renal, neurologic, 
and other comorbidities.
• HIV and AIDS are major causes of morbidity and mortality worldwide; however, antiretroviral 
therapy (ART) significantly alters the natural history of HIV, suppressing its effects, preserving 
immune function, and dramatically improving patient survival.
HIV Infection in Adults  427
• According to the CDC, in 2010 in the United States there were 1.3 million people aged 13 and 
older living with HIV, and 47 000 new HIV infections.
Economic impact
• The economic effects of HIV have been devastating, particularly in sub‐Saharan Africa and 
throughout the developing world.
• One study estimated that in the United States in 2002, the lifetime cost of new HIV infections 
was $36.4 billion, of which $6.7 billion was medical costs and $29.7 billion was due to lost 
productivity.
Etiology
• HIV is typically transmitted via sexual contact, intravenous drug use, other exposure to infected 
blood products, or via perinatal transmission.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• The majority of new HIV infections occur by sexual transmission, via the genital or rectal 
mucosa. Virions typically migrate through intracellular spaces or breaks in the epithelium to 
infect macrophages, CD4+ T lymphocytes and Langerhans cells. Following transmission, HIV 
begins replicating in the mucosal, submucosal, and adjacent lymphatic tissues, then typically 
progresses into the lymphoid tissue of the gut, where it rapidly replicates, causing an exponential 
rise in the serum HIV viral load and potentially irreversible depletion of CD4+ T lymphocytes. The 
widespread death of lymphocytes and ongoing viral replication cause the release of inflammatory 
cytokines, which causes flu‐like symptoms. Following the initial innate immune response, there is 
a cellular and humoral response. CD4+ T‐lymphocyte levels typically rise after the acute infection, 
then steadily decline afterwards.
Predictive/risk factors
These numbers are not clearly defined for HIV/AIDS.
Section 2: Prevention
Screening
• In 2013, the US Preventive Services Task Force recommended that all patients aged 15–65, 
all pregnant women, and all patients younger than 15 or older than 65 and at high risk for 
HIV be screened. This guideline suggests repeating screening annually in those at very high 
risk for HIV.
• Available screening tests for established HIV infection are the serum HIV enzyme immunoassay 
(EIA) in combination with a confirmatory Western blot, as well as rapid HIV antibody testing of 
both serum and oral fluid. HIV nucleic acid amplification and p24 antigen tests are used to 
screen for acute HIV.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Several preventive strategies specific to the different modes of HIV transmission have been 
proven effective. Importantly, for all types of HIV transmission the use of ART in source 
patients (i.e. “treatment as prevention”) has been shown to reduce their infectivity and 
prevent new infections.
428  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Primary prevention
• To prevent sexual transmission, abstinence, the use of barrier protection, male circumcision, 
and both pre‐ and post‐exposure antiretroviral prophylaxis are effective.
• Among intravenous drug users, methadone treatment programs, needle exchange programs, 
and educational outreach have helped reduce HIV transmission.
• To prevent mother‐to‐child transmission, perinatal ART and cesarean section delivery in high‐risk 
patients is efficacious.
• For all types of HIV transmission, the use of ART in source patients has been shown to reduce 
their infectivity and prevent new infections.
Secondary prevention
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 3: Diagnosis (Algorithm 52.1)
Differential diagnosis of acute HIV
Typical presentation
• Patients with acute HIV infection often present with non‐specific symptoms of an acute viral syn-
drome, including fever, chills, malaise, fatigue, myalgia, and lymphadenopathy. Other presenting 
complaints include rash, cough, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, or headache. Rarely, patients with 
acute HIV may present with an opportunistic infection.
• Patients who are newly diagnosed with AIDS may present with weight loss and signs of chronic 
illness, or with signs and symptoms of acute opportunistic infections. Given the wide range of 
opportunistic infections in AIDS patients, presentation at this stage is varied.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• When taking a history from a patient with suspected HIV, identifying high‐risk behaviors is 
essential. Additionally, patients who present with acute HIV often complain of viral symptoms, 
including fever, malaise, myalgias, rash, and lymphadenopathy.
• On examination, findings in patients with acute HIV are non‐specific and include fever, rash, 
or lymphadenopathy. Patients with advanced HIV/AIDS may present with signs of wasting 
and chronic illness, chronic skin lesions, signs of acute opportunistic infections, or signs of 
malignancy.
• Laboratory testing in patients with suspected HIV should include an HIV antibody test, either 
via rapid HIV test or serum EIA. In those with suspected acute HIV, a serum HIV RNA PCR or 
p24 antigen test should be carried out.
Differential diagnosis
Features
Mononucleosis
Very difficult to distinguish clinically, diagnosed on the basis of 
laboratory testing
Influenza
Very difficult to distinguish clinically, diagnosed on the basis of 
laboratory testing
Other non‐specific viral syndromes
A diagnosis of exclusion
HIV Infection in Adults  429
Clinical diagnosis
History
• When obtaining a history from a patient with suspected HIV, identifying high‐risk behaviors such 
as intravenous drug use, commercial sex work, unprotected intercourse with multiple partners, 
and men who have sex with men, is essential. Patients who present with acute HIV often complain 
of viral symptoms including fever, chills, malaise, fatigue, myalgia, and lymphadenopathy. Other 
presenting complaints include rash, cough, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, or headache. It is impor-
tant to gauge the acuity of these symptoms, especially in relation to recent high‐risk behaviors.
• When interviewing a patient with suspected long‐term HIV infection or AIDS, it is important to 
assess for complaints consistent with active opportunistic infections, as well as signs of prolonged 
immunosuppression, such as recurrent infections or other unexplained illnesses. Additionally, 
patients with AIDS may complain of cognitive decline or other neurologic deficits.
Physical examination
• The initial physical examination of a patient with suspected HIV infection or AIDS should be com-
prehensive, because of the varied, non‐specific, and sometimes subtle examination findings.
• When examining patients with suspected acute HIV, the clinician should include a search for 
rash, lymphadenopathy, signs of intravenous drug use, and signs of other concurrent sexually 
transmitted infections.
• The examination of a patient with suspected AIDS, in addition to the above, should include a 
meticulous search for opportunistic infections and other sequelae of AIDS, including but not 
limited to: general wasting, ocular infections, oropharyngeal lesions, chronic skin lesions (espe-
cially those suggestive of Kaposi’s sarcoma), signs of pneumonia, gastrointestinal infection, 
hepatosplenomegaly, peripheral neuropathy, or central nervous system pathology.
HIV screening
indicated
Suspected acute
HIV
NAAT or p24-
based test
Negative. Consider 
repeat in 1–2 weeks if
suspicion is high
Positive*
EIA
EIA
All others
Rapid HIV test
(oral or serum)
Negative. No
further testing.
Negative. No
further testing.
Positive.
Conﬁrm
with EIA.
Positive
Negative.
Consider NAAT to
rule out acute
HIV
Positive.
Established HIV
infection.
Conﬁrm with
western blot
Negative.
Possible acute
HIV
Positive.
Established HIV
infection
Algorithm 52.1  Diagnosis of HIV
Note: EIA, enzyme immunoassay; NAAT, nucleic acid amplification test. If HIV RNA viral load is used as screening for 
acute HIV, a cutoff of 10 000 copies/mL is suggested because of the possibility of false positives with lower values.
430  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Useful clinical decision rules and calculators
Not applicable for this topic.
Disease severity classification
Not applicable for this topic.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• HIV serum EIA: indicated for screening for established HIV infection. Highly sensitive. The current, 
“third generation” test typically becomes positive about 3 weeks after HIV infection.
• p24 antigen test: used for the detection of acute HIV. Typically becomes positive about 2 weeks 
after acute infection and 1 week before the EIA. Currently available in combination with EIA as 
the “fourth generation” HIV test.
• HIV Western blot: used to confirm a positive EIA. Highly specific, but less sensitive. May remain 
negative for up to 3 weeks after EIA becomes positive in early HIV infection.
• Rapid HIV tests: antibody tests that are performed on serum or oral fluid. Results may be returned 
in minutes. Sensitivity has been reported as similar to the serum EIA, although sensitivity may be 
lower in early HIV infection.
• HIV nucleic acid amplification tests: HIV RNA and DNA PCR testing is the recommended screening 
test for suspected acute HIV infection. Its use is limited by high cost and slow turn‐around time 
(about 2 days)
Lists of imaging techniques
• The use of imaging studies in newly diagnosed HIV or AIDS patients should be guided by clinical 
suspicion of opportunistic infections or malignancies.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis of disease
• Acute HIV infection is commonly mistaken for a non‐specific viral syndrome. Additionally, even 
when clinicians suspect acute HIV, often the correct diagnostic test (either a nucleic acid ampli-
fication or p24 test) is not performed.
• Screening for asymptomatic HIV infection may be overlooked in high‐risk patients until they 
become symptomatic with an AIDS‐defining illness.
Section 4: Treatment
Treatment rationale
• ART has revolutionized the care of patients with HIV, resulting in preserved immune function, 
reduced rates of opportunistic infections and other complications, and significantly improved 
survival for millions of patients.
• Antiretroviral agents and the recommendations for their use are continually evolving. Early guide-
lines suggested initiating ART only in patients with AIDS or otherwise low CD4 levels. However, 
given the enhanced efficacy and improved tolerability of current regimens, as well as recent evi-
dence indicating that starting treatment earlier may be beneficial, recent guidelines recommend 
starting ART sooner. The 2013 WHO guidelines recommend starting ART in patients with AIDS or 
CD4 counts of 500 cells/μL or less, while the most recent guidelines from the US Department of 
Health and Human Services recommend initiating ART for all patients with HIV.
• The general approach when initiating ART is to start three active antiretroviral agents from at 
least two different medication classes. Classes include nucleoside analog reverse transcriptase 
HIV Infection in Adults  431
inhibitors, non‐nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors, protease inhibitors, integrase strand 
transfer inhibitors, and entry inhibitors. Recent guidelines from the US Department of Health 
and Human Services include recommendations for preferred and alternative regimens. 
Second line and salvage regimen choices are typically guided by HIV resistance testing or 
other ­contraindications to first line medications.
When to hospitalize
Not applicable for this topic.
Managing the hospitalized patient
Not applicable for this topic.
Table of treatment
Preferred and alternative regimens for the initial treatment of HIV
Treatment
Comment
Medical
• Preferred regimens:
1.  Efavirenz/tenofovir/emtricitabine
2.  Ritonavir‐boosted atazanavir + tenofovir/
emtricitabine
3.  Ritonavir‐boosted darunavir + tenofovir/
emtricitabine
4.  Raltegravir + tenofovir/emtricitabine
Efavirenz: may cause significant neuropsychiatric 
side effects
Tenofovir: may cause renal toxicity and a reduction 
in bone mineral density
Protease inhibitors: potent inhibitors of 
the cytochrome p450 enzymes, resulting in 
numerous drug–drug interactions. May also 
cause severe gastrointestinal and metabolic side 
effects
• Alternative regimens:
1.	 Rilpivirine/tenofovir/emtricitabine
2.	 Efavirenz + abacavir/lamivudine
3.	 Rilpivirine + abacavir/lamivudine
4.	 Ritonavir‐boosted atazanavir, darunavir, 
lopinavir or fosamprenavir + abacavir/
lamivudine
5.	 Ritonavir‐boosted lopinavir or fosamprenavir +  
tenofovir/emtricitabine
6.	 Raltegravir + abacavir/lamivudine
7.	 Elvitegravir/cobicistat/tenofovir/ 
emtricitabine
Atazanavir: may cause indirect hyperbilirubinemia 
that does not reflect liver damage
Abacavir: may cause a fatal hypersensitivity 
reaction. Contraindicated in patients who are 
positive for HLA‐B*5701
Cobicistat: CYP 3A inhibitor, numerous drug–drug 
interactions
All medications that are joined by a forward slash (e.g. tenofovir/emtricitabine) are available in co‐formulated 
­fixed‐dose combinations. Treatment recommendations are likely to change as new drugs become available.
Prevention/management of complications
• Older ART regimens were associated with several severe, debilitating and potentially fatal adverse 
reactions, including lactic acidosis, hepatic steatosis, anemia, renal failure, lipodystrophy, 
peripheral neuropathy, and chronic diarrhea. In addition to managing associated symptoms, 
the cornerstone of managing these adverse effects in the modern ART era is changing the 
patient’s treatment to a better‐tolerated regimen.
432  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Section 5: Special populations
Pregnancy
• The care of pregnant women with HIV presents several challenges, given the imperative need to 
prevent the spread of HIV from mother to child, as well as the potential teratogenicity of certain 
antiretrovirals.
• All pregnant women should be started on ART.
• Pregnant women with HIV should be managed with close coordination between obstetrics and 
HIV specialists.
Children
• There are several distinct challenges to treating a child with HIV, including overcoming barriers 
to ART adherence and managing social and psychological stressors, especially among victims 
of sexual abuse.
Elderly
• As a result of the efficacy of modern ART, patients with HIV are living longer, and the number 
of elderly HIV patients is rising.
• The care of elderly patients with HIV must incorporate consideration of the long‐term effects of 
HIV infection, including cardiac, renal, and neurologic disease, and the potential for long‐term 
side effects of ART.
Others
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 6: Prognosis
Clinical pearls
• ART has revolutionized the care of patients with HIV, and has significantly improved survival 
for millions of patients.
• Current guidelines from the US Department of Health and Human Services recommend 
initiating ART for all patients with HIV.
• ART is associated with many potential toxicities and drug interactions; however, the safety and 
efficacy of current regimens are improving.
• Given the complexity of existing regimens and the rapidly evolving nature of HIV care, the 
decision to start ART and the choice of initial regimen should be made in consultation with an 
HIV specialist.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• In the absence of ART, HIV typically causes the gradual destruction of CD4 cells, which may 
result in fatal opportunistic infections.
• ART can significantly preserve immune function and improve survival.
• The survival of patients on ART with well‐controlled HIV may be similar to that of the general 
population.
HIV Infection in Adults  433
Natural history of untreated disease
• In the absence of ART, following the initial infection and widespread destruction of CD4+ 
T lymphocytes, HIV causes a gradual decline in CD4 cell levels. The rate of decline of CD4 
cells and the time until the development of AIDS is highly variable.
• A small subset of patients, called “long‐term non‐progressors,” exhibit minimal reductions 
in CD4 levels despite HIV infection. Another minority of patients, called “elite controllers” 
maintain undetectable serum levels of HIV without ART.
• Without treatment, most patients eventually develop profound immunosuppression, which 
may result in opportunistic infections and death.
Prognosis for treated patients
• The outcomes of patients who begin treatment early in the course of HIV infection, are adher-
ent to ART, and have few comorbid medical conditions are generally excellent.
• Recent studies have shown that the survival of patients with well‐controlled HIV may be similar 
to that of the general population.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
• Patients being treated with ART require life‐long regular follow‐up to ensure treatment efficacy, 
and monitor for adverse effects.
Section 7: Reading list
Cohen MS, Chen YQ, McCauley M, Gamble T, Hosseinipour MC, Kumarasamy N, et al. Prevention of HIV‐1 
infection with early antiretroviral therapy. N Engl J Med 2011;365:493–505
Global report: UNAIDS report on the global AIDS epidemic 2013. Geneva, Switzerland: 2013
HIV Surveillance Report. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2011; vol. 23
Hutchinson AB, Farnham PG, Dean HD, Ekwueme DU, del Rio C, Kamimoto L, et al. The economic burden of 
HIV in the United States in the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy: evidence of continuing racial and 
ethnic differences. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 2006;43:451–7
Kitahata MM, Gange SJ, Abraham AG, Merriman B, Saag MS, Justice AC, et al. Effect of early versus deferred 
antiretroviral therapy for HIV on survival. N Engl J Med 2009;360:1815–26
Panel on Antiretroviral Guidelines for Adults and Adolescents. Guidelines for the use of antiretroviral agents in 
HIV‐1‐infected adults and adolescents. Department of Health and Human Services, 2013
Ray M, Logan R, Sterne JA, Hernandez‐Diaz S, Robins JM, Sabin C, et al. The effect of combined antiretroviral 
therapy on the overall mortality of HIV‐infected individuals. AIDS (London, England). 2010;24:123–37
Rodger AJ, Lodwick R, Schechter M, Deeks S, Amin J, Gilson R, et al. Mortality in well controlled HIV in the 
continuous antiretroviral therapy arms of the SMART and ESPRIT trials compared with the general population. 
AIDS (London, England). 2013;27:973–9
Schneider E, Whitmore S, Glynn KM, Dominguez K, Mitsch A, McKenna MT. Revised surveillance case definitions 
for HIV infection among adults, adolescents, and children aged <18 months and for HIV infection and AIDS 
among children aged 18 months to <13 years – United States, 2008. MMWR Recomm Rep 2008;57:1–12
Screening for HIV: Final Recommendation Statement. AHRQ Publication No. 12‐05173‐EF‐3. US Preventive 
Services Task Force, 2013
World Health Organization. Consolidated guidelines on general HIV care and the use of antiretroviral drugs for 
treating and preventing HIV infection: recommendations for a public health approach. 2013 9241505729
Suggested websites
aidsinfo.nih.gov
hivinsite.ucsf.edu
www.cdc.gov/hiv
www.who.int/hiv
434  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Panel on Antiretroviral Guidelines for 
Adults and Adolescents. Guidelines for 
the use of antiretroviral agents in HIV‐1‐
infected adults and adolescents
Department of 
Health and Human 
Services (DHHS)
2014
(http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/contentfiles/
lvguidelines/adultandadolescentgl.pdf)
Screening for HIV: Final 
Recommendation Statement. AHRQ 
Publication
US Preventive 
Services Task Force 
(USPSTF)
2013
(Ann Intern Med 2005;143:32–7)
Guidelines for the Prevention and 
Treatment of Opportunistic Infections in 
HIV‐Infected Adults and Adolescents
Department of 
Health and Human 
Services (DHHS)
2013
(http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/contentfiles/
adult_oi.pdf)
International society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Consolidated guidelines on general HIV care 
and the use of antiretroviral drugs for treating 
and preventing HIV infection: recommendations 
for a public health approach
World Health 
Organization (WHO)
2013
(http://www.who.int/hiv/pub/
guidelines/arv2013/en/)
Section 9: Evidence
Too numerous to list here.
Section 10: Images
Not applicable for this topic.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at: 
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions,  
and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
  435
Infections in the Compromised Host
Charlotte Cunningham‐Rundles
Departments of Medicine and Pediatrics, The Immunology Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,  
New York, NY, USA
Chapter 53
Section 1: Background
Definition of disease
• The immune system is composed of a large network of cells and organs working together. As 
a strong immunity is so important for heath, nature has provided a number of overlapping 
immune systems to cope with an entire range of microbes. However, in a number of medical 
conditions, the immune system is not able to protect against infections due to underlying 
causes. Depending on the type and size of the immune defect, the infections that may develop 
can vary widely.
Disease classification
• The first objective is to determine the nature of the underlying cause and attempt correction 
or amelioration of this condition. For example, the use of steroids or immunosuppressants 
for allergic or autoimmune disease is likely to impair the number and/or function of these 
immune cells.
• To define the type of immune defect underlying various infections, immunologists use a 
classification system based on the components of the immune network:
• T cells: arise in the thymus and help control viruses, and aid in antibody production;
• B cells: develop into plasma cells and produce long‐lasting antibodies;
Overall Bottom Line
• Patients with severe unusual or recurrent infections may have defects in the immune system 
from non‐genetic causes.
• These are called secondary immune defects.
• The underlying causes are likely to be anatomic obstruction, previous organ damage, 
untreated allergy, immunosuppression given for other diseases, viral infections, malignancy, 
or malnutrition.
• The type of infections experienced will be based on the location of the organ damage, and 
type of immunosuppression, viral infection, or cancer.
• Subjects may be either sex, and of any age, but are more likely to be adults.
• Careful microbiologic cultures are important.
• The goal of treatment is to define the type of infection, the cause of the illness, and evaluate 
if protective measures can be instituted.
436  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
• Combined defects: in which both T and B cells are defective;
• Phagocytic cells: neutrophils go to the site of infection and engulf and digest bacteria;
• Complement: a system of proteins that interact to aid the function of antibodies but also 
control immune reactions;
• Innate immunity: a group of cells that do not need to be primed to work.
Incidence/prevalence
• The incidence of secondary immune defects is unknown but is likely to be common.
• Secondary immune defects may be due to drugs such as steroids, chemotherapy, chronic leukemias 
(chronic lymphocytic leukemia), or a viral infection (such as Epstein–Barr virus or HIV). In these cases, 
immune defects can lead to a variety of infections and also inflammatory/autoimmune disease.
Economic impact
• Unrecognized secondary immune defects lead to both morbidity and mortality.
Etiology
• Secondary immune defects result from loss or abnormality of one or more of the many components 
of the immune system.
• The mechanisms for this loss may be due to many causes, the main ones being the use of 
medications, presence of unrecognized malignancy, or viral infections.
Pathology/pathogenesis
• Immune defects may also be secondary to other causes.
• Genetics: complex inheritance patterns may obscure any genetic contributions.
• Pathology: as the immune system contains many components and various members of this 
network are found in all organs, the pathology of immune defects is based on the organ itself:
• Acute bacterial infections of the lungs, blood, or solid organs;
• Inflammatory disease of the joints, lung, liver, and so on;
• Autoimmunity, in particular immune thrombocytopenia or hemolytic anemia;
• Chronic gastrointestinal inflammation with loss of absorptive surfaces leading to diarrhea, 
malnutrition, iron deficiency anemia, hypoalbuminemia, and so on.
Predictive/risk factors
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 2: Prevention
Screening
• Patients with medical histories suggestive of immune defects (e.g. recurrent infections, autoim-
munity, enlarged spleen, lymphadenopathy) can be tested with screening tests to determine if 
serum immunoglobulins are normal, if vaccines have led to the production of antibodies, and 
if the cells of the immune system are found in normal proportions.
Primary prevention
There are no primary preventive measures.
Secondary prevention
There are no secondary preventive measures.
Infections in the Compromised Host  437
Section 3: Diagnosis
• Immune defects generally lead to acute or recurrent bacterial infections, infections with unusual 
organisms, or infections that prove difficult to eliminate.
• In some cases, significant infections have not occurred but various forms of inflammatory or auto-
immune disease have occurred (e.g. interstitial lung disease, arthritis, hematologic cytopenias, 
gastrointestinal infections, or inflammation).
• The clinical examination can be normal or show non‐specific signs such as lung abnormalities 
(rales, rhonchi) or lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, pallor, or evidence of malnutrition or 
­gastrointestinal disease is present.
Differential diagnosis
Typical presentation
• The typical scenario is an adult who has a significant medical history of asthma and has 
been treated with steroids for some time, who now has had several episodes of pneumo-
nia. Laboratory testing shows somewhat low serum IgG and antibody production to the 
pneumococcal vaccine shows a blunted response. The immune defect may be due to 
steroid use in this case. In other cases, the antibody response may be poor when the 
underlying cause is an expansion of clonal B cells, characteristic of chronic lymphocytic 
leukemia (CLL). Here, in early stages, CLL may not lead to a high lymphocyte count but 
antibody functions are not normal.
Clinical diagnosis
History
• Symptoms are as heterogeneous as the organs and systems affected, and depend on the 
nature of the immune defect. In 80% of cases, lung infections occur, specifically pneumonia or 
chronic bronchitis. A history of difficult‐to‐treat chronic sinusitis is very common; a history of 
having one or more previous sinus surgeries is often found. Gastrointestinal disease is seen in 
some. Details sought in the clinical history should include duration and onset of symptoms, 
fatigue, fever, weight loss, shortness of breath. Weight loss is common. Obtaining a detailed 
family history is always important, as well as questions about smoking, drug use, and the medi-
cations tried.
Physical examination
• Physical examination should start with evaluation for signs of systemic illness, including weight 
loss.
• Fever may be present with acute infections, otherwise chronic fever would be uncommon.
• Patients with lung disease may be short of breath, have a productive or non‐productive cough, 
and may have pulmonary signs such as rhonchi or rales on examinination.
• Lymphadenopathy is common, and enlarged spleen may be detected.
• Skin changes include scarring from previous herpes zoster; vitiligo appears to be common.
Differential diagnosis
Features
Allergy/asthma
Recurrent infections; pneumonias
Chronic viral/parasitic infection
Infections, weight loss
Malignancy/lymphoma
Weight loss, fever
Medications
Rash, fever
438  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
• Chronic conjunctivitis, iritis, or episcleritis, may be observed.
• Joint complaints include changes due to previous joint infections, or autoimmune, chronic 
arthritis.
Laboratory diagnosis
List of diagnostic tests
• Complete blood count (anemia, moderate leukocytosis, thrombocytosis).
• Serum IgG, IgA, IgM.
• Tests for functional antibody (e.g. tetanus, diphtheria).
• CRP and sedimentation rate.
• Microbial cultures where applicable.
• Liver function tests, renal function, and electrolytes.
• Serum iron, folate and vitamin B12 if malabsorption is suspected.
• Microbiologic studies to exclude infectious etiologies.
Lists of imaging techniques
• Chest X‐ray.
• Complete lung functions (spirometry and diffusion capacity).
• High resolution CT of the chest.
• Ultrasound for question of splenomegaly.
• CT of the abdomen to examine organ size, lymphadenopathy.
• MRI may be preferred to minimize exposure to ionizing radiation.
Potential pitfalls/common errors made regarding diagnosis of disease
• Failing to diagnose immune defects in adults leads to excess morbidity.
• Over‐diagnosis can lead to excess medical costs as therapies can be expensive.
Section 4: Treatment
Treatment rationale
• The goals of therapy are to provide protection against infections and, where possible, to use 
any available therapy to enhance the immune system.
• Antibiotics: when an immune deficiency has been documented, antibiotics should be started 
immediately for fevers and other manifestations of infection after appropriate cultures have 
been obtained. These cultures are important to direct further therapy if the infection does not 
respond to the initial antibiotic chosen. Prophylactic antibiotics can be of benefit, especially for 
subjects with chronic lung disease. A satisfactory combination of antibiotics includes amoxicillin‐
clavulanate, erythromycin, trimethoprim‐sulfamethoxazole, or a cephalosporin. In adults, 
amoxicillin‐clavulanate, trimethoprim‐sulfamethoxazole, tetracyclines, or a cephalosporin 
are useful. Quinolones are best saved to treat acute infections.
• Immunoglobulin: when significant loss of antibody production has occurred and this has 
been fully documented, the optimum treatment is immunoglobulin replacement. The usual 
starting dosage for the intravenous forms is 400–600 mg/kg/month; IVIg can be given at 
home. Subcutaneous treatment is also quite effective; smaller doses are given once a week.
• Specific treatment for T‐cell deficiency: there are few specific treatments for T‐cell immune 
deficiencies aside from bone marrow and stem cell transplants for the most severe forms 
(SCID). Other therapies, such as cytokines, remain investigational.
• Specific treatment of phagocytic disorders: there are very few treatments for the phagocytic 
disorders, aside from the use of antibiotics as needed, or G‐CFS to raise the neutrophil count.
Infections in the Compromised Host  439
• Specific treatment for complement deficiency: fresh frozen plasma from healthy donors can 
transiently replace specific complement components in patients with isolated complement 
component defects and severe infections. However, this is not clinically shown to be of use.
Table of treatment
Treatment
Comments
Conservative
Antibiotics for acute care as needed
Prophylactic antibiotics for some
Medical
Immunoglobulin replacement when loss of antibody documented; 400–600 mg/kg, 
IV or SC
Antibiotics as above
Surgical
Biopsies if pathology suspected
Radiological
To examine lungs or other organs as needed
Complementary
Vitamins and nutrients as needed
Other
Enforce normal activities, schooling, work, etc.
Prevention/management of complications
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 5: Special populations
Pregnancy
• Treatment is as usual but with medications approved in pregnancy.
Children
• Treatment is as usual but with medications given based on weight.
Elderly
• Treatment is as usual but with medications given based on weight.
Section 6: Prognosis
Clinical pearls
• Steroids and other immunosuppressants are to be avoided when the immune system is 
impaired.
• Smoking is a risk factor for progressive lung disease.
• Do not start immunoglobulin therapy unless a complete evaluation of antibody production 
has been carried out.
Bottom line/clinical pearls
• Most adults with immune defects will do well if the correct therapy is initiated.
• Careful evaluation of any new clinical findings that develop over time is important.
• Using antibiotics according to the requirements of the disease is essential; these choices are 
based on published data.
440  Part 2: Clinical Immunology
Natural history of untreated disease
• Continued infections and possibly unregulated inflammatory disease may occur.
Prognosis for treated patients
• Varying with the disease, but clearly improved with treatment.
Follow‐up tests and monitoring
• Careful follow‐up for signs of new infections not adequately treated is important. For patients 
on immunoglobulin therapy, attention to trough values (the IgG at the lowest points before 
retreatment) is essential.
Section 7: Reading list
Primary Immune Deficiency Disease: Cecil Medicine 22nd edition, Elsevier
Ocampo CJ, Peters AT. Antibody deficiency in chronic rhinosinusitis: epidemiology and burden of illness. 
Am J Rhinol Allergy 2013;27:34–8
Suggested websites
American Associate of Asthma Allergy and Immune Deficiency. http://www.aaaai.org/conditions‐
and‐treatments/primary‐immunodeficiency‐disease.aspx
Immune Deficiency Foundation. www.primaryimmune.org
Jeffrey Modell Foundation. www.info4pi.org
NIH. http://www.niaid.nih.gov/topics/immunedeficiency/
Section 8: Guidelines
National society guidelines
Guideline title
Guideline source
Date
Practice parameter for the 
diagnosis and management 
of primary immunodeficiency
American Academy of Allergy, 
Asthma and Immunology 
(AAAAI)
2005
(https://www.aaaai.org/Aaaai/media/
MediaLibrary/PDF%20Documents/
Practice%20and%20Parameters/
immunodeficiency2005.pdf)
Section 9: Evidence
Not applicable for this topic.
Section 10: Images
Not applicable for this topic.
Additional material for this chapter can be found online at: 
www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
This includes a case study, multiple choice questions,  
and ICD codes
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
  441
Index
Page numbers in italic refer to figures. Page numbers in bold refer to tables.
abacavir
hypersensitivity, 295, 302, 421, 431
pediatric HIV disease, 421
abdomen
eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 186
hereditary angioedema, 249, 251, 255
abscesses
chronic granulomatous disease, 410, 411
hyper IgE syndrome, 396, 397
immunodeficiencies, 330
sinusitis, 61
ACE-1 (angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors)
cough, 100
hereditary angioedema, 246, 248, 249
insect sting allergy, 285
aciclovir see acyclovir
acid anhydrides, asthma-causing, 115
acids, asthma-causing, 116
acrylates, asthma-causing, 115
acute atopic dermatitis, 15
acute cough, 98
treatment, 102, 103
acute food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome, 
158, 160, 161
acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis, 297
acute HIV disease, 417, 418, 428
screening, 427
acute rhinosinusitis, 52, 53, see also bacterial 
rhinosinusitis; recurrent acute rhinosinusitis
acute urticaria, 222–233
acyclovir
herpes simplex, 10
Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome, 365–366
additives (drugs and foods), adverse reactions, 200–207
adenosine deaminase deficiency (ADA deficiency), 
356, 358, 359
adhesion molecules, defects, 409
adolescents see teenagers
adrenaline see epinephrine
adrenal insufficiency, chronic mucocutaneous 
candidiasis, 377
adrenal suppression, 21
adult onset atopic dermatitis, 15
adverse reactions
food and drug additives, 200–207
to immunotherapy, 314, 317
skin tests, 320
aeroallergens
atopic dermatitis, 17
immunotherapy, 314
age-related differences, eosinophilic esophagitis, 
173, 175
aggressive systemic mastocytosis (ASM), 271
follow-up, 276
prognosis, 275
AH50 (test), complement deficiencies, 406
AIDS see HIV disease
airflow obstruction, definition, 85
air pollution, see also aeroallergens
sinusitis, 54
airways, see also laryngeal dysfunction
food allergy-induced anaphylaxis, 194
albuterol, 95, 129
anaphylaxis, 262, 263
food additive reactions, 205
aleukemic mast cell leukemia, 271
alkalis, asthma-causing, 116
allergens, see also aeroallergens; food allergens
allergic rhinitis, 36
asthma, 85, 90
avoidance, 40, 120, 137, see also avoidance 
under pollens
contact dermatitis, 25, 26
Hevea latex, 288
for immunotherapy, 314
skin testing, 39, 48
pregnancy, 41
testing specific to, 37–38
allergen-specific IgE, 39, 321–322
food allergy, 152, 169
food protein-induced proctocolitis, 169
for immunotherapy, 315
occupational asthma, 119
serum tests, 39, 48, 136, 142
442  Index
allergic angioedema, hereditary angioedema vs, 
248, 249
allergic conjunctivitis, 66, 67
clinical signs, 71
diagnosis, 69
perennial, 68, 69
presentation, 70
prognosis, 75
seasonal, 67, 68, 69
allergic contact dermatitis, 26, 150
atopic dermatitis vs, 6, 18
chronic, 29, 31
differential diagnosis, 70
immunosuppressants, 33
irritant contact dermatitis vs, 28
patch testing, 321
presentation, 28–29
rash, 27
allergic rhinitis, 36–43, 330
course of disease, 42
eosinophilic esophagitis, 174
eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 184
immunotherapy, 40, 41, 42, 315
non-allergic rhinitis vs, 46, 47
oral allergy syndrome, 142, 143
incidence, 140
sinusitis associated, 53–54
sinusitis vs, 56
symptom scoring, oral food challenge, 219
triggers, 48
allergic salute, 37
allergic shiners, 37
allergists, food reintroductions, 180
allopurinol, hypersensitivity, 295, 302
alpha-1-antitrypsin, eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 186
alternative pathway, complement system, 404, 407
American College of Gastroenterology, on celiac 
disease, 215
American Thoracic Society, website, 80
amino acid-based formulae
eosinophilic esophagitis, 178, 179
eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 187
food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome, 160
food protein-induced proctocolitis, 169
aminocaproic acid, 251, 252
amniotic fluid, testing for hereditary angioedema, 
247
amoxicillin, 60, 339
hypersensitivity, 295
ampicillin, hypersensitivity, 295
anabolic androgens, hereditary angioedema, 251, 
252, 253
anal fissure, 166, 169
anaphylaxis, 228, 256–266
defined, 256
diagnostic criteria, 260
during drug desensitization, 311
drug reactions, 305
food additives, 205
food allergy, 191–199
clinical features, 158
diagnostic criteria, 195
management, 137
oral food challenge, 218, 220
risk, 133
food-dependent exercise-induced, 191, 223
insect stings, 278
management, 196
mastocytosis vs, 269
oral allergy syndrome, incidence, 140, 142, 145
oral food challenge, 218, 220
presentation, 125
reintroduction of foods, 151, 152
anatomy, sinusitis, 54
androgens, hereditary angioedema, 251, 252, 253
anemia, see also hemolytic anemia
celiac disease and, 209
food protein-induced proctocolitis, 171
angioedema, 223, 225, 226
anaphylaxis vs, 258, 259
hereditary, 238, 245–255
vs allergic, 248, 249
mastocytosis vs, 269
mastocytosis vs, 269
angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors see ACE-1
angry back see erythema
annatto, 200
annual testing, food allergy, 138
anorexia, eosinophilic esophagitis, 175
anosmia, nasal polyps, 63
antibiotics
allergy, 294–300
antibody deficiencies, 344
atopic dermatitis, 10
children, recurrent infections, 332
chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, 380
hyper IgE syndrome, 396, 398
immunodeficiencies, 332, 338, 339, 344, 396, 
398, 412, 438
phagocyte disorders, 412
recurrent infections, 332, 338, 339
sinusitis, 60, 61
pregnancy, 62
Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome, 365–366
antibodies
celiac disease, 209
chronic urticaria, 236
cross-linking, food allergy, 192
deficiencies, 341–347
complement deficiencies vs, 405
selective IgA deficiency, 348–354
maternal, 328, 353
antibody tests, pediatric HIV disease, 420
antibody titers, vaccinations, 331
Index  443
anticholinergic effects, antihistamines, 230
anti-deamidated gliadin peptides, celiac disease, 
210
antifibrinolytics, hereditary angioedema, 251, 252
antifungal agents, chronic mucocutaneous 
candidiasis, 379, 380
antigen/antibody tests, HIV-1/2, 417, 419–420
antihistamines
allergic eye diseases, 74
allergic rhinitis, 40
anaphylaxis, 261, 262, 263
from food allergy, 192
atopic dermatitis, 8
challenge procedures and, 204, 217
children, 229, 231
cough and, 101
for drug desensitization, 310, 311
food additive reactions, 205
intranasal, 41, 49
allergic rhinitis, 41
non-allergic rhinitis, 49
pregnancy, 49
mastocytosis, 273, 274
oral allergy syndrome, 145
before oral food challenge, 217
side-effects, 230
before skin tests, 319
urticaria, 226, 227, 228, 229, 239–241, 242
anti-inflammatory drugs
allergic eye diseases, 73, 74
urticaria, 241
antiretroviral therapy see combination antiretroviral 
therapy
anti-transglutaminase antibodies, 208, 209, 210, 
212
antitussive agents, 102
antiviral agents, herpes simplex, 10
Apidae, 279
apoptosis see programmed cell death
Artemis deficiency, 358
arterial blood gases
food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome, 159
status asthmaticus, 123, 126
arthritis, autoimmune lymphoproliferative 
syndrome, 390
artificial tears, 72
ascites, eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 184
aspiration, exclusion, 197
aspirin, mastocytosis, 273, 274, 275
asthma
adults, 91–97
anaphylaxis vs, 258
assessment, 77–81
challenge procedures, 204
children, 82–90
status asthmaticus, 130
classification
severity, 79, 85, 86, 94, 126
symptom frequency, 91
clinical diagnosis, 84–85, 92, 93–94
clinical signs, 84, 92, 93, 125
cough, 93, 100, 101
differential diagnosis, 84, 93
eosinophilic esophagitis, 174
eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 184
exacerbations, 87–88, 126
exercise-induced, 107–113
follow-up, 89, 94
food additives and, 204, 207
food allergy-induced anaphylaxis and, 194
laboratory diagnosis, 85–87, 94
occupational, 114–122
prognosis, 120–121
pediatric, 82–90
prognosis, 88–89, 96
sinusitis, 55
status asthmaticus, 123–131
sulfites, 201
treatment, 87–88, 90, 95
emergencies, 94–95, 127–129
atazanavir, 431
athletes, exercise-induced bronchoconstriction, 
107, 112
atopic dermatitis
children, 3–14, 22
food allergy and, 148, 150
contact dermatitis vs, 6, 18, 27, 29
diagnostic criteria, 7
eosinophilic esophagitis, 174
eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 184
food allergy, 133, 135, 148–154
hyper IgE syndrome vs, 395
teenagers and adults, 15–23
urticaria vs, 225
atopic keratoconjunctivitis (AKC), 66, 67
clinical signs, 71
diagnosis, 68, 69
differential diagnosis, 70
hypersensitivity, 67
presentation, 70
prognosis, 75
tests, 72
treatment, 75
atopic march, 11
atopy, recurrent infections vs, 329
atopy patch test, 321
atrophic rhinitis, 38
auriculotemporal syndrome, 225
autoimmune disorders
celiac disease and, 209
chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, 377
complement deficiencies, 403
hereditary angioedema vs, 248
urticaria, 242
444  Index
autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome, 
388–392
autoimmune polyendocrinopathy, candidiasis and 
ectodermal dystrophy (APECED), 377
autoimmunity, see also thyroid autoantibodies
IPEX syndrome, 382
Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome, 364
autoinjectors, epinephrine, 137
autosomal dominant hyper IgE syndrome, 377, 
393, 394
avoidance
allergens, 40, 120, 137, see also avoidance 
under pollens
food additives, 204
pollens, 37
stinging insects, 280
azelastine, 41
azithromycin, 339
azoles, chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, 379, 380
bacteria
antibody deficiencies, 343
atopic dermatitis, 4
treatment, 10
bacterial rhinosinusitis, 53, 57
cultures, 54, 59
staphylococci, 53, 54
treatment, 60
bamboo hair, 6
barrier creams, 27, 33
barrier proteins, 4, 13, 16
baths, see also bleach baths
atopic dermatitis, 19
B cells, 435
chronic lymphocytic leukemia, 437
deficiencies, 335, 342, see also deficiencies 
under antibodies
children, 329, 330
common gamma chain deficiency, 358
selective IgA deficiency, 349
beta-2-agonists, 95
exercise-induced bronchoconstriction, 109, 
110, 111
short-acting (SABA), 109, 110, 111, 128, 129
status asthmaticus, 128, 129
status asthmaticus, 127, 129
beta 2 transferrin, 48, 57
beta-blockers
anaphylaxis and, 194, 198
drug desensitization and, 309
insect sting allergy, 285
beta-lactam ring, 300
beta-lactams see cephalosporins; penicillins
'B' findings, mastocytosis, 272
biologics
atopic dermatitis, 20
eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 187
biomarkers, inflammation, 77, 78
biopsy, see also histopathology
celiac disease, 211, 212
eosinophilic esophagitis, 175, 178
mastocytosis, 268
bone marrow, 270, 272
recurrent infections, 338
urticaria, 227, 239
biotin deficiency, 6
biphasic reactions, anaphylaxis, 261, 263
from food allergy, 195, 205
birch pollen allergy, 140
biting insects, allergy, 279
bleach baths, 19
hyper IgE syndrome, 399
bleeding
eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 183
rectal, food protein-induced proctocolitis, 165
blepharitis, 70
Blood-borne Pathogens Standard, 289
blood counts, see also complete blood count
white cells, food protein-induced enterocolitis 
syndrome and, 157
blood gases see arterial blood gases
blood pressure
anaphylaxis, 260, 261
childbirth, 263
food allergy, 195
symptom scoring, oral food challenge, 219
blood products
IPEX syndrome patients, 386
reactions, 351, 353
bone
adenosine deaminase deficiency, 359
densitometry, mastocytosis, 271
hyper IgE syndrome, 394, 396, 397, 399
bone marrow
mastocytosis, 268, 270–271, 272
neutrophil release disorders, 408
transplantation, 332
severe combined immunodeficiency, 359, 360
Bordetella pertussis, 102
bradykinin, hereditary angioedema, 246
breastfeeding
atopic dermatitis and, 4
food allergy prevention, 133, 134
food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome, 
156, 160
food protein-induced proctocolitis, 168
treating allergic rhinitis, 41
brilliant blue, 201
broad-spectrum antibiotics, 294
bronchiectasis, cough, 100, 101
bronchiolitis, 84, 125
bronchodilators
anaphylaxis, 262, 263
asthma, testing, 78, 81, 85
Index  445
bronchoprovocation, 78, 119
budesonide
allergic rhinitis, 41
asthma, 96
eosinophilic esophagitis, 178, 179
eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 188
bullous pemphigoid, 225
bumblebee venom, 282
Burkholderia cepacia pneumonia, 414
burning mouth syndrome, 142
C1 deficiencies, 405
C1-inhibitor
acquired deficiency, 248
replacement, 250–251, 252
testing, 249, 250
C1-inhibitor gene, 245
C1q, hereditary angioedema, 249, 250
C2 deficiencies, 405
C3 deficiencies, 405, 406, 407
C4 (serum)
decrease, 405
hereditary angioedema, 247, 249, 250
C5–9 deficiencies, 405
caffeine, 134
calcineurin inhibitors
allergic eye diseases, 74
atopic dermatitis, 10, 11
calcium supplements
DiGeorge syndrome, 372
hyper IgE syndrome, 399
Caldwell's view, 59
Candida albicans, 376
candidiasis, 377
hyper IgE syndrome, 397
immunodeficiencies, 330
mucocutaneous
chronic, 375–381
severe combined immunodeficiency, 357
severe combined immunodeficiency, 357
carbamazepine, hypersensitivity, 295, 302
carbon dioxide, blood, status asthmaticus, 123, 
127
carbon monoxide, diffusion capacity for, 101
carcinoid syndrome, 269
cardiac anomalies, DiGeorge syndrome, 369, 370, 
371
carmine, 200–201
casein hydrolysates see protein hydrolysate milk 
formulae
cashew allergy, screening, 133
cats, dander, 37
CD3δ, ε, ζ chain deficiencies, 358
CD4-positive T cells
autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome, 389
HIV disease, 419, 426, 427
immunotherapy, 315
CD8-positive T cells, autoimmune 
lymphoproliferative syndrome, 389
CD25
deficiency, 384
mastocytosis, 270
CD45 (common leukocyte antigen), mutation, 356, 
358
CD59 deficiencies, 405
CD117 (c-kit), 268
celiac disease, 208–216
cell-mediated food allergy, 133
cellulitis, 58
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 
HIV disease classification, 419, 426
cephalosporins
beta-lactam ring, 300
hypersensitivity, 295
ceramide, 4
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), leak, 46, 48, 57
cesarean section
hereditary angioedema, 252
HIV disease, 416
cetirizine, 40
children, 42
mastocytosis, 274
pregnancy, 41
urticaria, 229, 241
'C' findings, mastocytosis, 272
CH50 (total hemolytic complement), 331, 406
challenge procedures, see also exercise challenge 
test; graded challenges; oral food challenge; 
provocation tests
food additives, 202, 204
Chediak–Higashi syndrome, 409
chemotactic syndromes, neutrophils, 409
chest radiography
asthma, 85
children with recurrent infections, 331
cough, 101
childbirth, anaphylaxis, 263
children
allergic rhinitis, treatment, 42
antibiotic allergy, 298
antihistamines, 229, 231
asthma, 82–90
status asthmaticus, 130
atopic dermatitis, 3–14, 22
food allergy and, 148, 150
contact dermatitis, 33
cough, 105
drug desensitization, 312
eosinophilic esophagitis, 173, 176
exercise-induced bronchoconstriction, 
leukotriene modifying agents, 112
food allergy
anaphylaxis, 197
atopic dermatitis and, 148, 150
446  Index
children (cont’d )
hereditary angioedema, 252–253
HIV disease, 415–424, 432
hyper IgE syndrome, 399
IgA deficiency, selective, 353
IgA levels, 351
insect sting allergy, 285
recurrent infections, 327–334
signs of reactions, 220
sinusitis, 62
urticaria, 231
Chinese restaurant syndrome, 201
chlorpheniramine, urticaria, 229
cholinergic urticaria, diagnosis, 239
chondro-osseous dysplasia, 359
chorionic villus sampling, hereditary angioedema, 
247
chronic allergic conjunctivitis, 67
chronic allergic contact dermatitis, 29, 31
chronic atopic dermatitis, 15
chronic cough, 98
treatment, 104
chronic food protein-induced enterocolitis 
syndrome, 158
chronic granulomatous disease (CGD), 409, 
410, 411
treatment, 412
chronic HIV disease, 417, 418
chronic infections, 337
children, 327, 329
chronic lymphocytic leukemia, 437
chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, 375–381
chronic neutropenia, 410
chronic non-allergic rhinitis, 38, 39
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, 93
cough, 100
chronic rhinosinusitis, 52, 53, 58, 62–63
chronic urticaria, 222, 223, 227, 235–244
cigarettes see tobacco smoke
ciliary dysfunction, 46, 54
cimetidine
mastocytosis, 274
urticaria, 229, 241
ciprofloxacin, 339
c-kit (CD 117), 268
cladribine, mastocytosis, 274, 275
classic pathway, complement system, 402, 404, 
407
clinical features, children with recurrent infections, 
330
clotting factors, hereditary angioedema, 246
cluster immunotherapy, 314–315
coagulation factors, hereditary angioedema, 246
coatings, budesonide, eosinophilic esophagitis, 178
cobblestoning
allergic eye diseases, 70, 76
oropharynx, 101
cobicistat, 431
colchicine, urticaria, 241
collagen vascular disease see connective tissue 
diseases
colonoscopy, food protein-induced proctocolitis, 
168
colorants, 200–201, see also dyes
combination antiretroviral therapy (cART), 430–432
pediatric, 420–421, 422, 423
prophylactic, 416, 427, 428
common gamma chain deficiency, 358
common leukocyte antigen (CD45), mutation, 356, 
358
common variable immunodeficiency, 341, 349, 350
complement system, 436, see also C1-inhibitor; 
CH50
defects, 329, 330, 336, 402–407
treatment, 339, 439
hereditary angioedema, 246
diagnosis, 247, 249, 250, 253
therapeutic inhibition, 406
complete blood count, see also white cell count
antibiotic allergy, 297
food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome, 
159
food protein-induced proctocolitis, 168
complete DiGeorge syndrome, 357, 369
component testing, food allergy, 136, 322
computed tomography
allergic rhinitis, 38, 39
children with recurrent infections, 331
cough, 101
hyper IgE syndrome, 396
sinusitis, 52, 59, 61, 64, 65
pregnancy, 62
sinus tumors, 57
confined spaces, occupational asthma, 116
congenital disorders, sinusitis, 54
congenital methemoglobinemia, 158
congestive heart failure, 93
conjunctival scrapings, 72
conjunctivitis, see also allergic diseases under eye
non-allergic causes, 70
connective tissue diseases
eosinophilic esophagitis vs, 176
eosinophilic gastroenteritis vs, 185
consent
desensitization, 309
immunotherapy, 316
contact dermatitis, 25–35, 225, see also allergic 
contact dermatitis; irritant contact dermatitis
atopic dermatitis vs, 6, 18, 27, 29
latex allergy vs, 290, 291
oral allergy syndrome vs, 142
patch testing, 27, 28, 321
method, 29
contact lenses, giant papillary conjunctivitis, 67, 68, 72
Index  447
contact system, hereditary angioedema, 246
controls, skin tests, 319
cooking, anaphylaxis, 192
co-oximetry, 159
cord blood testing, hereditary angioedema and, 
247
corneal scarring, surgery, 74
coronary artery disease
asthma vs, 93
exercise-induced bronchoconstriction vs, 109
corticosteroids
allergic eye diseases, 73, 74
complications, 75
anaphylaxis, 261, 262, 263
asthma, 95
status asthmaticus, 127, 129
atopic dermatitis, 10–11, 19, 21
contact dermatitis, 30–31
for drug desensitization, 310
for drug reactions, 306
eosinophilic esophagitis, 178, 179
eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 187, 188
exercise-induced bronchoconstriction, 111
in immunodeficiency, 345
immunodeficiency from, 437
intranasal, 40, 49
children, 42
cough, 100, 102, 104
pregnancy, 41
IPEX syndrome patients, 386
mastocytosis, 274
side-effects, 230
status asthmaticus, 127, 129
sulfite-free, 204
teratogenesis risk, 130, 230
urticaria, 227, 228, 229, 240, 241, 242
cough, 98–106
asthma, 93, 100, 101
complications, 105
gastroesophageal reflux disease, 100, 101, 109
laboratory diagnosis, 101
treatment, 102–104
cough reflex, 99
cough-variant asthma, 101
counseling
eosinophilic esophagitis, 179, 180
eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 188
cow's milk
hypersensitivity, 155, 162, 163
rectal bleeding, 165
craniofacial abnormalities, DiGeorge syndrome, 
369, 371
crepe paper esophagus, 177
Crohn's disease, 186
celiac disease vs, 211
cromolyn sodium
allergic rhinitis, 41, 42
asthma, 95, 96
eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 187
exercise-induced bronchoconstriction, 111
mastocytosis, 274
pregnancy, 112
cross contact, food allergens, 137
cross-linking of antibodies, food allergy, 192
cross-reactivity
drugs, 305
foods with latex, 290
insect venoms, 282
cryoglobulinemia, 238
cultures, acute bacterial rhinosinusitis, 54, 59
currant jelly stool, 167
cutaneous mastocytosis (CM), 267, 269, 271, 272
cyanosis, DiGeorge syndrome, 371
cyclic neutropenia, 410
cyclosporin, atopic dermatitis, 20, 21, 22
cystic fibrosis
asthma vs, 84
recurrent infections, 329
sinusitis, 55
sweat chloride testing, 85
cytokines, see also inflammatory mediators
allergic conjunctivitis, 67
asthma, 83
atopic dermatitis, 4, 16
celiac disease, 209
eosinophilic esophagitis, 174
food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome, 
156
irritant contact dermatitis, 26
mast cell degranulation, 223
cytoreductive therapies, mastocytosis, 273
dairy products, celiac disease, 213
danazol, 251
dapsone, urticaria, 241
Darier's sign, 238, 270, 277
deamidated gliadin peptide antibodies, celiac 
disease, 210
death pathways see programmed cell death
decay accelerating factor deficiencies, 405
decongestants, allergic eye diseases, 72, 74
degranulation, mast cells, 223
dehydration, see also hydration
clinical features, 158
delayed detachment, umbilical cord, 330
delayed reactions, 301, 302, 304
antibiotics, 296, 297, 298
Dennie–Morgan folds, 7, 37
dental disease, sinusitis, 54, 57, 64
dental surgery, hereditary angioedema, 246, 247
dermatographism, 239
desensitization, 257, 302, 305, 308–313
antibiotics, 298
desloratadine, urticaria, 229
448  Index
developmental delay
DiGeorge syndrome, 370
HIV disease, 418
diabetes
celiac disease and, 209
neonates, 384
diarrhea, food protein-induced enterocolitis 
syndrome, 159
diets, see also elimination diets
celiac disease, 212–213, 214
eosinophilic esophagitis, 178, 179
eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 187, 188
food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome, 
160, 161, 162
food protein-induced proctocolitis, 169, 170
pregnancy, 134
diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis (DCM), 269
diffusion capacity for carbon monoxide, 101
DiGeorge syndrome, 368–374
complete, 357, 369
diphenhydramine
allergic rhinitis, 40
anaphylaxis, 262
mastocytosis, 274
urticaria, 229, 241
dipped rubber products, allergy, 289
DOCK8 gene mutations, 393
dogs, dander, 37
dosages, see also specific drugs
drug desensitization, 311
for immunotherapy, 314–315
intracutaneous tests, 320
oral food challenge, 218
double-blind oral food challenge, 217–218
double negative T cells, 388
Down's syndrome, celiac disease and, 209
doxepine
mastocytosis, 274
urticaria, 241
DRESS (drug reaction with eosinophilia and 
systemic symptoms), 297, 304,  
305, 306
drug(s)
additives, adverse reactions, 200–207
causing IgA deficiency, 350
reactions, 301–307
classification, 294
contact dermatitis vs, 28
eosinophilic gastroenteritis vs, 185
resistance, HIV disease, 422
rhinitis from, 38, 45
drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic 
symptoms (DRESS), 297, 304, 305, 306
drug users (intravenous), HIV disease  
prophylaxis, 428
duodenal biopsy, celiac disease, 211
dust mites, control, 37
dyes, see also colorants
asthma-causing, 115
dysphagia, eosinophilic esophagitis, 174, 175, 176, 
177
early satiety, eosinophilic esophagitis, 175
EASI (Eczema Area and Severity Index), 7
eating habits, eosinophilic esophagitis, 176, 177
ecallantide, 251, 252
ectropion, 71
eczema see atopic dermatitis
Eczema Area and Severity Index (EASI), 7
eczema herpeticum see herpes simplex
eczematous dermatitis
hyper IgE syndrome, 397
Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome, 364, 365
edema
hereditary angioedema vs, 248, 249, see also 
laryngeal edema
education
contact dermatitis prevention, 27
on epinephrine, 197
efavirenz, 421, 431
elderly patients
allergic rhinitis, treatment, 40, 42
antihistamines, 231
drug desensitization, 312
exercise-induced bronchoconstriction, 112
HIV disease, 432
immunodeficiencies, treatment, 339
sinusitis, 62
electrocardiography, myocardial infarction, 259
electrolytes, status asthmaticus, 127, 129
elemental diet, 178, 179, 187
eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 188
elicitation phase, allergic contact dermatitis, 26
elimination diets
atopic dermatitis, 8
diagnosis, 5
reintroduction of foods, 151, 152
eosinophilic esophagitis, 178, 179
food allergy, 136
food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome, 
160, 161, 162
food protein-induced proctocolitis, 169, 170
elite controllers, HIV disease, 433
emergencies, see also anaphylaxis
asthma, 94–95, 127–129
cough, 104
hereditary angioedema, 251
oral food challenge, 218
emergency treatment plans, food protein-induced 
enterocolitis syndrome, 161
emesis, acute food protein-induced enterocolitis 
syndrome, 158
emollients, 10
empyema, 347
Index  449
endocrinopathy, chronic mucocutaneous 
candidiasis, 376, 377
endoscopy, see also biopsy; functional endoscopic 
sinus surgery
celiac disease, 212
eosinophilic esophagitis, 175, 177, 181, 182
eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 184, 186, 190
food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome, 159
food protein-induced proctocolitis, 166, 168
sinusitis, 58, 64, 65
enterocolitis syndrome see food protein-induced 
enterocolitis syndrome
enteropathy
food protein-induced, 157
IPEX syndrome patients, 386
protein-losing, eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 183, 
186
enteropathy of infancy, 384
environmental history, allergic rhinitis, 39
enzyme immunoassay (EIA), HIV disease, 419, 430
enzymes, in workplace, 115
eosinophilia, see also DRESS; hypereosinophilic 
syndrome
eosinophilic esophagitis, 176
food protein-induced proctocolitis, 168
hyper IgE syndrome, 394, 397
lymphadenopathic systemic mastocytosis with, 271
nasal smears, 48
urticaria, 239
eosinophilic bronchitis, non-asthmatic, 100, 104
occupational, 118
eosinophilic enteritis, 211
eosinophilic esophagitis, 135, 173–182
oral allergy syndrome vs, 142
eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 183–190
presentation, 185
eosinophilic gastrointestinal disorders, clinical 
features, 158
eosinophilic non-allergic rhinitis, 56
eosinophils
asthma, 83
eosinophilic esophagitis, 174, 175, 177
eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 184, 185
food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome, 
156
food protein-induced proctocolitis, 166
vernal keratoconjunctivitis, 67
epidermal barrier dysfunction, 4
epigastric tenderness
eosinophilic esophagitis, 177
eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 186
epinephrine
anaphylaxis, 256, 264
administration, 261, 262–263
from food allergy, 192, 194
autoinjectors, 137
dosage errors, 263
education on, 197
hereditary angioedema, 252
insect sting allergy, 283, 284
mastocytosis, 272, 274
status asthmaticus, 127, 129
epithelium, eosinophilic esophagitis, 177
epoxy resin, occupational asthma, 115
erythema, generalized, on patch testing, 321
erythema multiforme, 225
erythema multiforme minor, 238
erythrodermic atopic dermatitis, 21
esophagus, see also eosinophilic esophagitis
infections, 176
manometry, 101
pH monitoring, 100
estrogens
hereditary angioedema, 246, 247
nasal congestion, 56
ethnicity, see also racial disparity
drug reactions, 302
IgA deficiencies, 342
exercise challenge test, 108, 110
exercise-induced anaphylaxis, food-dependent, 
191, 223
exercise-induced asthma, 107–113
exercise-induced bronchospasm, 83
prevention, 88
exercise-induced hyperventilation, 109
exfoliative dermatitis, 303, 304, 305, 306
Expert Panel guidelines, asthma, 84–85, 87
extracutaneous mastocytoma, 272
follow-up, 276
extraintestinal manifestations, celiac disease, 211
extrinsic atopic dermatitis see true atopic dermatitis
eye
allergic diseases, 66–76
autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome, 390
monitoring, intranasal corticosteroids, 102
sinusitis, 58
eyelids
allergic eye diseases, 68, 70, 71
atopic dermatitis, 7
facial abnormalities
DiGeorge syndrome, 369
hyper IgE syndrome, 394, 396, 397
facial pain, 56
factor H or I deficiency, 405
factors XI, XII and XIIa, hereditary angioedema, 246
false positives and negatives
challenge procedures, 204
oral food challenge, 217
patch testing, 321
family incidence, celiac disease, 208
famotidine
mastocytosis, 274
urticaria, 229
450  Index
fasting, before oral food challenge, 218
FcεR1α subunit, high-affinity IgE receptors, 
antibodies, 236
FESS (functional endoscopic sinus surgery), 62
fetal monitoring, anaphylaxis, 263
fexofenadine
allergic rhinitis, 40
children, 42
mastocytosis, 274
urticaria, 229, 241
fibrostenosis, eosinophilic esophagitis, 182
filaggrin, 4, 13, 16
fire ant stings, 282
venom tests, 282
fires, asthma-causing products, 116
fish poisoning, 134
flares
atopic dermatitis, 17
IPEX syndrome, 386
flavocytochrome b558, subunit defects, 409
flow cytometry, mastocytosis, 271
flow volume loops, 78, 81
fluconazole, chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, 
379, 380
fluid therapy see hydration
fluorescence in situ hybridization, 22q11.2 deletion 
syndrome, 371
fluticasone, eosinophilic esophagitis, 178, 179
follow-up
acute urticaria, 231
allergic eye diseases, 75
anaphylaxis, 264
asthma, 89, 94
combination antiretroviral therapy, 422
DiGeorge syndrome, 373
food allergy, 138, 152
hereditary angioedema, 253
hyper IgE syndrome, 400
immunodeficiencies, 333
mastocytosis, 276
oral food challenge, 219
sinusitis, 63
food(s)
cross-reactivity with latex, 290
label reading, 204
reintroduction see reintroduction of foods
food additives, adverse reactions, 200–207
food allergens, 132
atopic dermatitis, 7, 148
cross contact, 137
food allergy, 132–139, see also IgE-mediated food 
allergy; oral allergy syndrome; oral food 
challenge
vs adverse reactions to additives, 203
allergen-specific IgE, 152, 169
anaphylaxis from see anaphylaxis, food allergy
atopic dermatitis, 133, 135, 148–154
class I, oral allergy syndrome vs, 144
component testing, 136, 322
cross-linking of antibodies, 192
intracutaneous tests and, 320
prevention, protein hydrolysate milk formulae, 
12, 133
urticaria, 231
food challenge see oral food challenge
food-dependent exercise-induced anaphylaxis, 191, 
223
food elimination diets see elimination diets
food impactions, eosinophilic esophagitis, 174, 179
food intolerance, 134
food poisoning, 134
food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome, 
155–164
food protein-induced proctocolitis vs, 166, 169
risk factors, 156
food protein-induced enteropathy, 157
food protein-induced proctocolitis, 157, 165–172
forced expiratory volume in 1 second, 78–80
airflow obstruction definition, 85
asthma, 128
challenge procedures, 204
exercise-induced bronchoconstriction, 108, 110
forced vital capacity, 78–80
airflow obstruction definition, 85
foreign body
nasal, 46
respiratory, 84, 125
foreign substances, giant papillary conjunctivitis, 68
Formicidae, 279
formoterol, 95
fourth-generation antigen/antibody tests, HIV-1/2, 
417, 419–420
FOXP3 gene mutation, 382, 383
fractional exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO), 78, 80
fractures, hyper IgE syndrome, 397
fresh frozen plasma, 251, 252, 339, 439
frontal osteomyelitis, 60
fruits, cross-reactivity with latex, 290
fucose transporter, leukocyte adhesion deficiency, 
409
full blood count see complete blood count
functional endoscopic sinus surgery (FESS), 62
furrows, eosinophilic esophagitis, 181
gases, asthma-causing, 116
gastric juice, food protein-induced enterocolitis 
syndrome, 159
gastroesophageal reflux disease
asthma vs, 84, 93
cough, 100, 101, 109
eosinophilic esophagitis, 174, 175, 176, 178
infants, 158
oral allergy syndrome vs, 142
recurrent infections, 329
Index  451
sinusitis, 54, 55
treatment, 102, 104
gastrointestinal disorders, 436
antibody deficiencies, 343
eosinophilic, clinical features, 158
infections, infants, 158, 166
gastrointestinal food allergy, see also food 
protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome
prognosis, 138
gastrointestinal symptoms, mastocytosis,  
269–270
Gell and Coombs types, hypersensitivity, 295, 301, 
302
gender, occupational asthma risk, 116
gene therapy, severe combined immunodeficiency, 
359
genetics
autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome, 388, 
389
chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, 375
mastocytosis, 268, 271
phagocyte disorders, 408, 409
severe combined immunodeficiency, 355, 356
gestational pemphigoid, 242
giant papillary conjunctivitis (GPC), 66, 67
clinical signs, 71
contact lenses, 67, 68, 72
diagnosis, 69
differential diagnosis, 70
pathogenesis, 68
presentation, 70
prevention, 68
prognosis, 75
stages, 71–72
treatment, 75
glaucoma, 50
global airway disease, 55
glomerulonephritis, complement deficiencies, 403
glucagon, anaphylaxis and, 198, 261, 262, 263
glucocorticoids see corticosteroids
glutathione S-transferase polymorphisms, 
occupational asthma risk, 117
gluten, 209
gluten-free diets, 212–213, 214
graded challenges, 303
antibiotics, 297, 298
Gram-negative organisms, recurrent infections, 330
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), 
recombinant, 412
granulomas, lung, 414
H2 antihistamines
anaphylaxis, 261, 262, 263
mastocytosis, 273, 274
urticaria, 229, 239–241
habitual cough, 100
Haller cells, sinusitis, 54
hands, contact dermatitis, 28
hapten-specific T cells, 26
hay fever, 36
headache, 56
health care workers, latex allergy, 288
heart, DiGeorge syndrome, 369
heart failure
congestive, 93
exercise-induced bronchoconstriction vs, 109
heat exchange masks, 110, 111
heliox, 129
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
IPEX syndrome, 386
phagocyte disorders, 412
Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome, 366
hemolytic anemia
antibody deficiencies, 343
autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome, 391
complement deficiencies, 405
hemolytic uremic syndrome, complement 
deficiencies, 405
hemophagocytic syndrome, 389
hepatitis
celiac disease and, 209
viral, cryoglobulinemia, 238
hereditary angioedema, 238, 245–255
vs allergic, 248, 249
mastocytosis vs, 269
herpes simplex, atopic dermatitis with, 9, 10, 21
Hevea latex allergens, 288
high-affinity IgE receptors, 83, 223
FcεR1α subunit, antibodies, 236
high-molecular-weight agents, occupational 
asthma, 115
histamine
allergic conjunctivitis, 67
anaphylaxis, 258, 260
endogenous reactions, 194
testing for, 195
histopathology
celiac disease, 208, 209, 212, 216
chronic urticaria, 236
eosinophilic esophagitis, 174, 175, 177
eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 184, 186
food protein-induced proctocolitis, 166, 168
history-taking
adverse reactions to additives, 203
anaphylaxis, 259
asthma, 93
before drug desensitization, 310
environmental, allergic rhinitis, 39
exercise-induced bronchoconstriction, 109
food allergy, 135
HIV disease, 429
recurrent infections, children, 330
rhinitis, 48
urticaria, 238
452  Index
HIV disease, 426–434
children, 415–424, 432
crisis, latex allergy, 289
immunotherapy, 315
severe combined immunodeficiency vs, 357
severity classification, 419
hives, 225, 233, see also urticaria
HLA antigens
celiac disease, 209
genotyping, 211, 212
occupational asthma risk, 117
HLA-B alleles, drug hypersensitivity,  
295, 302
honeybee venom, 282
Horner's syndrome, rhinitis, 56
Horner–Trantas dots, 71
hornet venoms, 282
hospitalization, atopic dermatitis, 10
house dust mites, control, 37
Hycor IgE test system, 322
hydration
atopic dermatitis, 19
eosinophilic esophagitis, 179
intravenous, 160
hydrolysates see protein hydrolysate milk  
formulae
hydroxychloroquine, urticaria, 241
hydroxyzine
mastocytosis, 274
pregnancy and, 230
urticaria, 229, 241
hygiene hypothesis, 83
Hymenoptera see venoms
hyperactivity/attention deficit disorder, food 
additives and, 204
hypereosinophilic syndrome, 185,  
186, 238
hyperextensibility, hyper IgE syndrome, 397
hyper IgE syndrome, 330, 393–401
autosomal dominant, 377, 393, 394
hypersensitivity
abacavir, 295, 302, 421, 431
allergic conjunctivitis, 67
cow's milk, 155, 162, 163
Gell and Coombs types, 295, 301, 302
latex allergy, testing, 290
nevirapine, 421
soy formulae, 155, 162
hyperventilation, exercise-induced, 109
hypoalbuminemia, food protein-induced 
proctocolitis, 168
hypocalcemia, DiGeorge syndrome, 369,  
371, 372
hypoparathyroidism, chronic mucocutaneous 
candidiasis, 377
hypothermia, food protein-induced enterocolitis 
syndrome, 164
hypothyroidism
hereditary angioedema vs, 248
rhinitis, 56
hypovolemia, hereditary angioedema, 251
icatibant, 251, 252
idiopathic angioedema, 248, 249
IgA
celiac disease, 210, 212
deficiencies, 341, 342, 343
selective, 348–354
food protein-induced enterocolitis 
syndrome, 156
IgE (mucosal), food protein-induced enterocolitis 
syndrome, 156
IgE (serum)
allergen-specific, 39, 321–322
food allergy, 152, 169
food protein-induced proctocolitis, 169
for immunotherapy, 315
occupational asthma, 119
serum tests, 39, 48, 136, 142
allergic rhinitis, 37
antibodies vs, chronic urticaria, 236
atopic dermatitis, 16, 149
eosinophilic esophagitis, 176
food additives, 202
food allergy, 149, 152
food protein-induced enterocolitis 
syndrome, 159
hyper IgE syndrome, 393, 394, 396, 397
sensitization tests, 101
theophylline indication, 95
venom-specific, 282
IgE-mediated food allergy, 133
anaphylaxis, 137
atopic dermatitis, 13
eosinophilic esophagitis, 174
IgE-mediated hypersensitivity
allergic conjunctivitis, 67
drugs causing, 309
eosinophilic esophagitis, 174
latex allergy, 289
IgE receptors see high-affinity IgE receptors
IgE tests, specific, atopic dermatitis, 8
IgG
celiac disease, 210
deficiencies, 341, 343, 344
eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 186
IgG2 deficiency, 342
IgG4, food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome, 
156
IgM, deficiencies, 341
IL-7 receptor alpha chain deficiency, 358
imaging, see also specific modalities
mastocytosis, 271, 274
recurrent infections, 338
Index  453
immediate reactions to drugs, 301, 304
immune activation
atopic dermatitis, 16
irritant contact dermatitis, 26
immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, 
X-linked see IPEX syndrome
immune reconstitution
bone marrow transplantation, 360
DiGeorge syndrome, 372
immune thrombocytopenic purpura, antibody 
deficiencies, 343
immunoassay see enzyme immunoassay
immunodeficiencies, 335–340, see also specific 
diseases
abscesses, 330
antibody deficiencies, 341–347
atopic dermatitis vs, 6, 8
candidiasis, 330
children, 327, 329
corticosteroids as cause, 437
corticosteroids for, 345
diagnosis, 336–338
follow-up, 333
immunotherapy, 315
sinusitis, 54
treatment for, 331
immunoglobulins, see also specific types e.g. IgE
deficiencies, 341–347
parenteral
anitbody deficiencies, 344, 345
recurrent infections, 332, 338, 339, 438, 439
selective IgA deficiency, 352, 353
trough values, 440
Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome, 366
immunohistochemistry, mastocytosis, 270
immunologic anaphylaxis, 257
immunologic occupational asthma, 114, 115–116, 
118
immunosuppressants
allergic contact dermatitis, 33
atopic dermatitis, 10, 11, 20, 21
IPEX syndrome, 386
phagocyte disorders, 412
urticaria, 240, 241
Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome, 366
immunotherapy, 314–318
allergic eye diseases, 73
allergic rhinitis, 40, 41, 42, 315
asthma, 90
oral allergy syndrome and, 146
pregnancy, 41, 315
venoms, 273, 279, 283, 284, 285
anaphylaxis prevention, 258
mastocytosis, 275
indolent systemic mastocytosis (ISM), 271
follow-up, 276
prognosis, 275
infant formulae
atopic dermatitis and, 4
food allergy prevention, 133, 134
infants
anaphylaxis, 263
asthma
diagnosis, 86
status asthmaticus, 130
gastroesophageal reflux disease, 158
gastrointestinal infections, 158, 166
metabolic disorders, clinical features, 158
reactive airway disease, 87
sepsis, clinical features, 158
infections, 435–440, see also upper respiratory 
infections; viral infections
antibody deficiencies, 343
celiac disease vs, 211
complement deficiencies, 402, 403,  
404, 405
esophagus, 176
gastrointestinal, infants, 158, 166
HIV disease, 418
prophylaxis, 421
hyper IgE syndrome, 393, 394, 395–396
phagocyte disorders, 408, 410
recurrent see recurrent infections
WAS mutation disorders, 365
inflammation, biomarkers, 77, 78
inflammatory bowel disease, eosinophilic 
gastroenteritis vs, 185
inflammatory infiltrates, asthma, 124
inflammatory mediators, see also cytokines
anaphylaxis, 257
influenza
acute HIV disease vs, 428
immunization, 92
infundibular width, sinusitis, 54
infusions, C1-inhibitor, 250–251, 252
innate immunity, 336, 436
insect stings see venoms
inspiratory flow volume loops, 78
intensity score, atopic dermatitis, 19
interferon alpha 2b, mastocytosis, 274, 275
interferon gamma
hyper IgE syndrome, 398, 399
phagocyte disorders, 412, 413
interleukin 2, IPEX syndrome, 383
interleukin 7 receptor alpha chain deficiency, 358
intermittent X-linked thrombocytopenia, 365
International Classification of Diseases, on 
eosinophilic esophagitis, 174
intestinal obstruction, clinical features, 158
intracranial infection, sinusitis, 60
intracutaneous tests, 320–321
insect venoms, 282
intraepithelial lymphocytes, celiac  
disease, 209
454  Index
intranasal antihistamines, 41, 49
allergic rhinitis, 41
non-allergic rhinitis, 49
pregnancy, 49
intranasal corticosteroids, 40, 49
children, 42
cough, 100, 102, 104
pregnancy, 41
intraocular pressure, 50
intravenous antibiotics, sinusitis, 60, 61
intravenous C1-inhibitor, 250–251, 252
intravenous drug users, HIV disease prophylaxis, 428
intravenous hydration, 160
intravenous immunoglobulins see 
immunoglobulins, parenteral
intravenous saline, anaphylaxis, 262, 263
intrinsic atopic dermatitis, 16
intussusception, 167
IPEX-like syndromes, 383, 384
IPEX syndrome, 364, 382–387
ipratropium bromide
allergic rhinitis, 41
asthma, 95
non-allergic rhinitis, 49
pregnancy, 49
status asthmaticus, 129
iron, food protein-induced proctocolitis, 169
iron deficiency anemia, celiac disease and, 209
irradiated vaccines, indications, 331
irrigation, saline, 55
irritable bowel syndrome, 185, 186
celiac disease and, 209, 211
irritable larynx syndrome, work-related, 118
irritant contact dermatitis, 26
allergic contact dermatitis vs, 28
atopic dermatitis vs, 18
latex allergy vs, 290, 291
patch testing, 321
presentation, 28
rash, 27
isocyanates, 115
itching, skin tests, 320
itraconazole, phagocyte disorders, 412, 413
Jak3 deficiency, 358
JAK-STAT pathway, hyper IgE syndrome, 394
Job's syndrome, 393
kallikrein, hereditary angioedema, 246
kidney disease, complement deficiencies, 403, 405
Kindlin gene mutations, 409
kininogen, hereditary angioedema, 246
kit ligand, 268
KIT mutational analysis, 268, 272
label reading, food, 204
laboratory diagnosis
anaphylaxis, 260
asthma, 85–87, 94
chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, 378–379
chronic urticaria, 236–237, 239
cough, 101
DiGeorge syndrome, 371
hereditary angioedema, 247, see also laryngeal 
dysfunction
HIV disease, 419, 428, 430
immunodeficiencies, 336, 338
recurrent infections, children, 329, 331
severe combined immunodeficiency, 359
lactase deficiency, celiac disease vs, 211
lactose intolerance, celiac disease, 213
lamina propria, eosinophilic esophagitis, 177
laryngeal dysfunction, 109, see also vocal cord 
dysfunction
symptom scoring, oral food challenge, 219
work-related, 118
laryngeal edema
hereditary angioedema, 245, 253, 255
oral allergy syndrome, 142
laryngopharyngeal reflux, 46
sinusitis, 54
laryngoscopy, cough, 101
latency period, occupational asthma, 114, 118
late onset atopic dermatitis, 15
lateral view, sinusitis, 59
latex allergy, 288–293
oral allergy syndrome, 141
latex–ruit syndrome, 290
latex products, 290
lectin pathway, complement system, 404
legislation, contact dermatitis prevention, 27
leukocyte adhesion deficiency, 409
leukocyte common antigen see CD45
leukotriene modifying agents, 95
exercise-induced bronchoconstriction, 111
children, 112
mastocytosis, 273, 274
urticaria, 241
levocetirizine, urticaria, 229
lichenification, atopic dermatitis, 7, 15, 18
lipid transfer proteins, 141
liver disease, autoimmune lymphoproliferative 
syndrome vs, 389
liver function tests, antibiotic allergy, 297
long-term non-progressors, HIV disease, 433
lopinavir, 421
loratadine, 40
mastocytosis, 274
pregnancy, 41
urticaria, 229, 241
low-molecular-weight agents, occupational 
asthma, 115
Lund–Mackay scale, 59
lung cancer, 100
Index  455
lung disease, 437
autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome, 390
drug desensitization and, 310
exercise-induced bronchoconstriction vs, 109
hyper IgE syndrome, 393, 394, 395–396, 397
phagocyte disorders, 411, 414
selective IgA deficiency, 348
lung volume measurement, 78, 101
lymphadenopathic systemic mastocytosis, with 
eosinophilia, 271
lymphocytes, see also T cells
autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome, 388
chronic urticaria, 236
eosinophilic esophagitis, 177
intraepithelial, celiac disease, 209
severe combined immunodeficiency, 355
lymphoma
autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome, 389
celiac disease, 214
hyper IgE syndrome, 397
mediastinal, 125
lymphopenia, 332
DiGeorge syndrome, 369
neonates, 329, 357, 358, 359
macrophages, asthma, 83
magnesium sulfate, 95, 129
magnetic resonance imaging
sinusitis, 52, 59
sinus tumors, 57
malabsorption, celiac disease, 211
malignancy see neoplasms
malnutrition, severe combined immunodeficiency 
vs, 357
mannan-binding lectin-associated protease 2 
deficiency, 405
mannose-binding lectin deficiency, 405, 407
markers see biomarkers
masking, oral food challenge, 218
mast cell activation syndromes, 267, 269
mast cell inhibitors, allergic eye diseases, 74
mast cell leukemia (MCL), 271
prognosis, 275
mast cells
asthma, 83
degranulation, 223
eosinophilic esophagitis, 174
releasability syndromes, 238
urticaria, 223
mast cell sarcoma, 272, 273, 274
follow-up, 276
mast cell stabilizers, 73, 74, 95
mastocytomas, 270
extracutaneous, 272
follow-up, 276
surgery, 273, 274
mastocytosis, 267–277
diagnostic criteria, 271–272
prognosis, 275
venom allergy, 280
maternal antibody protection, 328, 353
maternal blood, swallowed, 167
maternal diet, food protein-induced proctocolitis, 
170
matrices, oral food challenge, 218
maxillary sinusitis, 64
measurement, skin tests, 320
Meckel's diverticulum, 167
mediastinal masses, 125
membrane attack complexes (MAC), defects, 406, 
407
meningitis, complement deficiencies, 404
metabolic disorders, infants, clinical features, 158
metals, asthma-causing, 115
methacholine, 78, 101, 119, 120, 239
methemoglobinemia
congenital, 158
food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome, 
157, 159, 161
methylprednisolone
anaphylaxis, 262, 263
asthma, 95
status asthmaticus, 129
food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome, 
160, 162
midline anomalies, hyper IgE syndrome, 397
migraine, 56
mixed rhinitis, 44
moisturizers, contact dermatitis, 33
molds, control, 37
monitoring see follow-up
monoclonal gammopathy of unknown significance, 
248
monoclonal mast cell activation syndrome (MMAS), 
269
mononucleosis-like illness, acute HIV disease, 418, 
428
monosodium glutamate (MSG), 201, 207
montelukast
asthma, 95
eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 187
mastocytosis, 274
mortality
asthma, 123
DRESS, 306
hereditary angioedema, 253
insect stings, 278
Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome, 367
mother-to-child transmission, HIV disease, 
prophylaxis, 416, 422
motility defects, neutrophils, 409
mucocutaneous candidiasis
chronic, 375–381
severe combined immunodeficiency, 357
456  Index
mucosal eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 183, 184
multimodal topical agents, allergic eye diseases, 73
mupirocin, 10
muscular eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 183, 184
Mycobacterium avium complex, prophylaxis, 421
mycophenolate mofetil, autoimmune 
lymphoproliferative syndrome, 391
myeloperoxidase deficiency, 409
myocardial infarction, 259
NADPH oxidase, granulocytes, gene defects, 409
nails, candidiasis, 376, 377
NARES (non-allergic rhinitis with eosinophilia), 48
nasal congestion, estrogens, 56
nasal polyps, 38, 46, 57
nasal smears, eosinophilia, 48
nasal width, hyper IgE syndrome, 397
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, 
website, 80
National Institutes of Health, hyper IgE syndrome, 
scoring system, 394, 397
necrotizing enterocolitis, 158, 167
nedocromil, 95
Neisseria (spp.), recurrent infections, 330
complement deficiencies, 402, 403, 404, 405
neonates, see also severe combined 
immunodeficiency
diabetes, 384
DiGeorge syndrome, 372
hereditary angioedema screening and, 247
hyper IgE syndrome, 394
lymphopenia, 329, 357, 358, 359
neoplasms
celiac disease, 214
hereditary angioedema vs, 248
HIV disease, 426
mastocytosis with, 271
sinuses, 57
Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome, 364
Netherton's syndrome, 6
neutropenia, 408, 410, 411
treatment, 412
neutrophilia, persistent, 410
neutrophils, 436
differentiation defects, 408
neutrophil-specific granule deficiency, 409
nevirapine, hypersensitivity, 421
nickel allergy, 34
9/11 World Trade Center bombings, sinusitis in 
rescue workers, 54
Nissen fundoplication, 102
nitric oxide see fractional exhaled nitric oxide
NK cells
celiac disease, 209
severe combined immunodeficiency, 356
non-allergic rhinitis, 44–51
chronic, 38, 39
sinusitis vs, 56
non-allergic rhinitis with eosinophilia, 48
non-asthmatic eosinophilic bronchitis, 100, 104
occupational, 118
non-IgE-mediated reactions
diseases caused by, 309, 310
drugs causing, 309
non-immediate reactions, 301, 304, see also 
delayed reactions
non-immunologic anaphylaxis, 257
non-immunologic occupational asthma,  
116, 118
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, allergic eye 
diseases, 73, 74
nucleic acid amplification tests (NAAT), 429, 430
nucleoside reverse-transcriptase inhibitors, 421
nutrition
food allergy patients, 137, 151
food protein-induced proctocolitis, 170
observation periods, anaphylaxis, 305
occupational asthma, 114–122
prognosis, 120–121
occupations, contact dermatitis, 25, 26
oil-based creams, latex allergy, 289
omalizumab
asthma, 95
eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 187
urticaria, 240, 241, 242, 243
Omenn's syndrome, 357, 395
ondansetron, 160
on-demand treatment, hereditary angioedema, 
250, 251, 252
open oral food challenge, 217, 218
ophthalmological examination, sinusitis, 58
oral allergy syndrome, 140–147
oral cavity
candidiasis, 376, 377
phagocyte disorders, 411
oral fluid testing, pediatric HIV disease, 420
oral food challenge, 134, 136, 217–221
atopic dermatitis, 8
food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome, 
157, 159, 160, 162, 164
oral allergy syndrome, 141, 143
symptom scoring, 219
oral surgery see dental surgery
orbits, infection, sinusitis, 60
osteomyelitis, frontal, 60
osteopenia, celiac disease and, 209
oxidative burst, defects, 409
oxygen
blood levels, status asthmaticus, 123, 126
therapy, 95, 127, 129
p24 antigen test, HIV disease, 430
pain, facial, 56
Index  457
palate
DiGeorge syndrome, 369
hyper IgE syndrome, 397
panic disorder, 126, 194, 258
papillae, allergic eye diseases, 70, 76
papules, giant papillary conjunctivitis, 71
parasites, eosinophilic gastroenteritis vs, 185
parathyroid glands, DiGeorge syndrome, 369
paronychia, 377
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH)
complement deficiencies, 403, 405
treatment, 406
patch testing, 321
atopic dermatitis, 8
contact dermatitis, 27, 28, 321
method, 29
drug reactions, 303
food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome, 
159
pdC1-INH (plasma-derived C1-inhibitor), 251, 252
peak expiratory flow rates
asthma, 78–80, 126, 127, 128
occupational asthma, 119
status asthmaticus, 125
peanut allergy, 133, 136, 138
pemphigoid
bullous, 225
gestational, 242
penicillins, 294, 297
beta-lactam ring, 300
skin tests, 297, 304
perennial allergic conjunctivitis
diagnosis, 69
prevention, 68
perennial allergic rhinitis, 36, 39
perforation, eosinophilic esophagitis, 179
perinatal HIV disease, 415
periodontitis, 410
persistent neutrophilia, 410
pertussis, 100, 102
pests, allergic rhinitis, 37
pet dander, 37
pH
blood, status asthmaticus, 123
esophagus, monitoring, 100
phagocyte defects, 329, 330, 336, 408–414, 436
treatment, 339, 438
pharyngeal pouches, 369
pheochromocytoma, 269
phototherapy, atopic dermatitis, 10, 19
physical examination
children
HIV disease, 418–419
recurrent infections, 330
HIV disease, 429
physical urticaria, 223, 237
provocation tests, 226, 239
pimecrolimus, 21
placebos, oral food challenge, 218
plaques, eosinophilic esophagitis, 181
plasma-derived C1-inhibitor (pdC1-INH), 251, 252
platelets, Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome, 365
pneumatoceles, hyper IgE syndrome, 395–396, 399
Pneumocystis pneumonia, 425
prophylaxis, 421
pneumonia, 437
hyper IgE syndrome, 397
phagocyte disorders, 414
pneumothorax, 126
pollen-related food allergy, 133, 136
pollens
avoidance, 37
oral allergy syndrome, 140, 141
polyps, see also pseudopolyps
nasal, 38, 46, 57
sinusitis, 63, 65
positioning of patient, anaphylaxis, 262
post-infectious cough, 101, 102
potassium, status asthmaticus, 127
Pott's puffy tumor, 60
powder, latex gloves, 289, 291
Practall schedule, 218
prednisolone, urticaria, 229
prednisone
asthma, 95
status asthmaticus, 129
atopic dermatitis, 20
contact dermatitis, 30
mastocytosis, 274
urticaria, 229
pre-exposure prophylaxis, HIV disease, 416
pregnancy
allergic rhinitis, treatment, 41
anaphylaxis, 263
antihistamines, 230
asthma, 96
status asthmaticus, 130
atopic dermatitis, 22
corticosteroids, 230
diets, 134
drug desensitization, 312
food allergy-induced anaphylaxis, 197
hereditary angioedema, 252
HIV disease
prophylaxis, 416
treatment, 432
hyper IgE syndrome, 399
immunodeficiencies
of antibodies, 345
treatment, 339
immunotherapy, 41, 315
insect sting allergy, 285
non-allergic rhinitis, treatment, 49
rhinitis, 38, 56
458  Index
pregnancy (cont’d )
shortness of breath, 112
sinusitis, 62
urticaria, 242
prekallikrein, hereditary angioedema, 246
premedication for surgery, mastocytosis, 274
prick tests, 319–320, see also skin tests
insect sting allergy, 282
before intracutaneous tests, 320
primary ciliary dyskinesia, 54
probiotics, atopic dermatitis and, 5
prodromal rashes, hereditary angioedema, 248
progesterone, hereditary angioedema  
and, 247
programmed cell death, autoimmune 
lymphoproliferative syndrome,  
388, 389
progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, 425
properdin deficiency, 402, 404, 405
prophylaxis
anaphylaxis, 258
antibiotics, 339
hyper IgE syndrome, 396, 398
Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome, 365–366
hereditary angioedema, 251–252
HIV disease, 416, 421, 422, 427–428
propylene glycol allergy, 34
treatment, 30
protease inhibitors, 431
protein hydrolysate milk formulae
food allergy prevention, 12, 133
food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome, 
160
protein-losing enteropathy, eosinophilic 
gastroenteritis, 183, 186
proteins, food allergy testing, 136
proton pump inhibitors
chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, 380
cough, 102
eosinophilic esophagitis vs GERD, 175, 178
provocation tests, see also bronchoprovocation; 
challenge procedures
physical urticaria, 226, 239
prurigo of pregnancy, 242
pruritus
symptom scoring, oral food challenge, 219
urticaria, 226
pseudopolyps, eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 186, 
190
psoriasis, 6, 28
psychiatric illness, DiGeorge syndrome, 373
psychogenic cough, 100
psychology
atopic dermatitis, 10
food allergy-induced anaphylaxis, 197
food protein-induced proctocolitis, 169
purulent discharge, sinusitis, 58, 64
quality of life
hereditary angioedema, 253
rhinitis, 48
sinonasal outcome tests, 58
quinolones, 344, 438
racial disparity, eosinophilic esophagitis, 176
radioallergosorbent test (RAST), 45
radiography, see also chest radiography
children with recurrent infections, 331
eosinophilic esophagitis, 175, 177
eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 184, 186
food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome, 
159
hyper IgE syndrome, 396
sinusitis, 59
RAG1/RAG2 deficiencies, 358
ranitidine
anaphylaxis, 262, 263
mastocytosis, 274
urticaria, 229, 241
rapamycin, autoimmune lymphoproliferative 
syndrome, 391
rapid HIV antibody tests, 420, 430
rashes
atopic dermatitis, 6, 7, 17, 18–19
contact dermatitis, 27, 28–29
hyper IgE syndrome, 394, 396, 397
prodromal, hereditary angioedema, 248
urticaria vs, 225
reactions see adverse reactions; drug(s), reactions; 
non-IgE-mediated reactions
reactive airway disease, infants, 87
reactive airway dysfunction syndrome (RADS), 118, 
119
diagnostic criteria, 119
treatment, 120
receptors, cough reflex, 99
recombinant granulocyte colony-stimulating factor 
(G-CSF), 412
recombinase-activating gene deficiencies, 358
rectal bleeding, food protein-induced proctocolitis, 
165
recurrent acute rhinosinusitis, 52
computed tomography, 61
recurrent infections, 335–340
children, 327–334
immunodeficiencies vs, 337
Neisseria (spp.), 330
complement deficiencies, 402, 403, 404, 405
refractory periods, after sting reactions, 282
regulatory T cells
FOXP3 gene mutation and, 382, 383
Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome, 363
reintroduction of foods
anaphylaxis, 151, 152
atopic dermatitis, 151, 152
Index  459
eosinophilic esophagitis, 180
food protein-induced proctocolitis, 169, 170
remission, asthma, 96
renal function
antibiotic allergy, 297
cyclosporin, 21
respiratory burst, defects, 409
respiratory distress
asthma, 94–95, see also status asthmaticus
clinical signs, 125, 126
infants, 130
management, 128
respiratory protection devices, 117
respiratory tract infections, see also pneumonia; 
upper respiratory infections
children, see also recurrent infections
frequency, 328
reversibility of bronchial obstruction, 78, 80, 81
defined, 85
occupational asthma, 119
rheumatic disorders, complement deficiencies, 403
rhinitis, see also allergic rhinitis; non-allergic 
rhinitis; sinusitis
differential diagnosis, 38
rhinitis medicamentosa, 38, 56
rhinoscopy, 39
rings, see also vascular rings
eosinophilic esophagitis, 177
risk behaviors, HIV disease, 429
ritonavir, 421
rituximab
autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome, 391
for neutropenia, 412
RNA assay, pediatric HIV disease, 416, 419
rule of nines, 23
saline (intravenous), anaphylaxis, 262, 263
saline irrigation, 55
salmeterol, 95
sarcoidosis, 57
scabies, 6, 8
scleroderma, hereditary angioedema vs, 248
scoliosis, hyper IgE syndrome, 397
scombroid fish poisoning, 134
SCORAD (Severity Scoring of Atopic Dermatitis), 7, 
19, 23
SCORTEN (for toxic epidermal necrolysis), 306
scrapings
chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, 378
conjunctival, 72
scratching, symptom scoring, oral food 
challenge, 219
screening
autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome, 389
celiac disease, 210
food allergy, 133, 149
hereditary angioedema, 247
HIV disease, 427
pediatric, 416
recurrent infections, 436
severe combined immunodeficiency, 356
US states providing, 328, 356
seasonal allergic conjunctivitis, 67, 68
diagnosis, 69
seasonal allergic rhinitis, 36
seborrheic dermatitis, 6, 27
secondary immunodeficiencies, 336, 435, 436
sedation, antihistamines, 230
selective IgA deficiency, 348–354
sensitization phase, allergic contact dermatitis, 26
sepsis, infants, clinical features, 158
septal deviation, sinusitis, 54
serosal eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 183, 184
serum sickness, 225
severe combined immunodeficiency, 355–361
US states providing screening, 328, 356
Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome vs, 364
Severity Scoring of Atopic Dermatitis (SCORAD), 7, 
19, 23
sexual transmission, HIV disease, 427, 428
shiners, allergic, 37
short-acting beta-2-agonists (SABA)
exercise-induced asthma, 109, 110, 111
status asthmaticus, 128, 129
Shwachman–Diamond syndrome, 409
siblings
celiac disease, 208
eosinophilic esophagitis, 174
side-effects
antihistamines, 230
corticosteroids, 230
drug allergy vs, 305
tenofovir, 431
Siemens IgE test system, 322
single-blind oral food challenge, 217, 218
sinonasal outcome tests (SNOT), 58
sinusitis, 52–65, 330, 337, 437
antibody deficiencies, 343
autoimmune lymphoproliferative  
syndrome, 390
selective IgA deficiency, 348, 351
sinus obstruction, 53–54
anatomical, 54
skin
autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome, 390
chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, 376, 377, 
378
drug reactions, 303
hyper IgE syndrome, 394, 396, 397
skin tests, 319–321
allergens, 39, 48
pregnancy, 41
atopic dermatitis, 7, 8
drug reactions, 303, 304
460  Index
skin tests (cont’d )
eosinophilic esophagitis, 176
food additives, 202
food allergy, 136
pitfalls, 136
food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome, 159
for immunotherapy, 315
insect stings, 281, 282
latex allergy, 290
oral allergy syndrome, 142–143
penicillins, 297, 304
sleep loss, atopic dermatitis severity classification, 19
smoking see tobacco smoke
smoldering systemic mastocytosis, 271
SNOT (sinonasal outcome tests), 58
soaps, atopic dermatitis and, 5
soy formulae, hypersensitivity, 155, 162
specific IgE tests, atopic dermatitis, 8
spina bifida, latex allergy, 288
spirometry
asthma
assessment, 77, 78–80
children, 85
diagnosis, 78
occupational, 119
prognosis, 80
status asthmaticus, 125
cough, 101
splenectomy
autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome, 391
mastocytosis, 274
Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome, 366
sputum cell counts, 119
squiggle cells, 177
stains, candidiasis, microscopy, 378
stanozolol, 251
staphylococci
acute bacterial rhinosinusitis, 53, 54
antibiotics for, 10
atopic dermatitis, 13, 15, 18, 19
chronic granulomatous disease, 410
hyper IgE syndrome, 393, 395, 396
recurrent infections, 330
STAT1 deficiency, 384
STAT1 gene mutations, IPEX-like syndromes, 383
STAT3 gene mutations, 393, 394
STAT5b deficiency, 384
status asthmaticus, 123–131
steam from cooking, anaphylaxis, 192
stem cell factor, 268
stem cell transplantation see hematopoietic stem 
cell transplantation
stenosis, eosinophilic esophagitis, 182
stepping, asthma treatment, 88, 90
steroids see corticosteroids
Stevens–Johnson syndrome, 297, 303, 304, 
305, 306
stings see venoms
stomach, topical corticosteroids, 187
stool
celiac disease, 208
eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 186
food protein-induced enterocolitis 
syndrome, 159
food protein-induced proctocolitis, 165, 168
intussusception, 167
strictures, eosinophilic esophagitis, 182
stridor, vocal cord dysfunction, 93, 109, 259
subacute cough, 98
treatment, 102, 103
subacute rhinosinusitis, 52
subcutaneous immunoglobulins, 344
sublingual immunotherapy, 314
submental view, 59
sulfasalazine, urticaria, 241
sulfites, 201
sulfonamides, 298
sunset yellow, 201
superior vena cava syndrome, hereditary 
angioedema vs, 248
surgery
allergic eye diseases, 74
hereditary angioedema, 247
latex allergy, 291
mastocytomas, 273, 274
sinusitis, 60, 61, 63
children, 62
swallowed maternal blood, 167
swallowing dysfunction, testing, 85
sweat chloride testing, cystic fibrosis, 85
sweating, contact dermatitis, 291
Sweet's syndrome, 225
syncope, vasovagal, 258
systemic lupus erythematosus, 238
complement deficiencies, 403, 404, 405
hereditary angioedema vs, 248
systemic mastocytosis (SM), 267
with associated clonal hematologic non-mast cell 
lineage disease, 271
follow-up, 276
prognosis, 275
WHO diagnostic criteria, 271–272
systolic blood pressure, anaphylaxis, 260, 261
childbirth, 263
food allergy, 195
tachyphylaxis, beta-2-agonists, 111
tacrolimus, 21
allergic contact dermatitis, 33
tartrazine, 201, 207
TBX1 knockout mouse, 369
T-cell receptor excision circle number, 332, 356
T cells, 435, see also CD4-positive T cells; 
regulatory T cells
Index  461
allergic contact dermatitis, 26
asthma, 83
atopic dermatitis, 4, 15, 16
CD8-positive, autoimmune lymphoproliferative 
syndrome, 389
celiac disease, 209
deficiencies, 335
children, 329, 330
treatment, 339, 438
DiGeorge syndrome, 369
double negative, 388
eosinophilic esophagitis, 174
food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome, 156
severe combined immunodeficiency, 355
vernal keratoconjunctivitis, 67
tears
artificial, 72
examination, 68
teenagers
atopic dermatitis, 15–23
food allergy, 138
HIV disease, 415, 422
teeth, hyper IgE syndrome, 394, 397
telangiectasia macularis eruptiva perstans (TMEP), 
267, 270
temporomandibular joint disease, 56
tenofovir
HIV disease prophylaxis, 416
side-effects, 431
teratogenesis risk, corticosteroids, 130, 230
terbutaline, status asthmaticus, 129
Th2 cytokine profile, asthma, 83
theophylline, 95
Thermofisher IgE test system, 322
threshold of reactivity, oral food challenge, 217
thrombocytopenia, see also X-linked 
thrombocytopenia
autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome, 389, 
391
Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome, 363, 364,  
365, 367
thrombocytopenic purpura (immune), antibody 
deficiencies, 343
thrombocytosis, food protein-induced enterocolitis 
syndrome, 164
thymus
DiGeorge syndrome, 369, 370
severe combined immunodeficiency, 355, 357, 
360
thyroid autoantibodies, chronic urticaria, 236
thyroid dysfunction, celiac disease  
and, 209
tic douloureux, 56
tobacco smoke
asthma, 96
occupational, 116
sinusitis, 54, 55
topical corticosteroids, stomach, 187
total hemolytic complement (CH50), 331, 406
toxic epidermal necrolysis, 297, 303, 304,  
305, 306
toxic reactions, insect stings, 280
trachealization see rings
tranexamic acid, 251, 252
transaminases, celiac disease and, 209
transglutaminase see anti-transglutaminase 
antibodies
transient hypogammaglobulinemia of infancy, 350
trauma, hereditary angioedema, 247
trichorrhexis invaginata, 6
trigeminal neuralgia, 56
triggers, see also allergens
allergic rhinitis, 48
asthma, 83, 85, 124
atopic dermatitis, 4, 10, 18, 149
hereditary angioedema, 247
mastocytosis, 272
trigeminal neuralgia, 56
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, 339
hyper IgE syndrome, 396, 398
phagocyte disorders, 412
trough values, immunoglobulins, 345, 440
true atopic dermatitis, 3, 16
T.R.U.E. TEST®, 321
tryptase (serum), 272
anaphylaxis, 195, 258, 260
antibiotic allergy, 297
drug reactions, 304
food allergies, 136, 195
insect sting allergy, 282
mastocytosis, 269, 271, 272
tuberculosis, cough, 100
tumors see neoplasms
tuna, 218
turbinates, allergic rhinitis
non-allergic rhinitis vs, 46
sinusitis vs, 56
Turner's syndrome, celiac disease and, 209
22q11.2 deletion syndrome, 368–374
tyrosine kinase inhibitors, mastocytosis, 273, 274
ulcers, eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 186, 190
ultrasound, sinusitis, 59
ultraviolet therapy see phototherapy
umbilical cord, delayed detachment, 330
united airway disease, 55
upper airway cough syndrome, 99, 100
treatment, 104
upper respiratory infections, 38, see also recurrent 
infections
asthma, 83
hyper IgE syndrome, 397
post-infectious cough, 101, 102
sinusitis, 55, 330
462  Index
urticaria
acute, 222–233
anaphylaxis vs, 258, 259
chronic, 222, 223, 227, 235–244
food additives and, 204
oral allergy syndrome vs, 142
severity classification, 226
symptom scoring, oral food challenge, 219
urticarial vasculitis, 238
urticaria pigmentosa (UP), 238, 267, 268, 269, 270
prognosis, 275
vaccinations
antibody tests, 342, 344
antibody titers, 331
complement deficiencies, 402, 404, 406
immunodeficiency, 331
vascular rings
bronchial, 84
DiGeorge syndrome, 371
vasculitis, urticarial, 238
vasoactive intestinal peptide-secreting tumors, 269
vasoconstrictors see decongestants
vasomotor rhinitis, 56
vasopressors, anaphylaxis, 262
vasovagal syncope, 258
vehicles, oral food challenge, 218
venoms
allergy, 278–287
risk factors, 279, 285
immunotherapy, 273, 279, 283, 284, 285
anaphylaxis prevention, 258
mastocytosis, 275
vernal keratoconjunctivitis (VKC), 66, 67, 68, 76
clinical signs, 71
diagnosis, 69
differential diagnosis, 70
hypersensitivity, 67
presentation, 70
prognosis, 75
tests, 72
treatment, 75
vertical transmission see mother-to-child 
transmission
Vespidae, 279
viral hepatitis, cryoglobulinemia, 238
viral infections
asthma, 83
rashes, 225
sinusitis, 56, 57, 60
viral load, HIV disease diagnosis, 429
visual disturbance, allergic eye diseases, 70
vitamin D, hyper IgE syndrome, 399
vocal cord dysfunction, 84, 93, 109, 118, 126, 
259, see also laryngeal dysfunction
volume measurement, lungs, 78, 101
vomiting, acute food protein-induced enterocolitis 
syndrome, 158
warm-ups, pre-exercise, 111
WASp (Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome protein), 362, 363
water loss, atopic dermatitis, 16
Waters' view, 59
Wegener's granulomatosis, 57
Western blot, HIV disease, 430
wet dressings, 10
wheals see urticaria
WHIM syndrome, 408
white cell count, food protein-induced enterocolitis 
syndrome and, 157
whooping cough see pertussis
WIPF1 gene mutation, 363, 364
Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome, 357, 362–367
hyper IgE syndrome vs, 395
severity classification, 365
wood dusts, asthma-causing, 115
work-exacerbated asthma, 114, 118
work-related irritable larynx syndrome, 118
World Health Organization
HIV disease classification, 426
mastocytosis, diagnostic criteria, 271–272
World Trade Center bombings (9/11), sinusitis in 
rescue workers, 54
X-linked immune dysregulation with 
polyendocrinopathy syndrome (IPEX 
syndrome), 364, 382–387
X-linked neutropenia, 362, 364, 365
X-linked SCID, 355
X-linked thrombocytopenia, 362, 364, 365
X-rays see radiography
yellow jacket venom, 282
zafirlukast, 95
mastocytosis, 274
zidovudine, pediatric HIV disease prevention, 416, 
422
zileuton, mastocytosis, 274
zinc deficiency, 6
Mount Sinai Expert Guides: Allergy and Clinical Immunology, First Edition. Edited by Hugh A. Sampson. 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Companion website: www.mountsinaiexpertguides.com
Plate 1.1  A child with multiple food allergies and severe persistent atopic dermatitis (AD) with acute 
exacerbation due to Staphylococcus aureus superinfection. Note the diffuse erythroderma and open sores.
Plate 1.2  AD chronic lesions of skin hypertrophy, lichenification, hyperpigmentation, and xerosis.
Plate 3.1  Contact dermatitis to nickel from belt buckle.
Plate 3.2  Contact dermatitis to propylene glycol, a preservative used in steroid creams. Consider this 
diagnosis if patient is not responding to treatment.
Plate 3.3  Contact dermatitis to Bronopol.
Plate 6.1  Nasal endoscopy of left middle meatus with purulent drainage noted in infundibulum.  
Patient had an acute maxillary sinusitis.
Plate 6.2  Nasal endoscopy of patient with nasal polyps and complete nasal airway obstruction. This patient 
had complaints of anosmia and nasal congestion.
Plate 6.3  Chronic rhinosinusitis with polyposis. Non‐contrast CT scan of the sinuses of patient in Plate 6.2 
demonstrates expansile polyposis of the right sinonasal cavity. The arrow points to area of polyp extension 
from ethmoid cavity into the orbit. In these cases the periorbita of the eye is usually not violated; however, 
caution is needed during surgical clearance of polyps in this area to avoid risk of intraorbital injury.
Plate 7.1  Vernal conjunctivitis – cobblestone papillae cover the superior tarsal conjunctiva. From Rubenstein 
JB, Tannan A. Conjunctivitis: infectious and noninfectious. In Yanoff M, Duker JS, eds. Ophthalmology. 4th 
ed. St. Louis, MO, Mosby Elsevier; 2013:chap 4.6. Reproduced with permission.
(A)
(B)
(C)
Plate 20.1  Inflammatory features of eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) on endoscopy. Patients with EoE can present 
with furrows (A), white plaques (B), or white plaques aligning along the furrows (C) on endoscopy.
6
5
(A)
(B)
Plate 21.1  Possible features of eosinophilic gastroenteritis (EG) on endoscopy include multiple erosions of 
the gastric mucosa (A) or multiple gastric pseudopolyps in advanced cases (B).
(A)
(B)
(C)
Plate 20.2  Fibrostenotic features of EoE on endoscopy. Rings (A), esophageal stricture (B), or esophageal 
shearing (C) can be present in patients with advanced EoE on endoscopy.
Plate 24.1  Histopathologic features of an intestinal biopsy from a patient with celiac disease (hematoxylin and 
eosin stain, magnification 100×): Blunted villi, crypt hyperplasia, mononuclear infiltration of the lamina propria, 
and intraepithelial lymphocytic infiltration. The latter is made visually clear in the inset (magnification 400×). 
Source: Courtesy of Margret Magid, MD, Pediatric Pathology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai.
Plate 26.1  Superficial urticarial lesions often have central pallor and raised erythematous edematous 
borders, but can vary in size, shape, and color. From Habif TP. Clinical Dermatology: A Color Guide to 
Diagnosis and Therapy. 5th edition. 2010 Philadelphia, PA, Mosby/Elsevier. Reproduced with permission.
Plate 26.2  Confluent urticaria. From Habif TP. Clinical Dermatology: A Color Guide to Diagnosis and Therapy. 
5th edition. 2010 Philadelphia, PA, Mosby/Elsevier. Reproduced with permission.
Plate 28.1  Extremity attack. Source: Bowen T. Hereditary angioedema consensus 2010. Allergy Asthma Clin 
Immunol 2010;6:13. Creative Commons Attribution License CC BY 4.0.
Plate 28.2  Abdominal swelling (arrow).
Plate 28.3  Airway angioedema.
Plate 30.1  Stroking one UP lesion has caused a linear raised area (wheal) with surrounding erythema to 
develop (Darier’s sign) on this child’s back. From Habif TP. Clinical Dermatology: A Color Guide to Diagnosis 
and Therapy. 5th edition. 2010 Philadelphia, PA, Mosby/Elsevier. Reproduced with permission.
